Jaime Caruana: Contemporary issues in credit risk 
Keynote address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Credit  Risk  Summit  USA  2003,  sponsored  by  Risk 
Magazine, New York, 27 October 2003. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  Risk  Magazine  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  summit  on  contemporary 
issues in credit risk. Looking at the agenda, it is clear that, while credit may constitute the oldest risk in 
banking, it remains the most important and is still one where we have much to learn.  
There  is  a  Latin  proverb  that  says  ‘Danger  can  never  be  overcome  without  taking  risks’.  As  a 
supervisor, I would tend to rephrase that by saying that managing risks properly is the best way to 
overcome danger. I think this idea is at the core of any modern, innovative and dynamic economy. The 
next two days will no doubt offer a sense of the rich abundance of research under way to identify risks, 
to improve our measures for them, and to find better ways to address them.  
On this front, a risk manager and a bank supervisor share similar interests. A risk manager seeks the 
best  risk  measures  and  management  techniques  to  protect  a  bank  against  losses,  to  hone  its 
competitiveness,  and  to  enhance  its profitability  and  long-term  growth.  Supervisors  advocate  sound 
risk  management  practices  to  ensure  the  adequate  capitalisation  and  prudent  management  of  all 
banks.  This,  in  turn,  strengthens  the  financial  sector’s  resilience  during  periods  of  distress.  I  am 
convinced  that  when  banking  systems  are  adequately  capitalised  and  well-managed,  and  risks  are 
correctly assessed within the appropriate time horizon, the financial system becomes more stable, less 
procyclical, more resilient during periods of distress and therefore better able to promote sustainable 
growth. 
In the light of our mutual interests, I am especially pleased to share with you some thoughts on the 
landmark efforts under way to revise the Basel Capital Accord. The Basel Committee embarked on 
this undertaking to promote the responsible pursuit of risk and rewards across the banking sector and, 
hence,  to  promote  greater  financial  stability.  This  reform  builds  on  trends  in  many  countries  to 
incorporate incentives into the regulatory framework encouraging banks to identify and understand the 
risks  they  face  today,  to  consider  what  risks  may  arise  tomorrow,  and  to  respond  actively  and 
appropriately to both.  
As you know, this has not been an easy task for supervisors or for bankers. Yet we have achieved 
considerable goals over the past four to five years, and I would like to begin with a brief look back to 
recall why bankers and supervisors decided that a New Basel Accord was needed. Then, I’d like to 
share  with  you  the  latest news on consultations with  the  industry  and  the Committee’s most  recent 
decisions on the way forward to finalise, and then to implement, the new rules.  
There  is  still  much  to  be  done:  I’ll  discuss  as  examples  our  efforts  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  the 
rules;  to  ensure  that  they  are  sufficiently  risk-sensitive  without  being  overly  conservative;  and  to 
maintain a level playing field. Finally, I’ll conclude with thoughts on some longer-term and future efforts 
that  the  Committee  may  undertake  to  continue  to  align  the  system  of  supervision  with  the  best 
practices of leading institutions and practitioners worldwide.  
A Look Back 
As we resolve the final questions and complete the text of the New Accord, it’s important to remember 
why all of us put our best into its success. The existing Accord was already considered a milestone 
achievement in banking, as it offered the first internationally accepted “yardstick” for capital adequacy 
and a simple measure of risk. It had received praise for reversing a downward trend in bank capital 
levels and for serving as a benchmark measure of a bank’s financial health around the world.  
But  the  1988  Accord  was  a  blunt  instrument  that  quickly  fell  behind  the  times.  Innovations  in 
technology, in banking products, and in risk management techniques changed the way that leading 
banks measure and manage their risks. By the mid-1990’s, bankers and supervisors agreed that the 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
original Accord no longer provided a meaningful measure of risk for the largest and most sophisticated 
organisations. 
As  a  result,  by  the  late  1990’s  the  Basel  Committee  and  leading  institutions  worldwide  began 
discussions on ways for supervision to incorporate more sophisticated and sensitive measures of the 
risks  that  banks  face.  The  initiative  for  these  discussions  can  be  attributed  above  all  to  William 
McDonough, who was until recently the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and my 
immediate predecessor as chairman of the Committee. Bill brought intellectual leadership, demanding 
standards, and tireless energy to a project whose size and implications became apparent only after 
bankers and supervisors had taken a long, hard look at how much the art of risk management had 
advanced in the short years since 1988.  
Throughout  the  five  years  of  work  on  the  New  Accord,  Bill  McDonough  convinced  leaders  in  the 
industry,  in  central  banks,  and  in  supervisory  agencies  that  merely  updating  the  rules  would  be 
unsatisfactory.  Instead,  Bill  sought  to  advance  the  state  of  the  art  in  risk  management  across  the 
industry and thereby promote greater stability in the global financial system. This would benefit not just 
bankers, but also businesses and consumers in all walks of life. 
It  was  truly  a  privilege  to  work  with  Bill  on  an  initiative  that  would  represent  not  just  good  banking 
policy, but most importantly good public policy, more broadly defined. Bill has since moved on to new 
challenges as head of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board in Washington, but the U.S. 
delegation to the Basel Committee remains in excellent hands. Now I have the privilege of working 
with leaders like Roger Ferguson, the Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and Jerry Hawke, the 
U.S.  Comptroller  of  the  Currency.  Their  hard  work,  and  the  hard  work  of  the  other    supervisors 
participating  in  the  discussions,  have  strengthened  the  quality  of  the  capital  rules.  They  and  others 
have helped to ensure that the New Accord will be flexible, forward-looking, and fit for the service of 
twenty-first century banking.  
The  process  of  revising  the  rules  has  involved  formidable  challenges.  That  should  come  as  no 
surprise.  Capital  requirements  make  up  the  foundation  of  the  regulatory  framework.  Even  more 
importantly,  capital  is  a  key  ingredient  to  the  health  of  the  banking  sector.  The  changes  we  are 
proposing  to  ensure  that  banks  hold  adequate  capital  will  have  broad  implications  not  just  for  the 
banking sector, but also for financial markets and the broader economy.  
But the new Basel Accord is about more than just capital, it is also about keeping a level playing field 
and about reinforcing incentives to foster sound risk management though three reinforcing pillars: risk 
sensitive  minimum  capital  requirements,  coordinated  supervisory  review,  and  enhanced  market 
discipline  through  greater  transparency.    Supervisors  and  risk  managers  know  that  a  bank’s 
management and controls make up its first and most important line of defence. The New Basel Accord 
seeks to capture the relationship between capital adequacy and risk management. 
Recent Developments: Status of Consultations and the October Press Release 
In that vein, I’d like to discuss the status of our discussions and especially the proposals for managing 
credit  risk.  By  now  you’ve  no  doubt  read  that  the  Basel  Committee  agreed  two  weeks  ago  on  a 
breakthrough plan to address the final issues raised in public consultations and to complete the new 
rules. This was a difficult task, as the Committee received over 200 comment letters from the industry 
and  the  broader  public  on  the  Third  Consultative  Paper,  or  “CP3”.  While  we  might  have  been 
somewhat surprised by the number of responses that we received, we were not surprised by the hard 
work that was evident in the letters. In addition, we will have further valuable information from national 
consultative processes such as that under way in the United States. 
The comment letters were positive and offered constructive suggestions on a wide range of issues. 
Indeed,  even  among  the  most  critical  of  respondents,  one  finds  support  for  the  introduction  of  the 
“three pillars” of the New Accord and its aim to align capital more closely to risk; for the development 
of  greater  consistency  in  the  supervisory  review  of  capital  adequacy;  and  for  strengthening  the 
effectiveness of market discipline through enhanced transparency. It was, moreover, satisfying for us 
that most commentators acknowledged substantial improvements in the proposals since the release of 
the second consultative paper in early 2001. 
The  depth  and  quality  of  the  responses  demonstrate  that  many  banks  and  industry  associations 
understand  the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  New  Accord.  I  would  like  to  offer  the  Committee’s 
sincere thanks to the many organisations and banking associations here in the United States, Canada, 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
and  elsewhere  that  invested  considerable  time  and  resources  in  the  consultations.  You  shared 
important  views  through  comment  letters,  gathered  data  for  impact  studies,  and  engaged  in 
discussions such as those that will be held here over the coming days. If you’ve been following our 
work since the first consultative paper was released in 1999, you will know that the proposals have 
evolved  and  improved  considerably  thanks  to  the  industry’s  candour,  its  creativity,  and  its  drive  to 
innovate.  
At the Committee’s meeting in Madrid earlier this month, all members acknowledged our responsibility 
to consider carefully your concerns and those of the broader industry. What is most important to the 
Committee  is  the  quality  and  consistency  of  the  new  Accord.  At  the  same  time,  we  recognised  the 
need to provide banks with as much certainty as possible while they plan and prepare for the adoption 
of  the  new  rules.  The  members  of  the  Committee  agreed  on  the  importance  of  finalising  the  New 
Accord  expeditiously  and  in  a  manner  that  is  technically  and  prudentially  sound.  We  noted  in  a 
statement to the press that we expect to take account of the remaining issues and complete the text of 
the New Accord in the coming months and no later than mid-2004. This period of time will also allow 
us  to  take  careful  note  of  domestic  consultations  under  way  in  some  jurisdictions,  including  the 
process for the Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in the United States. 
Most  of  the  comment  letters  that  the  Committee  received  focused  on  credit  risk  and  the  minimum 
standards in the first pillar. Respondents identified as one of the most important issues the proposed 
treatment of credit-related losses. As you know, with respect to the internal ratings-based treatment of 
credit  losses,  the  CP3  calibrated  regulatory  capital  on  the  basis  of  both  unexpected  and  expected 
credit losses – or “UL” and “EL” in Basel terminology. This was intended as a practical compromise to 
account  for  differences  in  national  accounting  practices  and  supervisory  authority  regarding 
provisioning.  
Many respondents – including quite a few here in the U.S. – cautioned against this approach, as they 
believed  that  it  departed  from  the  traditional  view  that  unexpected  losses  should  be  absorbed  by 
capital,  while  expected  losses  are  best  managed  through  provisioning.  Based  on  those  comments, 
and following additional research, the Committee now intends to align regulatory capital more closely 
to economic capital by calibrating it on the basis of unexpected credit losses alone. A supplementary 
mechanism will help to encourage banks to provide sufficiently for expected credit losses.  
Details on our proposal can be found on the website of the Bank for International Settlements, and the 
Committee  has  invited  public  comment  on  the  approach  through  the  end  of  this  year.  In 
recommending  this  revision,  the  Committee  seeks  to  ensure  that  risk  management  systems 
distinguish  between  losses  that  can  be  anticipated  versus  those  that  cannot.  Moreover,  the  new 
framework  would  include  explicit  incentives  for  banks  to  address  each  kind  of  loss  appropriately 
ensuring strong incentives for banks to provision properly against expected losses.  
Since  the  proposal  would  require  only  modest  revisions  to  the  text  of  CP3  and  would  not  alter  the 
underlying system and data requirements for banks wishing to adopt an advanced approach to credit 
risk,  we  expect  that  the  revised  treatment  will  conform  closely  to the  work  that  banks have already 
completed to prepare for implementation. The work plan to improve the framework discussed during 
our last meeting identified several areas in addition to this important EL-UL issue. We think that this 
work plan is perfectly compatible with the original time schedule to implement the New Accord by year-
end 2006. 
Other issues ahead: complexity 
Beyond the “EL/UL” issue, the Committee has put at the top of its work plan for the next few months 
several other credit-risk related issues that emerged in consultations. Of these matters, I’d especially 
like to highlight three, namely complexity, conservatism, and competition. 
Certainly, the complexity of the proposals continues to draw the public’s attention. It is no secret: the 
New Accord offers a far more sophisticated view of risk than the far simpler 1988 Accord does. But 
that is indeed the point. The Committee is adopting the best measures of credit and operational risk 
being  developed  by  leading  institutions  worldwide.  Today’s  conference  offers  a  good  picture  of  just 
how sophisticated – and sometimes complex – the measures of credit risk are becoming. Loan officers 
and  risk  managers  now  have  at  their  disposal  a  constantly  evolving  array  of  databases,  software, 
credit risk models, and risk rating systems, all of which provide supplemental empirical insight into a 
risk previously not readily quantified.  And all of these new tools were initially developed or refined to 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
promote a bank’s competitiveness and protect it against loss – and not just to respond to a regulatory 
mandate.   
We seek a balance between complexity and risk-sensitivity, between complexity and the necessary 
room for diversity and between complexity and comparability. Where complexity in the rules fails to 
add  much  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  New  Accord’s  measures  of  risk,  the  Committee  has  worked  to 
remove it. In the past, this has included eliminating the so-called “W” factor for credit risk mitigation 
and even shortening and simplifying the disclosure requirements of Pillar 3. Just two weeks ago, the 
Committee announced in our Madrid press release that we will simplify the proposals for securitisation 
exposures and replace the “Supervisory Formula” approach to unrated tranches with a simpler rule.  
At the same time, the industry has asked the Committee not to sacrifice risk sensitivity where it makes 
sense, even if it means that the rules may become somewhat complicated. Indeed, the complexity of 
the  New  Accord  stems  partly  from  the  options  the  industry  requested  to  ensure  that  a  blanket  rule 
would not unfairly disadvantage a particular business or exposure. You need only read a few of the 
comment letters on our website to see that many of the latest suggestions would tend to increase the 
complexity of the New Accord even further. Nonetheless, the Committee is aware that it is easier to 
enforce  a  simpler  rule  than  a  complicated  one.  As  we  complete  the  text  of  the  new  rules,  we  will 
continue to simplify and streamline the framework. 
Conservatism 
A  second  important  theme  addressed  in  comment  letters  suggested  that  the  Committee  may  have 
adopted an overly conservative approach to some aspects of the framework, resulting in much higher 
capital  charges  than  banks  feel  are  necessary.  Respondents  attribute  what  they  view  as  excessive 
levels of conservatism to different sections of the New Accord, including, as I mentioned earlier, the 
calibration  of  capital  requirements  to  both  EL  and  UL.  We  have  heard  similar  concerns  about 
conservatism in the securitisation proposals, in the treatment of certain credit risk-related hedges, and 
in the recognition of insurance products within the operational risk proposals.   
Questions about conservatism are important, as we are trying to align capital more closely to risk. This 
means that where the Accord treats exposures too harshly relative to their inherent risks, we expect to 
reduce the capital requirements. A good example would be the treatment of retail exposures, where 
the Committee found good economic evidence supporting a significantly lower requirement compared 
to  earlier  drafts  of  the  new  rules.  But  where  the  risk  is  greater,  and  where  the  existing  rules  fail  to 
assign  adequate  capital,  it  should  not  be  surprising  that  capital  requirements  are  raised.  We  will 
continue to evaluate the assumptions in the New Accord and their relative degrees of conservatism in 
the final months ahead. 
Competition and consistency of application 
Conservatism in the framework raises concern in the industry partly because banks welcome the great 
flexibility  they  will  enjoy  in  other  areas  of  the  New  Accord.  A  key  example  would  be  the  ability  to 
develop their own risk measurement tools and use their own models to estimate the drivers of credit – 
or operational – risk. Yet the great flexibility banks will enjoy raises the concern among some that too 
much flexibility might allow competitors at home or abroad to employ methods subject to less rigorous 
supervision.  This  brings  us  to  the  final  theme  we  noted  in  our  consultations,  namely  the  need  to 
maintain a level playing field and promote competition. 
Ensuring  the  consistent  application  of  the  New  Accord  in  its  entirety  is  a  critical  concern  for  the 
Committee. The minimum standards were developed to help ensure that global competition in banking 
markets  will be  driven  by each  bank’s strengths,  rather  than  by differences  in  each country’s  rules. 
Moreover, Pillars Two and Three were largely created to promote a more level playing field for banks.  
For  example,  incorporating  supervisory  review  –  or  Pillar  Two  –  into  the  international  guidelines 
represents a seminal achievement for all of us. By developing guidelines for supervisors’ evaluation of 
a bank’s internal capital allocation process,  the Committee believes that supervisors and banks will 
engage in more focused, more consistent, and less burdensome discussions of the risks that banks 
face and the responses they adopt. National laws and regulations provide different avenues through 
which supervisors may conduct such reviews, and consequently Pillar 2 affords each jurisdiction the 
flexibility to accommodate those differences. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
To advocate more consistent standards, the Committee created the Accord Implementation Group, or 
“AIG,” precisely to share experiences and encourage shared approaches. This group, which is chaired 
by Nick Le Pan, the Canadian Superintendent of Financial Institutions, has already been long at work 
comparing notes on practical matters. We expect these discussions to help supervisors apply the New 
Accord more  consistently at  home,  thereby  providing  a  more  level  playing  field  across  countries  as 
well. 
Based  on  the  AIG’s  work  to  date,  the  Committee  published  a  paper  last  August  on  the  “high  level 
principles for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord.” In this paper, we reiterate our view 
that  the  traditional  allocation  of  responsibilities  to  home  and  host  supervisors  will  continue. 
Cooperation will be critical for effective supervision under the New Accord, especially considering the 
need for an internationally active bank to receive the approval to adopt, and then validate, advanced 
approaches to credit and operational risk at home and in host jurisdictions. Similarly, supervisors will 
need  to  find  practical  ways  to  cooperate  in  the  evaluations  of  capital  adequacy  under  pillar  2  and 
ongoing reviews of compliance with the minimum operational requirements of the New Accord. 
At  the  same time,  Pillar  3  -  market  discipline  – draws  on  the  power  of  markets  to  help  ensure  that 
banks do not hold unrealistically low amounts of capital for credit or operational risk. More generally, 
by emphasising principles in the rules – that internal measurement tools must be credible, that they 
must  adequately  capture  risk,  that  they  must  be  used  by  banks  in  the  daily  management  of  their 
operations and not just for regulatory capital purposes – enhanced disclosure and transparency may 
actually  result  in  more  consistency  in  the  application  of  advanced  approaches  than  detailed 
quantitative criteria. 
Future Work: Full Credit Risk Modelling 
The  Committee  will  spend  the  next  few  months  considering  these  and  other  themes  carefully  and 
finding ways to balance the complexity of the New Accord against the need for appropriate sensitivity 
to  risk;  to  ensure  that  the  assumptions  supporting  the  rules  are  appropriately  conservative,  but  not 
excessively so; and to apply the rules consistently to protect and promote competition in the global 
banking market.   
But  when  the  ink  dries  on  the  New  Accord,  rest  assured  that  the  Basel  Committee  will  not  be 
adjourning. Just from the comment letters we received, we can already identify a wide range of issues 
ahead to continue to find new ways to advance risk management, to promote greater transparency, 
and to strengthen the stability of the financial sector. I’d like to conclude by mentioning just two of the 
potential items on our agenda for future work once the New Accord is implemented.  
The first would be to consider the benefits of full credit risk models in the calculation of minimal capital 
requirements. In theory, a bank’s capital requirements would then reflect to the greatest degree the 
economic  benefits  of  diversification  in  its  balance  sheet.  In  fact,  the  Committee  did  at  one  point 
evaluate whether advanced banks should be permitted to estimate the degree to which their assets 
might behave similarly or default together in the New Basel Accord.  
As  you  know,  we  decided  that  we  are  not  quite  there  yet.  We  know  that  some  banks  are  making 
commendable progress in thinking about ways to estimate the value of diversification. Nonetheless, 
we remain concerned about the degree of confidence one might have in those estimates, given the 
relative lack of data available on which to base them and the consequent difficulties third parties would 
have to validate any estimates at this stage.  
Likewise,  we  have  not  yet  seen  evidence  that  there  is  a  critical  mass  of  banks  that  today  would 
consistently  meet  the  “use”  test  spelled  out  in  the  New  Accord.  For  example,  we  are  not  certain 
whether  banks  today  consistently  take  into  account  in  their  valuations  each  asset’s  contribution  to 
diversification as part of their daily monitoring and risk management practices, or use diversification 
estimates as part of their credit approval and review process. 
Many  members  of  the  industry  have  accepted  our  decision  as  prudent  for  now.  But  you  have  also 
stressed  the  need  to  develop  a  treatment  for  credit  risk  that  is  more  consistent  with  the  existing 
treatment of market risk and the emerging practices for operational risk. That’s why the work that so 
many of you do is so important to the future of banking: by finding ways to capture and measure risk in 
a manner that is increasingly comprehensive, accurate, and elegant in form, you are laying out a map 
for us to consider as we all traverse the landscape of risk management. In the coming years, and we 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 5
can start very soon, we look forward to continuing this dialogue with banks, banking associations, and 
researchers to find ways to move Basel in the direction of full credit risk models. 
Consistency of Accounting Standards and the New Basel Accord 
A second area, where work has started and will continue, is the need to align the regulatory framework 
more closely with the converging standards in accounting worldwide. Many industry representatives 
have noted quite correctly that a greater “meeting of the minds” is warranted especially now that the 
New Basel Accord includes explicit disclosure requirements intended to promote greater insight into a 
bank’s  risk  profile.  Likewise,  the  Basel  Committee’s  treatment  of  provisions  and  the  valuation  of 
financial instruments must keep pace with changes in the relevant accounting standards.  
The  members  of  the  Committee  believe  that  market  discipline,  and  hence  financial  stability,  is 
strengthened when accounting and disclosure requirements reflect sound risk management principles 
and  are  consistent  with  the  control  practices  that  banks  adopt.  Consequently,  we  recognise  our 
responsibility  to  participate  actively  in  the  development  of  national  and  international  accounting 
standards.  Where  the  development  of  international  standards  is  concerned,  the  Committee  and  its 
member  organisations  devote  considerable  resources  and  staff  time  to  sharing  our  perspectives  as 
supervisors with those who make the rules.  
But the discussions between supervisors and accountants cannot be a one-way street. As supervisors 
on  the  Basel  Committee  have  developed  standards  for  the  disclosure  of  components  of  capital,  for 
loans, and for other topics of mutual concern, we have sought out the views of representatives of the 
accounting  profession.  This  dialogue  will  continue.  I  should  add  that  we  are  currently  seeking  new 
opportunities for discussion on issues of mutual concern with accounting standards-setting bodies and 
private sector accounting professionals. 
Conclusion 
By  the  end  of  this  conference,  I  think  that  we  will  all  have  a  better  sense  of  our  many  worthy 
accomplishments to date in refining the measures and management of credit exposures.  At the same 
time,  we  will  no  doubt  develop  a  better  understanding  of  the  significant  work  ahead  –  in  terms  of 
developing more sensitive capital requirements, but also in terms of advancing our ability to control the 
risks we face.  
With  regard  to  the  New  Accord  itself,  the  issues  and  themes  you  will  discuss  at  this  conference 
suggest  that  we’ve  moved  beyond  a  discussion  of  the  principles  behind  the  rules  to  a  focus  on 
preparing for their implementation. This seems appropriate, since we expect that, given the very good 
progress  that  we  have  noted  in  banks  preparing  to  adopt  the  New  Accord,  supervisors  and  the 
industry will be ready to implement the new rules by the end of 2006. Indeed, banks that wish to be 
among the first to adopt an advanced approach to credit risk should already have begun to gather and 
process the data that is key to the IRB approach.  
Adopting a more risk-sensitive treatment of credit risk will require significant work by all of us. What we 
learn about the factors driving losses from default, and how we can better measure and reduce our 
exposure to losses, means much more to all of us than simply a more favourable capital requirement. 
Instead, our efforts on credit risk, combined with advances on the operational and market risk fronts, 
will advance our understanding of the many risks banks face and improve our ability to navigate them 
successfully. For all of us, that offers the reward of a more stable banking system less susceptible to 
systemic  risks  and  the  business  cycle  and  one  better  able  to  ensure  the  circulation  of  credit,  the 
lifeblood of the economy, to businesses and consumers alike. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2003
