Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland in the midst of the euro area - situation and 
outlook 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the South Tyrolean Industrialists’ Association, Bozen, 14 October 2003. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 In  the  past  decade,  the  European  currency  landscape  has  undergone  fundamental  changes.  The 
European Central Bank today enjoys an excellent reputation as an independent central bank. Within a 
very short time, the euro has become most significant as an investment currency, and it continues to 
gain ground. Since 2002, from the time it took physical form, it has also been legal tender in twelve EU 
countries. 
The introduction of the single currency has also had manifold implications for Switzerland. First of all, 
the  euro  has  made  business  for  Swiss  companies  easier.  Foreign  currency  management  has  been 
facilitated,  and  the  danger  of  currency  turbulences,  as  witnessed  under  the  European  Monetary 
System EMS, has diminished. The euro is used as a payment instrument in Switzerland approximately 
to the same extent as formerly the national currencies of our immediate neighbours. It is possible that 
it will yet gain some significance in this respect. There is no risk, however, of it superseding the Swiss 
franc as payment instrument. As an investment and issuing currency, the euro represents increased 
competition,  but  the  Swiss  franc  will  remain  an  attractive  diversification  currency.  The  greater  price 
transparency  in  the  European  market  brought  about  by  the  euro’s  launch  also  has  an  influence  on 
Switzerland’s domestic economy, heightening awareness of the need for structural changes. 
Finally,  initial  fears  that  the  exchange  rate  relation  between  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  euro  might  be 
destabilised by the introduction of the euro have not come true. Notwithstanding a few fluctuations, the 
relation  between  the  two  currencies  has  remained  remarkably  stable.  Overall,  therefore,  the 
cohabitation between the Swiss franc and the euro is definitely a “success story”. 
BIS Review 49/2003 
 1
