Philipp M Hildebrand: Asset management at central banks - a special case? 
Speech by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the University of St Gallen, St Gallen, 5 December 2003. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Summary 
Next  to  monetary  policy,  the  management  of  international reserves  is  another  important  task  of  the 
Swiss National Bank (SNB). Since its obligations cannot be defined precisely, there can be no exact 
determination  as  to  the  optimal  level  of  a  country’s  international  reserves.  In  accordance  with  the 
buffer  stock  model,  the  level  of  international  reserves  should  be  determined  -  just  as  one  would 
choose an appropriate insurance - based on the likelihood of a crisis, on their contribution to managing 
or avoiding the crisis as well as on the opportunity costs implied in holding reserves. Both the insights 
derived  from  this  model  and  from  international  comparison  have  shown  that  Switzerland  holds  a 
reasonable  level  of  international  reserves.  The  long-term  development  of  these  reserves  should  be 
based  on  a  set  of  clear  goals,  as  is  the  case  in  Switzerland  with  the  growth  of  nominal  GDP  as  a 
strategic benchmark. 
In defining its investment policy, the SNB takes into account safety, liquidity, and performance. The 
new National Bank Law will enable the SNB to better adapt its investment profile to its needs, which 
ought to lower the opportunity costs implied in holding reserves. As investment activity is becoming 
increasingly  complex,  so  are  the  demands  of  corporate  governance.  In  conformity  with  the  private 
financial  sector,  central  banks  -  the  SNB  counts  itself  among  them  -  have  professionalised  their 
investment  and  risk  control  processes  and  improved  their  accountability  toward  the  public.  With 
increased professionalism, particularly as a result of applying the mark-to-market principle, the SNB’s 
profits  are  more  volatile  than  in  the  past,  however.  In  order  to  safeguard  the  independence  of 
monetary policy and so as not to restrict investment policy, the SNB’s annual profit distribution - as 
already  spelled  out  in  the  message  of  the  Federal  Council  on  the  new  National  Bank  Law  -  must 
remain a variable residual amount in the long term and must not be tied to any specific purpose. 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
