Michael C Bonello: Facing the challenge of today’s economic realities 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Institute of Financial 
Services Annual Dinner, St Julians, 14 November 2003. 
 This being my first public statement since my reappointment, I should like to express my appreciation 
to the Government for the trust that has been placed in me. I am conscious of the magnitude of the 
task that lies ahead, but I am also comforted by the thought that I shall continue to be supported by a 
team of competent and dedicated professionals. I am, therefore, able to look forward with confidence 
to leading an independent Central Bank of Malta into membership of the European System of Central 
Banks  next  May,  and  to  cooperating  closely  with  the  Government  in  creating  a  policy  environment 
which would allow us to guide the Maltese lira smoothly into the euro area. I stress this point because 
it is only when the economy becomes anchored in the relative safety of the common currency area 
that  the  benefits  of  participation  in  the  European  single  market  can  be  enjoyed  to  the  full.  Early 
adoption of the euro is, therefore, in the national interest and must become our common objective.  
Pursuing that goal successfully, however, will require a courageous effort to overcome the obstacles 
that stand in our way. This much was clear from the beginning. You might recall that in setting out the 
economic case for membership of the European Union (EU) on this occasion last year, I emphasized 
that the candidate countries needed to seriously question the way they had managed their economies 
in the past and to resolve to improve their performance. I warned against underestimating the entity of 
the  task  because  the  necessary  changes  were  pervasive,  affecting  both  institutions  and  mindsets, 
policies and work practices, and they also entailed costs.  
It was this same realization of the difficult challenge implied by EU membership that lay behind the call 
I made, the day after the referendum result was confirmed at the April general elections, for an early 
mobilization of all the nation’s resources. It is, therefore, somewhat disappointing that there persists 
today an insufficient awareness of the profound economic implications of that decision and of the need 
for  all  to  work  hard  to  secure  the  benefits  of  membership.  This  is  all  the  more  surprising  given  the 
threat posed by the continuing weakness in our major export markets. 
The Major Challenges Facing the Maltese Economy 
It is against this background that I propose to focus attention on four major challenges which I believe 
must be tackled with urgency if the economy is to return to a higher path of sustainable growth and 
development.  These  are  the  correction  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  which  I  have  often 
characterized as the need to live within our means; the need to respond to, and exploit the competitive 
forces unleashed by globalization; and the deleterious economic effects of population ageing and of 
environmental degradation.  
These challenges are by no means unique to Malta. Economies all over the world at different stages of 
development are similarly affected. They can, and must, therefore, be transformed into opportunities, 
because economies which are more successful than others in overcoming them will enjoy a significant 
competitive advantage. In Malta’s case the task is particularly difficult because all of these issues need 
to  be  tackled  at  the  same  time.  Indeed,  undue  postponement  of  the  necessary  reforms  could  have 
serious consequences.  
The Correction of Macroeconomic Imbalances 
The  Maltese  economy  has  been  devoting  far  too  many  of  its  relatively  scarce  resources  to 
consumption. Household and government consumption have increased steadily over the past decade 
from 80% to 85% of GDP. The household savings rate has meanwhile declined from almost 16% to 
around 1.5% of disposable income during the same period.  
These trends are a source of concern. First, because a reduced savings pool will compromise future 
economic  growth  by  curtailing  investment.  Indeed,  the  share  of  resources  devoted  to  productive 
investment  has  shrunk  from  almost  30%  a  decade  ago  to  just  over  20%  today.  Second,  because 
excessive consumption threatens the sustainability of the economy given the high import content of 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 1
domestic  expenditures.  The  balance between  exports  and  imports  of  goods and  services has been 
consistently negative over the past decade, averaging 8% of GDP. 
While in past these deficits have been made good through inflows of capital from abroad, there is no 
guarantee  that  external  imbalances  on  this  scale  can  persist  without  posing  a  serious  threat  to  the 
country’s external reserves and, ultimately, to the Maltese lira. And may I at this point remind you that 
the  low  and  predictable  inflation  we  have  experienced  in  recent  years  is  largely  attributable  to  the 
pegged  exchange  rate  regime.  This  has  also  significantly  reduced  pricing  risks  for  exporters  and 
investors.  It  should,  therefore,  be  clear  that  undue  and  sustained  pressure  on  the  reserves  would 
evoke a monetary policy response which would have pervasive repercussions.  
There is no doubt that a primary factor behind these macroeconomic imbalances is the state of public 
finances. Malta’s fiscal performance over the past decade has not been rigorously consistent with its 
intended objectives. Fiscal consolidation efforts based mainly on increasing taxation brought the deficit 
down from around 11% of GDP in 1998 to between 6% and 7% of GDP in the past three years. It is, 
however, clear that further attempts at consolidation, particularly in a weak growth environment, will 
have to focus on expenditure cutting.  
The Irish experience during the 1980s is most telling. The first half of the decade was characterised by 
increasing taxation, which often had to be followed by higher expenditure to satisfy economic, political 
and social demands. During this period the deficit to GDP ratio only shed two percentage points to 
12%. In contrast, the second half of the 1980s featured an emphasis on reducing expenditure. In the 
process  the  deficit  was  slashed  to  2%  of  GDP.  A  perceptible  dividend  of  this  policy  was  an 
acceleration in the growth rate to an annual average of 8.6% in the 1990s. 
At  this  stage,  therefore,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  urgent  need  to  reduce  the  fiscal  deficit 
primarily through better expenditure management. Broad policy statements of intent will no longer do. 
The  budgetary  allocation  process  must  be  radically  changed  so  as  to  ensure  that  expenditure  is 
minimised and delivers value for money.  
Perhaps  the  greatest  obstacle  to  an  effective  implementation  of  such  an  approach  is  the  negative 
short-term economic impact which expenditure cuts are likely to entail. It is thus crucial that the private 
sector be in a position to take up the slack as the State reduces its role in the economy. And for this to 
happen, there have to be the best possible conditions for the attraction of local and foreign investment.  
There are indications, however, that our performance is not quite up to standard in this regard. In a 
speech I delivered last year, I had shown how Malta’s competitiveness lags behind that of EU member 
States, mainly because of restrictive practices and other labour market inflexibilities; the maintenance 
of  monopolistic  situations  in  economically  strategic  areas  such  as  transportation  and  inland  freight; 
and  insufficiencies  in  our  educational  system  and  innovation  efforts.  These  conclusions  have  been 
supported by a number of studies since then and remain valid today.  
Problematic  as  it  is,  however,  the  budget  deficit  is  by  no  means  the  only  determinant  of 
macroeconomic imbalances. Certain systems and practices which create demand without generating 
output have equally harmful consequences. A typical example is the welfare system. It has become so 
entrenched  that  its  benefits  are  mistakenly  considered  to  be  immutable  rights;  but,  as  the  rapidly 
growing welfare gap shows, it is a system which carries the seeds of its own destruction. For while the 
welfare  state  was  born  from  the  noble  premise  that  care  for  the  weak  and  the  needy  is  the 
responsibility of society as a whole, in Malta the terms “weak” and “need” are defined very liberally. In 
so  doing,  we  overlook  the  fact  that  generous  welfare  depends  on  two  details  of  demography  and 
politics:  that  there  are  enough  people  of  working  age  to  fund  the  claims  of  those  defined  as  being 
weak  and  in need;  and  that  working  people  are  indeed  willing  to  pay  the  necessary  taxes.  If  these 
conditions are not met, there can be no other solution but to redesign the welfare system according to 
the funds available. 
Globalisation and Increased International Competition 
Such  considerations  lead  us  to  another  major  challenge,  that  of  globalisation  and  increased 
international  competition.  Malta  is  particularly  susceptible  because  it  has  a  very  open  economy. 
Developments  in  the  international  market  place  are  indeed  likely  to  become  even  more  relevant 
because the process of globalisation continues unabated. Facilitated by the progressive dismantling of 
trade  barriers,  this  process  has  been  characterised  by  a  rapid  growth  in  factor  mobility  and  cross-
border investment, and has given rise to harsh competition based on innovation, dynamism, improved 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2003
quality  and  low  cost.  It  has  also  become  easier  for  new  entrants  to  gain  access  to  global  markets, 
including the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, many of which are now our competitors. 
Globalisation  has,  therefore,  brought  more  uncertainty  because  there  will  be  winners  and  losers. 
Although  the  process  probably  involves  more  than  simply  a  zero-sum  game,  it  is  also  true  that 
countries which adapt to the new competitive conditions more rapidly will grow at the expense of those 
which are slower to react. This is a crucial consideration for Malta, which is a very small player in the 
global market place, and therefore a price taker, but which depends heavily on exports to maintain the 
living standards of its people.  
While  there  are  many  enterprises  in  Malta  which  are  rising  effectively  to  this  challenge,  the  cost 
pressures  associated  with  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  inefficient  practices  described 
earlier  are  proving  to  be  too  much  of  a  burden  for  some  others.  As  a  result,  they  are  finding  our 
country no longer profitable to operate in, especially when compared to locations in Eastern Europe, 
North Africa and Asia. For them, as the recent painful examples of plant closures have shown, Malta 
fails  to  offer  the  right  combination  of  productivity,  skills,  innovative  ability  and  cost  to  justify  their 
investment. 
There are other early warning signals. The economy’s 0.2% average real growth rate over the past 
two years is the lowest of all the acceding countries. It is also low compared to that of the existing EU 
member  States.  The  experience  of  those  two  years  may  well  have  been  exceptional,  but  it 
nevertheless serves to remind us that the economy needs to grow consistently much faster if Malta is 
to catch up with average EU per capita income levels within a reasonable period of time.  
I strongly believe that the factors making for high costs and weak growth rates should be addressed as 
a  priority.  As  I  have  observed  on  other  occasions,  strategies  to  improve  competitiveness  in  a 
globalising world can be devised. Other countries have shown the way. What is needed is the political 
will and the effective collaboration of all the parties concerned.  
Population Ageing 
Perhaps there exists no clearer example to illustrate the kind of challenge the country faces than the 
issue  of  population  ageing.  The  impact  of  a  rapidly  ageing  population  in  the  context  of  a  generous 
welfare system is inevitably a dramatic rise in spending on pensions and health care. Expenditure on 
welfare, including on health, is already absorbing close to one-fifth of the economy’s annual income, or 
about  Lm300  million,  and  almost  two-fifths  of  government  revenue.  Retirement  pensions  alone 
account for more than one-fourth of this, and are the cost item which is likely to register the strongest 
growth in the years ahead. Over the next twenty-five years it is expected that the number of workers 
supporting one pensioner will drop from the present 4 to just over 2, partly reflecting the fact that the 
proportion of pensionable age persons in the population will rise from 16.7% today to over 28%.  
An  ageing  society  will  also  further  aggravate  existing  national  saving  and  investment  trends.  The 
impact  on  private  consumption  and  savings  patterns  is  a  result  of  the  ‘life  cycle  hypothesis’,  which 
holds that a rise in the proportion of the elderly in the population tends to be accompanied by a decline 
in national savings.  
Indeed,  the  effect  of  population  ageing  on  public  finances  is  nothing  but  a  reflection  of  a  wider 
economic  problem  involving  a  reduced  productive  capacity.  Reforms  to  pre-empt  this  impact  must, 
therefore, be implemented without delay. Here again, Malta need not re-invent the wheel. The World 
Bank  model  involving  funded  pension  schemes  is  being  applied  successfully  in  many  countries. 
Equally interesting is the Open Method of Co-ordination of Pension Reform operated by the European 
Commission  with  the  aim  of  promoting  sustainability  of  pension  systems  across  the  EU  without 
imposing  uniformity.  This  method  places  a  strong  emphasis  on  social  acceptability  coupled  with 
supply-side reforms designed to ensure that the pension system is sustainable. 
A society like ours that is devoting more resources to welfare payments than it can afford, is saving 
and investing too little and is spending more than it is earning - while financing these excesses with 
borrowed  money  -  stands  in  blatant  contradiction  with  its  professed  commitment  to  social  justice, 
because it is bequeathing to its children an inheritance of debt in selfish rejection of the principle of 
inter-generational equity. This prospect is clearly unacceptable. It is time for all to recognise this and to 
shoulder what has become a moral responsibility. 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 3
Environmental Degradation 
It  is  in  a  similar  spirit  that  I  approach  another  important  challenge,  namely  that  of  environmental 
degradation. There is no question that a significant part of our economic achievements in recent years 
have been attained at the cost of the environment. It is doubtful whether this constitutes real progress, 
as it is eroding the welfare of current and future generations and depleting the productive potential of 
an economy that is highly dependent on quality tourism.  
From a more practical economic viewpoint, environmental sustainability, involving the conservation of 
existing amenities and resources for an indefinite time period, will entail significant resource outlays. 
This is in addition to the resources necessary to finance the investment needed to face the competitive 
pressures  of  globalisation  and  to  meet  the  costs  of  population  ageing.  This  requires  us  to  produce 
more,  and  more  intelligently,  and  to  devote  a  larger  share  of  the  nation’s  resources  to  fund  the 
investments which are vital for its continued economic development.  
Policy Dimensions 
I have often stressed that the solution to such problems lies in the implementation of a coherent reform 
strategy  that  enjoys  as  wide  a  measure  of  support  as  possible.  Today  I  would  like  to  dwell  on  two 
considerations  arising  directly  out  of  EU  membership,  which  should  in  themselves  help  to  promote 
progress  in  this  direction.  These  are  Malta’s  expected  contribution  to  the  realisation  of  the  Lisbon 
Agenda and its participation in the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).  
Malta and the Lisbon Agenda 
The  central  objective  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda  is  to  address  supply-side  impediments  to  growth.  The 
Agenda states: 
“The  Union  has  today  set  itself  a  new  strategic  goal  for  the  next  decade:  to  become  the  most 
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic 
growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion”  
As from May next year, Malta will automatically be part of a process which presents opportunities for 
improving supply capabilities through focused policies and for which specific funding is available. It, 
however,  also  involves  a  greater  degree  of  competition,  and  thus  constitutes  a  driving  force  for 
countries to move ahead rapidly with the required structural reforms.  
The Lisbon Agenda establishes numerous competitiveness indicators, as well as a set of targets to be 
achieved by 2010. I do not intend to dwell on these here. The Federation of Industry recently held a 
national  seminar on  this  very  issue  and  I  am sure that  these  indicators and  targets will continue  to 
attract  the  necessary  attention,  not  least  within  the  Malta  Council  for  Economic  and  Social 
Development (MCESD).  
Allow me, however, to make a few observations about how Malta is performing in this regard. I shall 
do so by comparison with the international best practice benchmarks upon which most of the Lisbon 
Agenda criteria were built. So how does Malta fare, especially when compared to the peer group of the 
new EU member States?  
Based on data relating mainly to 2002, Malta’s GDP grew by 1.5% compared to 2.5% in the other new 
member States. And this is not simply because less advanced economies than Malta’s need to grow 
faster in order to catch up. Indeed, the two acceding countries which are richer than Malta, namely 
Cyprus and Slovenia, grew by 2.0% and 2.9%, respectively. 
Turning  now  to  possible  reasons  for  Malta’s  slower  growth  rate,  a  first  observation  is  that  our  unit 
labour costs are relatively high. On average, other new member States have labour productivity and 
price  levels  which  hover  around  50%  of  the  current  EU  average.  In  Malta  labour  productivity  is 
relatively  higher,  at  70%  of  the  EU  average,  but  the  price  level  is  higher  still  at  almost  90%.  This 
suggests that Malta needs to increase its productivity to match its price level.  
A second measure relates to public finances. On average, the other new member States have fiscal 
positions ranging from close to balance to deficits of around 7% of GDP. Malta’s deficit is close to the 
latter figure and thus acts as a drag on the productive use of resources, and hence also on economic 
growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2003
Other  new  member  States  on  average  spend  0.8%  of  their  GDP  on  innovation,  research  and 
development. This compares with almost 2% for the present EU members and with a target of 3% to 
be achieved by 2010. The comparable figure for Malta is not yet known, but preliminary indications 
suggest  that  the  research  and  development  expenditure  undertaken  here  is  even  lower  than  the 
average for the other new members. And Malta is only now preparing to adopt a specific innovation 
policy as part of its programme of economic reform.  
Business  investment  in  the  other  new  member  States  amounts  to  almost  20%  of  GDP.  The 
comparable  figure  for  Malta  is  not  available,  but  it  is  known  that  the  combined  public  and  private 
investment to GDP ratio in 2002 was 21%. This suggests that the ratio of business investment to GDP 
in Malta is significantly lower than that in other countries.  
On  the  other  hand,  Malta  compares  relatively  well  in  terms of  its  educational expenditure which,  at 
almost  5%  of  GDP,  is  equivalent  to  that  in  other  new  members  and  indeed  in  the  EU  member 
countries.  Malta  also  compares  favourably  on  social  cohesion,  with  income  dispersions  being 
comparable  to  those  in  other  acceding  countries  and  with  the  long-term  unemployment  rate  being 
significantly lower.  
In  summary,  it  appears  that  Malta  has  costs  which  do  not  reflect  productivity  levels  and  a  highly 
expansionary  fiscal  stance.  There  is  also  a  need  for  more  spending  on  innovation  activities  and 
business investment. For while our economic system is successful in delivering social cohesion and 
stability, these factors cannot alone sustain the economy’s growth rate at sufficiently high levels. This 
suggests a need to question existing priorities and to re-direct policies to activities which can support 
higher income levels in future.  
Malta and EMU 
Malta’s participation in EMU will eventually lead to the adoption of the euro, a step which holds out the 
prospect of significant benefits. Perhaps the foremost of these is that Malta would share in the strength 
and credibility of a single, Europe-wide monetary policy. This would not only mean reduced exchange 
rate risks and less uncertainty for economic agents in Malta and for their foreign business partners, but 
also the elimination of the risk premium on the Maltese lira. The reduction in interest rates consequent 
upon the introduction of the euro would be of direct benefit in terms of price competitiveness, as would 
also be the reduction in currency conversion costs and the increased price transparency.  
On the other hand, if a country is to benefit fully from adopting the single currency, then its economic 
structures must be compatible with those of the countries that are already using that currency. It is for 
this reason that the EU Treaty sets a series of eligibility tests, known as the Maastricht criteria. These 
include  convergence  of  inflation  and  interest  rates,  sustainable  fiscal  positions  and  exchange  rate 
stability. 
The exchange rate criterion requires participation in ERM II for a minimum period of two years prior to 
the  adoption  of  the  euro.  This  is  an  arrangement  whereby  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and 
participating national central banks would not allow any currency to fluctuate beyond a given margin 
from its central euro rate. This margin at present can be as wide as 15%, but significantly narrower 
margins are being contemplated, with an often-cited reference value of 2.25%. Thus, participation in 
ERM II does not necessarily imply increased currency volatility. Indeed the rationale of this mechanism 
is to test the stability of a currency. As you know, the Maltese lira is pegged to a weighted average of 
three  currencies,  whose  individual  exchange  rates  against  the  lira  can  vary.  In  this  regard,  it  is 
noteworthy that the fluctuations in the Maltese lira/euro rate over the past few years on average have 
not exceeded 3.5%.  
As for the inflation and interest rate criteria, Malta is well within the reference values. The fiscal deficit, 
on the other hand, represents a significant hurdle as it is currently about double the 3% of GDP limit. 
Related to the deficit is the size of the public debt, which exceeds the 60% threshold.  
The  main  determining  factor  in  the  timing  of  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  therefore,  is  the  speed  with 
which fiscal consolidation can be achieved, bearing in mind that the euro area will not technically be in 
a position to accept newcomers before 2007. 
If  the  Government  embarks  on  the  relatively  fast  track  of  fiscal  consolidation  implied  by  Malta’s 
Pre-Accession Economic Programme, we would need to enter ERM II in 2005. Should this track be 
chosen, however, it would be vital that the planned pace of consolidation be maintained. In this way 
the benefits of an early adoption of the euro would be reaped, and the lira’s stay in ERM II would be 
BIS Review 50/2003 
 5
smooth,  with  no  noticeable  shocks  in  the  transition  from  the  current  basket  system  to  the  single 
currency. 
If, on the other hand, there are slippages in the rate of fiscal consolidation, the stay in ERM II would 
have to be prolonged and the adoption of the euro postponed. This would attract negative attention 
from the international financial markets, resulting in a reduced credibility of our economic policy and in 
pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rate.  The  country  would  then  probably  also  face 
difficulties  in  meeting  the  other  Maastricht  convergence  criteria,  further  complicating  the  task  of 
economic management. 
If the risk of this happening is considered unacceptably large, a slower pace of fiscal consolidation, 
entailing a smaller risk of slippage, could be chosen. The late adoption of the euro would, however, 
imply that the enjoyment of the relative benefits would be postponed, and that the country could lose 
competitiveness if other new member States successfully adopt the euro at an earlier date. 
In summary, the best case scenario is the one where a relatively fast pace of fiscal consolidation is 
both planned and achieved. The worst case scenario is the one where fiscal policy fails to deliver on a 
planned fast process of consolidation. The scenario featuring a slower pace of consolidation can be 
described as intermediate in terms of its degree of preference. However, this could turn into a worst 
case scenario if fiscal policy fails to deliver even on a planned slower consolidation process. 
It  is  for  these  reasons  that  medium-term  fiscal  planning  should  be  adopted,  detailing  concrete 
objectives and measures to be implemented over a number of years. It is equally important that such a 
programme enjoy the support of the social partners. The consensus-building approach being followed 
in  the  MCESD  is  a  welcome,  positive  development  in  this  regard,  one  that  could  facilitate  an  early 
adoption of the euro. 
Conclusion 
Throughout  a  long  and,  at  times,  turbulent  history,  our  people  have  faced  repeated  threats  to  their 
livelihood,  but  our  forefathers  always  rose  to  the  challenge.  In  a  commendable  demonstration  of 
courage, solidarity and vision they were able to put aside narrow political and sectoral interests and 
unite in the pursuit of the common good. Indeed, if we are here today, in control of our destiny as a 
free  and  independent  people,  it  is  because  they  found  the  inner  strength  to  put  country  first.  In 
recognition, we justly recall their achievements with pride.  
The challenge we face today is no less serious than any the country has had to deal with in the past. If 
this generation of policy makers and policy shapers wishes to earn a similarly favourable judgement of 
history, they must have the courage of their convictions and lead from the front. It must be understood 
that we are all in the same boat. Tackling our common problems means that we must fight together 
against inertia and embrace change in the pursuit of progress. For this alone is the key to job creation 
and higher living standards. 
In  this  context  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  making  my  own  the  message  which  the  recently  retired 
President of the ECB, Wim Duisenberg, gave to ECOFIN Ministers at a farewell dinner they organised 
for him last month in Venice. Speaking of the reform objectives contained in the Lisbon strategy, he 
said:  
“There has been some progress. I do not need to tell you that there is still a lot to be done. You have 
said  so  yourselves  many  times.  These  good  words  must  be  transformed  into  actions,  and  soon, 
because time is running out. It is no good having the right diagnosis if you don’t apply the medicine 
and cure the disease.”  
6 
 BIS Review 50/2003
