Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s monetary policy strategy after the evaluation 
and clarification of May 2003 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, delivered at the Center 
for Financial Studies’ key event, Frankfurt am Main, 20 November 2003. 
 It is a pleasure to address such a distinguished audience. I am particularly happy to be able to devote 
one of my first public speeches as President of the ECB to a topic of fundamental importance for the 
ECB:  its  monetary  policy strategy.  As  you know,  this  is a  topic which  the Governing Council  of  the 
ECB  discussed  at  great  length  in  the  first  half  of  2003,  when  we  conducted  an  evaluation  of  our 
experience with the strategy. This review resulted in the confirmation of our strategy on 8 May 2003. 
On  the  same  day  we  also  introduced  some  clarifications  which  have  already  proved  very  useful, 
particularly in terms of presenting and communicating to the public the more complex aspects of our 
monetary policy strategy. 
My aim here today is not so much to explain the meaning and details of the recent clarification, but 
rather to provide you with a description of the main features of the strategy. I will also address some 
important differences between our concept and alternative strategies, and I will explain why I consider 
the ECB’s strategy to be perfectly suited to the monetary policy of the euro area. I will then say a few 
words  about  the  importance  of  sound  public  finances  and  structural  reforms,  particularly  at  such  a 
critical point in time. 
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy in a historic perspective 
1. 
In  the  initial  stages  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  in  the  early  1990s,  many  observers 
doubted  that  the  single  currency  would  ever  see  the  light  of  day.  Then,  when  they  realised  that  it 
would come, they speculated that only a few countries would be able to join. 
Once  it  became  clear  that  most  EU  countries  were  in  a  position  to  adopt  the  euro,  some  experts 
argued  that  the  quality  of  the  euro  as  a  new  currency  would  converge  only  towards  a  sort  of  an 
arithmetic average of the legacy currencies, rather than to the benchmark set by the stronger ones. 
It is now clear that such bouts of scepticism were much overdone. Yet it was understandable that a 
substantial number of observers were initially cautious with regard to the euro’s chances of success. 
After  all,  monetary  integration  in  Europe  was  in  itself  an  extraordinary  innovation,  which  was 
surrounded by a large number of uncertainties in the introductory phase. 
On the achievements of the Eurosystem to date 
But the facts have disproved those initial fears and have shown that most people underestimated the 
resolve of European governments and central bankers to make EMU a large-scale success as well as 
a huge step forward in Europe’s history. 
For nearly five years now we have had a single monetary policy conducted by the Eurosystem. Ever 
since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  had  to  confront 
important challenges. We have witnessed two euro changeovers: the introduction of the euro first in 
book-entry form and, second, in the form of banknotes and coins. These were not simple tasks. But 
they  both  went  very  smoothly,  thanks  to  the  hard  work  of  all  those  involved  at  the  ECB  and  the 
national  central  banks  (NCBs),  as  well  as  in  the  private  sector.  Monetary  policy  has  had  to  face  a 
number of shocks to the euro area economy over the past few years. For a large part of this time, 
policy  had  to  be  conducted  in  a  context  of  exceptional  economic,  financial  and  even  geopolitical 
uncertainty. But we kept a steady hand and did not overreact. Consequently, in spite of often difficult 
circumstances, we kept inflation and inflation expectations low. And we have done so with pragmatism 
and determination. Even in its infancy, the ECB showed itself to be a mature central bank. 
These  outstanding  achievements  underpin  the  rapid  build-up  of  credibility  in  the  ECB  and  the  high 
level of confidence enjoyed by the new currency. 
The Governing Council of the ECB presented its monetary policy strategy in October 1998. The design 
of  the  strategy  had  to  be  geared  towards  the  special  characteristics  of  the  euro  area  economy.  It 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 1
incorporated,  in  an  integrated  framework,  many  features  of  the  successful  monetary  policies  of  the 
National Central  Banks of  the countries  adopting  the  euro. The strategy  lays  out  the  principles  that 
guide  monetary  policy  decisions.  Announcing  the  strategy  has  permitted  the  ECB  to  make  clear  its 
commitment to the price stability objective. The strategy has also provided a framework in which to 
organise and present to the public the information used in policy deliberations. 
The 2003 review of the strategy: confirmation and clarification 
In December 2002 the ECB announced its decision to conduct a comprehensive review of its strategy. 
This  decision  was  sometimes  wrongly  interpreted  by  observers  as  an  implicit  indication  of 
dissatisfaction  with  the  experience  thus  far.  In  fact,  the  opposite  was  true.  It  was  natural  that,  after 
more than four years of experience, the Governing Council of the ECB wanted to look back and reflect 
in a systematic way on the experience gained and the comments of external observers. Indeed, we 
conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  complex  and  changing  environment.  Undertaking  such  an  exercise  in 
stock  taking  and  reflection  is  essential  to  ensure  a  satisfactory  evaluation  of  the  strategy.  As  I  will 
explain,  the  result  of  this  evaluation  demonstrates  that  our  monetary  policy  is  based  on  a  sound, 
robust fundament. 
[The document entitled “Overview of the background studies for the reflections on the ECB’s monetary 
policy strategy” (8 May 2003) provides a detailed discussion of the issues considered in the Governing 
Council’s review of the strategy. It is available on the ECB’s website in the section Publications.] 
2. 
The elements of the ECB’s strategy 
The objective of price stability 
2.1 
The  basis  for  the  strategy  is  the  ECB’s  mandate  that  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy 
should  be  to  maintain  price  stability.  This  mandate,  which  mirrors  the  mandates  of  a  very  large 
majority of the EU National Central Banks before 1998, is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, which 
was signed by all governments of the European Union and ratified by all the parliaments. It is “written 
in stone”, if you wish. 
It reflects the well established fact that price stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and the 
creation  of  employment.  Price  stability  preserves  and  bolsters  consumers’  purchasing  power,  thus 
supporting consumption. It also enhances the efficacy of the market system in allocating resources. 
Price stability is associated in particular with lower uncertainty and risk premia in financial markets, 
facilitating  financial  transactions  and  ultimately  implying  lower  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates. 
This  fosters  investment.  Lasting  price  stability  is  also  an  indispensable  nominal  anchor  for  wage 
developments in line with productivity thereby contributing to preserve the competitiveness of the euro 
area economy. 
The evidence provided by experts and academics confirms and even strengthens the conclusion that 
departures  from  price  stability  entail  substantial  distortions  and  welfare  costs,  which  manifest 
themselves  thorough  various  channels.  In  short,  maintaining  price  stability  is  the  contribution  of 
monetary policy to sustainable growth, job creation and social cohesion. Price stability is a necessary 
condition to attain those goals. 
The ECB’s definition of price stability 
2.2 
To  make  the  Treaty  mandate  operational,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  provided  a 
quantitative definition of price stability. Price stability is defined as a year-on-year increase in the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area as a whole of below 2%. By referring 
to increases in the HICP it was made clear from the beginning, in 1998, that deflation is excluded from 
the  definition  of  price  stability.  The  Governing  Council  also  specified  that  price  stability  is  to  be 
maintained over the medium term. 
In the light of past experience, it is clear that the announcement of the quantitative definition of price 
stability was an extremely valuable element of the ECB’s strategy. 
First, the ECB’s definition of price stability has been instrumental in enhancing the transparency of the 
policy framework and thereby the accountability of the ECB. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2003
The anchoring of long-term inflation expectations 
Second,  with  its  quantitative  definition  the  ECB  has  made  a  very  significant  contribution  to  the  firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations. The definition of price stability permits all economic agents and the 
public at large to build expectations of future inflation outcomes. By providing a benchmark for inflation 
expectations,  the  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  has  considerably  facilitated  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy by the ECB. Indeed, if the public can trust the ECB, we can assume that the setting of 
wages and prices will be compatible with the ECB’s definition. This significantly reduces the likelihood 
of temporary bouts of inflation triggering harmful wage and price spirals, as was the case in previous 
decades. 
In  our  evaluation  of  the  strategy  we  analysed  particularly  closely  the  experience  with  euro  area 
inflation  expectations.  We  were  very  pleased  to  see  that  the  volatility  of  long-term  inflation 
expectations  in  the  euro  area  is  as  low  as  in  the  best  performing  industrialised  countries  in  this 
respect.  Since  January  1999,  medium and  long-term  inflation expectations, as  measured  by  survey 
data, have remained stable most of the time within the range of 1.7 to 1.9%, thus at a level compatible 
with the definition of price stability. 
This is all the more remarkable given that the ECB started without a track record of its own and was 
faced  with  a  number  of  sizeable,  mainly  upward,  price  shocks  hitting  the  euro  area  economy.  In 
mid-2000 the price of the Brent oil barrel denominated in U.S. dollar was four times higher than at the 
start of the single monetary policy, in January 1999. Since then, average oil prices have stayed at a 
considerably  higher  level  than  the  average  over  the  previous  ten  years.  In  2001,  when  the  indirect 
effects  of  the  earlier  oil  price  increases  were  still  exerting  upward  pressure  on  the  HICP,  some 
EU countries were affected by livestock diseases. This caused exceptionally strong upward pressure 
on unprocessed and, later, processed food prices. As a result of these shocks, HICP inflation has for 
quite  some  time  been  above,  and  sometimes  significantly  above,  the  2%  mark.  But,  as  I  just  said, 
medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  remained  rather  stable  despite  those  shocks.  As  the 
shocks gradually unwound, actual inflation rates always bounced back toward levels compatible with 
price stability. 
In our reflections on the strategy, we discussed at length all the aspects related to the ECB’s definition 
of price stability. We scrutinised again the properties of the price index, the HICP. We assessed the 
merits  of  the  possible  alternatives  for  expressing  the  price  stability  objective,  that  is,  whether  to 
express  it  in  terms  of  a  single  “point”  or  a  “range”.  We  also  reviewed  the  factors  determining  the 
“optimal”  rate  of  inflation,  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  2%  upper  limit  in  the  definition  and  the 
appropriate  aim  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  assessment  we  concluded  that,  on  the  grounds  of  both 
conceptual considerations and practical experience, the ECB’s definition is fully adequate. 
The May 2003 clarification: “HICP inflation below but close to 2%” 
At  the  same  time,  we  felt  the  need  to  convey  even  more  clearly  to  the  public  that  the  Governing 
Council  is  not  indifferent  between  all  positive  inflation  rates  below  2%.  On  8 May  2003 we  made  it 
clear that, in order to fulfil its price stability objective, the Governing Council aims to maintain HICP 
inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term. This was fully in line with our past practice and 
with  medium-term  market  expectations.  Thus, 
inflation 
expectations. We identified a number of arguments for aiming not at inflation close to zero but at a rate 
close to 2%. 
the  announcement  did  not  change 
Rationales for aiming for positive inflation (1): the zero lower bound for nominal interest rates 
The first argument is that maintaining a low positive rate of inflation reduces to very low levels the 
probability  that  nominal  interest  rates  will  approach  their  lower  bound  at  zero.  The  event  of 
nominal  interest  rates  hitting  the  zero  lower  bound  is  linked  to  an  increased  uncertainty  about  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. If this event were to coincide with a strong decline in demand, such a 
situation could complicate the central bank’s ability to avoid a deflationary episode. Examples where 
countries reached the lower bound for nominal interest rates are rare. And even if this event were to 
materialise, a number of effective monetary policy actions are still possible at zero nominal interest 
rates  and  various  plausible  solutions  for  escaping  from  a  liquidity  trap  have  been  proposed.  This 
notwithstanding,  prevention  is  better  than  cure  and  a  safety  margin  for  inflation  rates  above  zero 
proves helpful to avoid that the effectiveness of these alternative policies has to be tested in reality. 
In order to calibrate the adequate safety margin for inflation rates in this respect, we took into account 
the studies which have tried to assess the likelihood of nominal interest rates hitting the zero lower 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 3
bound  for  various  levels  of  inflation  objectives.  Results  in  this  area  differ  to  some  extent,  as  they 
depend  on  a  number  of  specific  assumptions.  But  the  available  studies  indicate  that  the  likelihood 
decreases to very low levels when the central bank aims at an inflation rate above 1%. We are thus 
convinced  that  focusing  on  inflation  of  below  but  close  to  2%  provides  a  sufficient  safety  margin 
against nominal interest rates hitting the zero lower bound. 
Rationales for aiming for positive inflation (2): measurement error in the HICP 
A second reason to aim for low positive inflation is that available inflation statistics may be subject to a 
positive  measurement  error,  which  would  imply  that  strict  price  stability,  that  is,  zero  inflation,  as 
measured by the price index would de facto mean a declining price level. In the specific case of the 
HICP, the precise estimation of such a measurement bias continues to be surrounded by uncertainty. 
But taking into account the continuous improvements implemented by Eurostat in the index, the bias is 
likely to be small and to decline further in the future. 
Rationales for aiming for positive inflation (3): inflation differentials within the euro area 
Third,  as  regards  the  possible  presence  of  sustained  inflation  differentials  within  a  currency 
union,  I  should  note  that  such  differentials  are  and  should  be  considered  a  normal  feature  of  any 
currency area. Indeed, they are an integral part of the adjustment mechanism resulting from not fully 
synchronised economic shocks in the various countries forming the euro area. The single monetary 
policy  cannot  address  such  differentials,  in  the  same  way  that  in  a  single  country  monetary  policy 
cannot reduce inflation differentials across regions or cities. Depending on the causes of temporary 
differentials,  national  remedies  may  be  needed  to  prevent  harmful  developments  in  the  country, 
notably in connection with competitiveness. Overall, it is crucial that product and labour markets in the 
euro area are sufficiently flexible to respond efficiently to supply and demand shocks. This assessment 
was confirmed in a recent and comprehensive study by the Eurosystem’s staff on inflation differentials 
in  the  euro  area.  [“Inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area:  potential  causes  and  policy  implications”, 
European Central Bank, September 2003, Publications.] This study noted, interestingly, that the size 
of  the  inflation  differentials  within  the  euro  area  is  broadly  comparable  to  that  in  the  United  States, 
although in the United States inflation differentials show somewhat lower persistence over time. This 
study highlights the inadequacy of using monetary policy to address such differentials, which primarily 
reflect transitory effects of monetary integration in Europe and also relate to the persistent differences 
in economic structures across countries. 
Among the possible structural factors underlying lasting inflation differences, the Balassa-Samuelson 
effect  has  been  often  singled  out.  The  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  relates  inflation  differentials  to 
differences  across  economies  in  the  relative  sectoral  productivity  trends  between  the  tradable  and 
non-tradable sectors. Empirical studies indicate that the magnitude of the Balassa-Samuelson effect is 
very  limited  in  the  group  of  countries  forming  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  the  size  of  the  Balassa-
Samuelson effect for these countries is diminishing over time, given that there has been substantial 
convergence  among  countries  in  terms  of  per-capita  GDP  and  productivity  levels.  The  size  of  the 
Balassa-Samuelson  effect  could  well  be  more  important  for  the  acceding  countries.  However,  its 
overall impact on the euro area should be limited, not least on account of the relatively small size of 
these  economies.  Moreover,  it  should  be  recalled  that,  in  order  to  adopt  the  euro,  the  acceding 
countries will have to fulfil the Treaty convergence criteria, which in particular require the sustainability 
of a low inflation environment. All this points to a more limited impact of the Balassa-Samuelson effect 
than is sometimes claimed. 
In  sum,  aiming  for  inflation  rates  below  but  close  to  2%  offers  an  additional  safeguard  against  the 
rather remote but undesirable event that nominal interest rates could hit their lower bound at zero. At 
the same time, it is also fully sufficient to cover the possible presence of a measurement bias in the 
HICP and the implications of inflation differentials of a structural nature within the euro area. 
The format of the price stability objective 
As  regards  the  form  in  which  our  inflation  objective  is  expressed,  I  am  aware  that  here  in 
Germany some observers recently called for the ECB to adopt a specific “point target” for inflation. As I 
mentioned  before,  this  option  was  considered  carefully  by  the  Governing  Council.  However,  after 
examining  thoroughly  all  the  arguments  and  available  evidence  in  our  review  of  the  strategy,  the 
Governing Council  deemed  it  preferable  to  avoid  this  option  and to  announce that  we aim at  HICP 
inflation below but close to the upper bound of the range in the definition. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2003
With  our  decision  we  convey  to  the  public  the  important  message  that  the  control  of  inflation  is 
inherently imperfect. 
As regards the theoretical advantages of referring to a specific rate of inflation as the objective, it has 
sometimes been argued that, in principle, it provides a more precise focal point for forming inflation 
expectations  and  taking  forward-looking  decisions.  We  therefore  looked  at  the  evidence  on  the 
experiences in various countries in this respect. We concluded that, above all, there is no unique or 
best  way  to  firmly  anchor  inflation  expectations.  The  crucial  aspect  appears  to  be  a  credible  and 
consistent  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  respect  the  ECB  has  been  very  successful  -  as  is 
demonstrated by surveys and the “jury” which is bond markets. 
The medium-term orientation of monetary policy 
Another  very  important  aspect  of  our  monetary  policy,  which  was  also  emphasised  at  the  start  of 
Stage Three of EMU, is that it aims to maintain price stability over the medium term. The medium-
term  orientation  clarifies  that  there  is  no  fixed  time  horizon  over  which  price  stability  has  to  be 
re-established.  The  medium-term  orientation  embodies  several  important  general  principles  of  the 
strategy.  First,  the  explicit  acknowledgement  that,  given  the  long  and  uncertain  lags  in  the 
transmission  of  monetary  impulses,  central  banks  cannot  steer  short-term  price  developments  with 
high precision. Second, it also reflects the idea that monetary policy should react differently to different 
forms of economic shocks. Notably, supply-side shocks, for example those to oil prices, often require a 
much  more  gradual  monetary  policy  response  than  shocks  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy  or 
shocks coming from labour cost developments. By adapting the appropriate monetary policy horizon to 
the nature of the shock, the ECB helps to avoid unnecessary volatility in output growth. 
In sum, the focus on the medium term in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy embodies a commitment 
to  avoid  overly  activist  and  ambitious  attempts  to  fine-tune  inflation  outcomes,  while  reinforcing  the 
credible  anchoring  of  our  definition  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  and  long-term  expectations  of 
economic agents and markets. 
The two pillars 
2.3 
A  further element  of  the strategy relates  to  the  analyses  and  economic  perspectives  of  the  risks  to 
price  stability,  which  are  founded  on  a  two-pillar  framework.  The  two-pillar  approach  permits 
conveying  to  the  public  the  notion  of  a  diversified  analysis  and  of  ensuring  robust  decision-making 
based on different analytical perspectives. 
These  two  perspectives  are  referred  to  as  “economic  analysis”  and  “monetary  analysis”.  The 
Governing Council has emphasised the lively and dynamic nature of the analyses under the two pillars 
of the strategy: over time, the analyses under both pillars have been deepened and extended, in line 
with  increasing  data  availability  and  continuous  improvements  in  technical  tools.  Obviously,  this 
process of improvement of the analysis will continue in the future. 
Economic analysis 
The  economic  analysis  focuses  mainly  on  the  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial 
developments,  their  likely  future  dynamics,  and  any  implied  short  to  medium-term  risks  to  price 
stability. 
To fully assess the economic situation and the outlook for price stability, the Governing Council must 
be able to call on a variety of tools and models. However, judgement is also needed, particularly in 
assessing  the  likelihood  of  certain  hypothetical  scenarios  eventually  materialising.  The  Eurosystem 
staff macroeconomic projections constitute one important input into the monetary policy decision as a 
way of organising a large amount of information and helping to create a consistent picture of possible 
future developments. However, they cannot be made the sole tool for the conduct of monetary policy: 
economic forecasts never encompass all the relevant information, and they can never be a substitute 
for the judgement that is needed on the part of the policy-maker. 
A further important aspect of economic analysis is a thorough assessment of economic shocks and 
dynamics. In addition, expectations held by the private sector of future inflation and activity as well as 
economic forecasts provided by international organisations are analysed regularly. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 5
Monetary analysis 
As regards the analysis under the monetary pillar, the ECB decided from the outset to single out 
money from the set of selected key indicators that it would monitor and study closely. To mark the fact 
that, in the medium and long run, inflation is indeed a monetary phenomenon, the Governing Council 
announced a reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate. 
These decisions were made in recognition of the fact that monetary growth and inflation are closely 
related in the medium to long run. Indeed, assigning money an important role underpins the medium 
and  long-term  orientation  of  the  strategy.  It  helps  policy-makers  to  see  beyond  the  more  transient 
impact of the various shocks affecting the economy and to implement the adequate gradual course for 
the conduct of monetary policy. 
To underline the medium to long-term orientation of the analyses under its monetary pillar, the ECB 
has  always  emphasised  the  fact  that  there  would  be  no  strict  link  between  short-term  monetary 
developments  and  monetary  policy  decisions.  Monetary  policy  would  not, 
therefore,  react 
mechanically  to  deviations  of  M3  growth  from  the  reference  value.  Rather,  the  reference  value 
performs an important role as a medium to long-term quantitative benchmark for assessing monetary 
developments.  It  constantly  reminds  the  central  bank  of  the  fundamental  principle  that,  while 
responding  to  economic  developments,  it  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that,  over  sufficiently 
extended horizons, the rate of money growth must be consistent with the price stability objective. 
The ECB knew from the beginning that it is difficult in practice to extract information on price trends 
from the short-term movements in money. Developments in M3, which is our key monetary aggregate, 
can always be affected by smaller or larger shocks which are not necessarily related to inflation. In this 
respect, the period since 2000 has been exceptional. We have seen an unprecedentedly long period 
of stock market declines. This persistent weakness in global stock markets drove investors away from 
equity and induced a reallocation of portfolios of euro area non-MFI investors towards low-risk assets. 
As a consequence, for a rather long period of time, M3 growth has been distorted upwards without this 
necessarily signalling inflation risks. However, we thus far have little reason to assume that we have a 
breakdown in the long-term stability of money demand. 
The May 2003 clarification: the role of money in the strategy 
In its recent review of the strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB further emphasised the medium-
term orientation of its monetary analyses and clarified the role of monetary analysis in the strategy. 
On  8  May  2003,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  discontinue  its  earlier  practice  of  reviewing  the 
reference value for M3 on an annual basis. In the past, at the end of each year, the Governing Council 
had  reviewed  the  assumptions  about  the  medium-term  trends  in  potential  output  growth  and  the 
income  velocity  of  M3  underlying  the  derivation  of  the  reference  value  for  M3.  The  decision  to 
discontinue  the  regular  annual  review  is  more  in  line  with  the  medium  and  long-term  nature  of  the 
assumptions underlying the computation of the reference value. It may also help to dispel occasional 
misperceptions  in  the  public  that  the  former  practice  implied a  reference  value  that  was specifically 
applicable - like a monetary target - to the year ahead. The Governing Council will, however, continue 
to  monitor  the  validity  of  the  conditions  and  assumptions  underlying  the  reference  value  and 
communicate any changes to the underlying assumptions as soon as they become necessary. 
On  8  May  2003  the  Governing  Council  also  clarified  the  way  in  which  it  integrates  the  indications 
stemming from these two complementary analyses as it seeks to come to an overall judgement on 
the risks to price stability. In particular, it emphasised that the monetary analysis mainly serves as a 
means  of  cross-checking,  from  a  medium  to  long-term  perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term 
indications coming from the economic analysis. 
The ECB’s strategy and inflation-targeting strategies 
2.4 
The  two-pillar  framework,  in  conjunction  with  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy  conduct,  has  over  time  become  the  hallmark  of  the  ECB’s  strategy.  These  features,  among 
others,  distinguish  the  ECB’s  strategy  somewhat  from  the  approaches  implemented  by  some  other 
central banks, in particular from inflation-targeting strategies. The notion of inflation targeting has 
changed  over  time  and  it  is  not  a  clearly  defined  concept.  It  is  nevertheless  true  that  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy concept and the “inflation targeting” concept are relatively close in some respects: in 
particular the quantitative setting of the inflation target in the latter is close, without being identical, to 
the  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  in  the  ECB’s  concept.  In  both  cases  there  is  a  level  of 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2003
transparency and of accountability unequalled by other monetary policies. However, inflation targeting 
is sometimes seen as a framework that makes macroeconomic forecasts the main, or even the sole, 
all-encompassing  tool  of  the  policy-making  process  and  of  the  external  communication  of  policy 
decisions. In fact, in some, admittedly  more extreme characterisations, inflation targeting is seen to 
imply  a  simple  policy  rule  whereby  changes  in  interest  rates  should  feed  back  from  the  deviation 
between  a  conditional  inflation  forecast  and  the  inflation  objective  at  a  specific  fixed  time  horizon, 
typically around two years. 
I  have  already  explained  why  it  is  our  conviction  that  limiting  attention  to  an  ex  ante  fixed  horizon 
would be arbitrary and could induce sometimes short-sighted, sometimes delayed reactions. I should 
mention  the  recent  tendency  seen  in  some  inflation-targeting  central  banks  towards  relaxing  their 
emphasis on a fixed horizon, in favour of the more flexible medium-term notion. In this respect, we 
may see those central banks as moving closer to the approach adopted by the ECB. 
Our  monetary  policy  framework  acknowledges  the  need  to  flexibly  take  into  account  the  nature  of 
shocks  hitting  the  economy  and  the  prevailing  economic  circumstances.  Monetary  policy  needs  to 
focus on the period covering the whole transmission process, bearing in mind that this may sometimes 
span a protracted period of time. 
This flexibility, together with the special emphasis on a medium to long-term perspective for economic 
developments,  imparts  a  fundamental  robustness  to  the  ECB’s  policy.  As  I  mentioned  already,  the 
longer-term perspective of our policy is also underpinned by the emphasis on medium to long-term 
monetary analysis. 
As an important side effect, the regular examination of monetary trends might help to detect financial 
imbalances. There is often a strong positive correlation between credit growth and rapid rises in asset 
prices  in  the  run-up  to  a  speculative  bubble.  The  emergence  of  such  long-run  disequilibria  in  the 
economy has to be taken into account in setting monetary policy. Such fundamental imbalances may 
cause problems for the economy well beyond typical inflation forecast horizons. I note that this point of 
view  is  increasingly  also  considered  by  other  central  banks.  Our  framework,  with  its  emphasis  on 
monitoring money and credit developments and the sustainability of macroeconomic developments, is 
in this respect well equipped to take into account the implications of exceptionally strong dynamics in 
the financial markets in terms of potential risks to price stability over the long run. 
Limitations of economic forecasts 
As regards the role of forecasts and projections, it is our view that an exclusive focus on an inflation 
forecast would neither do justice to the intrinsic complexity of the decision-making process, nor would 
it  provide  a  transparent  means  of  communicating  this  complexity.  An  articulated  analysis  of  the 
economic forces at work in the economy is always preferable to the use of a single summary indicator. 
In practice, inflation forecasts and projections, but also other model-based exercises, are often subject 
to a number of well-known limitations, notably as regards the problem of model misspecification. The 
possible  presence  of  model  misspecification  is  something  that  economists  and  econometricians 
sometimes have difficulty in acknowledging. However, we are very well aware that every model we 
develop  contains  shortcuts  and  approximations.  This  uncertainty  is  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that 
economists do not agree upon a proper, commonly accepted approximating model. This implies that 
the appropriateness of a monetary policy strategy cannot be evaluated by means of just one particular 
model or class of models. Rather, a good candidate strategy needs to perform well across a variety of 
empirically plausible models, and it has to allow for the judgement of policy-making bodies. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  inflation  forecasts,  while  being  useful,  even  indispensable  ingredients  of 
monetary  policy  strategy,  cannot  be  the  only  input  into  monetary  policy-making.  The  same  inflation 
forecast figures can be associated with quite different states of the world, commanding quite different 
reactions  on  the  part  of  the  central  bank.  For  this  reason  too,  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  for 
maintaining price stability should always be made conditional on the circumstances and the nature and 
magnitude  of  the  threat  to  price  stability.  For  example,  it  would  depend  on  whether  a  shock  is 
temporary or permanent, on whether it has emerged on the supply or the demand side, or on whether 
it is of domestic or external origin. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 7
Conclusions on the strategy: continuity with the past and in the future 
2.5 
Let me conclude my remarks on the ECB’s monetary policy strategy by pointing out that the ECB’s 
Governing Council thinks that it has a sound and robust concept for the monetary policy strategy of the 
euro area. The fact is that this strategy has performed its task well from the outset. Let me highlight 
five points here. 
First, the ECB implements a clear monetary policy concept. The ECB is unambiguously bound to 
its  price stability  objective and  price  stability  is  clearly  defined.  The  strategy  makes  it  clear that  the 
ECB maintains a firm and steady hand to respond to disturbances in price stability. 
Second, the ECB’s policy reflects realism and pragmatism. The ECB recognises that the laws of 
motion of the economy are not easily reduced to a system of equations. Instead, the ECB’s strategy 
emphasises the broad principles that guide monetary policy. This flexibility helps to avoid some of the 
limitations and risks associated with more narrowly defined monetary policy strategies. 
Third,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  is  built  on  the  principle  of  robustness.  At  the  core  of  the 
strategy are fundamental and successfully tested results of monetary theory, which are robust across 
empirical analysis and theoretical models. The ECB’s monetary policy places particular emphasis on 
the need to take all relevant information and models into account when formulating policy decisions. 
Fourth,  our  framework  enhances  the  transparency  and  accountability  of  the  ECB.  The 
framework  helps  to  convey  to  the  public  the  complexity  surrounding  the  monetary  policy  process, 
providing  an  honest  account  of  all  the  relevant  factors  considered  in  monetary  policy  deliberations. 
Such  transparency  has  enhanced  the  effectiveness  of  external  communication,  thus  fostering  the 
process of transmission of monetary policy decisions to the economy. At the same time, the use of the 
same framework for external communication as for internal analysis has guaranteed consistency and 
improved public understanding of how monetary policy is conducted. Empirical studies show that the 
ECB  has  been,  in  the  eyes  of  the  market,  at  least  as,  if  not  even  more  predictable  in  its monetary 
policy decisions as most other central banks in the industrialised world. 
Fifth,  the  framework  provided  by  the  strategy  has  facilitated  the  debate  within  the  ECB’s 
decision-making  bodies.  In  the  decades  preceding  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  the  NCBs  forming  the 
Eurosystem  accumulated  a  wealth  of  mutually  consistent  yet  diverse  experiences  and  views.  The 
ECB’s strategy has provided a commonly accepted framework within which these various experiences 
and views contribute to policy decisions. 
I can assure you that we will build on this continuity with our previous experience also in the future. 
Indeed, our experience so far with the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy and the results of the 
recent evaluation give us the confidence to continue to implement our strategy with the same vigour 
and determination as in the past. 
3.  
Europe’s present challenges: elevating the growth potential through structural 
reforms and enhancing confidence in the fiscal strategy 
I  have  reviewed  the  main  achievements  of  the  ECB  so  far:  notably,  the  implementation  of  a sound 
monetary policy concept; the rapid build-up of credibility in the ECB; the fact that inflation and inflation 
expectations in the euro area have remained in line with our definition of price stability, in spite of the 
clustering  of sizeable  upward price  shocks  in  2000 and 2001;  and,  not  least,  the  fact  that we have 
successfully  averted  creeping  fears  of  deflation  amid  global  concerns  regarding  rapid  declines  in 
inflation or even deflation in some major markets. 
But I can assure you that we are not complacent about our past achievements. We recognise that new 
and important challenges are constantly emerging, and we are aware that credibility and confidence 
are  assets  that  central  banks  can  develop  only  gradually  but  that  can  be  lost  rapidly  if  the  central 
banks are not vigilant at all times. 
Elevating the growth potential through structural reforms 
More than ever there is in Europe a need to push ahead with structural reforms for enhancing the 
competitiveness of the euro area. Structural reforms in the labour and product markets, and in social 
security systems, are needed to allow a more flexible allocation and utilisation of capital and human 
resources,  thereby  enhancing  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential  and  facilitating  the  adjustment  to 
economic  shocks.  The  Governing  Council  very  strongly  supports  recent  and  ongoing  efforts  by  a 
8 
 BIS Review 52/2003
number  of  governments  in  this  direction  and  also  encourages  social  partners  to  fully  commit 
themselves  to  the  objective  of  making  the  euro  area  a  more  dynamic  and  innovative  economy  as 
called for by the “Lisbon agenda”, which was agreed upon by the European Council in 2000. 
At our press conference on 6 November I mentioned that one challenge for the Eurosystem would be 
to explain why structural reforms would enhance Europe’s growth potential. Such changes are always 
difficult  to  implement,  as  the  benefits  are  not  immediately  clear  to  many  citizens.  Explaining  to  the 
general public the reasons for and advantages of structural reforms is something we trust is important. 
What the euro area economy really needs is a higher long-term sustainable growth rate. 
Such a higher growth potential can be brought about via various channels: by enhancing productivity 
growth,  by  introducing  measures  that  facilitate  employment  creation  and  by  providing  incentives  for 
higher labour force participation and longer working hours for those who want them. I am convinced of 
the need to rely on all these channels. Such reforms should be designed to give a clear signal for job 
creation. We need convincing assurance that in the near future, as well as over the longer term, labour 
and product market rigidities will be substantially lower than what is currently the case. This is a crucial 
element for enhancing the confidence of workers and entrepreneurs, of consumers and of domestic as 
well as international investors. 
Sound supply-side policies should aim to increase the flexibility of the labour markets, reducing the 
disincentives to work. Such policies would enhance confidence that working hard and undertaking new 
investments in human and physical capital will not be penalised through costly rigidities. Entrepreneurs 
and international investors would invest more in equipment and research in the euro area and offer 
new  jobs.  Such  a  reform  agenda  would  enhance  supply-side  dynamics  and  thus  potential  output 
growth in many ways. 
Many  euro  area  countries  are  currently  at  a  crossroad.  If  they  pursue  and  fully  implement  these 
reforms, they have a good chance of prospering and maintaining the core features of solidarity and 
public  welfare.  That  is  why  we  firmly  support  governments  and  social  partners  that  courageously 
embark on those reforms. Failure to implement them would not only imply fewer new jobs and lower 
real income, but would also seriously call into question the sustainability of social security systems. It 
would, in the future, require much deeper cuts in the level of welfare than what is currently required. 
As a last resort, the reforms are particularly necessary for those who are unemployed and those who 
are most dependent on government support and who fully deserve our solidarity. 
If governments and social partners deliver those necessary reforms, I believe that we will not have to 
wait many years to see the first positive results. Indeed, impetus from structural reforms would set in 
motion a virtuous circle of increasing confidence and success in the reform process: the more credible 
the reforms are, the more confidence they will create, and the more confidence is created, the quicker 
we will see the positive results. 
The  upswing  which  we  currently  foresee  is  a  first  sign  that  confidence  is  returning,  and  that  some 
governments  have  seriously  started  to  discuss  structural  reforms.  It  is  essential  that  the  reforms 
currently  being  discussed  are  carried  out,  otherwise  disappointment  will  be  great  and  employment 
creation will suffer. 
Enhancing confidence in fiscal policies through compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact 
Growth and job creation depend not only on monetary stability and structural reforms but also on the 
improved  confidence  of  the  various  constituencies  of  economic  agents.  And  confidence  depends 
very much on the soundness of fiscal policies. This is why we encourage all governments concerned 
to display their willingness to abide by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. By doing so, they will 
reduce public spending, which is conducive to growth through the alleviation of unproductive spending 
and reduction of costs in the economy. By doing so, they will credibly reduce public finance deficits, 
which  is  conducive  to  growth  by  helping  diminish  medium  and  long-term  market  interest  rates.  By 
doing so, they will improve the confidence of the household and business constituencies, notably by 
guaranteeing that taxation will not increase in future years and therefore they will foster growth through 
more dynamic consumption and investment. 
In this respect it is clear that there is a very close relationship between the structural reforms already 
mentioned and sound fiscal policies. Structural reforms in state and local authorities’ spending and in 
social security management are vital to create room for manoeuvre, facilitating the reduction of deficits 
and - if there is enough room to permit it - the reduction of taxes. 
BIS Review 52/2003 
 9
Positive spillover effects from structural policies for the conduct of monetary policy 
You may ask what all this has to do with monetary policy. First, as the central bank responsible for the 
euro area, we place great value on seeing a major necessary condition for growth, job creation and 
prosperity for current and future generations being fulfilled: ensuring price stability, confidence in the 
euro  and  its  purchasing  power  is  our  own  decisive  contribution  to  sustainable  growth.  And  this 
contribution  is  less  difficult  to  deliver  in  an  environment  where  governments  and  social  partners 
contribute to confidence and potential output growth. 
I would also like to emphasise the strong complementarities of carrying out sound policies in the 
different  fields.  Policies  that  contribute  to  lower  current  and  future  taxes,  moderate  labour  cost 
increases  and  higher  productivity  in  the  euro  area  could  allow  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price 
stability  by  keeping  rates  relatively  low  as  long  as  aggregate  demand  lags  behind  supply-side 
dynamics. By contrast, non-disciplined fiscal policies, wage increases in excess of productivity growth 
and  higher  taxes  would  undermine  confidence  and  thus  reduce  potential  output  and  longer-term 
growth. Such a situation could soon lead to unwelcome inflationary pressures if not counteracted by 
monetary policy. 
Overall conclusions 
4. 
EMU is based on the conviction that Europe can derive strong benefits from a “culture of stability and 
confidence” in which there is a clear allocation of responsibilities to different policy-makers. Monetary 
policy  has  made  its  contribution  to  achieving  this  aim.  Price  stability  is  ensured  and  inflation 
expectations  have  been  well  anchored  in  the  medium  and  long-run.  Thanks  to  the  high  level  of 
confidence in the euro we have a financial environment all over the euro area which is favourable to 
growth and job creation. 
In the field of fiscal policies the arguments in favour of the Stability and Growth Pact are not simply 
based on fiscal orthodoxy for the sake of orthodoxy. They are based upon fiscal soundness for the 
sake of fostering sustainable growth and job creation. 
This is the reason why I very profoundly wish and hope that all partners concerned will, in the coming 
days,  live  up  to  their  responsibilities:  the  Commission,  the  Council,  the  governments concerned,  so 
that  we  can  not  only  preserve  but  reinforce  the  overall  credibility  of  the  euro  area,  and  therefore 
growth. 
Finally,  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  euro  area  must  be  increased.  The  current  rate  of  potential 
output growth of the euro area is not sufficient to address the long-term challenges of Europe and, in 
particular,  the  high  rates  of  unemployment.  The  full  and  rapid  implementation  of  the  Lisbon  reform 
agenda on which we all agree must be supported and is wholeheartedly supported by the European 
Central Bank. It is the long-term prosperity of Europe’s citizens that is at stake. 
10 
 BIS Review 52/2003
