Kristina Persson: Economic conditions and welfare in Sweden and the Nordic 
countries  
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at Union conference of the 
Nordic Teachers’ Council, Marienlust, 23 October 2003. 
 Thank you for your invitation to participate in this conference.  
I would like to begin by clarifying the Riksbank's role after the referendum in which the Swedish people 
said  a  clear  "no"  to  introducing  the  euro  in  Sweden.  Then,  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to 
account for our current view of the economic outlook and inflation prospects. I shall do this in the light 
of  the  year's  third  Inflation  Report,  which  was  published  last  week.  This  formed  the  basis  for  the 
Executive  Board's  decision  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged.  Subsequently,  I  shall  discuss  some 
longer-term factors that are of great importance for welfare in the Nordic countries.  
Different economic-policy situations in the Nordic countries 
The  result  of  the  referendum  means  that  the  Riksbank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  as 
before. The repo rate is set according to the outlook for economic activity and inflation in Sweden. The 
Riksbank has defined the objective of monetary policy, to maintain price stability, as keeping the rate 
of change of consumer prices at 2 per cent, with a tolerance for deviations of +/- 1 percentage point. 
The Riksbank's experiences of inflation targeting have been positive, and there is therefore no reason 
to change our monetary policy strategy as a result of the referendum outcome.  
Ahead of the referendum, I believed that the advantages of a single currency in Europe outweighed 
the  loss  of  a  monetary  policy  adapted to  a  specific  level  of  Swedish  economic  activity.  The  debate 
ahead of the referendum sometimes gave the impression that the monetary policy regimes in Sweden 
and the euro area are different. In actual fact our monetary policies are similar, as we both have an 
inflation  target,  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  an  independent  central  bank.  One  difference  is  that 
monetary policy in Sweden is based on Swedish conditions, while that in the euro area is based on 
average developments in prices and economic activity in the area as a whole. 
The  Nordic  countries  have  different  economic-policy  situations.  Sweden,  Finland  and  Denmark  are 
members of the EU. But Norway and Iceland, who have chosen to remain outside the EU, also enjoy 
the four freedoms, i.e. free movement for capital, goods, services and labour, through the EEA Treaty. 
Finland  has  taken  a  step  further  in  the  EU  cooperation  by  participating  fully  in  EMU  since  1999. 
Consequently,  Finland  no  longer  has  its  own  currency  and  does  not  conduct  a  national  monetary 
policy. Denmark has not introduced the euro but participates in the exchange rate mechanism, ERM II. 
This means that the Danish krone has a fixed exchange rate with the euro and that interest rates in 
practice track those of the euro area. In Norway monetary policy is now similar to that in Sweden, with 
an explicit domestic inflation target.  
In spite of the differences between the Nordic countries, our central banks cooperate closely with each 
other.  The  central  bank  governors  meet  regularly  for  discussions,  and  once  a  year  there  is  a  big 
meeting  between  the  central  banks'  Executive  Boards  and  a  number  of  experts,  depending  on  the 
themes that are up for discussion. Together with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania the Nordic countries are 
jointly  represented  in  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  World  Bank.  This  has  partly 
resulted in close cooperation between the countries' respective central banks on all issues related to 
the  IMF.  Furthermore,  a  memorandum  of  understanding  was  recently  signed  by  the  Nordic  central 
banks regarding the management of financial crises. There is also a continuous exchange of expertise 
between the Nordic central banks. 
The Riksbank expects moderate inflation 
The  Riksbank's  monetary  policy  remit  is  to  adjust  interest  rates  with  a  view  to  influencing  price 
developments so that inflation is 2 per cent one to two years ahead. As a basis for our decisions, we 
carry out regular forecasts of inflation and economic activity in Sweden. Thus, at our monetary policy 
meetings,  we  in  the  Executive  Board  must  decide  whether  inflation  is  forecast  to  be  above  target, 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
which usually implies raising the repo rate, or whether it will be below target, thereby resulting in a 
repo rate cut.  
Last  week  the  Riksbank  presented  a  new  assessment  of  economic  and  inflation  prospects  in  this 
year's third Inflation Report, which led to our decision to leave the repo rate unchanged. 
Assessment of economic activity and inflation 
It is our assessment that there has been an improvement in the economic outlook for Sweden and the 
world economy since June. But the picture is neither clear-cut nor problem-free. Economic conditions 
in Europe have continued to be gloomy, with several countries experiencing a decline in GDP during 
the second quarter, in particular large countries such as Germany and France. Elsewhere, mainly in 
the US, expansionary economic policy appears to have had some impact. This has been reflected in 
high  consumption  and  signs  of  a  recovery  in  business  investment.  The  positive  signals  have  been 
mirrored in rising equity prices and long yields in the financial markets. Moreover, in the US labour 
market  there  are  indications  of  a  possible  turnaround,  which  is  a  precondition  for  a  sustainable 
upswing in economic activity. Asia has also been witnessing relatively favourable economic conditions, 
particularly in China, where economic growth has been approximately 8 per cent per year. In Sweden, 
GDP growth was somewhat more robust during the first half of this year than we previously thought, 
and the outlook for the economy appears now to be slightly brighter. Adding to this is the repo rate 
cuts  totalling 0.75  percentage  points  during  the  summer.  However,  in  the  labour  market,  conditions 
remain weak. 
Inflation  has  fallen  back  since  June  but  not  as  much  as  we  had  expected.  This  is  because  energy 
prices have not dropped as forecast. This decline will now come somewhat later. Excluding energy 
prices, inflation two years ahead is expected to be on target.  
Risk factors for Swedish inflation 
What  then  are  the  risks  and  threats  that  we  see  regarding  a  continued  improve-ment  in  economic 
activity?  In  the  Riksbank's  Inflation  Reports,  we  always  assess  the  risk  of  inflation  being  higher  or 
lower  than  in  the  main  scenario  that  we  present,  which  in  turn  is  closely  related  to  our  forecast  of 
future economic activity.  
There is a risk that international economic activity will be slacker than in our main scenario. In the US, 
the large deficits in the public finances and current account may prompt a rise in long-term interest 
rates,  which  in  turn  would  hamper  consumption  and  investment.  The  large  current  account  deficit 
implies  that  there  has  been  a  substantial  flow  of  capital  to  the  US  from  abroad.  Good  productivity 
growth and high GDP growth have so far contributed to considerable confidence in the US economy. 
This has enabled the US to attract international investors. But should investors believe that they risk 
earning less or risk losing money by investing in US assets, their interest will wane. This could give 
rise  to  both  a  weaker  dollar  and  a  rise  in  bond  yields.  While  a  weaker  dollar  would  facilitate  the 
necessary adjustment to a smaller current account deficit in the US, it would also be likely to delay 
economic recovery in Europe. A dramatic depreciation of the dollar cannot be ruled out either.  
In Europe, the strained budget situations in mainly Germany and France also constitute a source of 
uncertainty. Savings in the public finances and a weak labour market risk subduing consumption and 
thereby delaying a revival. The combination of imbalances in the US and the sluggish growth in the 
euro area risk derailing an economic upswing, and could perhaps even result in a decline.  
According  to  the  Riksbank's  assessment,  the  risks  to  Swedish  inflation  prospects  posed  by  weaker 
international economic activity are balanced by the risk of higher inflation in Sweden. New collective-
wage agreements will be negotiated at the beginning of next year for employees in the private and 
central government sectors. Wages are the single most important factor for inflation and are therefore 
always  associated  with  inflation  risks.  But  unlike  the  last  big  wage  bargaining  round,  which  was 
initiated  during  the  final  stages  of  an  economic  boom,  these  negotiations  will  be  conducted  when 
demand in the labour market is weak.  
Nevertheless, there are tensions in the labour market that could result in wage rises that increase cost 
and inflationary pressures. Furthermore, energy prices have not fallen as much as we expected during 
the summer, which means that the risks of contagion effects have increased somewhat.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
Growth and welfare in the long run  
A  monetary  policy  that  leads  to  price  stability  creates  favourable  conditions  for  economic  activities, 
consumption,  trade  and  investment.  But  monetary  policy  in  itself  cannot  generate  growth.  Other 
economic policy decisions can, however, especially those that affect people's willingness to work and 
invest in new businesses. 
Between 1975 and 1995 Sweden lost its previously so prominent position in the world. These years 
were also characterised by substantial wage increases and high inflation. Average inflation during this 
period was 8 per cent per year. We also lagged behind our Nordic neighbours. Had we experienced 
the  same  growth  as  Norway,  Denmark  and  Finland  during  these  years,  the  standard  of  living  in 
Sweden today would be about 20 per cent higher. Partly as a result of the economic policies of the 
1970s and 1980s, Sweden found itself in serious economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. This 
led  to  large  deficits  in  both  the  central  government  budget  and  the  current  account,  as  well  as  to 
unemployment that quadrupled in the space of a few years. It was the largely the lessons drawn from 
this crisis that formed the basis for the changes in economy policy at the beginning of the 1990s. 
It was then that price stability was introduced as the objective of monetary policy. As regards fiscal 
policy, an expenditure ceiling and surplus target for central government expenditure were introduced, 
while cutbacks were also implemented. Moreover, entry into the EU and reforms in the tax and social 
security systems helped create better conditions for economic growth.  
Today, Sweden's central government finances are healthy, there is a surplus in the current account, 
inflation expectations are anchored around the Riksbank's target of 2 per cent and unemployment has 
fallen to a level that is far below the European average.  
Potential growth 
The  decisive  factor  for  economic  growth  and  thereby  the  resources  available  for  wage  increases, 
earnings or an expansion of the public sector is the economy's long-term production capacity. Another 
term for this is potential growth, which determines the rate at which the economy can grow without 
giving rise to inflationary pressures. So it is demand in the economy in relation to production capacity 
that  to  a  large  extent  determines  the  future  path  for  inflation.  Potential  growth  is  therefore  of  vital 
importance for monetary policy.  
In turn, the long-term production capacity is determined by how much we work (the labour supply) and 
how productive we are (productivity). The labour supply depends partly on the number of people that 
work and the number of hours each person works. Important factors here include the age structure in 
the economy and the number of people on sick leave. Productivity is partly dependent on investment 
and technological progress - for example that machinery becomes more modern or that it is employed 
more  efficiently.  Educational  levels  also  affect  productivity.  Knowledge  can  be  put  into  practice  in 
production and increase opportunities to assimilate new ideas and innovations.  
The labour supply 
Because labour force participation varies so much in different age groups, the future age structure is 
highly  significant  for  the  labour  supply  and  thereby  also  for  growth.  The  Nordic  countries  have 
generally  high  activity  rates,  around  87  per  cent  in  the  age  group  25-54,  compared  with  the  other 
European countries. In the oldest age group, participation has decreased over the last 10 years. One 
reason for this is that the retirement age has fallen. In Sweden today, the actual age of retirement is 62 
years. The only group in which there has been a rise in the labour supply in recent years is elderly 
women, since those that live to a higher age today are better educated than their predecessors.  
The  proportion  of  elderly  in  the  population  is  growing  larger  throughout  Europe,  and  the  Nordic 
countries are no exception. At present, 16 per cent of the European population are 65 years or older. 
This percentage is forecast to increase to 18 percent by 2010. If we look instead at the number of 
people over 80 years in Europe, this will double over the next 15 years. 
According to Statistics Sweden, the proportion of people in Sweden that are 65 years or older will rise 
from 17 per cent today to 23 per cent in 2050. Meanwhile, the economically active proportion of the 
population, those between 20 and 64 years, will decline from 59 per cent in 2002 to 54 per cent in 
2050. So, from having experienced a rise of almost one million people between 1950 and 2000, this 
group will increase by half as much, or by half a million people, over the next 50 years.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
This trend means, according to Statistics Sweden's forecasts, that the economically active population 
in Sweden will have to support an increasingly large percentage of the young and old. Today, each 
person of working age supports 0.7 people that do not work. By 2050, it is forecast that each worker 
will have to support 0.84 people. If we only look at the elderly, there are 0.29 people that are 65 years 
or older for every worker. By 2050 this ratio is forecast to have risen to 0.42. These developments will 
entail ever increasing demands on higher labour force participation among the elderly. According to a 
study by Statistics Sweden, the percentage of Sweden's retirement pensioners that have to work to 
support themselves is forecast to rise by 50 per cent by 2035.   
One  part  solution  to  the  problem  comes  from  the  immigrant  population.  It  is  people  with  a  foreign 
background that are forecast to account for the net contribution to the economically active population. 
By 2015 it is forecast that approximately every fifth person in Sweden between 20 and 64 years will 
have been born outside Sweden or have foreign-born parents. Meanwhile, the number of Swedes with 
Swedish-born parents will be fewer in 2015 than in 2000.  
People  with  a  foreign  background  in  Sweden  have  found  it  difficult  to  get  a  foot-hold  in  the  labour 
market. Employment among people with a foreign background is around 30 per cent lower on average 
than among native Swedes. Were the employment rate for this group to be as high as the average for 
Sweden's population, employment would rise by 96,000 people. 
Finally, the decisive factor for the labour supply is how many hours we work. The number of hours 
worked has fallen recently for several reasons: overtime has declined, part-time work has increased 
and absence to care for own children has also risen. But the single biggest reason and consequently 
the most serious problem in Sweden is sick leave. Both the number and length of absences due to 
sickness have risen sharply in recent years, thus entailing a reduction in working hours per employee. 
Three  years  ago  the  number  of  hours  worked  increased  by  2.7  per  cent.  Last  year  the  number 
decreased by 1.2 per cent.   
Larger proportion of elderly entails increased demands 
The  age  composition  will  place  great  demands  on  welfare  services,  increasing  further  the  need  for 
labour. In Sweden the number of people that are judged to require extensive care, i.e. those that are 
85 years or older, will double up to 2035.1 This is expected to result in greater pressure on the public 
finances since the costs for care rise steeply in line with increasing age. All in all, public expenditure 
on pensions, nursing and geriatric care is forecast to rise from about 18 per cent to around 23 per cent 
of GDP around 2030.  
Furthermore, a smaller labour supply and thereby lower production implies lower central-government 
receipts from employer contributions and income tax, for instance. A relevant example from Sweden is 
the costs of sick leave. If the Government's target of halving the number of sick days up to 2008 were 
to be attained, estimates from the National Institute for Economic Research show that the number of 
hours worked could be 0.4 percentage points higher per year up to 2008. If productivity were to remain 
unchanged, this could result in higher GDP growth of just over 0.4 percentage points per year over the 
period 2003-2008, thus enabling an improvement in the public finances of SEK 45 billion during the 
period.  These  resources  could  be  used  to  enhance  care  and  education  -  or  to  reduce  the  central 
government debt and thereby create greater scope for borrowing in the future when we are more likely 
to need it.  
When  our  requirements  grow  in  relation  to  our  resources,  it  naturally  brings  questions  about  the 
organisation and financing of welfare to the fore. The Nordic countries have a long tradition of dealing 
with welfare issues and a comparatively large public sector that provides, for instance, healthcare and 
nursing, education and geriatric care. Important issues on the political agenda in the future will be how 
the Nordic welfare model should be renewed to make it both economically and socially sustainable. 
Will we once again be able to serve as a model for other countries during the change that the whole of 
Europe now faces? 
Regardless  of  the  chosen  model,  our  demographic  situation  will  require  measures  that  result  in  a 
higher average number of hours worked, a larger number of workers e.g. pensioners, and an increase 
in immigration. This assumes that we want to keep or enhance our welfare system.  
                                                      
1   Swedish Association of Local Authorities, "Aktuellt om äldreomsorgen" (Current trends in geriatric care), October 2003. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
Productivity growth can help 
When the long-term growth rate receives little or no contribution from the labour supply, dependency 
on labour productivity increases. Compared with other countries, Sweden has thus far performed well 
in  terms  of  productivity  growth.  During  the  1990s  productivity  has  risen  by  2  per  cent  per  year  or 
slightly more. This is a clear improvement on the 1980s when productivity growth was around 1 per 
cent per year, and even more so compared with the 1970s when the trend was actually negative. So it 
is productivity rather than the labour supply that has fuelled growth in recent years. This also applies to 
the  other  Nordic  countries,  al-though  the  labour  supply  has  made  a  bigger  contribution  than  in 
Sweden.  
The  particularly  steep  rise  in  labour  productivity  during  the  1990s  was  due  to  several  factors.  One 
important  factor  was  that  many  low-productivity  firms  went  bankrupt  in  connection  with  the  sharp 
economic  slowdown  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  while  other  firms  implemented  cutbacks  of  low-
skilled labour that had less qualified tasks. When the economy began to grow again there was plenty 
of  unemployed  labour,  and  it  was  possible  to  attain  high  growth  without  inflation  gathering  pace. 
Another cause was the IT boom towards the end of the 1990s, which also contributed to productivity 
growth. In the years ahead, we can also expect to have good productivity growth in Sweden.  
Increases in productivity growth can be a solution for large parts of the corporate sector, but this is 
less often the case for parts of the public sector. Quality care and education often require a strong 
presence  of  human  labour.  Nevertheless,  there  is  probably  much  to  be  gained  by  organising  and 
financing the public sector in new ways. The contribution made by trade union organisations in this 
regard  could  prove  to  be  a  decisive  success  factor.  Here,  the  Nordic  countries  have  an  advantage 
over others through a high degree of organisation and an established cooperation between employers 
and employees. 
The education sector also faces considerable challenges. When the current generation of teachers in 
Sweden  retire,  a  substantial  increase  in  new  teachers  will  be  needed.  According  to  the  National 
Labour Market Board, the number of new recruitments required to replace retired teachers is forecast 
to  come  to  around  100,000  up  to  and  including  2015.  This  is  40  per  cent  of  the  number  currently 
employed. Recruitment difficulties are forecast to begin within certain teacher categories as early as 
2006. This means that measures must be taken immediately to ensure a satisfactory supply of staff in 
the future. 
Investing in education is different to investing in care. Education is unique in the sense that it can be 
an investment to both increase productivity and to increase fairness. A society that for various reasons 
is forced to accept increasing income gaps can to some extent make up for this by providing education 
on terms that enable real freedom of choice and opportunities for everyone. 
Monetary policy and wage formation 
The labour supply is a problem in both the short and long term. If it is not dealt with through measures 
that increase the labour supply - e.g. by reducing sick leave, raising working hours per employee or 
through  an  influx  of  foreign  labour  -  potential  growth  in  the  Swedish  economy  may  decline.  The 
Riksbank may then be forced to curb demand in the economy through interest rate rises at a lower 
level of growth than during the last ten years.  
In coming years, when actual growth is expected to approach and gradually reach its potential level, 
the labour market's ability to ensure satisfactory wage formation will be put to the test. While we don't 
believe  that  resource  utilisation  will  exert  any  pressure  on  prices  and  wages  so  soon,  increasing 
demands  for  restraint  will  be  placed  on  labour  market  organisations  as  economic  activity  gains 
impetus.  
Concluding remarks   
The  main  problem  that  I  have  discussed  has  been  the  implications  of  an  ageing  population  for  the 
Nordic countries and the resultant imbalance between the supporters and the supported. The problem 
is  aggravated  further  by  the  fact  that  it  will  become  difficult  to  maintain  high  taxes  as  a  result  of 
globalisation. So the great challenge facing the Nordic welfare states in the future is a combination of 
two processes that are both important and difficult to influence.  
BIS Review 46/2003 
 5
The  demographic  changes  will  entail  a  loss  in  tax  receipts  due  to  fewer  people  in  work  while 
expenditure on pensions and healthcare will rise. At the same time, globalisation and openness has 
made it easier to transfer money abroad or to live and work in other countries. Our tax bases have in 
other words become more mobile, which reduces the scope for high-tax policies.  
In  Sweden  we  have  taken  certain  preparatory  measures,  including  a  reformed  pension  system  to 
enable  the  public  finances  to  bear  the  costs  of  an  increasing  number  of  retirers.  In  this  respect, 
Sweden  has  been  a  leading  country  from  a  European  perspective.  We  have  also  consolidated  our 
public finances thanks to our surplus target. This has laid firmer foundations to meet future demands. 
The question is whether it is enough. Sweden's weak point is the number of hours worked. In relation 
to the total demands on resources, there are already far too few that can or want to work full-time.  
The demographic situation will therefore place great demands on innovation. It is likely that employers 
will be forced to make better use of their labour, recruit from abroad and support people to be mobile 
so that they can find the right tasks in life. Employees will have to realise that if too many choose not 
to work, the welfare system will collapse. People that no longer feel satisfied with their work must think 
of  alternative  ways  of  supporting  themselves.  The  welfare  model  must  be  designed  to  encourage 
people to work.  
Great demands will be placed on society to think in a longer-term strategic manner so that changes 
can be implemented in time. Competition in Europe for the young, and especially the well-educated, 
will be fierce. More people will have to want to stay in or move to our countries. Immigrants must be 
integrated quickly and successfully. Next year ten accession countries will join the EU and become a 
part of the free market. The enlargement of the EU and the establishment of a common labour market 
around  the  Baltic  could  perhaps  increase  the  potential  for  an  influx  of  foreign  labour  to  the  Nordic 
countries. But poorer countries further away are likely to offer greater potential - and pose a bigger 
challenge. 
So it is not the Nordic central banks that possess the instruments for or solutions to these problems. 
But if other policy areas are effective, it will help us to fulfil our objectives, i.e. to ensure price stability 
and thereby also favourable economic growth. 
It will require great leadership, a lot of cooperation and a high degree of openness in many areas in 
society. In particular, I believe that you, as teachers and participants in teachers' trade unions, have a 
vital role to play in this exciting process.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2003
