Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Launch of International Centre for Leadership in Finance 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Official 
Launch of International Centre For Leadership In Finance (ICLIF), Kuala Lumpur, 28 October 2003. 
 Yang Amat Berhormat, Dato Seri Dr. Mahathir, Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to the official launch of the International Centre for 
Leadership  in  Finance  (ICLIF).  This  Centre  is  being  established  with  the  objective  of  providing  a 
focused and co-ordinated approach towards the development of world class leaders in the financial 
services sector in Malaysia and in the region.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  unprecedented  economic  and  financial  transformations  in  this  decade  have  created  new 
operating  environments  that  demand  new  leadership  skills.  This  is  most  evident  in  the  financial 
services sector which has become increasingly more complex, more competitive, more uncertain and 
ambiguous and more challenging. 
It is therefore essential to have leaders who are able to see the new emerging opportunities, deal with 
the high level of unpredictability and navigate through turbulent conditions. The pressure on leaders 
has become increasingly more immense. In emerging market economies where our aspirations are to 
elevate our level of performance and development, the demands are even greater. Indeed, in this new 
environment the role of leadership has changed. Our objective in the establishment of the International 
Centre for Leadership in Finance (ICLIF) is to contribute to this process of developing a generation of 
leaders  in  the  financial  services  sector  that  will  achieve  our  objectives  in  the  development  of  the 
financial sector in particular, and our overall economic prospects in general as we advance forward in 
this new environment.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  are  most  honoured  today  by  the  presence  of  Yang  Amat  Berhormat  Dato  Seri  Dr.  Mahathir 
Mohamad to launch our International Centre for Leadership in Finance. This is particularly special in 
view  of  the  leadership  he  has  demonstrated  for  a  period  of  more  than  two  decades  in  bringing 
Malaysia to our present level of development and prosperity. The most significant being his leadership 
in overcoming the 1997-1999 financial crisis experienced by our region. It represents a lasting legacy. 
In the most testing of times during the crisis, critical decisions were made with the firm conviction that 
it is a country’s legitimate right to defend itself during extreme conditions. At that time, we were able to 
avoid being put under an IMF programme as we were in a position to meet and repay all our foreign 
obligations.  We  have  since  emerged  from  this  turbulence  much  strengthened  and  on  a  solid  and 
steady growth path. Indeed, this is one debt that the country will not be able to repay. Malaysia will 
always be indebted to you, Yang Amat Berhormat, for your leadership and your vision.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The financial sector in our region has now reached a new stage of development. Over the years, the 
role of  the  financial system  has  evolved,  facilitating  the  various  stages of  development and  growth. 
Increasingly, the financial services industry is also becoming a source of growth, especially as several 
countries  in  the  region  are  moving  towards  a  knowledge-based  and  services-led  economy.  In  the 
process, the dynamic changes taking place are also being driven by technological advances and an 
increasingly competitive environment.  
As  financial  restructuring  and  reforms  progress  to  a  more  advanced  stage,  financial  institutions  are 
also  moving  on  to  make  the  necessary  adjustments  to  become  more  productive,  innovative,  and 
strategically more focused. Efforts are now focused not only on the creation of a sound and resilient 
financial sector but towards institutional development and capacity building of the financial sector to 
elevate  it  to  a  higher  level  of  performance,  efficiency  and  excellence.  This  represents  an  important 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
phase in the development of the financial sector as highlighted in our 10-year Financial Sector Master 
Plan  that  was  released  almost  three  years  ago.  It  represents  an  important  development  prior  to 
moving towards a more deregulated and liberalised environment. In this context, we are envisaging 
forward-looking financial institutions that will be able to face the challenges of financial liberalisation 
and globalisation as we progress into our next stage of development.  
In this context, leaders need to be visionary to see future trends focused on organisational vision, to 
stay competitive and be able to adapt rapidly to changes. In addition leaders need to take into account 
the corporate social responsibility so that the profit mindset is balanced against the objective of long-
term sustainability. When we talk about enhancing leadership capability we are talking about leaders 
who  are  continuous  learners,  who  are  on  the  cutting  edge  of  excellence,  leaders  who  have  strong 
convictions and beliefs, and yet having humility and recognising the need to reinvent themselves and 
inspire  their  organization  to  adapt  to  the  new  challenges  and  changes.  This  is  vital  if  the  financial 
services sector is to forge ahead and remain at the forefront of new innovations, an element that is 
critical to securing long-term competitiveness. We need the remarkable force of corporate leaders to 
fuel the drive towards long-term growth and stability. We need dynamic leaders to push the frontiers of 
excellence – leaders who are constantly learning and possess the courage to take on new challenges. 
In this process, avenues for continuous learning must be actively sought. 
The establishment of ICLIF is part of our commitment towards providing such an avenue to enhance 
our leadership capability and develop world-class leaders in the financial services sector. Towards this 
endeavour,  the  Centre  is  currently  in  the  process  of  developing  a  unique  leadership  competency 
model that will analyse and understand what makes for great corporate leaders in our regional context. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Centre  is  putting  together  a  world-class  Global  Leadership  Development 
Program (GLDP) with leading consultants and drawing faculty from the best schools in the world. The 
Global Leadership Development Program represents ground-breaking design in terms of an executive 
education program. By drawing faculty from not just one or two, but up to five leading institutions, the 
Centre will be able to combine the best ideas and thoughts in the world on the various key leadership 
issues  and  concerns.  The  Centre’s  role  will  not  be  to  replicate  the  roles  of  institutions  of  higher 
learning,  but  rather  to  facilitate  and  provide  specific,  directed  and  targeted  learning  based  on  the 
requirements of our industry. 
In  addition  to  its  Board  of  Directors,  the  Centre  will  also  be  governed  by  an  International  Advisory 
Panel  comprising  eminent  personalties.  In  the  process,  participants  will  benefit  from  the  best  of  all 
worlds  in  terms  of  the  latest  thinking  on  leadership  issues.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  Centre  will  also 
serve  to  complement  and  supplement  the  existing  capacity  building  facilities  in  the  financial  and 
corporate  sector  to  become  a  regional  centre  of  excellence  for  leadership  training  in  finance.  The 
Centre  aims  to  reinforce  the  notion  that  investments  in  human  capital,  including  the  pursuit  of 
leadership excellence, is a continuing process in this ever-changing environment so as to enhance the 
calibre of our human capital in the financial and corporate sector in meeting the challenges ahead as 
we advance forward in this new millennium.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
