Lars Nyberg: Current financial stability issues 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Riksdag  Standing 
Committee on Finance, Stockholm, 25 November 2003. 
 Allow me to begin by thanking you for your invitation to come here and speak about the Riksbank’s 
work  on  financial  stability.  In  the  same  way  that  the  Standing  Committee  has  the  opportunity  to 
regularly  question  the  Riksbank  Governor  about  monetary  policy,  it  is  natural  that  the  Committee 
should also be able to learn about the Riksbank’s stability efforts. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  banking  crisis,  the  Riksbank  began  to  develop  its  expertise  and  analytical 
capacity with regard to stability issues. In autumn 1997, the Riksbank published the first report with a 
more coherent analysis of financial stability. The Riksbank became the first central bank to present its 
view of stability publicly. Other countries were more hesitant about speaking openly about stability in 
the  financial  system.  Their  opinion  was  that  it  would  nevertheless  be  impossible  to  be  open  about 
these issues in the event a crisis should occur. The Riksbank’s attitude, however, was that it is better 
to be open. Discussing risks and vulnerabilities at an early stage would enable crises to be avoided. 
Moreover, the experiences of transparency in the area of price stability were positive. 
Today,  some  thirty  countries  have  followed  suit.  Repeated  financial  crises  have  made  it  clear  that 
there will always be problems to take account of and that authorities can therefore be benefited by a 
structured approach to financial stability. 
Banks are the focus of our work on financial stability. This is because banks are the institutions that 
ensure the functioning of the payment system. Experience shows that if individuals and companies are 
unable  to  make  ordinary  payments,  or  if  the  credit  function  in  society  is  disrupted,  this  has  highly 
adverse effects on the economy. Insurance companies are also important in society, but they are not 
system-critical in the same way as banks. I intend to return to the subject of insurance companies later 
on as they are undeniably in the spotlight at present. 
But  banks  are  not  only  important  for  stability;  their  balance  sheets  also  contain  a  built-in  source  of 
instability.  Banks’  funding  is  generally  short  term  in  nature  and  can  quickly  disappear,  while  their 
assets have long maturities and cannot be realised as quickly. Should depositors and financiers lose 
confidence  in  a  bank,  it  could  face  an  acute  liquidity  crisis.  Moreover,  problems  in  one  bank  can 
spread to other banks. This can happen because they have liabilities to one another due to loans or 
securities trading, or because they participate in the payment system. Contagion effects can also arise 
if  other  economic  players  suspect  that  there  are  connections  between  the  banks.  Banks  can  then 
encounter difficulties, even if the original suspicions were entirely unfounded. 
As a result of these factors, banks operate within the bounds of a strict regulatory framework and are 
subject to public supervision. Finansinspektionen has primary responsibility for prudential supervision 
of individual banks. The Riksbank oversees the banking system as a whole and attempts to assess 
the risks that could arise in it in both the short and long term. Of course, there is some overlap in the 
tasks of both Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank, but it is sometimes fruitful to approach a problem 
from somewhat different angles. I am also of the opinion that the cooperation between the authorities 
works well. 
If a crisis were to actually occur in spite of regulations and supervision - and this can happen as we 
know  -  the  Government  may  need  to  take  action.  The  Riksbank’s  task  in  a  crisis  is  to  provide 
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to the banks that have run into liquidity problems. Allow me to 
underscore, however, that it is far from certain that a bank in difficulty will be given ELA. Since all our 
experience says that it is easier to provide assistance than not, especially when decisions have to be 
made under time constraints, there is reason to carefully consider such a measure - and to be well 
prepared. It would be serious if the banks were to feel certain that they would automatically be given 
assistance in the event of difficulties. Such thinking could cause them to take unnecessary risks. Were 
the crisis to spread to other healthier banks than the bank that requested ELA, perhaps the Riksbank 
should concentrate its liquidity injections to these banks in order to rescue the system rather than the 
bank itself. 
If the problems in a bank are of a more serious nature, whereby its solvency - that is the bank’s ability 
to meet its long-term obligations - rather than its liquidity is in question, this is more an issue for the 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 1
Government  than  the  Riksbank.  Even  in  such  cases,  there  is  reason  to  question  whether  the  bank 
really is systemically important before taking measures. In practice, every crisis should entail intensive 
cooperation  between  Finansinspektionen,  the  Riksbank  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  I  am  keen  to 
stress how important it is to be well prepared for such cooperation, especially given how quickly crises 
can develop in today’s financial markets. 
Stability in the Swedish financial system 
The Riksbank presents an analysis of system stability twice a year. This comprises partly a review of 
developments in banks, mainly the four major banking groups, and partly an analysis of the financial 
infrastructure. The analysis of the banks discusses how borrowers’ indebtedness and their ability to 
service this debt has changed and how the banks themselves have acted. The analysis of the financial 
infrastructure  discusses  problems  and  risks  in  the  rather  complicated  technical  systems  that  are 
currently used to transfer payments, for example RIX, VPC and BGC. 
The  Financial  Stability  Report  enables  the  Riksbank  to  describe  the  banks’  ability  to  cope  with 
unexpected  disruptions.  We  can  point  to  conceivable  risks  and  dampen  any  exaggerated  optimism 
during an upturn, when everything appears problem-free. Similarly, we can modify the picture during a 
downturn and, with the help of thorough analysis, ease concerns about serious loan losses. We can 
also call attention to risks and discuss these with the banks. However, the day will never come when 
the Riksbank indicates in a Financial Stability Report that the risk of a financial crisis occurring is high. 
In such a case, the crisis would materialise immediately, as pricing in the financial markets is based on 
expectations of future developments. 
Following  this  background  information  about  the  Riksbank’s  stability  efforts,  I  intend  to  discuss  the 
most recent assessment of the Swedish financial system that was published in a Financial Stability 
Report yesterday. 
As always, the point of departure is the general picture of economic activity. An improvement in activity 
usually enhances bank profitability and thereby the resilience of the financial system. I should probably 
add here that this applies in the short term, as a prolonged economic upturn can lead to over-optimism 
and price imbalances in asset markets, which subsequently affect the banks in the form of loan losses. 
At the moment, there is no doubt that the overall economic outlook appears more positive than it did 
six  months  ago,  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  even  if  it  is  somewhat  mixed.  Prospects  for  an 
acceleration in growth are favourable for the United States and a number of emerging markets, but 
less so in Europe. 
The major Swedish banks have now begun to increase profitability for the first time since 2000. This is 
partly because the equity market has strengthened again, but also because the banks have cut costs 
while their interest income from lending has continued to increase. Banks have thereby improved their 
ability to cope with unexpected losses. Loan losses remain low. There has not been any expansion in 
credit other than in mortgages to households. The Tier 1 capital of the four major banks has risen over 
the  past  two  years  and  now  averages  just  over  seven  per  cent,  which  is  satisfactory  given  current 
economic conditions. Developments in the coming year are expected to lead to a further increase in 
profits and capital adequacy ratios. 
Neither are the banks’ borrowers - of which half actually reside outside Sweden - expected to cause 
the banks any considerable losses in the period ahead if economic activity strengthens in accordance 
with the Riksbank’s main scenario. The corporate sector, which is the largest borrower group and the 
group  that  previously  has  caused  the  banks’  biggest  loan  losses,  has  reduced  its  debt  burden 
somewhat in relation to equity. Companies should also be able to benefit from an improved economic 
situation and thereby lower their interest expenditure in relation to income. Property companies have 
been  feeling the  effects of  a  decline  in  office  prices  and rents,  but  their  debt is  moderate and  their 
earnings continue to be well above interest expenditure. We are far from the situation that existed at 
the end of the 1980s. 
However, households’ debt burden has increased throughout the slowdown. The main reasons have 
been higher disposable  income  and  low  interest  rates,  which  has  led  to  high  house  prices.  Debt  in 
relation to income is now approaching the levels seen before the crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. 
The  difference,  however,  is  that  interest  expenditure  makes  up  a  considerably  lower  percentage  of 
income than it did then. This makes the high debt levels possible to endure. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2003
There  is  reason  for  vigilance  regarding  growth  in  household  debt,  even  if  households  have  never 
caused the banks’ losses that have posed a threat to financial stability. But it is also possible that the 
increase  in  indebtedness  is  partly  an  adaptation  to  a  low-inflation  economy.  The  pattern  of  rising 
household borrowing is evident in many industrialised countries that have got the better of inflation in 
the past decade. When there is less uncertainty about future inflation and thereby interest rate levels, 
lenders are more willing to grant credit and also demand a lower risk premium for this credit. Loans 
become cheaper. This makes borrowers more inclined to borrow, also because they are less uncertain 
about their future costs. Thus, they can accumulate more debt. 
However,  households’  willingness  to  borrow  tends  to  boost  demand  for  housing  and  thereby  raise 
house prices. This has been observed both in Sweden and other countries. House prices in Sweden 
have risen 56 per cent since 1997 at current prices. Also, unlike commercial property prices, they have 
not  declined  during  the  economic  slowdown  of  recent  years.  In  addition  to  low  financing  costs, 
increasing disposable income and the low housing supply have also contributed to the price rises. 
Does this give us reason to suspect that a speculative bubble is developing in the housing market? I 
don’t believe so, even if we have glimpsed local tendencies, notably in Stockholm. We don’t see any 
signs of housing being bought as an investment with a view to leasing it out until prices rise further. 
Such indications are evident in a couple of other European countries. As far as we can see, the price 
increases in the Swedish housing market appear to be due to fundamental factors and are not being 
driven  by  speculative  behaviour.  Low  interest  rates,  rising  income  and  limited  housing  construction 
goes a long way towards explaining current price developments. 
Lower confidence in insurance companies 
Recently,  the  media  have  drawn  attention  to  the  strained  financial  situation  of  life  insurance 
companies.  The  crisis  in  these  companies  has  been  placed  on  a  par  with  the  banking  crisis  at  the 
beginning  of  the  1990s,  and  there  is  concern  that  it  could  have  equally  serious  repercussions  for 
society.  This  is  not  the  case.  The  actions  of  the  life  insurance  companies  do  not  jeopardise  the 
financial system’s basic functions - to transfer payments, provide credit and manage risk. What could 
happen is that those who have saved in these companies choose to transfer their savings elsewhere, 
in the event that they can do this. In any case, fewer people will be signing new life insurance policies. 
This  is  bad  news  for  life  insurance  companies,  but  has  limited  significance  for  financial  system 
stability. 
It is unfortunate that the criticism of the life insurance companies, which is justified, also affects their 
products,  especially  traditional  life  insurance.  Traditional  life  insurance  is  an  excellent  product  for 
anyone hoping to have a long life. The insurance includes the “risk” of policyholders living a long life, 
that is, policyholders ensure that they will receive a predetermined income over life, which is enabled 
by evening out the risk in a large insurance portfolio. It is a unique product and a form of saving that 
deserves a better fate than that of disappearing because of a confidence crisis. Anyone that doesn’t 
know exactly when they’re going to pass away, and that means most of us, have reason to reflect over 
the advantages of life insurance. 
In my opinion, the serious consequence of the life insurance companies’ problems is that confidence 
in the financial system as a whole may have taken a blow. As savers we feel cheated, both by broken 
promises about returns that have not been forthcoming and by the greed inherent in some perks and 
bonus programmes. Low confidence in financial market institutions tends to subdue capital formation, 
which  we  all  lose  out  on  in  the  long  run.  Functioning  financial  markets  are  a  precondition  for  good 
growth. 
As regards the life insurance companies, I personally believe that the root of the problem is found in 
their mutual construction, which has long been cherished since it means that all profits are given back 
to  the  policyholders.  But  as  the  companies  have  largely  been  affiliated  to  non-life  insurance 
companies or banks, it has been natural for them to charge high fees for various services, such as 
sales and asset management. As profits go to policyholders, this is the only way to yield any gains 
from the affiliated life insurance companies. This is not a new problem, far from it, but it has come 
under the spotlight due to recent events, particularly the sale of asset management companies, where 
values that were previously difficult to establish have become evident. 
It is especially annoying that the life insurance companies’ mutual construction and no-dividend rule 
has made policyholders responsible for the entire risk capital. Affiliated non-life insurance companies 
or banks have neither been able to nor had reason to contribute equity, in spite of the fact that they 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 3
life 
the 
this  reason, 
in  practice.  For 
insurance  companies 
the  board  of 
have  controlled 
Finansinspektionen  has  proposed  that  it  should  not  be  possible  for  the  boards  of  the  mutual  life 
insurance  companies  to  be  controlled  by  affiliated  companies.  The  fact  that  the  mutual  corporate 
structure is being investigated further as planned is, I believe, also necessary, though overdue. 
It should be observed that the Insurance Committee called attention to the problems associated with 
mutual  life  insurance  companies  in  its  1998  report  and  proposed  that  profit-making  companies  be 
established  to  clarify  both  ownership  structure  and  control.  Legislators  adopted  the  Committee’s 
proposal  and  a  profit-making  life  insurance  company  has  since  been  established.  In  this  case, 
moreover, the owner was forced to inject new risk capital as a result of the equity market decline. 
Another confidence issue stems from the fact that many savers since the bursting of the equity market 
bubble  naturally  feel  they  were  misled  by  the  advice  they  received  from  banks,  securities  brokers, 
insurance  brokers  and  life  insurance  companies.  It  has  happened  many  times  that  salespeople  at 
these institutions have been presented as advisers, which has created the credibility we associate with 
neutrality.  Unfortunately,  the  advisers’  competence  has  been  rather  superficial  in  some  respects, 
especially with regard to assessing risk. Although information, particularly from the major banks and 
life insurance companies, has become appreciably better, much remains to be done so that savers 
with limited knowledge are not led astray. Whether companies’ own efforts are sufficient in this respect 
is  a  delicate  question.  Strict  ethical  guidelines,  drawn  up  by  each  company  and  followed  up  by 
Finansinspektionen,  could  be  a  start.  In  countries  like  the  United  States,  where  families  have  long 
been forced to plan their saving to finance their children’s education and their own pensions, it has 
become natural to turn to independent investment consultants to discuss how much and in what way 
they should save. 
A new financial landscape? 
Allow me to conclude by taking a look ahead to discuss a number of challenges we may encounter 
regarding  financial  stability.  They  are  all  tied  to  our  increasing  international  dependence.  Financial 
market  integration  is  beginning  to  become  a  reality  in  several  parts  of  Europe  and  this  has  led  to 
increasing interdependence between these countries’ banking systems. A problem in one country can 
spread  in  various  ways  to  the  banking  systems  of  other  countries.  This  places  new  demands  on 
prudential supervision, oversight and regulations. 
In order to create a single market for financial services, the EU is striving to introduce a regulatory 
framework that will be common to all financial companies within the Union. This will enable banks to 
compete on equal terms, thus allowing the evolution of a single market with only the most competitive 
companies. 
This is an important initiative. Common regulations are often a precondition for enabling far-reaching 
integration. The integration we have seen so far has been very positive for growth, even if it is difficult 
to quantify the exact effects. Studies have indicated that increased financial integration in the EU could 
boost growth by around half a per cent per year. 
The risk, however, is that harmonisation in itself will make regulations more extensive and onerous for 
the  banks  than  really  desired.  In  their  eagerness  to  safeguard  stability,  regulators  risk  overlooking 
efficiency. If regulations are to be harmonised, there is a risk that the strictest rules in the Union will 
also be those that prevail, as the reluctance to ease already existing rules is often greater than the 
reluctance to tighten rules further. The biggest common denominator is a more natural choice than the 
smallest. 
Neither  can  we  have  the  ambition  to  regulate  away  all  potential  problems  -  for  then  we  will  also 
regulate away competition and efficiency, just as we did in Sweden up to the mid 1980s. Therefore, it 
is not unlikely that we will also witness bubbles in the asset markets in the future, as well as banks that 
have  over-expanded  or  that  have  encountered  difficulties  for  other reasons.  We  have  to be  able  to 
manage such situations without them developing into systemic crises. Our ongoing work on financial 
stability is one way of dealing with these issues, not least as regards the financial system’s sensitivity 
to bubbles. But we also need legislation that can bolster efforts during a crisis, which is something that 
is lacking in several countries, including Sweden. However, the Banking Law Committee put forward a 
proposal in 2000 for such legislation in Sweden. We have to hope that a Government bill will come 
before the need becomes acute! 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2003
Although  harmonisation  of  regulations  is  desirable  and  opens  up  new  possibilities,  it  also  leads  to 
problems  that  need  to  be  dealt  with,  for  example  with  regard  to  prudential  supervision  and  crisis 
management.  I  intend  to  leave  it  at  that  as  regards  supervision,  but  would  like  to  say  a  few  words 
about crisis management. 
Managing  a  domestic  banking  crisis  can  be  tricky  enough,  but  managing  one  across  national 
boundaries is in all probability even more difficult. Let me give you an example. After its most recent 
restructuring,  Nordea  is  a  Swedish  bank  with  subsidiaries  in  other  Nordic  countries.  It  has  market 
shares of approximately 40 per cent in Finland, 25 per cent in Denmark, 20 per cent in Sweden and 
15 per  cent  in  Norway.  The  bank  wants  to  change  its  subsidiaries  into  branches.  This  would  make 
Nordea  an  entirely  Swedish  bank  with  branches  that  potentially  could  be  systemically  important  in 
other  countries.  According  to  current  EU  legislation,  prudential  supervision  and  crisis  management 
would in principle be an issue for Swedish authorities. But would the Finnish authorities accept that 
Sweden takes responsibility for the most important part of the Finnish financial system? And would we 
in Sweden be willing to resolve a banking crisis in Finland, with all that it would ask of the Swedish 
taxpayers,  if  Nordea  were  to  run  into  difficulties?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are  not 
straightforward. But it is fairly obvious that present EU legislation does not accommodate banks with 
systemically important branches. An article in the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Report discusses this 
particular problem. 
The Nordic central banks have a joint working group for discussing cross-border crises, and we have 
drawn  up  a  memorandum  of  understanding  for  how  we  are  to  manage  them.  The  supervisory 
authorities  have  a  corresponding  group  for  their  purposes.  Unfortunately,  such  cooperation  is  still 
uncommon at European level. 
Thus, to sum up, we require harmonised rules for the financial sector in Europe, but it is important to 
resist the forces that seek to make them unnecessarily extensive. We also need legislation for crisis 
management in Sweden, which we have been waiting a long time for. And we need new regulations in 
the EU for managing cross-border banks. These are the main priorities for now. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 5
