Sir K Dwight Venner: Economic reform – towards a programme for 
resuscitation of economic growth and development in the Caribbean 
Remarks by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the opening 
ceremony  of  the  35th  Annual  Caribbean  Monetary  Studies  Conference,  Basseterre.  St  Kitts, 
24 November 2003. 
 The Caribbean region now finds itself at the crossroads of its economic history when it must make 
some fundamental choices in order to ensure the economic viability of its citizens, the improvement of 
their social prospects, and the maintenance of their political freedoms. 
All  these  issues  fit  squarely  within  the  theme  of  this  35th  Annual  Conference  of  Monetary  Studies, 
“Economic Reform: Towards a programme for resuscitation of economic growth and development in 
the Caribbean”. 
The international and domestic environments within which we now operate make this one of the most 
challenging  epochs  we  have  experienced  and  make  the  case  for  economic  reform  an  even  more 
urgent one. 
The  increasing  pace  of  globalisation  and  the  constant  spectre  of  poverty  at  the  international  level 
present  formidable  challenges  and  in  some  instances  reduced  options  for  most  members  of  the 
international community, that is, the developing countries. 
The dominant countries of the international system have now posed or exposed the threat of terrorism 
as a counterpoint to the eradication of poverty. They may not express it in those terms, but the facts 
are that resources will be diverted from the fight on poverty to prosecute the fight against terrorism. 
The question which is being increasingly asked is “Are the circumstances of poverty not a pre-requisite 
for terrorism?” 
The  opposition  to  globalisation  has  certainly  brought  out  a  number  of  dissidents  of  different 
persuasions, including new style anarchists who are not opposed to violence. 
These  issues  speak  to  fundamental  and  systemic  disjunctions  at  the  international  level,  which  will 
certainly have a limiting impact on our capacity to develop. The stark reality is that while we may have 
little or no control over these matters, other things being equal, we still must have strategies at our 
disposal  to  avoid,  if  possible,  or  to  mitigate  the  impact  on  our  countries  and  communities.  This  will 
require clarity of thought and rigorous intellectual analysis as well as a clear understanding of our long-
term goals as opposed to short-term expediency. 
The policy makers of the region could possibly find themselves between a rock and a very hard place 
as  they  attempt  to  balance  two  sometimes  conflicting  demands.  On  the  one  hand  there  are  the 
demands of the international community with their insistence on a raft of standards and codes, rating 
agencies in not only the financial sphere, but also in governance in democracy, the environment, etc. 
On the other hand are the insistent demands of our populations, a large section of which experiences 
poverty and unemployment, for education, health and social services. It must also be borne in mind 
that standards of living are relative and ours is not that of Bangladesh or sub Saharan Africa, but that 
of the Americas. 
The weighted, undemocratic voting systems as well as the lack of participation in the decision making 
process  of  major  international  institutions  introduce  significant  biases  into  international  decision 
making, which on many occasions presents difficulties for developing countries. 
These,  however,  while  they  are  current  givens,  should  not  be  permanent  showstoppers  for  our 
development  process.  This  is  contingent  on  how  we  approach  the  solutions  to  our  domestic  and 
regional economic, social and political problems. 
These  approaches  should  be  based  on  our  vision,  our  technical  capacity  and  a  broad  societal 
consensus on the goals of our societies and how to achieve them. 
With respect to the vision, the broad outlines are fully accepted. That is, the solution to our problems 
lies in the closest possible integration of the Caribbean countries. This vision is devalued by raising it 
to utopian proportions and stating that it would not be possible in our own lifetimes. This, one could 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
posit, in fact represents a clear disjuncture between the fact of political authority where it now resides, 
and  the  recognition  of  economic  efficiency,  which  requires  a  larger  contiguous  economic  space. 
Consideration of the economic benefits to the mass of people is in a sense not a primary objective, to 
the extent that there is no clear articulation of the economic benefits of such a wide space. 
A recent opinion survey in Jamaica revealed that 61% of the population were not, so to speak, averse 
to a federal arrangement. A similar poll in that country some time ago, revealed some uncomfortable 
views  on  the  issue  of  independence.  These  two  results  in  the  largest  and  probably  best-endowed 
country in the region poses significant questions for us as Caribbean citizens at the beginning of the 
21st century. 
The answer to one of the unspoken questions is that independence is a necessary, but not a sufficient 
condition  for  economic  and  social  progress.  Independence  gives  us  the  capacity  but  then  we  must 
exercise policy choices which lead to sustainable economic and social progress. 
We have never doubted that a collective regional approach is also a necessary condition for social 
and economic progress. The impediment has always been what the political traffic could bear after the 
demise of the ill- fated West Indian Federation. 
Lloyd Best at the 30th Monetary Studies Conference in the Bahamas, in a truly outstanding tribute to 
Alister McIntyre remarked on the fact that the “independence movement within the single territories of 
the CARICOM community, has not had the local machinery for exploiting or converting opportunities 
for development and transformation at home.” He also stated that the integration movement had been 
hopelessly  short  on  implementation.  The  movement  lacked  the  required  instruments;  a  view  he 
claimed was shared by the West Indian Commission in 1992. 
I  now  quote  fully  from  Lloyd  Best,  in  one  of  his  most  controversial  assertions  in  a  style,  which  is 
uniquely Lloyd’s. “If, in 1992, the West Indies Commission felt bound to declare time for action, what 
was the reason? Was it not that the Trade Unions and the Labour Congresses had gone off the stage 
fifty  years  before?  Wasn’t  it  that  organized  units  had  effectively  disappeared,  almost  blocking  all 
political trade (as distinct from industrial relations bargaining) above all, when it involved transactions 
across the borders of newly independent states with insanely jealous leaders”. 
Lloyd  went  on  -  “Within  the  islands  and  territories,  this  gap  was  difficult  to  fill  without  breeding 
consistent new conflict. In many places, industrial stabilization became a surrogate for slowing or even 
stopping the development of new community forces with political potential. However, at the regional 
level, certain accidents of Federation did make it possible to envisage the emergence of an effective 
network of active as well as passive participants of Caribbean integration, exchanging ideas as well as 
promoting concrete measures. Let us call this the West Indian party. I am sure that today it is very well 
represented here.” 
Finally, in paying tribute to McIntyre and Demas, Lloyd delivered this very stirring oration. “Over the 
years, McIntyre and Demas have consistently and without fail, provided this party with inspiration and 
leadership,  policy,  programme  and  plan.  They  have  worked selflessly.  They have  worked  tirelessly, 
whether  out  of  the  multilateral  institutions  operating  in  the  region,  including  the  UWI  and  the  wider 
system of higher education, the CARICOM Secretariat and regional agencies, the CDB and the UN 
system. McIntyre and Demas have had no other business - not academic life, not administration, not 
the university, not the regional Development Bank. 
The  pair  has  had  one  transcendental  concern,  which  has  not  been  economics,  which  they  have 
practiced  expertly,  when  and  where  it  has  mattered  to  them.  They  have  sought  only  the  holding 
together of the West Indian nation and, as a means to that, the construction of one single integrated 
and effective West Indian party. At issue here is not an election party of course, but a political party in 
the  proper  sense:  a  private  voluntary  and  considered  community  instrument  deployed  to  public 
purpose.” 
I have quoted at length from our colleague Lloyd, to remind you of the tremendous institution we have 
created over the last 35 years and to alert you to the challenges ahead which will reach their zenith in 
the year 2007. 
Four arrangements will literally peak in that year. These are the FTAA, the COTONOU Agreement, the 
WTO, and of course, the Cricket World Cup. 
Economic reform will have to be greatly accelerated to get past this turning point. From an optimist’s 
point of view, this is a golden opportunity. The conditions to hold the World Cup are so commercially 
stringent that satisfying them will have an impact on our ability to treat with the trade arrangements. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
Also, using cricket as a reason and given our passion for the game we should be able to get our public 
and private sectors to attain standards they thought were unattainable in the past. Once we get past 
that year, when freedom of movement will be a condition to host the games, there will be no possible 
return to the status quo ante. 
I  would  simply  like  to  say  in  conclusion  that  there  is  an  inevitability  in  our  circumstances  about 
economic reform and we must get down to business without delay. 
Once again, quoting from the West Indian Commission of 1992, “This is the time for action.” 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 3
