Burhanuddin Abdullah: Globalization, financial stability and regional 
cooperation 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Burhanuddin  Abdullah,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  33rd  Asean 
Banking Council Meeting, Bali, 10 October 2003. 
 Mr.  Secretary  General,  Mr.  Chairman,  distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  ASEAN  Banking 
Council, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning and Assalamu’alaikum wr.wb 
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to welcome all of you to this beautiful island of Bali and to open 
this  Meeting  today.  It  is  also  a  most  gratifying  experience  to  speak  before  a  large  gathering  of 
distinguished representatives of Bankers Association from the 10 ASEAN nations. Your presence here 
is an opportunity to further enhance cooperation among bankers to promote regional growth in a new 
global environment.   
As we all may aware, globalization is a reality and no country in the world is immune to its impact. It 
has opened up tremendous opportunities, but it has also posed a wide range of challenges and risks. 
We must therefore strive to maximize the benefits of globalization while endeavouring to minimize the 
costs.  Our  experiences  in  the  past  crisis  has  shown  that  even  the  most  dynamic  economies  are 
vulnerable.  In  spite  of  the  judicious  macroeconomic  policies  that  we  adopted  and  the  structural 
adjustments that we carried out, the development gains that we earned over decades could crumble in 
the span of a few weeks.   
The  severe  crisis  proved  that  our  banking  system  had  some  structural  weaknesses.    Those 
weaknesses had led most of the ASEAN countries banking system into deep trouble, reflecting in the 
mounting  amount  of  non  performing  loan,  serious  liquidity  problems,  huge  amount  of  losses  and 
eventually caused many banks to became insolvent.   
In  the  face  of  these  realities,  the  ASEAN  banking  industry  has  rightly  responded  to  restore  the 
solvency  and  the  stability  of  the  banking  system,  through  banking  restructuring  program,  and 
improvement of banking supervisory and regulatory capability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This crisis may be abating, but greater challenges still lie ahead. The challenges that we are going to 
faced,  first  is  the  heightened  competition  among  banks  that  requires  bankers  to  make  the  basic 
strategic decision. As financial modernization going forward, bankers will be forced to decide what kind 
of institution they want to be. Bankers need to figure out where they want to be in terms of a whole 
spectrum of activities whether they want to be a local bank, regional, or global bank.  
The second is a challenge of effective risk mitigation and risk intermediation. We have to ask how do 
we  keep  our  risk  management  skills  honed  enough  to  deal  with  the  world  of  high  tech  and 
sophisticated  finance.  I  believe  that  the  nature  of  the  risk  is  changing.  It’s  changing  because  the 
products  and  services  are  also  changing  in  a  more  sophisticated  way;  that  means  the  ability  to 
recognize risk, measure risk, manage risk, offset risk, is utmost important for financial institution. 
The third challenge, obviously, is the process of financial deepening which affected market structures, 
complicating the task of regulatory oversight in  several ways. As financial instrument become more 
complex; the boundaries between different types of financial market activity (lending, trading, insuring) 
become  blurred;  more  claims  become  securitized  and  were  exchanged  in  markets  as  traded 
instruments;  and  much  financial  activity  became  international  in  nature,  blurring  boundaries  of 
responsibility among authorities. 
Now, the question is, what are the implications for bankers and regulators such as central banks? 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  first  implication  is  that  we  have  to  acquire,  improved,  and  further  enhance  our  skills  and 
capabilities.  We  need  to  improve  our  risk  management  skill  considering  that  the  nature  of  risk  is 
changing very fast with new technology and products.   
BIS Review 44/2003 
 1
The other is the requirement for us to conduct good corporate governance in the business.  The need 
for transparency and corporate governance in any business including banking is very critical.  
Banking supervision cannot function well if sound corporate governance is not in place. Supervisory 
experience  underscores  the  necessity of  having  the  appropriate  levels of  accountability  and  checks 
and  balances  within  each  bank.  Put  plainly,  sound  corporate  governance  makes  the  work  of 
supervisors  infinitely  easier.  Sound  corporate  governance  can  contribute  to  a  collaborative  working 
relationship between bank management and bank supervisors. 
Consequently,  central  banks  or  regulator  showed,  by  necessities,  to  impose  market  discipline  and 
strengthen risk-based supervision as implied in the Basle Core Principles.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  the  face  of  these  challenges and  implication,  ASEAN  countries  should  make  every  effort  to  take 
advantage of the globalization and liberalization of investment and trade, knowing that it is the order of 
our global economy today. We should therefore actively involved in the many multilateral cooperation 
and/or institution. 
To  strengthen  economic  cooperation  among  ASEAN  countries,  the  leaders  of  ASEAN  has  just 
launched  a  new series of economies policies and  initiatives  as  mentioned  in  Bali  Concord  II  during 
their ninth ASEAN Summit, three days ago. One of the concept in Bali Concord II is the establishment 
of  ASEAN  Economic  Community.  That  community  envision  "a  stable,  prosperous  and  highly 
competitive  ASEAN  economic  region  in  which  there  is  a  free  flow  of  goods,  services,  investment, 
labour and a freer flow of capital."  The goal is to create a single market and production base by 2020; 
emulating other regional trade arrangements, particularly of the European Economic Community in the 
1960s-1970s. With a population of some 500 million people and a combined GDP of about equal to 
China’s, ASEAN Economic Community is clearly not an economic lightweight. 
ASEAN  Economic  Community  should  continue  to  cooperate  to  make  the  region  more  integrated, 
dynamic,  and  ultimately  prosperous.  We  should  also  continue  to  cooperate  in  the  area  of  financial 
sector,  among  other;  to  develop  the  Asian  Bond  Market  that  could  facilitates  Asian  savings  to  be 
smoothly reinvested in the region, encourage alternative longer term financing through capital market, 
and formulate the task for the regulatory oversight to deal with the complexities of financial instrument 
between banks and non banks financial institution. 
Our ultimate objective is, of course, to establish the financial stability in the region. The role of central 
banks  has  to  be  in  conjunction  with  that  of  other  guardians  of  financial  stability.  Complexity, 
globalisation, and institutional interdependence forcefully argue for close cooperation between central 
banks,  monetary  authorities  and  other  standard  setters.  It  is  within  this  sphere  that  ASEAN  swap 
arrangement could be further strengthened for the benefit of the region.  
In line with the objective to maintain financial stability, there is an even greater need to promote our 
common interest and exchange views on regional issues. A major concern to most ASEAN financial 
sector nowadays is to revive the intermediation function of banking system.  
Alternatives  route  toward  the  recovery  of  intermediary  function  should  be  explored,  for  example; 
Indonesia has been trying to improve intermediary function through among others by promoting credit 
channelling to the micro or small and medium enterprises. There has been quite some success in this 
area and we are very much willing to share with you the achievement so far.  
Another concern for ASEAN financial sector is the implementation of Basle Accord II which has raised 
question  of  the  readiness  of  the  banking  system.  We  should  therefore  continue  strengthening 
collaboration between central banks, monetary authorities, bankers, and private sector.  In this regard, 
central  banks  have  to  provide  the  infrastructure  where  financial  markets  rely  on,  so  that  the  best 
practices can be adapted.  We also need to harmonized/standardized the financial institution structure, 
skill, and regulation in the region to face the Accord.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On bilateral level, cooperation among bankers in the region is also essential in preparing the system 
for a more sophisticated and complex banking practice in the globalized era so that the region could 
still achieving financial stability. This is the challenge for us and also for ASEAN Bankers Association. 
The  ASEAN  Bankers  Association  has  played  an  important  role  in  facilitating  the  exchange  of 
information and expertise on banking among the staff of the banks in Southeast Asia. There is room 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2003
for greater cooperation among banks, such as exchange, attachment, and apprenticeship among the 
staff of the banks in the region, as well as cooperation with other regional groupings and international 
financial institutions.  
ASEAN Bankers Association should explore ways to create greater synergies through partnership and 
cooperation. 
I  believe  that  the  ASEAN  Bankers  Association  will  deliberate  at  length  a  strategic  review  of 
cooperation in Finance, Investment, and Trade; Education; and Inter Regional relation on this meeting. 
This  is  an  opportunity  for  the  Council  to  re-examine  the  relevance  of  ASEAN  Bankers  Association 
roles, and explore ways in which it can better serve its members. ASEAN Bankers Association has to 
reposition itself to meet the challenges of the new globalized economy. 
Finally, may I now take a great pleasure in declaring the Meeting open and wishing all of you success 
in your deliberations.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 44/2003 
 3
