T T Mboweni: Recent economic developments 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the dinner for Heads of 
Foreign Missions, Pretoria, 1 December 2003. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dean of Diplomatic Corps - Ambassador Alzubeidi 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
Representatives of: the United Nations System - Mr Ohiorhenuan 
The European Union - Ambassador Lake 
The International Labour Organisation - Dr Andoh  
The World Bank - Mr Omar 
Foreign Affairs - DDG: Africa, Ambassador Mamabolo 
Management & Staff of the South African Reserve Bank 
Ladies & Gentlemen  
As a relatively open developing economy, South Africa was again affected considerably by world 
economic conditions during the past year. The weak and fragile global economic recovery impacted on 
domestic economic growth, low world inflation contributed to a decline in domestic inflation and 
substantial financial inflows led to a further recovery in the external value of the rand. 
International economic developments 
2. 
Global economic activity suffered a setback in the second half of 2002 when business confidence was 
detrimentally affected by revelations of corporate accounting malpractices, a further decline in stock 
exchange prices and a threat of war against Iraq. In the first half of 2003 equity prices began to rise 
somewhat  and  the  war  in Iraq was concluded without  severely  impacting on oil  production.  Yet  the 
international  economy  continued  to  move  at  a  sluggish  pace,  with  the  result  that  most  analysts 
downgraded their initial forecasts for world growth in 2003. 
More recently there have been encouraging signs that the macroeconomic environment has improved 
somewhat. Production growth in the United States of 8,2 per cent in the third quarter of 2003 seems to 
confirm that the much-anticipated economic recovery is gaining momentum. This acceleration in the 
pace of growth impacted favourably on the demand for labour, causing the US unemployment rate to 
edge lower to 6 per cent in October 2003. The real gross domestic product of Japan also increased at 
stronger-than-expected  rates  during  2003,  while  growth  in  China  remained  high.  A  strong  domestic 
demand,  improved  export  performance  and  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in  the  rest  of  Asia  are 
expected to support growth in the rest of this continent. 
In  contrast  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  was  weaker  than  expected  in  the  second  quarter  of 
2003, but indicators for this region indicate that economic activity could firm somewhat in the coming 
months. Rising net exports and real exchange rate developments are expected to lead to a modest 
recovery in Latin America. 
Global  inflation  remains  low  and  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  were  eased  in  most  advanced 
economies  during  the  past  two  years.  However,  with  the  recent  acceleration  in  economic  growth, 
some authorities have begun with a less lenient policy stance. The Reserve Bank of Australia and the 
Bank of England have both recently increased their official central bank rates by 25 basis points. Both 
central banks cited the pickup in economic activity and increasing household borrowing as the main 
reasons for the tightening in their monetary policy. 
An important further characteristic of the global economic environment in the past two years has been 
a  considerable  weakening  in  the  external  value  of  the  United  States  dollar.  In  particular  during  the 
current  year  this  has  affected  the  currencies  of  most  developing  countries  because  of  substantial 
financial inflows into these countries. 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 1
Domestic production and expenditure 
3.  
Although  domestic  growth  is  expected  to  benefit  from  the  improvement  in  the  global  economic 
environment in the coming months, the weakness in international economic growth impacted severely 
on domestic production. Having recorded a high rate of 5 per cent in the second quarter of 2002, real 
output growth in the South African economy slowed down progressively in the next four quarters to a 
mere ½ per cent in the second quarter of 2003. In the third quarter of 2003 the growth in production 
rose somewhat to an annualised rate of 1 per cent. This brought the increase in real gross domestic 
product  to  only  2  per  cent  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2003  compared  with  the  same  period  in  the 
preceding year, i.e. to a considerably lower rate than the 3½ per cent attained in 2002 as a whole. 
As  could  be  expected  if  world  economic  conditions  are  taken  into  consideration,  this  decline  in 
domestic production was mainly the result of a decrease in the volume of net exports. The growth in 
South African exports has always been closely correlated with world demand for our goods, especially 
the demand for our minerals and metals. The recovery in the exchange rate of the rand also had a 
significant  price  effect  on  manufacturing  exports  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  At  the  same  time  it  was 
accompanied by a rise in real imports to South Africa. Fortunately a considerable improvement in the 
terms  of  trade  of  the  country  related  to  a  substantial  increase  in  international  commodity  prices, 
softened the effect of a deterioration in the volume of net exports. As a consequence, the surplus on 
the current account of the balance of payments in 2002, changed to a deficit of approximately 1 per 
cent of gross domestic product in the first nine months of 2003. This relatively small deficit poses no 
threat for a recovery in domestic economic growth. 
Growth in domestic production during 2003 continued to be supported by domestic demand. Domestic 
final demand increased at a rate of 4 per cent in the first nine months of 2003 compared with the same 
period in the preceding year. This continued high growth in domestic final demand was the result of 
increases in consumption as well as fixed capital formation. 
The  growth  in  real  final  consumption  expenditure  by  households  also  remained  strong  throughout 
2003. The sustained high growth in private consumption expenditure was underscored by a rise in real 
personal  disposable  income  owing  to  recent  salary  and  wage  increases,  a  reduction  in  income  tax 
rates and more recently the decrease in interest rates. To supplement the growth in their disposable 
income,  households  became  more  willing  to  incur  debt.  Consequently,  households  debt  as  a 
percentage of disposable income rose somewhat from 51 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2002 to 53 
per cent in the third quarter of 2003. This level is still low compared to those of many other countries. 
The strong domestic demand was also supported by growth in real final consumption expenditure by 
general government at an annualised rate of about 4 per cent in the first three quarters of 2003. This 
was mainly due to government purchases of goods and services, while real spending on salary and 
wages of government employees was rather restrained. 
Expenditure on real gross fixed investment continued to be buoyant throughout the first nine months of 
2003. Private business enterprises as well as the public sector increased their fixed capital outlays. 
The  government  and  public  corporations  increased  their  capital  expenditure  on  infrastructure 
expansion  aimed  at  service  delivery,  while  private  business  appeared  to  be  making  the  most  of 
conditions  that  favour  expenditure  on  capital  goods.  Such  conditions  included  an  exchange  rate 
conducive  to  importing  goods,  a  lowering  in  the  cost  of  borrowing,  rising  prices  in  international 
commodity markets and considerably more stability on the inflation front. 
The strong domestic final demand was unable to prevent a decline in manufacturing output. Having 
increased robustly in the first half of 2002, real manufacturing output started to grow at a slower rate in 
the  second  half  of  that  year  and  then  declined  in  the  first  nine  months  of  2003.  This  was  mainly  a 
reflection of lacklustre global growth trends and the recovery in the exchange rate of the rand. Most of 
the subsectors of manufacturing were affected by a low demand for exports and increased imports as 
a  greater  proportion  of  domestic  demand  was  met  by  competitively  priced  imports.  As  could  be 
expected, this had a marked effect on employment. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
4.  
The inflation outlook improved significantly during 2003. The twelve-month CPIX inflation fell from a 
peak  of  11,3  per  cent  in  October  2002  to  below  the  upper  boundary  of  the  inflation  target  from 
September 2003. In October 2003 it even receded to below the mid-point of the target range when it 
reached 4,4 per cent. This achievement was underpinned by the sustained maintenance of prudent 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2003
monetary and fiscal policies together with the recovery in the international exchange value of the rand 
and a moderation in food price increases. 
As the inflation outlook improved, the monetary policy stance was adjusted on four occasions in 2003. 
The first reduction in the repo rate was only made in June 2003, but there were already clear signs 
that the inflation rate was moving towards the inflation target at the March meeting of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. At the time of that meeting it was felt that upside risks limited any possible actions 
that the MPC could take. In particular, the commencement of the war in Iraq on the first day of the 
meeting had an important effect on the Committee's decision. 
As  the  uncertainties  about  the  inflation  outlook  dissipated  and  it  became  increasingly  apparent  that 
most factors favoured the attainment of the inflation target in the next two years, the MPC started to 
lower interest rates. The repo rate was cut by 150 basis points in June, by 100 basis points in August 
and  September,  and  again  by  150  basis  points  in  October.  All  in  all,  a  total  reduction  of  500  basis 
points  in  a  period  of  only  five  months.  This  was  indeed  an  aggressive  lowering  of  interest  rates. 
Nominal rates are at levels last seen in the 1980s, but the difference is that the current and expected 
inflation rates are significantly lower than those observed in the 1980s. 
Although international and domestic economic conditions have allowed the MPC to reduce short-term 
interest  rates  in  an  aggressive  manner,  the  overriding  objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  the 
attainment of the inflation target. Achieving low inflation is not an end in itself. It is important because it 
is  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  high  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  The  current  and 
more  importantly  the  expected  state  of  the  domestic  economy  will  always  carry  weight  in  the 
determination of monetary policy. 
The exchange rate of the rand 
5. 
Of all the recent economic developments, the behaviour of the external value of the rand has attracted 
the most attention. The exchange rate of the rand has been very volatile during the past few years. 
After the nominal effective exchange rate of the rand had declined by 13 per cent in 2000 and 34 per 
cent in 2001, it increased by 24 per cent in 2002 and by nearly 25 per cent in the first eleven months 
of 2003. Such volatility in exchange rates seems to be a fact of life in most economies these days. 
Fluctuations in the external value of currencies are unavoidable in the current international monetary 
system of generally floating exchange rates. Even when currencies are pegged to another currency or 
to a basket of currencies, they still float against other currencies and fluctuate widely at times. 
Large  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  are  clearly  not  healthy  for  the  economy.  The 
uncertainty  caused  by  these  fluctuations  makes  investment  and  export  planning  extremely  difficult. 
What may seem to be a profitable venture can turn out completely different with a substantial swing in 
the external value of the rand. The Reserve Bank would obviously prefer to have greater exchange 
rate  stability,  but  as  already  indicated  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  seems 
unavoidable. 
The  Bank  can  only  create  an  environment  that  favours  exchange  rate  stability.  One  of  the  most 
important  recent  developments  in  this  regard  has  been  the  improvement  in  the  net  open  foreign 
currency position of the Reserve Bank. The oversold foreign currency position of the Bank has always 
been  perceived  as  a  source  of  exchange  rate  weakness  and  instability.  The  Bank's  objective  was 
therefore to eliminate this oversold position, which stood at US$23,2 billion at the end of September 
1998. During the past year this objective was finally achieved in May. At the end of October a positive 
net  open  foreign  currency  position  of  US$2,7  billion  was  recorded.  Having  removed  this  perceived 
vulnerability,  the  price  discovery  process  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange  should  now  display  a 
better two-way trading pattern. 
In an attempt to further improve the functioning of the South African market for foreign exchange, the 
Bank  has  shifted  its  focus  to  reducing  its  oversold  forward  book  and  to  strengthening  the  official 
foreign exchange reserve position. Considerable success has been achieved in bringing the oversold 
forward book down to lower levels. The balance on the oversold forward book stood at US$2,3 billion 
at the end of October 2003, compared with US$6,9 billion at the end of December 2002. In the mean 
time, the official foreign exchange reserve position was also increased to a level of US$7,8 billion at 
the end of October 2003. 
BIS Review 55/2003 
 3
Conclusion 
6.  
These  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  lower  inflation  rate 
should at least provide a basis for more stability in the value of the rand. However, the South African 
economy will always be affected considerably by developments in the rest of the world. Any weakness 
in the US dollar or any of the other major currencies will affect the exchange rate of the rand. Our 
focus can therefore only be to develop an environment favouring greater stability. Monetary policy will 
continue  to  focus  on  the  objective  of  price  stability.  Fortunately  the  world  economic  outlook  has 
recently improved considerably, which should assist in attaining higher domestic economic growth. In 
addition, the outlook for inflation looks good. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 55/2003
