Jürgen Stark: Ten years of Maastricht - currency union leading to political 
union? 
Lecture  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Vice  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  17th  European 
Finance Convention, London, 2 December 2003. 
 I 
The Treaty on European Union - better known as the Maastricht Treaty - entered into force ten years 
ago on 1 November 1993. The then 12 EC member states launched at that time an innovative and 
unique approach to creating in Europe an Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).  
This was only the latest step in a far-reaching process of economic integration initiated 50 years ago. 
Back then, it soon became clear that the time was not ripe for political integration. The pragmatic path 
which was being followed went from economic to monetary integration. The wider political purpose of 
establishing in Europe an area of peace and prosperity has been served well by this approach, despite 
all major and minor setbacks.  
EMU  brought  about  a  profound  transformation  within  the  international  monetary  system.  Sovereign 
countries  showed  their  determination  to  hand  over  one  of  the  major  instruments  of  macroeconomic 
policy making to a supranational institution. 
The historical dimension of this political project is undisputed. Europe - at least continental Europe - 
has fundamentally changed with the creation of EMU and the consequential introduction of the euro.  
The  project  has  weathered  many  storms  in  the  past  ten  years.  However,  thundery  clouds  are  still 
lingering. It is obvious that not everybody has fully grasped all the ramifications of this project. The 
damage done by the legally dubious abeyance of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) constitutes a 
real institutional crisis.  
This  politically  short-sighted  decision  is  a  regrettable  step  backwards  in  the  European  integration 
process  and  shows  the  talent  of  some  politicians  to  increase  the  already  impressive  number  of 
challenges  ahead.  But  no  one  should  forget  where  we  came  from  and  what  has  been  achieved 
already. 
Right  now,  we  are  actually  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  Constitution  for  Europe.  Something  we 
already  have  in  the  monetary  field.  Maastricht  has  in  fact  established  a  stability-oriented  monetary 
constitution. On the other hand, the purpose of the Convention’s draft Constitutional Treaty, which is 
being  discussed  by  the  Intergovernmental  Conference,  is  to  replace  and  modify  the  content  of  the 
existing treaties. 
The  Constitutional  Treaty  seeks  to  establish  more  efficient  structures.  The  whole  decision-making 
process  is  intended  to  become  more  transparent  and  comprehensible.  This  will  strengthen  the 
democratic legitimacy of the EU, a step which is also necessary in view of the upcoming enlargement 
with its increase in diversity and complexity within the Union. It is therefore not a further integrative 
step  but  rather  a  consolidation  of  the  existing  institutional  framework.  Changes  to  the  institutional 
framework of EMU were not originally intended, but these now seem to be on the agenda. The ECB 
and  the  euro  area  central  banks  have  voiced  their  opinion.  It  is  now  up  to  the  Intergovernmental 
Conference to decide if a change in the European stability consensus is in the interest of Europe’s 
citizens. 
I do not intend to comment on whether the UK should join the euro area or not. When the UK requests 
that it be allowed to move to the third stage, the Council of the EU will have to decide if the necessary 
conditions - that is to say, the convergence criteria - have been fulfilled.  
II 
Europe  has  changed.  It  should  not  be  confused  with  the  Europe  of  ten  or  twenty  years  ago.  The 
process  leading  up  to  the  final  stage  of  EMU  has  especially  helped  the  countries  with  an  unstable 
track record to reduce inflation rates, interest rates and fiscal deficits. The appeal of being part of EMU 
has certainly been helpful and has released an impressive amount of energy. 
What have been the key characteristics, the main achievements of Maastricht? 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 1
framework  based  on  sustainable  economic 
A  medium-term-oriented  macroeconomic  policy 
convergence with two distinct features: 
1. 
an independent system of European central banks with the supranational European Central 
Bank and the primary objective of maintaining price stability 
a fiscal institutional framework which - if properly applied - is meant to ensure fiscal discipline 
and which has the goal of preserving the sustainability of public finance. 
2. 
Is that enough? Have we achieved these worthy and courageous objectives? Where would we like to 
go? And in which direction should we go? 
The expectations of EMU were manifold. There were many sceptical voices which did not believe that 
a “one-size-fits-all” monetary policy was appropriate for such a heterogeneous area.  
Convergence was seen to be insufficient, and the criteria of an optimal currency area not fulfilled. The 
proponents of this view saw monetary union only as the last crowning step of economic integration. 
Furthermore, experience has shown that all attempts in the past to establish a currency without a state 
have failed.  
The  optimistic  view  focused  more  on  the  advantages  of  greater  price  transparency,  the  removal  of 
exchange-rate-induced planning uncertainties and the lower transaction costs in intra-euro-area trade. 
The euro was seen as the next logical step to complete the single market. EMU was expected to serve 
as a catalyst for further economic reforms and political integration. 
Who was right?  
After  almost  five  years  of  EMU  one  has  to  acknowledge  that  neither  the  positive  nor  the  negative 
extremes have become true. However, the institutional framework currently faces a crucial stress test.  
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy has managed to gain credibility and to build up confidence despite 
quite a number of challenges. This could not be taken for granted given the fact that there were no 
blueprints  to  fall  back  on.  The  centralised  monetary  policy  and  the  decentralised  but  closely 
co-ordinated economic and budgetary policies constitute a rather demanding regime.  
The  Eurosystem  at  least  has  proved  that  it  is  up  to  the  task.  The  ECB  is  endowed  with  an 
unambiguous  mandate  and  has  developed  a  strategy  in  accordance  with  the  latest  insights  into 
monetary theory and practical experience. Even the severe criticism of Anglo-Saxon economists and 
media has become less ardent recently. The monetary policy strategy is increasingly understood or at 
least better respected by market participants. Long-term inflation expectations have been close to and 
mostly below the ECB definition of price stability of 2%. 
The economic rationale behind the mandate and strategy is the generally accepted principle that price 
stability  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  improving  economic  prospects  and 
raising living standards. How this translates into a monetary policy strategy depends, of course, on the 
structural preconditions. It concerns the manner in which the complex transmission mechanism works 
its  way  through  from  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  economy  in  general  and  the  price  level  in 
particular.  A  very  important  influencing  factor  in  this  respect  is  whether  investment  decisions  are 
influenced more strongly by developments in long-term or in short-term interest rates.  
The two-pillar approach has proved to be the appropriate strategy for the euro area. It avoids creating 
unnecessary  volatility  in  financial  and  real  markets  through  its  medium-term  orientation,  thus 
recognising  that  monetary  policy  does  not  have  the  instruments  to  fine-tune  the  economy.  The 
prominent  role  of  monetary  growth  acknowledges  that  money  matters.  This  is  by  no  means  an 
outdated concept and is a lesson which I would like to stress considering the recent experiences of 
stock and housing market bubbles.  
And the track record?  
The ECB, together with the national central banks in the Eurosystem, has delivered. It is fair to say 
that the credibility test has been passed so far. Average inflation over the past five years has been 
close  to 2%.  The  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been  conducted  quite smoothly 
from the outset. The logistical endeavours linked to the cash changeover from the national currencies 
to  the  euro  were  a  success,  and  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  were  readily  accepted  by  market 
participants.  
However,  EMU  did  not  create 
integration.  The 
intergovernmental nature of the police and judicial co-operation and the so-called common foreign and 
further  political 
the  expected 
impetus 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2003
security policy have not been decisively strengthened since the inception of EMU. On the contrary, this 
year has shown that we are quite some way from a “common” European foreign policy.  
Owing  to  the  asymmetrical  nature  of  Maastricht,  other  economic  policy  areas  still  remain  largely 
decentralised.  There  is,  however,  economic  policy  coordination  through  the  Broad  Economic  Policy 
Guidelines and the Stability and Growth Pact.  
Nobody  seriously  challenges  the  need  for  budgetary  rules  in  a  currency  union  with  supranational 
monetary policy and national budgetary policies. Both policies are linked in the medium to long term. 
Lasting monetary stability needs sound and reliable public finances. The pact was designed to sustain 
the confidence of the public and financial markets in the euro.  
The  pact  was,  in  fact,  the  answer  to  monetary  union  without  a  political  union,  just  like  a  virtual 
European finance minister.  
III 
What has to be done?  
The  economic  rationale  clearly  and  unambiguously  calls  for  retaining  medium-term-oriented  fiscal 
policy rules. It is not about applying a mechanistic procedure. Stability and growth go hand in hand. 
There is no trade-off between these goals; instead, they are mutually reinforcing. 
The structural growth obstacles of euro-area countries cannot be solved with monetary policy nor with 
expansionary fiscal policy measures. Further damaging the pact would expose the policy regime of 
EMU to a very severe endurance test with tensions between the member states owing to the free-rider 
problematic.  Furthermore,  the  open  budgetary  flank  increases  the  likelihood  of  tensions  between 
politicians and the central bank.  
I  am  not  surprised  that  the  financial  markets have so  far  reacted  rather  moderately  to  the  ECOFIN 
decision. What weighs most are the medium to long-term effects on credibility and on the functioning 
of the institutional setting of economic and monetary union.  
The  decision  of  the  ECOFIN  Council  threatens  to  break  the  political  consensus  of  the  Maastricht 
Treaty. Signing the Maastricht Treaty has limited the national sovereignty of fiscal policy. The Treaty is 
primary international law and contains inter alia: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
the commitment of member states to avoid excessive deficits 
the 3% threshold 
an early warning procedure 
the provision to give notice to a member state to take measures to reduce the deficit within a 
specified time limit 
the right to impose fines if a member state fails to comply. 
• 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  fleshed  out  these  provisions  and  streamlined  the  procedures  at  the 
same time. Contrary to appearance, the Stability and Growth Pact is not a non-committal statement of 
political purpose but secondary EU law. Permanently fumbling with the pact is a clear sign that political 
authorities  in  many  member  countries were  only  vaguely  aware of  the  implication  of  EMU  on  fiscal 
policy leeway.  
The pact is a decisive element of the institutional framework of the monetary union. Treaty and pact 
already resemble a partial political union.  
The technical preconditions for the functioning of EMU are in place. If properly applied, this will suffice 
for  the  time  being.  In  the  medium  to  long  term,  however,  additional  political  back-up  will  be 
indispensable.   
EMU has tied the participating countries permanently together. National policy choices have become a 
matter of concern for all. For the lasting success of the politically decentralised monetary union  
1. 
it  is  crucial  to  implement  structural  reforms,  thus  lifting  member  countries  on  to  a  higher 
growth path 
it is crucial to overcome integration and adjustment fatigue 
2. 
BIS Review 56/2003 
 3
3. 
4. 
5. 
it is crucial to embrace reality and accept the fact that national sovereignty in fiscal policy is 
limited in a monetary union 
it is crucial to accept the constituting principle of all democracies, the rule of law, which lays 
down the primacy of law over policy  
it  is  crucial  to  adhere  to  the  stability  consensus  of  Maastricht  which  is  additionally  put  in 
question by disregarding the suggestions of the ECB and the central banks of the euro area 
to refine the Convention’s proposal. 
It  will  be  necessary  to  reconcile  the  “ever  closer  union”  with  the  “ever  wider  union”.  Today  we  are 
further  away  from  a  political  union  than  we  were  when  the  euro  was  introduced  five  years  ago. 
Regarding  the  co-ordination  of  budgetary  policies,  we  are  even  thrown  back  to  intergovernmental 
co-operation.  
It will be necessary to reconcile the negotiations on the Constitution for Europe with the damage done 
to the political stability consensus of Maastricht.  
It is in the European and in the national interest to solve the institutional crises.  
We  must  put  a  stop  to  incurring  excessive  debt  because  we  are  living  at  the  expense  of  future 
generations.  Sustainable  growth  can  be  achieved  only  on  the  basis  of  stability  and  sound  public 
finance.  
We must put a stop to the process of aggravating the credibility crises which strangles a sustainable 
European recovery. 
We  must  put  a  stop  to  the  disintegrating  forces  which  allege  victories  by  organised  majorities  over 
reason.  I  cannot  comprehend  how  such    behaviour  -  I  am  not  willing  to  call  it  a  system  -  can  be 
expected to work in an enlarged union with 25 member states. 
I do hope that the suspension of the rules and procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact is only 
temporary.  
I do hope that Europe develops the political will and leadership to return to a rule-based system. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2003
