Eva Srejber: Financial delegation - how do I keep a check on those managing 
my money? 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Swedish 
Shareholders Association, Stockholm, 25 November 2003. 
 Introduction 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  the  Swedish  Shareholders  Association. 
During the time at my disposal I intend to discuss the issue of what opportunities we savers have to 
ensure that our money is not used for purposes other than to improve our personal finances. This is a 
problem that has dogged us for quite some time and it has risen to the surface once again with the 
discussions  on  ownership  of  certain  Swedish  life  insurance  companies.  What  makes  this  question 
particularly interesting for the representative of a central bank are the further complications that can 
ensue if the general public loses confidence in those managing its savings. If this were to happen, it 
would  affect more  than  just  the  savers.  There  is a risk  that  we would  all  be affected  in  the  form  of 
poorer economic growth. As confidence crises can arise in all forms of savings, regardless of whether 
this  is  via  normal  bank  accounts,  through  direct  purchases  of  shares  or  deposits  in  funds,  I  shall 
discuss the issue on a more general level and not focus on the present problems in the life insurance 
companies. 
Driving forces behind saving 
The  deregulation  of  the  financial  markets  that  began  in  Sweden  during  the  1980s  signified  major 
changes  for  Swedish  savers.  Suddenly  we  had  much  greater  rights  to  decide  over  our  money 
ourselves  and  to  take  many  of  the  savings  decisions  that  were  previously  a  central  government 
monopoly. The rapid and innovative developments in the financial markets also gave savers greater 
opportunity to choose different types of savings. It is not surprising that during this time we have also 
seen a large increase in financial savings. The deregulation processes explain some of this. The tax 
reforms  and  the  return  to  a  low-inflation  economy  are  other  explanatory  factors.  However,  the 
underlying trend is mainly due to demographic changes. As recently as in the 1980s, people invested 
the greater part of their savings in real assets, such as housing and durable consumption goods, as 
well as human capital, i.e. various forms of education. Since then, financial investments, whether in 
bank accounts or in various types of securities, have taken up a larger part of people’s savings. This 
change  can  be  broadly  explained  by  people  adapting  their  consumption  and  thereby  their  savings 
according  to  different  life  phases.  When  they  are  young,  their  consumption  usually  exceeds  their 
income. This is when people start a family, get an education, buy cars and houses or apartments. To 
cover all of this expenditure, most of us borrow money. As the years go by, incomes rise, enabling 
people  to  reap  the  fruit  of  investments  in  human  capital,  while  they  have  already  made  their  major 
investments. Their debts can now begin to be paid off and their financial savings can increase. One 
conclusion is that the larger the percentage of young people in relation to older people, the larger the 
savings in real assets. On the other hand, a country with a slightly older population has a relatively 
large percentage of financial savings. This description applies quite well to Sweden. Bearing in mind 
the need for change that population developments put onto the pension and welfare systems, it is also 
reasonable  to  assume  that  private  financial  savings  will  need  to  increase  further  in  the  near  future. 
This is what will be required in future to be able to manage one’s finances after retirement. I discussed 
the link between this development and inflation in a speech I held on 19 November. 
Confidence forms the foundation 
When it comes to savings, most of us probably want to diversify as much as possible. Of course, we 
want to receive a good return on our savings, but at a reasonable risk level. We have also become 
more aware that it is net return, that is, the return after deductions for various charges, that determines 
how much our savings are worth. The demand for well-diversified savings at a relatively low cost has 
created  the  basis  for  the  substantial  expansion  in  passively-managed  share  index  funds  in  recent 
years. Investments in these funds reflect the development of a given index, which means that active 
management  becomes  unnecessary.  The  fact  that  these  funds  have  been  so  widely  successful,  at 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 1
least on more developed markets, can be seen in the BIS report on institutional asset management 
presented last spring.1 As the report also shows, developments in the financial markets have opened 
up more exotic markets and sectors for our savings. Active management is more common on these 
markets,  as  the  opportunities  to  pan  for  gold  nuggets  that  will  outperform  the  market  average  are 
considered greater here. 
This  development  has  had  great  significance  for  the  efficiency  of  the  functions  supplied  by  the 
financial sector. Here I am thinking of the possibilities for risk management and conversion of savings 
to risk capital for investment. The financial sector also has other important functions, but I will not be 
discussing them today. Diversification, as I mentioned earlier, is one example of how households can 
simply and relatively cheaply reduce risks in their savings. The increased confidence savers can feel 
through  the  diversification  offered  by  various  savings  companies  increases  the  flow  of  capital  from 
savers to investors. As national boundaries are less distinct within the financial world, capital is able to 
move to where it is most useful, whether this is in Sweden or elsewhere in the world. 
Deregulation enables market forces to be utilised to a greater extent to allocate capital and manage 
risks. Once a society has taken this step, it must take the further step of ensuring that individual savers 
have  confidence  in  the  market  actors.  The  possibility  for  the  financial  system  to  supply  functions 
important  to  the  economy  in  an  efficient  manner  is  based  on  the  existence  of  such  confidence.  A 
glance  in  the  rear-view  mirror  shows  that  this  confidence  cannot  be  taken  for  granted.  What  is 
happening in the life insurance companies now is a good example of this. Although the crisis is fairly 
limited, it clearly shows how fickle confidence can be. The amount of new savings in life insurance 
companies has been declining for some time now, but the scandals at Skandia have further fuelled 
savers’  mistrust.  According  to  a  survey  by  Sifo  printed  in  Göteborgs-Posten  newspaper  on 
2 November,  three-quarters  of  the  Swedish  public  lost  confidence  in  life  insurance  companies  after 
revelations of the scandals. 
Herd behaviour causes problems 
The risk of confidence problems arising in connection with financial delegation, that is to say, when I 
put the management of my savings in the hands of someone else, cannot be ignored. This is largely 
because all forms of financial delegation contain a potential conflict of interests. The person managing 
my savings may have quite different interest from me. 
One  example  is  the  herd  behaviour  observed  among  asset  managers.  To  some  extent,  this  is  a 
question of rational behaviour based on the assets earning money on the charges paid by savers. It is 
important  to  be  at  least  as  good  as  the  average  to  avoid  losing  the  battle  for  savers’  money. 
Otherwise, it will be much more difficult to attract new savers. From this perspective, the cost of being 
poorer than average weighs heavier than the gain of being better than average. It will then be rational 
for asset managers to act in the same way as their counterparts. If everyone else buys IT shares, I as 
an asset manager will also have to buy them to avoid deviating too much from the rest. The major 
problem here is that this in turn could have a negative effect on the financial markets. It appears that 
this is the case. Herd behaviour has been highlighted as one of several possible reasons for the most 
recent stock market bubble and the ensuing crash. 
Large  fluctuations  in  the  financial  markets  make  savings  less  secure.  Well-diversified  savings,  for 
instance  in  a  fund  investing  in  both  shares  and  debt  securities,  normally  provides  good  protection 
against changes in share prices and interest rates, and people are aware of this now. On the other 
hand, it is less certain that they realise that the asset managers’ behaviour in itself can contribute to 
major fluctuations in the markets, which in turn makes well-diversified savings more risky than they 
ought to be. If the incentives programmes used to motivate individual asset managers are based on 
their success in relation to competitors, this can further reinforce negative herd behaviour. 
These  problems  can  be  aggravated  by  the  construction  of  the  index  against  which  many  asset 
managers  are  assessed.  This  is  one  aspect  taken  up  in  the  BIS  report  I  mentioned  earlier.  The 
weights used to calculate a company’s share in many of the most popular indices are based on the 
company’s market value. This tends to lead to overvalued companies being overrepresented in the 
                                                      
1  Committee  on  Global  Financial  System,  BIS,  2003,  “Incentive  structures  in  institutional  asset  management  and  their 
implications for financial markets”. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2003
index.  As  asset  managers’  opportunities  to  deviate  from  the  index  by  underweighting  overvalued 
companies is often very limited, the unavoidable result is that the manager may be forced to invest in 
companies that are considered overvalued. 
Naïve view of bonus programmes 
The remuneration structure for managers of listed companies is another potential source of a conflict 
of interests affecting savers. Linking senior management’s incomes to the development of the share 
price  increases  the  probability  that  company  management  and  shareholders  will  have  the  same 
interests. Senior managers will concentrate on increasing the value of the company, as this will give 
them  higher  income.  The  idea  is  that  this  will  reduce  the  risk  of  senior  managers  occupying 
themselves  with  business  that  will  not  benefit  the  development  of  the  company.  This  also  benefits 
those  who  have  invested  their  money  in  a  savings  company  which  has  in  turn  invested  in  the 
company.  The  whole  idea  is,  of  course,  based  on  the  share  price  also  reflecting  some  form  of 
fundamentally expected change in value in the company. 
However, the corporate scandals in recent years show that it was naïve to link the bonus solely to the 
short-term development of the share price. This evidently gave less scrupulous senior managers an 
incentive to try to affect the share price through creative accounting or through dubious dealings in an 
attempt to affect the reported profits. If this type of bonus programme is to function, it will require much 
more sophisticated systems than merely linking the bonus to temporary changes in the share price. 
The bonus must be based on actual, sustainable improvements in the company’s results and it must 
have  a  ceiling.  On  the  other  hand,  one  can  wonder  why  a  good  salary  should  not  be  considered 
enough  incentive  to  do  a  good  job.  Whatever  the  circumstances,  it  can  be  observed  that  there  is 
tremendous pressure from the general public and authorities to make changes. We should therefore 
be able to assume that improvements will be made, to reduce the risk of senior managers acting in a 
way detrimental to shareholders and those saving indirectly in the company’s shares. 
Ownership issue important but difficult 
Many people have pointed to the increase in institutional savings as the culprit in the bonus drama. 
The AP pension funds, the insurance companies and various types of asset management companies 
have  tried  to  avoid  taking  on  an  active  ownership  role  as  far  as  possible.  The  reason  given  is  that 
active  ownership  does  not  benefit  savers.  Active  ownership  costs  money  and  also  makes  it  more 
difficult to withdraw from a company one is dissatisfied with. The institutions have said they prefer to 
vote with their feet. If they are dissatisfied with a company, they quite simply sell their holdings in it. 
One consequence of this reluctance to exercise active ownership has been that more power has been 
transferred  to  company  managers,  who  have  been  able  to  grant  themselves  unreasonable  fringe 
benefits. 
The emergence of the institutional owner has also led to pronouncements about the advantages of the 
old, traditional family ownership. Personally, however, I am not entirely convinced that this is the best 
form  of  ownership.  In  Sweden  this  has  meant  that  one  owner  has  been  able  to  control  companies 
despite a very small capital contribution, what is known as pyramiding. As is the case with excessively 
powerful company managers, these owners can act in a way that does not benefit other shareholders. 
In Sweden the desire to control corporate groups has probably often been a more important driving 
force  among  some  of  the  traditional  owner  families  than  an  interest  in  increasing  the  worth  of  the 
shares. 
Personally, I believe that Sweden would benefit from more institutional investors electing to take an 
interest in ownership issues and how to check on those managing our savings. This would reduce the 
risk of expressions of avarice such as we have seen in ABB and Skandia. There are also signs that 
some institutions have begun to think along these lines. For instance, a couple of the AP funds have 
taken a fairly firm stand on ownership issues. However, it is important that we continue to discuss the 
role of institutional owners. 
A  further  potential  conflict  of  interests  can  be  found  between  shareholders  and  mutual  fund 
participants in the bank-owned investment fund companies. According to Swedish law, an investment 
fund company shall be a limited liability company and act to maximise the value for shareholders. If 
shareholders’  interests  and  the  interests  of  those  contributing  capital  do  not  coincide,  there  are 
grounds  for  a  conflict.  One  example  is  when  a  bank-owned  investment  fund  owns  shares  in  a 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 3
company  in  which  the  bank  in  its  turn  has  an  interest  as  lender.  If  developments  in  this  company 
motivate  selling  shares,  and  if  this  in  turn  could  put  at  risk  the  capital  the  bank  has  lent  to  the 
company, there is a risk that the bank would try to influence the investment fund company to retain its 
shares.  On  the  other  hand,  this  risk  should  not  be  exaggerated.  In  Sweden  the  protagonists 
themselves, as well as Finansinspektionen (the Swedish financial advisory authority), have prevented 
the potential conflict from burgeoning. In addition, there is considerable incentive to act in a way that 
benefits savers. Bad deals would lead to a risk of savers selling their shares and perhaps most of all to 
a reduction in new savings. 
Dividend ban circumvented 
The conflicts of interest we have seen in the mutual life insurance companies are different from those 
that  could  arise  in  the  bank-owned  investment  fund  companies.  This  is  because  of  the  special 
construction of the life insurance companies. The surplus in the mutual insurance companies shall fall 
to the savers and thus may not be paid out as dividends. Despite this ban on paying out dividends, it is 
common for mutual life insurance companies to be tied to property and liability insurance companies. 
One  may  wonder  why.  Probably  because  there  are  other  ways  of  earning  money  on  savers  in  life 
insurance. It is usually the property and liability insurance company that manages the capital of the life 
insurance company and it certainly does not do this for free. Although Finansinspektionen has the task 
of  examining  whether  the  remuneration  paid  in  these  cases  is  reasonable,  there  is  no  regular 
procurement  procedure  for  the  management  task  and  it  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  or  not  the 
contract benefits savers. As it is not possible to move their money, savers have no opportunity to take 
action if they are dissatisfied. The present discussions about Skandia have concerned whether it was 
right or wrong to sell the management contract to Den norske bank. However, the problem in this case 
is rather the fundamental contract that gave the property and liability insurance company the task of 
managing the life insurance company’s capital. 
It is also common that property and liability insurance companies handle the sales of the life insurance 
company’s insurance policies. This contract was not exposed to competition, either, which means that 
it  is  possible  that  the  remuneration  to  the  property  and  liability  insurance  company  could  be  lower. 
There  are  a  number  of  other  examples  of  how  money  could  have  been  transferred  from  the  life 
insurance  company  to  the  property  and  liability  insurance  company.  For  instance,  one  could  ask 
whether Skandia AB’s sale of property to Skandia Liv was really made at market prices. Folksam Liv 
granted loans to its sister property and liability insurance company that had the nature of risk capital. 
However, the interest on the loans appears to be lower than should be required for risk capital. 
The question is how this has been able to happen for so many years, without anyone reacting. We 
cannot blame it on ignorance of the problems. They have been brought up in various contexts over the 
years without this triggering any major discussion. Perhaps the current system has become so firmly 
established in our minds that we have been unable to see the actual risks. This has been the case for 
me. During the late 1980s I was on the board of directors of Försäkringsinspektionen (the Swedish 
private insurance supervisory service), but I cannot remember this issue being discussed, despite the 
fact  that  the  problems  were  the  same  then  as  now.  Everyone,  from  the  government  and 
Finansinspektionen  to  corporate  management  and  consumer  organisations,  was  aware  of  the 
problems.  Despite  this,  very  little  has  been  done,  apart  from  the  introduction  of  the  possibility  to 
establish profit-making companies. 
Lock-in effects 
I have tried to give examples of conflicts in the savings chain that could have a negative effect on the 
value of savings. Such conflicts are inherent in all forms of financial delegation and are not, of course, 
limited  to  Sweden.  The  prevailing  institutional  structures  in  individual  countries  can  lead  to  conflicts 
being expressed in different ways. But the fact that competition for savers’ money is not allowed to 
take full effect is probably an important factor in most cases. 
From an international perspective, it is difficult to claim that the supply of savings products in Sweden 
is too small. On the contrary, Sweden fares well in this type of comparison. Here the problem is rather 
that  competition  is  curbed  by  various  types  of  deadlock  effects  that  stem  from  the  old  days  of 
regulation in Sweden. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2003
The capital flow to the AP pension funds is safeguarded by legislation. Regardless of what we think of 
their  management,  there  is  little  we  can  do  to  influence  it.  Formerly,  the  AP  funds  were  used  for 
political aims to subsidise house building by allowing them to buy housing bonds and treasury bonds 
below market rates. Fortunately, this is not the case today. Other parts of our pension savings have 
gone  via  collective  agreements  in  the  labour  market  to  companies  such  as  Alecta  and  AMF.  We 
cannot influence the management of the money there either. Some life insurance and pension policies 
are in turn protected by taxation regulations. The premiums in the “P insurance policies” were made 
tax deductible in income tax returns, which together with the limited opportunity for transferring money 
meant that savings were locked in. 
There is also a lock-in effect with regard to savings in the investment fund companies attached to the 
banks.  Reluctance  to  pay  capital  gains  tax  when  selling  mutual  fund  shares  can  make  savers  less 
willing to sell their shares, despite dissatisfaction with the fund growth. This is of course a problem that 
also  affects  those  saving  directly  in  equity.  These  various  forms  of  lock-in  effects  have  curbed 
competition  in  the  savings  market,  which  together  with  the  obscure  ownership  in  many  limited 
companies, has probably been to the detriment of savers. 
A further problem that is of significance to competition concerns financial advice. In the United States 
there is a whole cadre of independent financial advisers who have no connection to the companies 
selling  various  savings  products.  This  is  not  the  case  in  Sweden.  Here  we  still  accept  that  our 
investment advice comes from the same people who then earn money on managing our savings. It is 
self-evident that such a close linking of these roles is far from ideal. 
Time for change 
So what shall we do? We must ensure that confidence can be maintained in the market participants. 
There  is  evidently  a  need  to  review  the  institutional  framework  regarding  the  mutual  life  insurance 
companies. It is not sufficient to have a general requirement for them to reorganise themselves. The 
government’s decision to appoint a commission to look into these problems is therefore a welcome 
one. Until this commission puts forward its proposals, it is important to ensure that people who abuse 
their positions should be replaced. This is precisely what has happened at Skandia. That is good. I 
think  it  illustrates  that  the  market  economy  works.  Even  if  people  are  upset  over  events  in  the  life 
insurance  companies,  this  should  not  need  to  entail  widespread  confidence  crises.  Some  form  of 
prevention  can  be  achieved  by  pointing  out  the  alternatives  for  efficiently-functioning,  diversified 
savings offered in the market. Broad index funds with low fees are one example. 
It is also important to point out the need for serious financial advice independent of companies selling 
savings products. There should be a market for this in Sweden, even if it is expensive. 
However, releasing the entire potential competition in the savings market is not what would provide the 
best guarantee that savers’ capital will not be used for other purposes than improving savers’ finances. 
If we are to achieve this, the lock-in effects currently hampering competition must be broken. This in 
turn requires changes in tax regulations and better opportunities for insurance policyholders to move 
their money. I am aware that these are complicated issues. However, this does not make it any less 
important to deal with them as quickly as possible. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 54/2003 
 5
