Jarle Bergo: The role of the interest rate in the economy 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway) , at AON Grieg 
Investors, Zürich, 19 October 2003.  
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
17 September and on previous speeches and publications. 
The Charts in pdf can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 The interest rate is a variable that affects most of us, whether we are investors or borrowers. And even 
if  we  don’t  have  debts  or  assets,  the  influence  of  the  interest  rate  on  the  economy  will  affect  us 
indirectly. 
In my speech tonight, I would like to look at some factors surrounding the interest rate and monetary 
policy.  I  will  discuss  the  various  roles  played  by  the  interest  rate  in  the  economy  from  a  more 
theoretical viewpoint and examine interest rate movements over the past 130 years to see whether 
there are lessons to be learned. Furthermore, I will touch upon the factors governing the interest rate 
in Norway and, in conclusion, I will discuss some challenges facing monetary policy in a number of 
countries. 
The interest rate has several functions in an economy  
Many financial decisions involve a trade-off between present and future consumption. One example of 
this is households’ decisions on saving and borrowing. Income from employment normally varies in the 
course of a lifetime. Earnings are low when we are young, rising in our middle years, before falling 
again as we reach retirement age. Many people raise loans in early adulthood, repay their loan and 
build up positive net wealth as they reach middle age, then draw on their savings towards the end of 
their lives. This results in consumption that is more evenly spread over a lifetime than implied by the 
flow of annual income. A company’s investment choices also involve the choice between present and 
future consumption. Owners may give priority to present consumption by taking out dividends, or they 
can invest profits in the company and thereby lay the basis for larger profits later. By placing capital at 
the disposal of others, in other words by saving, one’s own consumption is postponed. People require 
compensation  for  this,  both  because  human  beings  are  impatient  and  because  there  is  a  certain 
probability we may not live to see the future. The interest rate provides this compensation. If we want 
to use our money for consumption now or to finance investments by raising loans, the interest rate is 
the price we must pay in order to do so. The interest rate is therefore a key variable in our choice 
between consumption now or in the future.  
Interest rates are the terms at which money or goods today may be traded off for money or goods at a 
future date. 
The interest rate is also the price of money. We can choose to store our savings in the form of cash or 
in  a  current  account.  The  price  we  pay  is  the  return  other  alternatives  would  have  provided.  Bank 
deposits and bonds are examples of investments that provide a reliable return – interest income. If we 
choose to store money, we lose this income. But in contrast to bonds, money can be used directly to 
purchase  goods  and  services.  Interest  is  therefore  also  the  price  we  pay  in  order  to  have  liquid 
holdings. 
The interest rate is also used as an instrument in economic policy. Setting the interest rate to achieve 
a monetary policy objective, often price stability or low and stable inflation, is usually the responsibility 
of the central bank. The central bank sets a very short-term nominal interest rate. In Norway, this is the 
interest rate on banks’ overnight deposits in Norges Bank, the sight deposit rate. This rate determines 
the very short interest rates in the money market with maturities from one day upwards, normally up to 
Norges  Bank’s  next  monetary  policy  meeting.  Longer-term  rates  are  determined  by  expectations 
concerning  Norges  Bank’s  use  of  instruments  in  the  future  and  by  the  degree  of  confidence  in 
monetary policy. The real interest rate, that is the nominal interest rate minus expected inflation, is the 
rate that influences decisions concerning saving and investment. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 1
The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. When the interest rate falls, it is less profitable for households to save, 
and  they  will  therefore  increase  their  consumption  now  rather  than  wait  until  later.  Borrowing  also 
becomes less costly, with an associated rise in investment. Higher demand in turn leads to a higher 
rise  in  prices  and  wages.  Lower  interest  rates  make  it  less  attractive  to  invest  in  NOK  and  less 
attractive for Norwegian enterprises and households to raise loans in other currencies. Lower interest 
rates will therefore normally result in reduced capital inflows and a weaker krone. This makes imported 
goods more expensive. In addition, a weaker krone increases activity, profitability and the capacity to 
pay in the internationally exposed sector. 
The equilibrium interest rate and the neutral interest rate are closely related concepts.  
The neutral interest rate is the rate that does not in itself result in an increase or a reduction in price 
and cost inflation in the economy in the course of a business cycle. An assessment of whether interest 
rate  setting  is  expansionary  or  contractionary,  involves  comparing  short-term  market  rates  with  the 
neutral rate. A real interest rate in the interval 3 – 4 per cent is often regarded as neutral in economies 
such as the Norwegian economy. I will revert to a quantification of this level later. 
In  the  longer  term,  the  interest  rate  level  influences  capital  accumulation  in  the  economy  and  the 
potential  for  economic  growth.  The  equilibrium  interest  rate  is  the  rate  that  ensures  that  capital 
accumulation corresponds to saving in the economy. This results in an output potential that over time 
satisfies demand without generating pressures in the economy.  
The equilibrium interest rate is determined by long-term phenomena associated with the structure of 
the  economy,  while  the  neutral  rate  is  defined  on  the  basis  of  its  influence  on  pressures  in  the 
economy and thereby on inflation. In the long term, the neutral interest rate will correspond to the long-
term equilibrium interest rate in the economy.  
The  long-term  equilibrium  interest  rate  is  determined  by  fundamental  structural  relationships  in  the 
economy,  such  as  consumer  impatience  and  the  economic  growth  rate.  Rising  population  growth 
means that a larger labour force must be equipped with real capital. Fixed investment and saving must 
increase. Higher population growth will therefore require a higher equilibrium interest rate. The higher 
productivity growth is, the higher future gains from today’s investments will be. This also provides the 
basis for a higher equilibrium interest rate. 
The  long-term  equilibrium  interest  rate  cannot  deviate  too  much  between  countries  over  time.  With 
liberalised  capital  markets,  capital  will  move  towards  those  countries  that  can  provide  the  highest 
return. Substantial interest rate differentials between countries cause fluctuations in the exchange rate 
and  will  not  be  compatible  with  a  long-term  equilibrium.  Thus,  we  may  refer  to  a  global  equilibrium 
interest rate for open economies, although perhaps with an added national risk premium. 
The interest rate has thus several roles to play in the economy and these roles should be fairly closely 
linked. The interest rate shall in the short and medium term contribute to stable inflation and stable 
developments in production. At the same time, it shall in the long term also contribute to equilibrium in 
the market for real capital. Capital accumulation shall over time correspond to saving. To achieve this, 
the  real  interest  rate  must  not  over  time  deviate  substantially  from  the  return  on  real  capital. 
Substantial deviations can give rise to undesirable fluctuations in the markets for real capital that have 
no basis in economic fundamentals.  
The  economic  situation  varies  over  time.  Monetary  policy  will  set  an  interest  rate  that  is  alternately 
above  and  below  the  neutral  rate.  Consequently,  the  interest  rate  level  will  probably  not  deviate 
substantially from the long-term equilibrium rate over time. By taking a gradualist approach to interest 
rate setting, it is also possible to assess whether imbalances are developing in capital markets. 
Interest rate developments from a historical perspective 
In  the  long  term,  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  will  be  determined  by  underlying  structural 
relationships  in  the  economy.  These  relationships  will  probably  only  be  changed  gradually  so  that 
changes  in  nominal  rates  will  primarily  reflect  changes  in  expected  inflation.  In  the  short  term, 
however, the real interest rate will vary, not least because monetary policy seeks to influence the real 
interest rate in the short and medium term. Changes in nominal interest rates might therefore reflect 
changes in both real interest rates and inflation expectations.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2003
Nominal interest rates were relatively stable from the 1800s and up to the 1950s.1 Periodically strong 
fluctuations in inflation resulted in substantial variations in the real interest rate from one year to the 
next, as we measure it in retrospect. 
The gold standard set the framework for monetary policy at the end of the 1800s and up to 1929.2 
During the gold standard era, the central bank determined the price of the national currency relative to 
the price of gold. Central banks had to keep stocks of gold that could be used to stabilise the gold 
price by actively buying and selling gold in the market.  
The money supply and inflation in a country are then determined by the supply of gold on the world 
market. When two or more currencies are pegged to gold at a fixed price, these currencies will also 
have  a  fixed  price  in  relation  to  each  other.  As  in  other  systems  with  fixed  exchange  rates,  this 
restricted the individual country’s scope for using the interest rate as an instrument to stabilise the real 
economy.  
In the interwar years, nominal interest rates were relatively high. This may primarily be ascribed to the 
policy of gold parity that was pursued in many countries. The aim of a number of countries, including 
Norway, was to strengthen the value of the national currency against gold, so as to reestablish the 
gold parity of the pre-First World War period. 
Nominal interest rates increased markedly from 1950 – 1985, reflecting accelerating inflation in this 
period.  After  1985,  nominal  interest  rates  fell  again  and  are  now  at  about  the  same  level  as  in  the 
interwar  period.  At  the  same  time,  short-term  variations  in  nominal  interest  rates  seem  to  have 
increased.  This  may  be  related  to  central  banks’  more  active  use  of  interest  rate  policy  to  combat 
inflation. 
Developments in inflation since 1870 have been remarkably similar from country to country. This is not 
a new feature that has coincided with the market globalisation we have witnessed in recent years. 
It would appear that inflation is particularly low in periods when monetary policy has a clearly defined 
nominal anchor. Up to the First World War, the gold standard was that anchor, providing a direct link 
between the supply of gold and inflation. Whenever gold was discovered, the gold price dropped. In 
order to fulfil its commitment to maintaining the fixed price between a country’s currency and gold, the 
central bank was obliged to buy gold using the national currency as payment. The supply of money 
then increased, which contributed to inflation. In periods when no new gold finds were made, prices 
tended  to  be  stable  or  falling.  The  tendency  for  prices  to  fall  was  amplified  in  periods  of  strong 
economic growth. Economic growth is accompanied by higher turnover. Unless new money is printed 
to accommodate this, prices must fall.  
After 1945, with the introduction of the Bretton Woods system, a number of countries’ currencies were 
pegged to the US dollar, which was in turn pegged to gold until 1971. In many ways, US monetary 
policy and nominal interest rate levels functioned as a nominal anchor, and to a large extent governed 
global interest rates and inflation developments. 
Inflation has been particularly high in times of war. The 1970s and 1980s were characterised by fairly 
high inflation following the collapse of the Bretton Woods agreement, the oil price shocks and counter-
cyclical policy. From the end of the 1980s, an inflation target for monetary policy has functioned as a 
credible nominal anchor in a number of countries, curbing the pace of inflation. 
To calculate historical real interest rates, an estimate must be made of expected inflation. Figures for 
actual inflation are normally used. Inflation expectations may deviate from actual inflation, especially in 
periods when the latter is subject to considerable fluctuation. 
From 1870 to today, developments in global real interest rates can be roughly divided into 5 periods. 
In  the  period  1870  –  1896,  the  real  interest  rate  ranged  between  4  and  5  per  cent,  and  inflation 
fluctuated around zero. No new major gold finds were made in this period and the economy in general 
was exhibiting brisk growth.  
The real interest rate fell to about 1-3 per cent in the period 1897 -1913, reflecting some acceleration 
in inflation in this period. New discoveries of gold were again made in this period. In the 1800s and up 
                                                      
1   Bordo, M.D. and Jonung, L. (1987), "The long-run behaviour of the velocity of circulation". Cambridge University Press and 
Norges Bank 
2   J.D. Sachs, F. Larrain (193), Macroeconomics in the Global Economy 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 3
to the First World War, the gold standard and price fluctuations in the agricultural sector contributed to 
alternating inflation and deflation. 
In the interwar period 1918-1940, real interest rates were fairly high, sometimes well above 5 per cent. 
This was partly due to the policy of gold parity and the reestablishment of the gold standard, which 
resulted in high nominal interest rates in a number of countries. 
The  post-Second  World  War  era  can  be  divided  into  two  periods.  The  postwar  period  up  to  the 
collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  agreement  in  1971  was characterised  by  unusually  low  real  interest 
rates,  ranging  from  0  to  2  per  cent.  Real  interest  rates  were  low  despite  high  returns  in  the  stock 
market,  strong  growth  in  output  and  in  stocks  of  real  capital.  According  to  most  economic  growth 
theories,  this  should  have  been  accompanied  by  a  high  real  interest  rate.  From  a  more  short-term 
perspective, however, low real interest rates led to high investment activity and growth. However, this 
probably contributed to the tensions that led to the marked changes in economic policy in the 1970s 
and 1980s, internationally and in Norway. 
To a certain extent, a negative real interest rate characterised the 1970s and most of the 1980s in 
Norway.  In  retrospect,  we  might  ask  whether  the  interest  rate  was  kept  too  low  in  relation  to  a 
reasonable long-term equilibrium level. In particular, this was a period of substantial fluctuations in the 
Norwegian economy, with high and variable inflation. The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the 
main reasons behind these pronounced swings in the Norwegian economy. Because of the extensive 
use of credit regulations, nominal interest rates remained low. With a policy of low interest rates and 
devaluations, inflation took root. Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation 
and the value of tax- deductible interest expenses rose. The wide fluctuations culminated in a credit 
boom in the mid-1980s, followed by a deep recession and high unemployment towards the end of the 
1980s.  
From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble, it was recognised that a substantial revision of 
economic  policy  would  be  necessary  and  that  the  problems  created  by  inflation  had  to  be  taken 
seriously. The exchange rate was chosen as the nominal anchor. The real interest rate gradually rose 
and  was  relatively  high  until  the  mid-1990s,  partly  as  a  result  of  the  tight  monetary  policy  that  was 
conducted in order to reduce inflation. The real interest rate has fallen markedly since the beginning of 
the 1990s. 
Neither the neutral interest rate nor the equilibrium interest rate are variables that can be observed. 
Economic  theory  can  contribute  insight  into  the  factors  that  determine  the  equilibrium  rate,  but 
attempts to quantify the equilibrium interest rate based on theory yield a broad interval for a possible 
level.  Quantification  also  presents  problems,  as  estimates  must  be  made  for  unobserved  variables 
such as consumer impatience. An estimate of the equilibrium interest rate in industrialised countries 
presented in the publication Penger og Kreditt 2/003 indicate an interval of 3-9 per cent. The upper 
limit in particular seems unreasonable in relation to observed real interest rates, for example. 
An alternative is to use historical average interest rates on the basis of an assumption that actual real 
interest rates will vary around the equilibrium interest rate. This method also poses problems. Each 
historical era will, for example, be affected by the specific characteristics of that era. Credit rationing, 
for example, has influenced interest rate formation for long periods. In addition, both population and 
productivity growth have varied over time. 
Throughout  the  period  1870-2003,  the  average  for  long-term  real  interest  rates  in  Norway  has 
remained close to the average in the UK and the US: Norway 2.2 per cent, the UK 2.0 per cent and 
the US 2.8 per cent. The economy has changed substantially in this period. Thus, the average for this 
period probably provides little indication of what a long-term equilibrium interest rate is today.  
In order to comment on whether the real interest rate today is low or high, it may therefore be more 
meaningful to look at a “representative” period when the structure of the economy was more similar to 
the current structure. It is most reasonable to examine a period in the recent past, for example the past 
10-15  years.  Markets  were  deregulated  in  this  period,  for  example.  For  Norway,  it  would  also  be 
natural  to  study  the  period  after  1994.  In  the  period  1994-2002,  the  average  real  interest  rate  for 
Norway was 4.2 per cent, the UK 4.7 per cent and the US 3.4 per cent. Since 1994, the long-term real 
 3  Hammerstrøm, G and I. Lønning, “Kan vi tallfeste den nøytrale renten? (Is it possible to quantify the neutral interest rate?”). 
Penger og Kreditt 2/2000 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2003
interest  rate  in  Norway  has  varied  between  3  and  6  per  cent,  reaching  its  highest  level  at  the 
beginning  of  the  period  and  its  lowest  in  the  years  1997-2001.  Both  the  Norwegian  and  the  global 
economy  have  now  entered  a  period  of  low  real  interest  rates.  The  low  interest  rate  level  must  be 
viewed in the light of the possibility of persistently low inflation both in Norway and other countries. 
However, the real interest rate is not by any means as low as when inflation in Norway was high in the 
1970s and 1980s. 
Various monetary policy regimes 
As long as capital markets have been in existence, the interest rate has had the key role of creating 
equilibrium  within  and  between  the  various  markets.  The  interest  rate’s  role  as  a  monetary  policy 
instrument used to influence inflation, however, is a more recent phenomenon.  
The gold standard was introduced in Norway as the basis of the Norwegian monetary system by the 
Act of 4 July 1873 relating to the Monetary System. Norway’s monetary system was largely based on 
the gold standard until its international collapse in 1929, when the Norwegian krone was pegged to the 
pound sterling.  
Up to the mid-1980s, the focus of monetary policy was, first, to stabilise the exchange rate by means 
of interventions and regulation of international capital movements. Second, credit developments were 
governed by regulations on borrowing. The interest rate was primarily used to provide cheap credit for 
some sectors. Many other countries have followed a similar path of development. 
Many of the changes in international monetary policy over the past 25 år can be viewed as a response 
to the problems of stagflation in the 1970s and to financial innovations and deregulation of financial 
markets in the 1980s. In many countries, the authorities have increasingly focused on price stability as 
the  long-term  objective  of  monetary  policy,  with  the  interest  rate  as  the  most  important  policy 
instrument. The nominal interest rate (the key rate) will thus be set by central banks with the objective 
of achieving a level of actual inflation that is equal to the inflation target. Provided there is confidence 
in  monetary  policy,  expected  inflation  will  remain  consistent  with  the  inflation  target.  Changes  in 
nominal  interest  rates  will  then  be  fully  reflected  in  real  interest  rates.  This  makes  monetary  policy 
more effective. 
The  changes  in  Norges  Bank’s  monetary  policy  over  the  past  25  years  are  largely  in  line  with 
international developments. In Norway, the interest rate was used to stabilise the exchange rate from 
1986. Capital regulations no longer had the desired effect and were removed. Events in international 
financial markets in the last half of the 1990s led to more pronounced fluctuations in the exchange rate 
and  demonstrated  that  the  exchange  rate  cannot  be  finely  tuned.  High  petroleum  revenues,  fiscal 
slippage and expectations of an increase in the use of petroleum revenues contributed to eliminating 
the effect of interest rate policy on wage formation and fiscal policy. The exchange rate was no longer 
suitable as a nominal anchor. 
The Government laid down new monetary policy guidelines in March 2001. Norway’s current system 
of flexible inflation targeting and the objective of inflation over time of 2 ½ per cent is similar to systems 
in other comparable countries. 
The OECD countries have placed greater emphasis on inflation targeting through the 1990s. This has 
had a substantial effect on the largest capital markets in the global economy, i.e. in the EU, the US 
and Japan. Capital markets outside these areas are small. However, changes are also being made in 
monetary  policy  regimes  in  a  number  of  emerging  markets.  One  important  tendency  is  that  fewer 
countries operate an exchange rate policy regime where they are free to change the conversion rate 
to other currencies on their own initiative, so-called “crawling pegs”. A number of emerging markets 
have chosen inflation targeting instead: for example Israel, Chile, Brazil, Colombia, Korea, Thailand, 
Mexico  og  South  Africa.  Other  countries,  such  as  China,  Hong  Kong  and  the  Baltic  States,  have 
chosen to continue to use a fixed exchange rate system. 
The operational target of monetary policy in Norway as defined by the Government is inflation of close 
to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  The  inflation  target  provides  economic  agents  with  an  anchor  for  their 
decisions concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target is also a vehicle for 
allowing monetary policy to stabilise developments in output and employment. This objective is also 
expressed  in  the  Regulation  on  Monetary  Policy.  High  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  labour 
shortages  normally  point  to  higher  inflation.  When  interest  rates  are  increased,  demand  falls  and 
inflation  is  kept  at  bay.  When  demand  is  low  and  unemployment  rises,  inflation  will  tend  to  slow. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 5
Interest rates will then be reduced. This orientation of monetary policy will normally also contribute to 
stabilising output and employment. 
The impact of monetary policy occurs with a lag. The current inflation rate does not provide sufficient 
information to determine the level at which interest rates should be set now. Our analyses indicate that 
a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years.  
Frequent and marked interest rate changes can keep inflation under tight control, but will lead to wide 
variations in output and employment. This can be called a strict inflation target. Theoretically, we could 
also  have  chosen  to  stabilise  output  without  taking  into  account  variability  in  inflation.  This  can  be 
called a strict output target. In Norway, as in a many other countries, we have chosen an intermediate 
solution.  Interest  rates  are  changed  more  gradually  with  less  impact  on  output  than  under  a  strict 
inflation target, and inflation is allowed to deviate from the target over a somewhat longer period. This 
is called flexible inflation targeting.44 A two-year horizon in interest rate setting will also contribute to 
smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. Two years is therefore normally a reasonable time 
horizon for achieving the inflation target. 
The most important monetary policy instrument is the interest rate on banks’ sight deposits in Norges 
Bank. Short money market rates will shadow changes in Norges Bank sight deposit rate. The short-
term nominal interest rate in Norway is now very low historically.  
With reduced pressures in the economy and the prospect of an inflation rate below target at the two-
year horizon, Norges Bank has over the past year reduced the key rate on a number of occasions. 
The interest rate reductions since December 2002 reflected a change in the inflation outlook. The cuts 
were made in response to a weaker global economy and a sharp reduction in interest rates in other 
countries. In addition, Norway’s business sector has clearly felt the effects of the high level of costs 
and  the  strong  krone  exchange  rate.  The  public  sector  has  also  had  to  scale  back  its  activities 
following last year’s wage settlement. The sluggish prospects both abroad and at home have in turn 
influenced  the  Norwegian  labour  market  and  the  outlook  for  wage  and  price  inflation  in  the  years 
ahead. 
The  interest  rate  reductions  this  summer  were  carried  out  in  larger  steps  than  what  has  been 
customary. They were important in order to prevent inflation expectations from taking hold at too low a 
level. The interest rate cuts, which have also brought real interest rates down to a historically low level, 
will also contribute to a pick-up in growth in the economy. 
Relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates 
Interest rates with a long maturity may be viewed as a sequence of expected short-term interest rates 
at different future dates. Changes in expectations concerning Norges Bank’s future monetary policy 
may therefore influence interest rates with a maturity in excess of 1-2 months. Norges Bank’s mandate 
for  monetary  policy  is  well  known  in  the  market.  When  economic  agents  also  understand  Norges 
Bank’s response pattern in connection with events in the economy, market expectations concerning 
the interest rate will change as a result of economic news and to a lesser extent as a result of Norges 
Bank’s interest rate decisions in themselves. 
Norges Bank reduced the key rate at the monetary policy meeting on 17 September 2003. Short-term 
interest  rates  showed  little  change  since  the  interest  rate  decision  was  expected  by  market 
participants. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  changed  its  bias  concerning  future  inflation.  At  the  monetary  policy 
meeting in August, the Bank stated that, with an interest rate of 3 per cent, the probability that inflation 
two years ahead would be lower than 2½ per cent was greater than the probability that it would be 
higher. Following the meeting on 17 September, the Bank stated that, with an interest rate of 2.50 per 
cent, the probability that inflation two years ahead would be higher than 2½ per cent was the same as 
the  probability  that  it  would  be  lower.  Expectations  concerning  future  short-term  interest  rates  rose 
slightly, probably as a result of the change in Norges Bank’s bias concerning future inflation. This was 
perceived  as  new  information  by  market  participants.  The  yield  curve  was  therefore  a  little  steeper 
following the monetary policy meeting. 
                                                      
4   Svensson, L.E.O. (September 2002), "Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization". Princeton University 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2003
The  market’s  expectations  concerning  future  short-term  rates  can  be  reflected  in  forward  rates. 
Interest rate expectations for the next few years largely depend on the economic outlook and market 
expectations concerning  monetary policy.  In  the  long  term,  up  to ten  years,  market  participants  are 
unlikely to have any particular expectations concerning cyclical fluctuations. The forward rate may then 
be interpreted as the sum of the expected real interest rate and expected inflation when the economy 
is in balance. 
Without  limitations  on  capital  movements,  the  real  interest  rate  must  be  expected  to  develop 
approximately the same across countries over time. If there are no systematic differences in the risk 
premium between countries, differences in forward rates may be interpreted as differences in inflation 
expectations between countries. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  inflation  target  is  below,  but  close  to  2  per  cent.  This  results  in  an  inflation 
differential of ½ - 1 percentage point against Norway. An investor must therefore have an interest rate 
in  Norway  that  is  ½  -  1  percentage  point  higher  than  in  Germany  in  order  to  achieve  the  same 
expected  real  return  in  the  two  countries.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target,  the 
difference  between  German  and  Norwegian  forward  rates  was  about  1  percentage  point  for  a  long 
time. So far in 2003, this differential has been somewhat lower. This interest rate differential indicates 
that the market is confident that we will achieve the inflation target. 
This line of reasoning can also be reversed. Given stable inflation expectations of 2½ per cent, i.e. that 
monetary policy is credible, an estimate of the expected equilibrium real interest rate can be derived 
from  the  long-term  forward  rate.  About  ten  years  ahead,  market  participants  expect  a  short-term 
nominal  interest  rate  in  Norway  of  about  5¾  per  cent.  With  expected  inflation  corresponding  to  the 
inflation target of 2½ per cent, we can estimate the market’s expected real interest rate in the long 
term at about 3¼ per cent. This is approximately the same level for long-term real interest rates as in 
the period 1997-2002, but higher than the long historical average from 1870 to 2003. 
Deflation tendencies in a number of countries 
Inflation has declined in a number of countries. This indicates that the global shift in monetary policy, 
with a greater focus on inflation, has been effective. However, other factors have also played a role. 
Fiscal policy is being used to a lesser extent in demand management. Structural reforms have been 
adopted  in  order  to  improve  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Financial  markets  have  been 
liberalised and the markets for both financial services and products have been globalised.  
Deflation, i.e. a sustained fall in prices, has again become a subject of economic debate in the last few 
years. This is naturally due to the fall in consumer prices in a number of countries in Asia and the very 
low rate of inflation in many countries. Deflation can have a destabilising effect. If market participants 
expect  prices  to  continue  to  fall,  the  real  interest  rate  may  be  high  since  the  nominal  interest  rate 
cannot  fall  below  zero.  Households  and  enterprises  may  then  find  it  profitable  to  increase  saving 
pending a decline in prices, which leads to further fall in demand. The real debt burden increases as a 
result of the fall in prices. This curbs demand. Deflation is often accompanied by a decline in asset 
prices. This reduces banks’ collateral value for loans and may reduce banks’ total lending. 
Deflation can be spread across countries. Even though Norway is not experiencing deflation, we see 
that increased imports from low-cost countries are curbing inflation in Norway. Inflation in Norway is 
now low. It is primarily developments in prices for imported consumer goods that have pushed down 
the rise in consumer prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE). The 
low  rise  in  prices  reflects  the  appreciation  of  the  krone  through  2002  and  the  low  rate  of  inflation 
abroad. The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has also slowed, particularly 
prices for goods influenced by world market prices. 
As a result of the fall in inflation rates globally, key monetary policy rates are now low in the major 
economies. Monetary policy has also been eased considerably in the US and the euro area over the 
past few years as a result of the economic downturn. Norway’s monetary policy must be adapted to a 
global economy that is marked by unusually low interest rates. 
The Federal Reserve stated after its last meeting that the upside and downside risks to the attainment 
of  sustainable  growth  for  the  next  few  quarters  were  roughly  equal.  The  risk  of  inflation  becoming 
undesirably low was therefore deemed to be greater than the risk that inflation would move up from its 
already low level. This is the predominant concern of monetary policy in the period ahead. Monetary 
policy in the US may therefore remain expansionary for a fairly long period ahead. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 7
In Japan, expectations of a continued fall in prices have held up the real interest rate in spite of low 
nominal interest rates. In Japan, the key rate has been close to zero since the end of 2001. This limits 
the  central  bank’s  scope  for  stimulating  demand.  In  recent  years,  “untraditional”  monetary  policy 
instruments have also been discussed, such as supplying considerable liquidity through purchases of 
various  types  of  securities,  including  long-term  paper.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  to  a  large  extent 
purchased long-term government bonds and, since last summer, asset-backed securities as well. 
How to respond to financial bubbles 
Another subject that is being discussed globally is how monetary policy should respond to financial 
bubbles.  Should  we  try  to  prevent  the  bubble  from  developing  or  be  content  with  responding 
afterwards once the bubble has burst and then make the best out of the situation? And what is actually 
feasible?  
Financial stability is often defined as the absence of financial instability. Those who experienced the 
banking crisis in the 1990s have a clear perception of this. Financial instability is characterised by wide 
fluctuations in prices for assets, such as dwellings, commercial property and securities or failure in the 
functioning of financial institutions (a “run” on banks) or financial markets. Financial instability is also 
characterised by disturbances in credit availability or the flow of capital. This may have consequences 
for output, employment and for inflation. Financial stability therefore promotes price stability. 
In tandem with the trend towards lower inflation since the mid-1980s, asset prices have shown wider 
variations  and  financial  crises  have  become  more  frequent.  In  the  short  term,  a  conflict  may  arise 
between  achieving  the  inflation  target  and  financial  stability.  In  Japan,  equity  and  property  prices 
increased sharply in the 1980s, while inflation was subdued. In the US, household and corporate debt 
rose  fairly  sharply  and  equity  prices  trebled  between  1994  and  1999,  while  inflation  was  moderate. 
This has prompted a debate as to whether monetary policy must take financial stability into account to 
a greater extent.  
Low interest rates and low inflation may contribute to a rise in asset prices and debt build-up (financial 
bubbles)  through  several  channels.  With  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  inflation  may  be  less 
affected by changes in the economic situation. Increased international competition and imports from 
low-cost countries can keep inflation at a low level even during a period of strong expansion in the 
domestic  economy.  High  productivity  growth  contributes  to  low  inflation,  but  also  to  high  earnings. 
Banks will then record low losses and may increase their lending. Investments financed by loans may 
push up property prices. 
When  the  bubbles  burst,  either  in  the  housing  market  or  in  the  stock  market,  asset  prices  fall  and 
many will want to reduce their debt. This reduces demand and may lead to a fall in prices. Deflation in 
Japan  is  clearly  related  to  the  property  and  stock  market  bubble  that  burst  in  the  early  part  of  the 
1990s. 
The build-up of financial bubbles may make the financial sector more vulnerable to any disturbances in 
the  economy  at  a  later  stage.  A  sharp  rise  in  asset  prices  and  debt  build-up  may  pose  a  risk  to 
economic  stability.  In  order  to  reduce  this  risk  it  will  in  certain  situations  be  appropriate  to  apply  a 
somewhat longer horizon than the normal time horizon of two years for achieving the inflation target. 
This presupposes that financial market participants are confident that inflation will be low and stable 
over time. Norges Bank has stated that if it is necessary to deviate from the normal response pattern 
in order to promote financial stability, the Bank will give notification of this. 
Closing remarks 
Interest rates are now low both globally and in Norway. This applies to both nominal interest rates and 
real interest rates. Interest rates differ from what we were accustomed to earlier, and real interest rates 
are  lower  than  the  interval  normally  arrived  at  as  a  result  of  analytical  attempts  to  estimate  the 
theoretical equilibrium interest rate. 
Low real interest rates in many countries are largely the result of a conscious policy to counteract the 
international downturn of  the  past  few years. Low  real  interest rates will  in  the  short  term stimulate 
economic growth and contribute to preventing deflation. Keeping interest rates low for a long period 
may involve risk, however. Bubbles may develop in markets for both financial and real capital. Low-
inflation bubbles are a challenge to monetary policy. One would normally expect monetary policy to be 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2003
gradually tightened as economic growth and inflation returned to more normal levels and that actual 
interest rates would again correspond more closely with the more theoretical equilibrium interest rate. 
There is little reason to expect otherwise in the current business cycle, although one might of course 
raise the question of whether the equilibrium interest rate is still in the range we have believed it to be. 
In some countries, it could be argued that, in the US for example, the equilibrium interest rate should 
be higher in the light of strong productivity growth and continued relatively strong population growth. In 
much of Europe, however, populations are more likely to decline and productivity growth is, if anything, 
weaker than previously, indicating that the equilibrium interest rate should be lower.  
Furthermore,  since  we  are  referring  to  a  global  equilibrium  interest  rate,  shouldn’t  developments  in 
China and other emerging markets also play a role? They probably do, but given the distribution of 
financial and real capital in the world, it is likely that the global equilibrium interest rate is to a large 
extent affected by developments in the US, the EU and Japan. 
However, viewed from the perspective of a very small, though very open, economy such as ours, it is 
clear that equilibrium interest rates and required returns do not reflect specific Norwegian conditions, 
but are determined externally, and we must adapt to this situation as well as possible. 
BIS Review 46/2003 
 9
