European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr 
Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  6  November 
2003. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Today  marks  the  first  time  that  I  had  the  honour  and  the  pleasure  of  chairing  the  meeting  of  the 
Governing  Council  of  the ECB.  I  am  delighted  to  now proceed with  our  well-established practice  of 
real-time  communication  and  to  report  on  the  outcome  of  our  meeting,  together  with  the  Vice-
President. 
Following  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analysis,  we  have  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB 
interest rates unchanged at their low levels. Overall, we anticipate some further stickiness of inflation 
rates in the shorter term, while the medium-term outlook for price stability remains favourable. Against 
this  background,  we continue  to  judge  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  as  appropriate.  At  the 
same time, we see additional signs of a gradual economic recovery in the euro area. We will carefully 
monitor all developments that might affect our assessment of risks to price stability. 
Let me now explain our decision in more detail. 
Starting with the economic analysis, new data and other information show that the recovery of the 
world  economy  is  clearly  making  progress.  Also  for  the  euro  area,  the  indicators  are  increasingly 
pointing towards some improvement in economic activity in the second half of this year. For the time 
being,  this  is  primarily  reflected  in  business  surveys  and  leading  indicators,  but  we  expect  that 
forthcoming  data  on  euro  area  production  and  demand  will  confirm  that  a  gradual  recovery  has 
started. 
Taken  together,  we  see  further  confirmation  of  our  main  scenario  of  a  gradual  improvement  in 
economic  activity  this  year,  and  a  broadening  and  strengthening  in  the  course  of  2004.  This 
assessment has received support from recently published forecasts of official and private sources, as 
well  as  from developments  in  financial  markets.  Externally,  the  expansion  of global  economic  trade 
and real GDP growth should counteract the changes in the effective exchange rate of the euro, which 
is back to its level of early 1999. Domestically, the conditions for investment should improve further, 
given the continued adjustment efforts of firms to enhance productivity and profitability, the low level of 
interest  rates  and  generally  favourable  financing  conditions.  Moreover,  private  consumption  should 
benefit from real disposable income growth, fostered by positive terms-of-trade effects stemming from 
the past appreciation of the euro. 
The short-term risks to our main scenario appear to be balanced. Over a longer horizon, we remain 
concerned  about  the  sustainability  of  global  economic  growth  being  undermined  by  persisting 
imbalances.  This  relates,  in  particular,  to  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and  to  external 
imbalances in some regions of the world. 
Recent inflation rates, measured by the HICP, developed broadly as anticipated. The annual rate of 
inflation was 2.1% in October, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. It thus remained unchanged from 
August and September. When looking ahead over the shorter term, it appears that inflation rates may 
continue to hover around this level for several months to come and, hence, may not fall as quickly and 
strongly as had been expected up to the summer. Three factors can be identified as contributing to 
this  stickiness  of  inflation  rates.  First,  in  the  remainder  of  2003  and  early  2004,  unprocessed  food 
prices  could  imply  some  limited  upward  pressure  as  a  consequence  of  this  summer’s  heat  wave. 
Second, oil prices remain higher than expected, owing to political uncertainties in the Middle East. Last 
but  not  least,  in  the course  of  2004,  planned  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  in 
some euro area countries will have an upward impact on inflation.  
However,  when  taking  into  account  more  lasting  factors,  we  continue  to  expect  inflation  rates  to 
moderate over the medium term and to develop in line with price stability. This expectation is based on 
the assumption that wage developments will not be affected by the current inertia of inflation rates, 
and  will  remain  moderate  in  the  context  of  a  gradual  economic  recovery.  Moreover,  the  past 
BIS Review 47/2003 
 1
appreciation of the euro should continue to dampen price pressures. These views are also reflected in 
recently released forecasts. At the same time, inflation expectations warrant close monitoring. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, after an extended period of strong M3 growth, liquidity in the euro 
area  remains  ample,  despite  a  certain  slowdown  in  monetary  expansion  over  recent  months.  This 
situation  of  persistently  more  liquidity  than  is  needed  to  finance  non-inflationary  economic  growth 
reflects past portfolio shifts, precautionary savings and the low level of interest rates. The low level of 
interest  rates  also  supported  the  annual  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector,  which  fluctuated 
between 4½% and 5% in recent months. At the current juncture, the accumulation of excess liquidity is 
not  of  concern  for  price  stability,  given  the  economic  outlook.  However,  if  it  were  to  continue  in 
conjunction with a significant strengthening of economic activity, it could lead to inflationary pressures 
in the medium term. 
Cross-checking  the  information  from  the  two  pillars,  our  economic  analysis  indicates  that  the 
medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability  remains  favourable,  in  the  context  of  a  gradual  economic 
recovery and moderate import price and wage developments. In view of the economic situation, the 
strong monetary expansion should not, for the time being, be seen as adversely affecting this outlook. 
Fiscal  developments  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  now  at  a  critical  point  at  which  the 
credibility of the institutional underpinnings of EMU must be maintained. The Treaty and the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  provide  an  appropriate  framework  for  ensuring  fiscal  discipline,  within  adequate 
bounds of flexibility. The deficit reference value of 3% of GDP, which is laid down in the Maastricht 
Treaty itself, is the nominal anchor for the rules and procedures governing fiscal policies in the EU. 
This anchor must not be placed in doubt. 
Fully  abiding  by  the  rules  and  implementing  them  in  every  respect  has  very  solid  economic 
justifications, and is not a mere procedural matter. Upholding trust in the soundness of public finances 
enhances  confidence  of  all  economic  agents  and  thereby  contributes  to  sustainable  growth  in 
consumption  and  investment.  Stability  and  growth  are  thus  not  conflicting  objectives,  but  rather 
reinforce each other - a fact which is very well captured in the title of the fiscal framework called the 
“Stability and Growth Pact”. Concerning recent developments in the context of the excessive deficit 
procedure, it is the view of the Governing Council that the proposals of the Commission push the room 
for  interpretation  of  the  rules  and  procedures  to  the  limit.  As  regards  future  decisions,  which  are 
expected  in  the  course  of  November,  the  Governing  Council  strongly  urges  each  institution  and 
government  concerned  to  live  up  to  their  responsibilities.  It  is  the  overall  credibility  of  the  fiscal 
framework and, hence, the prospects for economic growth in the euro area that are at stake.  
Fiscal consolidation plans are best placed within a comprehensive and credible medium-term strategy. 
This requires strong emphasis on structural expenditure reforms and the adaptation of public pension 
and health systems to the challenges arising from the ageing of the population. Moreover, structural 
reforms in the labour and product markets are needed to allow a better allocation and utilisation of 
capital  and  human  resources,  and  to  enhance  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential.  The  Governing 
Council  strongly  supports  current  efforts  by  a  number  of  governments  in  this  direction  and  also 
encourages social partners to fully commit themselves to the objective of making the euro area a more 
dynamic and innovative economy. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2003
