T T Mboweni: Recent economic developments and monetary policy in South 
Africa  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Mercury/Safmarine 
Business Breakfast, Durban, 14 May 2004. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen. Since September of 2003, monetary policy in South Africa has succeeded in 
maintaining CPIX inflation within the specified 3-6 per cent target range. This was achieved less than a 
year after inflation had peaked at over 11 per cent in November of 2002. This success was a result of 
the monetary policy reaction to the inflation surge in 2002 following the depreciation of the rand in late 
2001, as well as other favourable developments, both domestically and internationally. 
This morning I will review some of the recent economic developments, both positive and negative, that 
have  contributed  to  the  favourable  inflation  outcomes  of  the  recent  past.  However  monetary  policy 
should not dwell on the past. Monetary policy should be, and in fact has been, forward looking, and I 
will, therefore, highlight some of the risks and challenges to monetary policy in the future.  
International economic developments 
2. 
After a number of false starts, the world economic recovery was well under way in the latter half of 
2003, particularly in the United States and Asia. Real growth in the US had risen to 3,1 per cent in 
2003,  and  the  latest  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  forecast  is  for  4,6  per  cent  growth  in  2004.  The 
recovery has been accompanied by high levels of productivity growth, and more recently by increases 
in employment. The Japanese economy appears to have emerged from a protracted period of low or 
negative growth, and this has provided an additional stimulus to the Asian region. Recent suggestions 
of a possible slowdown in China have raised fears that the generalised recovery is under threat. This 
has  had  a  negative  impact  on  commodity  prices  in  recent  weeks.  These  fears  are  likely  to  be 
exaggerated, as China still has enormous growth potential. Although Chinese growth may decline from 
its  unsustainably  high  levels,  the  country  is  likely  to  remain  an  important  and  dynamic  engine  of 
economic growth internationally.  
Of greater concern to South Africa is the low growth in the euro area, South Africa’s largest trading 
partner. Growth in the euro area was 0,4 per cent in 2003 and although there are encouraging signs 
that some of the countries in the region are beginning to recover, growth is only expected to reach 
1,7 per cent in 2004. The United Kingdom, Latin America, Australasia and Africa have also been part 
of the global recovery to varying degrees. 
Behind the euphoria, there are a number of factors that have been identified as posing a risk to the 
sustainability of the turnaround. Firstly there are the imbalances in the US economy. The US trade and 
current  account  deficits  may  require  an  adjustment  in  US  macroeconomic  policies,  if  the  required 
adjustment  is  not  achieved  through  movements  in  the  dollar  exchange  rate.  Some  adjustment  is 
inevitable as economic growth in the US accelerates. The challenge for the US will be to reverse its 
policies  in  such  a  way  that  does  not  undermine  the  global  recovery  and  also  achieves  the  desired 
effects  with  respect  to  the  imbalances.  The  lenient  macroeconomic  policies  of  the  United  States  in 
particular  were  an  important  element  in  bringing  about  the  global  recovery,  and  the  challenge  is  to 
prevent the inevitable reversal of these policies from undermining the recovery. The recent positive 
employment figures emanating from the US have fuelled expectations that the tightening of the US 
policy stance will begin sooner rather than later. This will follow the lead of central banks in the UK, 
Australia and New Zealand which have already increased interest rates.  
Secondly, a further risk to the global recovery is posed by the recent developments in the international 
oil market, where oil prices are moving inexorably towards the US$40 per barrel mark. This is a result 
of  a  combination  of  low  inventory  levels  in  the  United  States,  the  reduction  in  OPEC  production 
quotas, tensions in the Middle East, and political problems in a number of oil-producing countries. As 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
recently as February it appeared that the pressure on prices would be short-lived as the OPEC basket 
price moved from around US$30 per barrel down to the US$28 per barrel level, the upper limit of the 
OPEC target range. Unfortunately this turned out to be a temporary reprieve. The average price of the 
OPEC basket was US$32,05 in April and US$35,23 in the first week of May. Although at this point it 
appears that this threat is more short term in nature, there have been warnings that excessively high 
prices could undermine the sustainability of the global upswing.  
Despite  the  upswing  in  the  global  economy,  there  is  no  widespread  expectation  of  a  revival  of 
generalised world inflation. The IMF World Economic Outlook projects a decline in world inflation from 
3,7 per cent in 2003 to 3,2 per cent in 2005. Although a handful of countries are expected to have 
higher inflation, the forecast is for all regions of the world to have single digit inflation by 2005. The 
expected  upturn  in  the  international  interest  rate  cycle  is  likely  to  reinforce  this  positive  inflation 
outlook, although the oil price developments could pose some risk.  
Domestic economic developments 
Output, expenditure and monetary conditions 
3.  
Domestic  growth  has  not  been  synchronised  with  world  developments.  Following  the  3,6  per  cent 
recorded in 2002, growth declined to an annual rate of 1,9 per cent in 2003, as a result of a significant 
contraction in the value added by agriculture and manufacturing. The poor performance in agriculture 
was a result of poor weather conditions that had an impact on both livestock and field crop production. 
In  the  case  of  manufacturing  output,  the  contraction  was  largely  a  result  of  the  initially  slow  world 
recovery  and  the  impact  of  the  recovery  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand.  Capacity  utilisation  in 
manufacturing had declined in the fourth quarter of 2003 to 79,6 per cent. 
There are, however, indications that South Africa’s growth prospects are improving. Although still at 
low levels, growth in the second half of 2003 exceeded that recorded during the previous six months 
and the recent good rains have improved the outlook for agriculture in many areas. The delay in the 
release  of  manufacturing  sector  statistics  makes  it  difficult  to  know  with  certainty  how  the 
manufacturing sector has been performing in the recent past, but there are indications that there has 
been an overall improvement in this sector. Recent reports have pointed to strong domestic demand 
impacting  positively  on  manufacturing,  and  various  confidence  indices  as  well  as  the  Investec 
Purchasing  Managers  Index  (PMI)  are  indicative  of  an  improvement.  There  are  also  signs  that  the 
growth in world demand is beginning to have a positive impact on manufactured exports. 
Domestic expenditure has continued to grow at a robust pace, increasing by 7,2 per cent in the fourth 
quarter on a quarterly annualised basis, and 4,2 per cent for 2003 as a whole, slightly lower than that 
recorded in the previous year. Gross fixed capital formation grew by 8,4 during the year, reflecting in 
part  increased  infrastructure  spending  by  government,  while  government  consumption  expenditure 
and household consumption expenditure increased by 4,6 per cent and 3 per cent respectively. The 
latter  was  underpinned  by  declining  prices  of  various  consumer  items,  tax  reductions,  interest  rate 
reductions,  a  declining  ratio  of  debt  servicing  costs  to  disposable  income  and  fairly  high  real  wage 
settlements.  
This  excess  of  expenditure  over  output  is  reflected  in  a  smaller  trade  surplus  and  higher  current 
account deficit of around 1,8 per cent of GDP. Import volumes increased by 3,3 per cent in the final 
quarter of 2003 while the physical volume of exports of goods and services increased by 2,2 per cent. 
However, the trade surplus in February and March of this year improved as a result of an increase in 
exports with the 3-month moving average (seasonally adjusted and annualised) of the trade surplus 
increasing from R17,6 billion in January to R20,5 billion in February. 
The moderate deficit on the current account is not an immediate cause for concern. At these levels the 
deficit  is  sustainable  and  has  been  comfortably  financed  through  significant  inflows  on  the  financial 
account, which showed healthy surpluses in the final three quarters of 2003. The surplus in the final 
quarter amounted to R34,6 billion. However, there is no room for complacency. It is well known that 
financial account reversals can occur very quickly, and if expenditure growth proceeds unchecked, the 
current account developments could prove to be unsustainable.  
The  higher  levels  of  domestic  expenditure  have  been  reflected  in  more  buoyant  money  market 
conditions. Most of the money supply aggregates have grown at a relatively robust pace. The average 
twelve-month growth rate for M3 in 2003 was 13,0 per cent, and grew by 14,9 per cent and 14,0 per 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
cent in February and March respectively. Twelve-month growth in banks’ total loans and advances to 
the  private  sector  has  remained  at  levels  of  around  12,5  per  cent  since  early  2003.  Growth  in 
mortgage, instalment sale and leasing finance has been particularly strong over the past year. 
Recent labour market developments 
4.  
The  unemployment  situation  in  South  Africa  remains  a  major  source  of  concern.  Fortunately, 
quarter-to-quarter  increases  in  employment  were  recorded  on  both  the  public  and  private  sectors 
during the final two quarters of 2003, reversing the trend of the previous two quarters. 
From a monetary policy perspective, a concern of the Bank has been the trend in wage settlements, 
which play an important role in the inflation process in South Africa. Central to the Bank’s concern is 
the  fact  that  wage  settlements  often  tend  to  be  set  in  a  backward-looking  manner.  This  acts  as  a 
constraint of the downward movement of inflation. The Bank would like to see wages and prices being 
set on the basis of the inflation rate that is expected to prevail over the period for which wages are 
being set. Although wage demands are still trying to compensate for the high inflation of 2002, there 
are  indications  that  nominal  wage  settlements,  although  still  high,  are  moderating.  According  to 
Andrew  Levy  Employment  Publications,  the  average  rate  of  settlements  in  collective  bargaining 
agreements declined from 8,9 per cent in 2003 to 7,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2004.  
Of greater significance perhaps is the fact that the average unit labour cost increases amounted to 
5,2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2003 and an average of 5,0 per cent for the year. Although the 
trends are promising, the Monetary Policy Committee will be watching these developments carefully. 
Exchange rate and foreign exchange reserves 
5.  
The exchange rate continues to play a critical, albeit unpredictable role in the inflation process. During 
2003 the rand continued its recovery and from the end of December 2002 to the end of April 2004 the 
nominal effective rand exchange rate appreciated by 16,4 per cent, and by 26,4 per cent bilaterally 
against the US dollar.  
There are a number of factors that explain the recovery of the rand during the past two years. Besides 
the  correction  of  the  overshooting  that  occurred  during  2001,  other  factors  include  US  dollar 
weakness,  rising  commodity  prices,  positive  interest  rate  differentials,  improved  perceptions  of  the 
strength  of  South  Africa’s  economic  fundamentals  as  evidenced  by  narrowing  spreads  on  South 
African  international  bonds  and  improved  credit  ratings  by  the  international  credit-rating  agencies. 
Furthermore, the conversion first of the net open foreign-currency position (NOFP) in May 2003 into a 
positive position, and the closing out of the Reserve Bank’s oversold forward book during 2004 not 
only contributed to the rand’s recovery, but is also expected to contribute to greater stability in the rand 
exchange rate, as the perception that the rand is a one-way bet has now disappeared.  
In the past few weeks the rand has moved from the levels of around R6,50 to the US dollar to around 
US$7,00 to the dollar, a result of increased dollar strength, the recent moderation in commodity prices 
and  an  expectation  of  an  early  increase  in  US  interest  rates.  In  the  past  such  a  move  would  have 
sparked  fears  of  a  continuous  depreciation  of  the  currency,  leading  to  a  large  sell-off.  There  is 
however  a  broader  acceptance  in  the  market  that  although  the  rand  may  still  be  subject  to  some 
volatility, a weakening of the currency will not inevitably lead to further weakening. The emerging view 
is  that  the  rand  will  respond  to  changing  fundamentals  in  an  orderly  manner,  and  the  direction  of 
change will not be one way. This change in perception is to a large extent a result of the improvement 
in the overall international liquidity position. 
Although  the  Bank  has  been  engaging  in  limited  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  the 
purpose of bolstering foreign exchange reserves, this should not be misinterpreted as intervention in 
the  market  in  order  to  target  a  specific level  of  the  exchange rate.  South  Africa’s  foreign  exchange 
reserves are low by comparison with other emerging market economies, and this perception makes 
the  rand  vulnerable  to  speculative  attacks.  The  Bank’s  objective  is  to  build  up  foreign  exchange 
reserves in a prudent manner, and in such a way that has a minimum impact on the exchange rate. 
The Bank does not have a target for the exchange rate, and at this stage the Bank does not have a 
target for foreign exchange reserves or a target for the rate of accumulation of reserves.  
As  at  the  end  of  April  2004,  gross  reserves  stood  at  US$10,1  billion  while  the  net  reserves  or 
international liquidity position was US$6,4 billion. This can be compared, for example, to the position 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
at  the  end  of  December  2002  when  gross  reserves  amounted  to  US$7,8  billion  and  international 
liquidity position was minus US$1,6 billion.  
Inflation developments 
6. 
Developments on the inflation front continue to be positive. CPIX inflation slowed down from a peak of 
11,3 per cent in October and November of 2002 to move to within the target range of 3-6 per cent by 
September of 2003 and has remained there since. It reached a low of 4,0 per cent in December 2003 
before increasing to 4,8 per cent in February and then fell back to 4,4 per cent in March 2004. The 
achievement  of  bringing  inflation  down  to  within  the  target  range  can  be  attributed  to  a  number  of 
factors including the monetary policy response to the inflation shock of late 2001, positive base effects 
and the sustained recovery in the exchange rate of the rand. The decline in food price inflation, which 
had been a major factor driving inflation up in 2002, was also an important contributor to the decline in 
the inflation rate.  
The upturn in the inflation trend in the early months of this year was not unexpected and in line with 
the Bank’s inflation forecast. The Bank’s inflation forecast which is published in the latest Monetary 
Policy Review, shows that CPIX inflation is expected to rise gradually towards the upper limit of the 
inflation target range before moderating again. There are a number of factors underlying this inflation 
outlook.  On  the  positive  side  is  the  low  world  inflation,  the  relatively  low  levels  of  manufacturing 
capacity  utilisation  resulting  in  output  below  potential,  continued  fiscal  prudence,  and  the  impact  of 
production price inflation, which is a short term indicator of future consumer inflation. Production price 
inflation  has  been  negative  since  September  2003,  with  the  rate  of  decline  in  the  production  price 
index slowing from minus 2,5 per cent in November 2003 to minus 1,0 per cent in February 2004 and 
minus 1,2 per cent in March. The main factor driving this trend has been imported prices, influenced 
by  the  recovery  in  the  rand  and  the  low  global  inflation.  Imported  price  inflation  has  been  negative 
since April 2003. However, domestic producer price inflation has also declined, reaching 0,2 per cent 
in November of last year, and 1,5 per cent in March 2004. On a quarter-on-quarter basis, producer 
price inflation showed no growth in the first quarter of 2004.  
A  further  positive  development  has  been  the  evolution  of  inflation  expectations.  The  Bureau  for 
Economic  Research  (BER)  at  the  University  of  Stellenbosch  conducts  a  survey  of  inflation 
expectations on behalf of the Bank. The latest survey released in April 2003 shows a continuation of 
the  downward  trend  in  CPIX  inflation  expectations.  Most  significantly,  the  expectations  of  business 
executives and trade union officials have fallen sharply.  
Unfortunately there are a number of risks to the inflation outlook. A factor constraining the continued 
downward movement in the inflation rate was the fact that services inflation had remained relatively 
sticky. Services inflation did moderate from 8,6 per cent in September 2003 to 7,8 per cent in March, 
but this is still significantly above the upper limit of the target. A significant portion of services comprise 
administered prices which for long have been singled out as a threat to the inflation target. Fortunately 
some  administered  prices  have  shown  signs  of  moderating,  particularly  in  the  light  of  low  tariff 
increases granted by the relevant regulators to the Post Office, Eskom and Telkom.  
A further concern is the trend in international oil prices discussed earlier. The higher international oil 
price  translates  itself  quickly  into  higher  pump  prices  and  the  effects  have  already  been  felt  in  the 
inflation numbers. The pump price of 93 octane petrol in Gauteng, for example, rose from R3,78 in 
January  2004  to  its  current  level  of  R4,39  per  litre,  although  this  includes  the  10  cents  per  litre 
increase in the fuel tax and the 5 cents per litre increase in the Road Accident Fund levy announced in 
the recent budget.  
A lesser risk is posed by food prices which threatened to create problems as the maize price began to 
rise considerably in late 2003 as a result of the drought in large parts of the country. Fortunately this 
threat  has  dissipated  somewhat  with  the  good  rains  that  were  experienced  in  many  parts  of  the 
country recently. The SAFEX futures price for white maize for delivery in 2004 increased sharply from 
around R1000 per ton in October-November 2003 to R1578 per ton early in February 2004. However 
prices  have  subsided  to  around  R1100  per  ton  since  March  as  rainfall  figures  improved  late  in  the 
season and higher crop estimates were published. 
Monetary policy 
7. 
Recent  monetary  policy  should  be  seen  against  the  backdrop  of  the  developments  outlined  above. 
Between June and December of 2003, the repo rate was reduced by 550 basis points, bringing the 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
repo rate to 8,0 per cent, the lowest nominal level for this interest rate or its predecessor, the Bank 
rate,  since  1980.  However,  historical  comparisons  of  nominal  rates  can  be  misleading.  In  1980  the 
inflation  rate  was  around  14  per  cent,  implying  a  strongly  negative  real  interest  rate.  Currently, 
although real interest rates have come down with the successive reductions in nominal rates, they are 
still significantly positive. 
In December the repo rate was reduced by 50 basis points, despite the fact that the market consensus 
was  that  the  reduction  would  be  100  basis  points  or  more,  with  further  reductions  forecast  for  the 
subsequent  meeting.  It  is  perhaps  important  to  explain  why  the  MPC  decision  was  not  in  line  with 
market expectations. The expectation that the MPC would continue to lower interest rates aggressively 
in  December  was  probably  based  on  the  incorrect  assumption  that  monetary  policy  decisions  are 
based  on  current  inflation.  At  that  time,  CPIX  inflation  was  within  the  target  and  was  still  trending 
downwards. However policy decisions are made not on the basis of the current inflation rate but on the 
basis of the expected trend of inflation over the control horizon, which is the lag between a change in 
monetary policy and its full impact on inflation. This transmission lag in South Africa is estimated to be 
between 18 and 24 months.  
Monetary policy cannot impact on current inflation, rather it has to focus on future inflation. The current 
inflation rate is the basis for assessing the success or otherwise of past monetary policy. To assess 
the appropriateness of the current monetary policy stance, on the other hand, we need to look at how 
the expected trend of inflation over the next 18 to 24 months or so compares to the target. 
In the same way that the decisions to lower interest rates during the course of 2003 were determined 
by the outlook for inflation rather than the actual inflation at the time, so the recent decisions of the 
Monetary Policy Committee to keep rates unchanged were based on forward-looking assessments of 
the factors that affect the inflation rate, and were informed by the forecasting model of the Bank. It 
should be stressed however that although the forecast is an important guide to policy, policy is not 
determined by the forecast in a mechanical way. 
Although  the  current  inflation  rate  was  well  within  target  at  the  time  of  the  December  meeting,  the 
focus of the MPC was on the future trend of inflation. By then it was clear that a further lowering of 
interest  rates,  combined  with  the  assessment  of  the  factors  that  are  likely  to  affect  inflation  in  the 
future, would threaten the inflation target. These factors are likely to change over time, which is why 
there is a reassessment of monetary policy at regular intervals. 
Conclusion 
8. 
Over the past few months monetary policy has achieved the objective of keeping the CPIX inflation 
rate  within  the  inflation  target  band  of  3-6  per  cent.  Monetary  policy  was  assisted  in  this  through 
favourable developments that were outlined earlier. On the other hand, there are risks to inflation, and 
the Monetary Policy Committee will have to monitor these carefully. These risks include the uncertain 
trend  in  wage  settlements,  domestic  demand  conditions,  and  developments  with  respect  to 
administered prices. Perhaps a more immediate threat is that posed by developments in international 
oil markets. Since the adoption of inflation targeting in South Africa, the economy has been hit by a 
number of shocks including food price shocks, exchange rate shocks and oil price shocks. Whilst the 
general  policy  prescription  is  to  respond  only  to  the  second-round  effects  of  such  shocks,  the 
challenge for monetary policy is to recognise when the impacts are becoming more generalised, and 
to act at the appropriate time to avoid undermining the integrity of the inflation targeting framework. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 5
