Jaime Caruana: Perspective on issues relevant to the new international capital 
framework 
After-dinner remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the “Accounting, Transparency and Bank Stability Workshop”, 
Basel, 17 May 2004. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good evening. I hope that you are enjoying this opportunity to dine and unwind after your deliberations 
on emerging issues in accounting, transparency, and financial stability. You represent a wide range of 
views and institutions and, based on the animated conversations taking place during dinner, it seems 
that you bring great enthusiasm and interest to this workshop. In my view, that mixture enlivens the 
exchange  of  ideas  and  helps  us  to  sharpen  our  understanding  of  the  questions  we  face  and  the 
options we have to address them.  
It has been said that “learning is achieved only in company.” In this connection, we are all indebted to 
the workshop’s coordinators and sponsoring organisations for bringing together such select and highly 
qualified company  in  which  to  learn.  Here  I’d  like  to  thank  in  particular Urs  Birchler  from  the  Swiss 
National Bank, along with Reint Gropp from the European Central Bank. On the academic side, I’d like 
to thank Mark Flannery (University of Florida), Rafael Repullo (CEMFI and CEPR), Ernst-Ludwig von 
Thadden  (Université  de  Lausanne,  CEPR  and  JFI),  and  Anjan  Thakor  (Washington  University). 
Together  with  staff  from  the  Secretariat  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  its 
member  agencies,  they  have  selected  timely  topics,  invited  speakers  who  have  sparked  our 
discussions, and encouraged informed public discussion and debate on these matters.  
At this half-way point on the conference agenda, I would like to take a few minutes to share with you 
the very good news that the Basel Committee reported last week on Basel II. I’d also like to add some 
thoughts  from  my  perspective  on  the  some  of  the  issues  you  are  discussing  and  especially  their 
relevance to the new international capital framework.  
Summary of 12 May 2004 press release 
II. 
As you will probably know, the full Committee met just last Tuesday, actually in a conference room not 
far from the auditorium where you are meeting. Tuesday’s meeting may have been one of the most 
historic for the Basel Committee. Three results make this meeting especially significant in my view.  
First, and most important, we achieved consensus on the remaining outstanding issues that we faced 
in  our  efforts  to  revise  the  international  capital  framework.  Over  the  last  few  months  we  have 
completed  significant  changes  in  a  number  of  important  areas:    we  decided  to  calibrate  regulatory 
capital to unexpected losses only; we have made significant improvements to the  provisions relating 
to securitisation, credit risk mitigation and operational risk; we have clarified Pillar 2 and the calibration 
process;  we  have  specified  the  treatment  of  revolving  retail  exposures,  and  we  continue  to  make 
progress in preparations for the implementation of the Accord. 
Having reached consensus on the framework, the Basel II process is entering a new stage. Member 
authorities will now focus on transforming the text of the framework, which will be published at the end 
of June, into national rules. This will require national supervisors to conduct rule-making and adoption 
processes relevant to their jurisdictions, something that is well under way in many countries.  
In addition, the Committee agreed on the timetable for the implementation of the Accord in member 
countries. This is the second important development of last week’s meeting in my view.  
The Committee  confirmed  that  the  new  framework will  be  implemented by  year-end  2006  for  those 
banks adopting the standardised and foundation approaches to risk.  
With  regard  to  the  most  sophisticated  approaches  to  risk  measurement  and  management,  the 
Committee considered the needs of national supervisors and of the industry and decided to provide an 
additional year.  This additional year of data collection and analysis will be invaluable to the prudent 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 1
and  consistent  implementation  of  the  advanced  treatments.Let  me  explain  in  more  detail  the 
supervisory perspective. 
As you know - and perhaps many of you have been involved - supervisors, bankers, and others have 
discussed  intensively  the  technical  requirements  for  the  most  advanced  treatments  of  credit  and 
operational  risk  over  the  past  few  years.  This  exchange  of  views  has  helped  us  to  improve  the 
requirements tremendously.  The Committee wishes to have the best information possible to assess 
how the recent changes will improve risk sensitivity, enhance the role of supervisory judgement, and 
promote sound disclosures regarding a bank’s measures and processes for controlling risk.   
The  Committee  agreed  that  this  could  be  done  by  requiring  additional  impact  analysis,  perhaps 
through national field tests in those jurisdictions that plan them. An alternative is to require banks to 
calculate  their  requirements  under  the  1988  rules  and  the  new  framework  in  parallel  for  two  years, 
rather than just one as originally proposed.  
Consequently, those banks that will adopt Basel II’s advanced approaches to risk will be permitted to 
implement  the  new  rules  at  year-end  2007,  or  just  one  year  after  the  standardised  and  foundation 
banks. I believe that this decision responds to the views of both national supervisors and the industry 
that  a  limited  amount  of  additional  time  is  necessary  to  prepare  consistent  approaches  to  the 
implementation  of  the  most  sophisticated  rules.  I  believe  that  it  will  lead  to  a  more  optimal 
implementation of the new framework. Furthermore, possible concerns about competitive equality can 
be alleviated thanks to the existence of temporary capital floors. 
The third significant result of last week’s meeting is that the Committee agreed on the way forward for 
the implementation and evolution of Basel II. 
The framework and timetable have been agreed. Yet we have much hard work still ahead of us, as the 
implementation of the rules will be a challenging task and also because we have recognised that the 
Basel II approach is intended to be evolutionary.  
At our meeting, the members of the Committee discussed several implementation issues that we will 
“iron out” in consultation with other supervisors and the industry. This includes finding ways for home 
and  host  jurisdictions  to  coordinate  and  cooperate  when  applying  the  new  rules  to  banking 
organisations that are active in multiple jurisdictions. More than ever before, supervisors will need to 
work together to reduce the regulatory burden on banks and to conserve supervisory resources.  
We also face some difficult technical matters. For example, the Committee’s press release noted that 
we must determine acceptable methods for banks to estimate a key driver of credit risk. Banks that 
adopt the advanced internal ratings-based approach to credit risk will be required to estimate how the 
loss-given-default parameter for borrowers may vary when the economy experiences a downturn. On 
this  specific  matter,  the  Committee  will  continue  its  dialogue  with  supervisors  and  the  industry  to 
ensure that banks use appropriately conservative methodologies for this driver of credit risk.  
Another topic that the Committee has agreed to study prior to implementation is whether there is a 
reliable way to estimate the lower likelihood that a borrower and a guarantor will default on the same 
obligation.  Recognising  “double  default”  effects  may  help  the  new  framework  to  avoid  an  overly 
conservative  treatment  of  exposures  that  are  guaranteed.  Moreover,  the  Committee  has  already 
begun  discussions  with  securities  supervisors  on  trading  book  issues  and  ways  to  determine  the 
potential future exposure of derivative positions purchased “over-the-counter.” 
Together, these results mark the end of a phase of Basel II. Now we must all work hard to implement it 
so that we can realise the benefits of the new capital framework. 
Transparency as part of the “blend” of approaches in Basel II 
III. 
In talking about the benefits of Basel II, I would like to turn to the second half of my remarks to share 
my  thoughts  on  how  transparency  contributes  to  stability.  Supervisors  seek  to  achieve  much  more 
than  simply  a  revision  of  the  existing  rules  to  calculate  regulatory  capital.  By  aligning  capital 
requirements more closely to economic risk, we expect that, on a microeconomic scale, Basel II will 
encourage individual banks to improve the quality of their risk management.  
But the rewards of Basel II are more notable on a macro scale. When banks have the right incentives 
to improve their management of risk and they are well capitalize, we believe that the banking sector 
becomes more resilient, less sensitive to the business cycle, and better able to serve as a source for 
credit and sustainable growth of the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2004
This workshop explores the role of transparency in promoting the resilience and stability that Basel II 
has as its overarching goal. The Basel Committee certainly agrees that markets can serve as powerful 
allies of official supervision. We recognise that, in some cases, market discipline can exercise a more 
binding constraint on banks’ activities than regulations do. But I would emphasise that transparency 
does only part of the job. For transparency to promote stability, it must be combined with other policy 
approaches to achieve a goal that is as far-reaching and as significant as greater financial stability. 
Certainly,  the  Committee  would  agree  that,  when  banks  disclose  sufficient  information  about  their 
activities  and  controls,  marketplace  participants  can  create  strong  incentives  for  prudent  behaviour. 
Markets can reward banks that manage their risks properly and penalise those that hold unrealistically 
low amounts of capital for their risk. So there is a great deal of merit in a markets-based approach.  
But we must remember that markets can behave inefficiently. They may overreact to minor events yet 
ignore  significant  indicators  of  risk,  or  they  may  be  too  short-sighted.  Likewise,  markets  may  not 
capture external concerns: they may focus on the immediate needs of direct participants rather than 
those of depositors, customers, or the public.  
That is why transparency is one “pillar” of Basel II’s three-pillar approach. The pillars we selected are 
meant  to  complement  and  to  supplement  each  other.  The  first  pillar  - which  specifies  the  minimum 
capital requirements - constitutes a very direct approach to supervision. By applying a uniform set of 
rules  to  banks,  the  first  pillar  adds  transparency  to  the  regulatory  process  and  makes  it  easier  to 
compare banks to gain a sense of their relative degrees of solvency.  
On  the  other  hand,  uniform  rules  have  certain  drawbacks.  They  tend  to  be  inflexible  and  therefore 
might  preclude  or  ignore  innovation.  Applying  uniform  rules  may  also  fail  to  account  for  a  bank’s 
unusual businesses or risk profile.  
The second pillar, supervisory review, addresses some of those drawbacks. It introduces judgement 
into  the  policy  mix.  Banks  and  supervisors  will  exercise  discretion  in  determining  capital  needs 
relevant  to  their  particular  businesses  and  risk  profiles.  That  degree  of  discretion  makes  the 
supervisory framework more flexible and better able to adapt to change and innovation. In a way, we 
might  think  of  the  second  pillar  as  being  analogous  to  the  “principles-based”  policy  approach  that 
some have advocated in accounting and financial reporting.  
Yet relying on a system that would permit discretion without boundaries would have its shortcomings 
as well. Transparency may be reduced if it is unclear why supervisors set certain requirements for one 
bank, and a different requirement for another. Allowing a discretionary approach in the absence of the 
other pillars also makes it difficult to ensure a level playing field, since banks would not necessarily be 
held  to  the  same  standards.  That  would  certainly  harm  competitiveness  across  jurisdictions,  and 
possibly even within the same jurisdiction.  
So the third pillar, market discipline, adds greater transparency. When a bank discloses information 
that offers meaningful insight into its risk positions and exposures, marketplace participants can better 
assess the financial health of the institution. They can then provide economic incentives for banks to 
strengthen their management of risk and hold realistic levels of capital against their risks.  
One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. 
Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot, and each is essential to achieving our overall 
objective  of  financial  stability.  I  realise  that  this  analogy  of  the  three  pillars  as  a  portfolio  of  policy 
options is an oversimplification. But it helps us visualise why we think that the most “efficient frontier” 
involves  a  mixture  of  minimum  rules,  tempered  by  supervisory  discretion,  and  supplemented  by 
market-based incentives. 
Consistency of accounting standards and Basel II 
IV. 
Of course, it would be impossible to improve transparency and promote stability without examining the 
mechanics that define how financial data are recorded and reported. Because those mechanics are 
governed  by  national  accounting  standards,  global  markets  face  significant  hurdles  in  exercising 
discipline across jurisdictions. Business practices differ. Legal systems may be unfamiliar. Deciphering 
balance sheets prepared under national accounting systems can be an extremely taxing undertaking.  
Considering those burdens alone, it is easy to agree that market discipline would be more effective 
under more harmonious - if not completely harmonised - accounting rules. But the task is formidable: a 
reporter from the Wall Street Journal questioned recently how accounting rules could be harmonised 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 3
when, for example, Europeans and Americans do not even agree on which set of measures should be 
used in the kitchen. 
In our efforts to strengthen financial stability, central banks and supervisors have a legitimate interest 
in the quality of accounting standards and their effective implementation. We believe that in order to 
contribute to strengthening the banking system, accounting standards should support - or at least be 
consistent  with  -  sound  risk  management  and  control  practices  in  banks.  In  addition,  they  should 
facilitate market discipline by promoting transparent financial reporting of banks’ financial position and 
performance,  risk  exposures  and  risk  management  activities.  Finally,  accounting  standards  should 
facilitate the effective supervision of banks.  
This is why, as you know, the Committee has attached great importance to taking an active role in the 
international  debates  on  accounting  and  promoting  the  supervisory  perspective  on  key  accounting 
issues, and we very much support the work towards convergence in international accounting.  
We have worked closely with our colleagues in the International Accounting Standards Board to avoid 
conflicts between Pillar 3 and the broader accounting standards. In fact, the Committee views Pillar 3 
as a further refinement of the accounting standards that apply to banks’ specific exposures.  
Because we recognise that we have much to do in this area, we will continue to monitor accounting 
and  market  developments  in  the  light  of  Pillar  3.  Our  dialogue  with  accounting  standards-setting 
bodies and the accounting profession will continue to grow in the years to come. 
Conclusion: Basel Committee & the Global Research Community 
I  hope  that  this  conference  will  help  to  identify  the  policy  options  that  supervisors  have  in  order  to 
address  emerging  issues  in  risk  management,  financial  reporting, and  transparency  so  that we  can 
work toward a more stable banking system. We can expect the financial services industry to quantify 
new aspects of risk while refining the existing measurement and management techniques. Innovation 
and advances in the banking industry’s quantitative tools will open up many new areas for us to study 
that  may  enhance  our  ability  to  interpret  financial  information,  to  aggregate and  report  data,  and  to 
leverage the power of markets to motivate responsible business behaviour.  
On  that  note,  on  behalf  of  the  Basel  Committee,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  research  community  in 
member agencies, in academic circles, and in the industry for your contributions to our work. Many of 
Basel II’s advanced methods for quantifying risk were first explored in research units within individual 
financial  institutions,  but  also  in  central  banks,  supervisory  agencies,  and  universities.  Our  contacts 
with researchers, the work of the Research Task Force, has helped us to gain access to some of the 
best research being done in risk management. Equally important, it helped to translate the results of 
some of the most sophisticated technical advances into tangible tools for implementing public policy 
objectives.  
Applied research cannot be conducted in a vacuum, and good research is rarely achieved alone. In 
that vein, I look forward to continuing a vigorous dialogue with researchers from many institutions as 
we explore ways to safeguard depositors’ savings, to ensure prudent risk management in banks, and 
to secure more stable growth in the economy. I hope that you find tomorrow’s sessions to be equally 
stimulating and enjoyable, and I thank you for your attention this evening. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2004
