Sir Andrew Large: Financial stability oversight - past and present 
Speech  by  Sir  Andrew  Large,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  London  School  of 
Economics, London, 22 January 2004. 
 Introduction: Globalisation and the Financial World 
1. 
The  financial  system  has  been  in  the  vanguard  of  globalisation  of  economic  activities.  The  past  30 
years or so have seen a transformation of the financial scene. Just as the financial world has become 
significantly  more  complex  with  an  ever  more  inter-connected  global  network  across  firms  and 
countries, so too has the challenge been transformed for those involved in financial stability oversight. 
That is my theme tonight. 
Much of what I am about to say may be familiar. But what I have tried to do tonight is to tie these 
subjects together - to provide a picture of the whole area we grapple with. So I may have exchanged 
some depth for breadth in the interest of getting home tonight. 
I would like first to consider what financial stability oversight is and why it is important. Then, what has 
changed  in  the  financial  market  place  and  the  challenges  that  this  has  brought.  And  finally  the 
response of the public authorities to these challenges. 
What is financial stability oversight? 
2. 
Unquestionably financial stability is a critical ingredient in a high performing market economy, although 
its  definition  has  been  an  elusive  subject  of  endless  fascination  to  generations  of  commentators.  I 
agree  with  Raymond  Goldschmidt,1  who  said:  “It  is  hard  to  define,  but  recognisable  when 
encountered”. But any definition would surely refer to the crucial roles of confidence, resilience and 
reliable liquidity. These are the indicators if you like of what is a state of financial stability. 
In times of instability or crisis, that confidence - and with it liquidity - can evaporate. Bank runs are 
phenomena that result from loss of confidence: resulting from or causing withdrawal of liquidity. The 
fear of collapse of other non-bank financial institutions could also give rise to a drain on liquidity. The 
huge cost of preparing for Y2K was about preventing the dangers of loss of liquidity. And the horrific 
events of 9/11 required a temporary massive injection of liquidity. 
The  starting  point  for  this  confidence  is  the  players  in  the  market  place.  It  relies  on  integrity  in 
individual  firms  and  markets,  effective  standards  and  high  quality  prudential  controls  and  risk 
management practices. 
But  to  underpin  integrity  and  confidence  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  also  requires  financial 
stability oversight. In the first instance this relies on effective supervision. This is a key aspect of the 
prevention of financial instability. Financial stability oversight must also look at the system as a whole. 
So  it  is  involved  with  the  oversight  of  concentrations  and  of  risk  correlations,  interrelationships  and 
interdependencies. There is a premium on understanding channels of risk transfer and likely behaviour 
in response to shocks. This is what enables an appropriate policy response. 
Real  effort  is  needed  to  try  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  collective,  and  sometimes  irrational 
behaviour of firms, their clients and counterparties - particularly behaviour that could lead to one-way 
markets. In a downward market they can be the scourge of stability and destroyer of liquidity. 
Financial stability and public policy 
3.  
The  business  of  oversight  of,  and  possible  intervention  in,  the  financial  system  falls  to  public 
authorities.  The  justification  for  this  involvement  is  accepted  by  all  but  the  freest  of  free  marketers. 
                                                      
1   Raymond  Goldsmith,  Comment  on  Hyman  Minsky’s  “The  Financial  Instability  Hypothesis:  Capital  Processes  and  the 
Behaviour  of  the  Economy”  in  C  P  Kindleberger  and  J-P  Laffargue  Eds,  Financial  Crises:  Theory,  History  and  Politics. 
Cambridge University Press (1982). 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
Financial stability can be looked on as a public good. And the costs to society of crises and instability 
can go well beyond the cost borne by players within the financial services arena itself. Not only is it 
important in providing an effective monetary transmission mechanism, but collapse and instability can 
lead  to  decline  in  aggregate  demand  and  a  rise  in  unemployment.  Research  suggests  that  the 
average cumulative output loss of a banking crisis in an emerging market economy is nearly 14% of 
GDP, and up to 25% in developed countries.2 
The  roles  and  aims  of  the  public  authorities  -  a  combination  of  supervisors,  central  banks  and 
government - embrace two interdependent fields. First there is the process of oversight itself - spotting 
risk concentrations and threats that could cause instability: and taking actions to mitigate these threats 
in a variety of ways. 
Second, however, there is as a last resort the mechanism for intervention: if things go wrong and crisis 
is threatened or actually occurs. And things will go wrong. A zero-risk environment would not only be 
impossible, but would be undesirable. The moral hazard which would ensue, together with unwelcome 
restriction of market processes could ultimately add to, rather than detract from, social cost. We need 
to be in a position to decide about, and where necessary to act, in occasional injections of liquidity and 
support for particular firms or markets. Breaking the chain of adverse behaviour may sometimes be 
necessary to restore confidence in the integrity of the system as a whole. 
Using financial stability oversight to reduce the costs to society requires sophisticated and up-to-date 
techniques. Despite today’s complexity the basic concepts in relation to oversight have not changed. 
Concentrations of risk have been with us since financial markets began and so have mechanisms for 
the transfer of risks. The concepts of guarantees, of options and of securities transfer date back into 
history - references to the use of derivatives can be traced back to the Sumerians in Mesopotamia 
4000 years ago. And so too does the concept of speculative, or misconceived excess being deflated 
by a variety of possible macro or micro shocks. 
The new environment 
4. 
But  the  financial  world  today  has  globalised  both  across  borders  and  different  kinds  of  firms.  Risk 
transfer  processes  have  mushroomed.  And  there  has  developed  a  corresponding  will  and  ability  to 
exploit them. The new world is characterised by new concentrations of risk. They can be built - and 
dissipated - with bewildering speed. 
Before looking at the consequences of the changes for financial stability oversight it is worth reflecting 
on the main causes of this new world. There are of course many drivers, but to my mind development 
of  the  new  products  and  risk  transfer  techniques  is  based  on  the  precondition  of  liberalisation  and 
technological advance. 
Liberalisation 
5. 
As to liberalisation, it was little wonder that the rise in popularity of derivatives in the global economy 
was stimulated by the emergence in the 1960’s of that most liberal of markets: the international capital 
market.  This  burgeoning  and  open  market  place  provided  the  preconditions  to  develop  the  new 
techniques.  Regulation  was  minimal  and  market  imposed.  Disintermediation  and  securitisation 
gathered pace from the early 1980’s. And as derivative instruments were developed, newly emerging 
players including hedge funds and others entered the scene. So today we see a global market place 
of truly astonishing size and breadth where contracts straddle both national boundaries and the old 
functional areas of banking, insurance, and securities: and where the old silos are no more. 
The  international  capital  market  was  itself  in  my  view  a  major  stimulus  in  encouraging  individual 
governments to liberalise their markets. The new techniques employed could lead to a lower cost of 
capital.  In  addition  the  market  and  its  capabilities  began  to  highlight  the  ineffectiveness  of  national 
barriers,  and  restrictive  practices.  It  gave  governments  the  courage  to  dismantle  restrictions  and 
barriers despite protest from those who, in a series of big bangs, lost their franchises. The examples of 
the international Swiss Franc - and Sterling - debt markets highlight this. In each case the authorities 
                                                     
 
2   Glenn Hoggarth and Victoria Sapporta “Costs of Banking System Instability: Some Empirical Evidence”. Bank of England 
Financial Stability Review (June, 2001). 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
in the 1970’s imposed flow controls on new bond issues through queues. But this could be bypassed. 
As derivatives and swaps developed, so Swiss Franc liabilities could be created by borrowing US$ on 
an unrestricted basis and swapping them outside the jurisdiction of the Swiss authorities into Swiss 
Francs.  So  this  caused  a  gradual  rethink,  as  the  national  grip  of  the  authorities  had  ceased  to  be 
effective. 
Consequences of technological advance 
6.  
While liberalisation was an important trigger, technological advance also played a vital role. We may 
not understand its full impact yet: just as it took us time to exploit fully the benefits of the printing press, 
electricity,  and  the  motor  car.  But  the  advance  and  speed  of  communication  with  its  erosion  of 
geographical and national barriers spawned the development of often derivatised financial instruments 
and risk transfer techniques. 
The concepts involved in this risk transfer may not be new. But the instruments to handle them, to 
quantify their value, to measure them, and to judge the risks inherent in them, are. The consequences 
of these developments, whose impact took off in the 1980’s, have been quite dramatic. 
Firstly they have enabled greater dispersion of risks. Banks, at the heart of the financial system, used 
to act as warehouses, with the loan assets they generated staying on the books until maturity and - 
normally  -  repayment.  The  balance  sheet  was  the  net  result  of  these  events.  But  today  banks 
approach  matters  in  a  fundamentally  different  way:  they  review  their  balance sheets  intraday.  They 
ask themselves, “What is the opportunity cost of not altering the balance sheet?”. And they are then in 
a position to act. Assets can be disposed of, packaged, securitised, and sold. In size. And fast. This is 
what is so new. So risk can be, and is, dispersed across the system globally. Not only from bank to 
bank, but also between different types of financial institutions, as well as to private individuals, or to 
corporate entities. 
This can create the build up of concentrations of risk in new areas, and often with new players, who 
may or may not be well informed about what they are doing. 
But this set of processes adds to the opacity of the financial system. It is more difficult to see where 
risks reside. Despite steps forward through enhanced disclosure and improved accounting standards, 
there  have  been  other  steps  back  towards  opacity:  the  result  of  the  sheer  complexity,  speed  of 
movement  of  risks,  and  in  some  cases  obfuscation  through  special  purpose  vehicles,  or  other  off-
balance sheet devices. 
Another  implication  of  the  derivatised  world  is  the  premium  it  places  on  risk  management.  The 
deployment  of  intellectual  capital  in  finding  new  opportunities  to  create  and  disperse  risk  has  been 
prodigious.  This  in  turn  places  a  real  burden  on  the  managers  of  the  great  array  of  risks  and 
interdependencies and on those supervising the entities that take them. 
A  particular  feature  of  these  risk  management  processes  is  the  reliance  on  modelling  techniques. 
Although  when  used  judiciously  models  are  a  valuable  tool,  they  also  have  limitations  and  contain 
hazards when in the wrong hands. First, they are only as good as the assumptions on which they are 
based.  And  second,  hazards  exist  where  models  can  provide  a  false  reassurance  that  liquidity  to 
deliver assumed value will be available. 
This leads to the question of measurement and accounting for values and risks. Inherited systems of 
accounting - with historic cost conventions for banking and insurance - bring real tensions in today’s 
world. There is understandable concern regarding the added volatility which the developing Fair Value 
techniques  can  give  rise  to,  in  relation  to  reported  earnings  and  disclosed  values.  But  equally,  the 
need for management of risks, and for comparison of values across all sectors with a mark to market 
capability,  is  how  business  is  actually  managed  and  conducted.  That  is  why  I  have  for  some  time 
argued  that  a  resolution  of  the  conflict  is  important.  The  lack  of  consensus  makes  this  a  difficult 
process, needing consideration of the governance and control process of accounting, quite apart from 
the  standards  themselves.  In  this  respect  I  recommend  a  recent  report  by  the  G303  as  outlining  a 
possible way forward. 
 
                                                     
3   The Group of Thirty, “Enhancing Public Confidence in Financial Reporting” (2003). 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
Paradoxically the existence of standards of risk management, or prudential control, themselves can 
lead  to  unintended  consequences.  For  example,  if  banks  all  have  similar  approaches  to  risk 
management or all use similar models, or if rules require them all to provide more capital at times of 
economic downturn, then they may all react similarly to a given shock. This could itself amplify market 
movements and trigger liquidity difficulties, despite the best intentions. 
There  is  also  the  question  of  legal  certainty.  If  counterparties  doubt  an  institution’s  strength  or 
solvency, their behaviour may be influenced if they feel that complex and untested types of contract 
may  not  “close  out”,  particularly  in  adversity.  Such  concerns  lay  behind  the  LTCM  crisis  in  1998. 
Counterparties  feared  LTCM  might  be  insolvent.  They  could  sense  a  drain  of  liquidity  from  LTCM 
which might precipitate collapse. If collapse occurred, the vast array of complex contracts within LTCM 
might  not  close  out.  The  dimensions  of  the  exposures  were  considerable,  and  a  disorderly  run  on 
LTCM,  triggered  in  part  by  a  lack  of  legal  certainty,  could  well  have  provoked  a  serious  liquidity 
situation.  No  surprise  that  there  was  a  co-ordinated  purchase  by  the  main  creditors  to  enforce  an 
orderly  wind  down.  A  key  lesson  for  financial  stability  oversight  is  the  need  to  encourage  ways  of 
improving legal certainty. 
Implications of the new environment: risk and culture 
7.  
So much for the drivers of change - liberalisation; technological advance and new products. But what 
about the implications for the financial markets and their oversight? 
The first implication is to highlight the need for examination and possible change in supervisory and 
regulatory  frameworks.  What  made  sense  before,  in  terms  of  separate  regulation  for  each  silo  of 
banking,  insurance  and  securities  might  look  different  today.  We  have  also  certainly  seen  a  move 
towards consolidated supervision. I will return to this area later. 
But  second,  oversight  needs  an  understanding  of  a  number  of  different  soft  issues:  of  culture  and 
attitudes  to  risk  which  can  affect  behaviour.  These  can  and  do  vary  across  the  different  areas  of 
activity. 
The existence of new concentrations of risk might not matter if their new holders are fully aware of the 
risk implications, or if their likely behaviour could be anticipated by other financial participants or the 
public authorities. But new holders of such risk may not have the same understandings of what the 
risks consist of, as those who generate them. And accordingly they may behave in unexpected ways 
when shocks arise. 
For  example  in  banking,  confidence  in  the  liquidity  of  the  system  and  expected  behaviour  is 
underpinned by the presumption that, in the absence of a credit event, obligations will be honoured at 
a known time and date. This would typically beon the expiry of a loan contract - the crystallising event 
if you like. In general insurance on the other hand, the industry is used to handling crystallising events 
differently. Rather than acting as the trigger for immediate payment of due amounts, it may instead 
lead to discussion - even dispute - the results of which will determine how much is eventually paid and 
when. So risk transfer contracts straddling the two areas may engender expectations that in practice 
may harbour surprises; with unexpected outcomes and adverse behaviour. 
Implications of the new environment: new types of financial player 
8. 
A  key  ingredient  of  life  in  today’s  financial  world  of  course  is  the  new  players,  or  the  increased 
significance of previously smaller players - encouraged as they have been by liberalisation and new 
risk transfer techniques. 
Firstly there is the advent of globally active Large Complex Financial Institutions - LCFIs. These create 
a particular challenge for public policy. They are built on highly sophisticated understandings of the 
global  market  place.  Their  deployment  of  intellectual  capital  has  been  dramatic.  And  they  have 
overcome both technical and juridical barriers so as to operate on a global basis. You cannot label 
them in the historical categories: - are they banks? Are they securities firms? Are they insurers? 
Of course you can categorise them by their historical roots. The large so-called broker-dealers such as 
Morgan  Stanley  and  Goldman  Sachs come  from  the  securities side.  The  big banks -  Citigroup and 
HSBC - come from the banking side. But today they are all involved in convergent thought processes 
and  operations,  even  if  their  precise  legal  structures,  and  in  many  cases  regulatory  arrangements, 
may  differ.  They  are  all  involved  in  considering  in  real  time  whether  they  are  comfortable  with  the 
4 
  BIS Review 5/2004
balance  sheet  of  assets  and  liabilities  that  they  have.  And  they  all  are  involved  in  risk  transfer 
techniques to adjust to a desired proprietary outcome. 
Their  scope  is  multifunctional  and  multinational.  This  enables  them  to  maximise  opportunities  for 
return. But it can also create challenges for the markets, and for the authorities. With global firms if 
there  should  be  a  failure,  then  who  will  oversee  its  resolution,  and  will  there  be  any  safety  net  to 
counter what could be significant economic and social costs globally? Which set of taxpayers in which 
countries will be prepared to share the burden to support such LCFIs?  
This highlights a real tension in the globalised world. The markets have globalised, and so have the 
firms. But, to a large measure, the oversight apparatus remains nationally based. This is an important 
area which will provide all those of us involved in financial sector oversight with major challenges for 
years to come. 
Increasingly  active  players  are  the  hedge  funds,  employing  alternative  investment  techniques  and 
attracting  a  multitude  of  investors  searching  for  higher  yields.  They  often  operate  globally  on  the 
strength of the derivatised and securitised world. There has been a dramatic growth in hedge funds: 
data suggest that the past eight years alone have seen the value of assets rise by nearly 450%. Many 
of  them  are  unregulated  in  a  prudential  sense,  and  are  typically  characterised  by  large  proprietary 
positions, sometimes with an emphasis on unconventional assets and arbitrage positions. 
The complex and diverse operations of hedge funds can help to arbitrage away pricing mistakes, and 
to integrate financial markets. But they also raise new questions for financial stability oversight. 
The areas  we  need  to  look at  are quite  wide.  There  is  of course  the  opacity  aspect  -  what  are  the 
underlying concentrations hedge funds hold? But there are also other questions. How leveraged are 
they? Do lenders to them understand the risks that they are taking? And what is the potential impact of 
confidence  and  liquidity  if  they  don’t?  And  what  would  happen  if  the  new  investors  in  hedge  funds 
became disillusioned by their performance. Would it trigger an exodus and cause markets to go “one 
way”?  
And I would stress that many of the issues raised by the attributes of, and thought processes within, 
hedge funds themselves are shared increasingly by securities companies and other types of financial 
institution including banks. Overseers of financial stability take note! 
A third group of new players is the non-financial groups who straddle finance and the real economy. I 
could  mention  industrial  giants  like  GE.  We  need  to  understand  their  implications,  and  any  new 
vulnerabilities they may cause. 
Next  I  want  to  highlight  the  rating  agencies.  The  new  holders  of  financial  assets  find  that 
understanding  the  credit  risks  inherent  in  the  assets  they  hold  has  become  more  difficult.  So  they 
outsource  credit  evaluations  to  the  rating  agencies,  as  third  party  specialists  who  benefit  from 
economies of scale. Indeed in the case of collateralised debt obligations whole categories of assets 
are dependent on their rating. 
But this can give rise to particular vulnerabilities. What happens if there is a rating downgrade? Did the 
investors  in  Parmalat  bonds  rely  on  the  fact  that  they  were  rated  investment  grade?  Changes  to 
ratings will be known to all at the same time. And this could trigger mass exodus either by holders of 
rated assets or, in cases where banks themselves are rated, by depositors or other counterparties. 
Of course the rating agencies provide valuable services and information. And their increasingly public 
significance raises calls for them to be regulated. In my view, attempts to do so could actually create 
additional  moral  hazard,  particularly  in  today’s  compensation  orientated  society.  If  rating  agencies 
were regulated who would you blame if mistakes are made: the rating agency, the regulator, or both?  
Implications of networks 
9. 
Finally  we  need  to  consider  the  financial  stability  oversight  implications  of  the  networks  which 
increasingly hold the financial system together. These are the plumbing or the nervous system of the 
financial world. This is the world of payments, clearing and settlement systems. Such networks can 
and do both generate significant economic benefits, but they also create vulnerabilities. 
The economic benefits of scope and scale from such networks come as a result of the development of 
standardised  messaging,  IT  protocols  and  other  areas  of  interoperability.  However,  the  universal 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 5
reliance on these networks makes the financial system increasingly vulnerable to any failure, whether 
financial or physical. 
If  the  market  all  settles  in  one  system  and  is  faced  by  single  points  of  failure  how  could  we  work 
around these? 
Secondly, if there is a failure, what about data retrieval? If an entity containing a series of uncompleted 
transactions  fails,  how  can  that  data  be  retrieved  or recreated  so that  you  can get  markets up  and 
running  again?  Fortunately  significant  effort  is  being  put  into  developing  innovative  solutions: 
something which may give confidence to the many who are unfamiliar with this area. 
Implications of the new environment for financial stability oversight 
10. 
It will be clear from the litany of issues I have just mentioned - new players, new products, new risk 
transfer techniques and interconnections - that the changes in today’s financial world are indeed quite 
profound in relation to financial stability oversight. But are they net benign or net negative? The world 
here is sometimes portrayed as being in two designated camps. This may be a bit of a parody, but I 
am sure the two protagonists would forgive my little sketch. 
The bullish view is led by Governor Greenspan. This holds that, in the new financial world, banks now 
possess the enhanced ability to disperse risk - to offload risk to others, be they investors, insurance 
companies or whatever. The banks have thereby been able to weather a variety of shocks, which in an 
earlier age might well have engendered financial instability. The Asian crisis, Russia, 9/11, Enron: I 
could go on. In each case the banks came through and the financial system has demonstrated greater 
resilience  as  derivatives  and  sophisticated  risk  transfer  processes  have  dispersed  risk  to  a  wider 
audience. 
The bearish camp is led by Warren Buffett. This points out the opacity of today’s world: the difficulty of 
spotting  risk  concentrations;  or  judging  the  behavioural  expectations  in  the  face  of  given  types  of 
shock. 
My view would be that both schools of thought are right! I think in reality it depends on your vantage 
point. There has been improved capital formation. And well managed banks have indeed been able to 
weather the shocks - a real positive from the point of view of financial stability oversight. But on the 
other hand the added vulnerabilities too are real. So I do not find it surprising that there are calls for 
public policy response. 
The  consequences  of  liberalisation  and  the  derivatised  world  of  enhanced  risk  transfer  are  indeed 
formidable. There is the breakdown of the old barriers; with unfamiliar and new players operating in 
often  unfamiliar  territory;  uncertainty  over  concentrations  of  risk  and  with  a  more  difficult  or 
unpredictable set of behaviours; and newly created networks whose failure could be catastrophic. 
Spotting threats is tougher: and there is a premium on intelligence from a broader network to cover a 
multitude of new transmission channels. The tension between globalised players in a world of national 
supervisors needs to be managed. 
But  let  me  not  leave  you  with  the  impression  that  we  are  deterred  by  the  task.  On  the  contrary 
challenging certainly, but hopeless certainly not. After all, the market place itself has to act prudently; 
to judge potential behaviour of counterparties; to improve risk management techniques; to understand 
where concentrations of risks reside and what their dangers are. If firms fail to do so they go out of 
business. And as for the public authorities, we all know the maxim or guiding prayer “Lord let there be 
failures: but let them be small ones”. No better way of encouraging market discipline! We cannot, and 
should not aspire to a zero-risk solution, but we do need to be prepared to take measures to restore 
confidence if things do go wrong. 
Public policy response - process 
11.  
The first area of public policy response concerns how we handle our day to day activities. These have 
to be sharpened and broadened to oversee this more complex environment: a real life challenge for all 
of us here in London. Given our position as a major international financial centre the stability of the 
system could be impacted by any significant storms from elsewhere. 
6 
  BIS Review 5/2004
Perhaps I can say a few words about what this means to us at the Bank of England. Responsibility for 
the  overall  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  means  we  undertake  activities  ranging  from 
behavioural research to oversight of payment and settlement systems; from involvement in standard 
setting to implementing infrastructural change. To do this efficiently means, as our Governor Mervyn 
King recently reminded us, that we have to see the wood for the trees. The challenge is where you 
draw  the  line.  This  entails  a  prioritisation  process  to  decide  on  the  extent  and  degree  of  potential 
threats - and also a “sunset” approach where we subject each area of work to regular review to assess 
progress and continued relevance. 
There  are  a  number  of,  interconnected,  areas  of  work.  These  focus  both  on  “hard  infrastructure”, 
including payment and settlement systems, and on “soft infrastructure”; standard-setting in areas like 
accounting,  audit,  prudential  and  legal  standards.  We  also  analyse  key  developments  in  the 
international  arena,  for  example  in  relation  to  threats  of  failure  of  emerging  market  economies  and 
response to this. 
Public policy response - institutional 
12. 
As  to  the  second  area  -  the  institutional  response  -  there  are  both  national  as  well  as  international 
dimensions. 
On a national basis, countries increasingly recognise the distinction between supervision (looking at 
the  individual  institutions  and  markets)  and  the  systemic  factors  involving  concentrations,  inter-
relationships and behaviour in relation to the system as a whole. Each is an essential element in the 
provision of financial stability oversight. In relation to supervision, in some jurisdictions - including the 
UK, Japan and Germany - all the supervisory functions are carried out within one institution. In others 
they are handled by different agencies. 
Certain countries have combined questions of the systemic issues with those of prudential oversight, 
and then put the investor and consumer protection aspects of regulation into separate agencies [the 
“twin peaks” approach adopted in Australia and France]. Yet others still survive with a multiplicity of 
agencies.  The  US  is  a  case  in  point  -  and  it  is  worth  noting  that,  despite  all  its  complexities  and 
conflicts, the health of the US financial sector as well as its economy do not appear to have suffered 
unduly,  despite  episodes  like  the  savings  and  loan  crisis.  However,  the  broad  trend  is  to  combine 
investor protection and consumer protection for banking securities and insurance, and split these away 
from the systemic aspect. The precise architecture in different countries depends on historical, political 
and institutional factors. 
Personally I feel we have been quite enlightened in the UK. As a former Chairman of the old Securities 
and Investment Board - a forerunner of the FSA - I could certainly see the limitations of the earlier 
situation.  And  despite  the  inevitable  challenge  -  being  well  addressed  in  my  view  -  of  managing  a 
supervisory  authority  with  the  size,  scope,  and  powers  of  FSA,  it  reflects  the  realities  of  today’s 
environment. 
And as for financial sector oversight in the UK, this is carried on under the auspices of a Standing 
Committee of the three authorities involved: HMT, FSA and the Bank of England. The roles of each 
party have been carefully thought out in relation to which party is best placed to do what, and laid out 
in a published MoU. 
The FSA is responsible for the supervision of firms, markets and clearing systems, and for the conduct 
of  regulatory  operations  in  response  to  problem  cases  affecting  these  players.  The  valuable 
intelligence it gains can help in understanding concentrations and threats. The Bank has responsibility 
for the overall stability of the financial system as a whole. Without the need to focus on the regulatory 
responsibilities for the individual firms, we focus on what might disrupt the functioning of the financial 
system, and especially what might pose a threat to liquidity, and what can be done to mitigate it. We 
also need to be in a position to advise on the extent of possible financial support if major problems 
arise, and to provide that support if and as agreed. And the Treasury of course has to play a vital role 
in reflecting Government policy as a whole, with a particular scrutiny of developments which ultimately 
could bring into consideration the need for taxpayers’ money. 
On  the  global  level  things  are  very  different.  You  could  argue  intellectually  that,  since  national 
boundaries mean so little in relation to financial stability oversight, there is a case for creating a single 
global body. In reality of course we are nowhere near that, any more than we are to creating global 
Government  itself.  The  difference  in  political  and  legal  systems  and  culture,  clearly  make  it 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 7
impracticable.  So  for  the  time  being,  whether  at  a  global  or  even  an  EU  level,  we  have  to  rely  on 
proxies and co-ordination. 
This proxy must be as effective as possible. This explains the activity to create and maintain robust 
international  standards  and  practice  in  the  institutions,  and  infrastructure  of  the  global  market.  It 
explains endeavours to encourage or enforce compliance with them, through a variety of measures 
including international bodies, such as the Basle Committee, IOSCO, the Committee on Payment and 
Settlement  Systems,  the  IMF,  and  the  World  Bank  -  and  others  too  numerous  to  mention.  The 
Financial Stability Forum is noteworthy too, as it brings together the three sets of key bodies involved 
in  financial  stability  oversight  -  central  banks,  regulators  and  finance  ministries  -  to  supplement  the 
actions of other international organisations in promoting standards globally. 
Public policy response - if things go wrong 
13. 
I  spoke  about  identifying  threats  and  the  steps  to  mitigate  them,  but  we  also  need  to  be  able  to 
intervene if things do go wrong. In a non-zero risk environment, failure is a possibility. So we need to 
look at both mitigants in relation to the impacts of financial crisis, and how to restore confidence. 
This  is  true  both  for  financial  crises  which  could  occur  as  a  result  of  business  failure,  as  well  as 
possible major operational disruption - whether from terrorism, cyber failure, or natural calamity. They 
are situations where predictability is so vital, when normal mechanisms for decision making may be in 
abeyance. 
I have left until last the tricky question of emergency liquidity injection and lender of the last resort. 
This is an area full of mystique and ambiguity. “Intervention,” as the late - Charles Kindleberger4 said, 
“is  an  art  form  not  a  science.”  My  contention  is  that,  whilst  an  aspect  of  such  ambiguity  may  be 
inevitable,  or  even  necessary,  the  demands  of  today’s  complex world  for  enhanced  predictability  of 
behaviour and transparency should not be ignored. 
Ultimately public policy may require emergency liquidity injection through lender of last resort facilities. 
This  may  be  justified  to  defend  the  public  good  of  financial  stability  which  the  market  itself  cannot 
provide.  I  stress  the  word  ultimately  for  this  is  a  last  resort  after  all  other  efforts  have  failed.  The 
granting of any such support does, however, contain a basic dilemma. On the one hand there is a 
strong case for market discipline to avoid the dangers of moral hazard. This is the case for ambiguity 
as to whether and when the lender of last resort facility would be deployed. On the other hand people 
want predictability of process: who can be expected to do what if problems do arise? 
In  the  UK  we  are  quite  advanced  in  addressing  these  dilemmas.  Our  former  Governor  Sir  Edward 
George, in a speech here at the London School of Economics in 1993, outlined the five key principles 
of lender of last resort assistance. They are equally valid today. To précis: explore every commercial 
option; ensure the key benefits come to the financial system not the shareholders; aim towards a clear 
exit; treat with care any details of the support given; and distinguish between problems of liquidity and 
solvency. A tricky, but crucial, ex ante question. 
We do not have a formal agreement as to how these principles are to be handled case by case: nor 
the circumstances under which emergency liquidity might be made available. Therein lies ambiguity. 
But equally there is an acknowledgement that the issue might arise, and the Standing Committee’s 
remit includes decision making and implementation in relation to any emergency liquidity as well as a 
clear statement of the roles of the parties. 
Internationally and globally the situation is more complex and diverse. In some countries the subject is 
still  taboo  -  both  process  and  policy  decisions.  This  might  be  due  to  a  lack  of  clarity  of  roles  and 
powers. To my mind this transparency deficit is not conducive to systemic confidence, either within 
given jurisdictions or, on a global basis. 
But whilst there may be validity in a lack of transparency in relation to the actual policy decision - 
certainly  ex  ante  -  there  needs,  in  my  view,  to  be  less  fear  in  relation  to  more  transparency  of  the 
processes  that  surround  it.  There  will  of  course  always  be  varying  views  on  when  market  or 
institutional  failures  should  be  allowed  to  play  themselves  out,  and  when  all  else  has  failed, 
intervention is justified. Prior clarity here might provoke market gaming to the detriment ultimately of 
                                                     
 
4   Charles Kindleberger, “Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises”. John Wiley and Sons (2000). 
8 
  BIS Review 5/2004
the  taxpayer.  But  in  general,  transparency  of  process  can  contribute  to  confidence.  Some  indeed 
argue that you should improve transparency generally to a point where lender of last resort support 
could be withdrawn altogether. And let the market  take the fallout from, and absorb, the shocks as 
they arise. This I fear gets into the realms of philosophy and political thought, and as a mere central 
banker  I  would  prefer  to  go  no  further!  Some  countries  are  less  inclined  to  such  opacity.  To  quote 
Governor Heikensten of the Riksbank “Those who have lived through a crisis are generally in favour of 
a transparent process”5 
Conclusion 
14. 
I have ranged widely on the many factors which - at least in my view - arerelevant to financial stability 
oversight. 
So in concluding, let me try to draw together some of the principal themes in what I have been saying. 
I  am  naturally  well  aware  that  there  are  many  positive  features  to  today’s  environment.  But  central 
bankers are sometimes accused of being pessimists and seeing the glass half empty. In our defence I 
suppose it is our job to think out what could go wrong and to be ready accordingly. 
The first message to leave you with is that we are concerned about financial stability because of the 
potential economic and social costs arising from financial instability. Private markets will not always 
reflect these costs fully and prima facie there is a need for public oversight. 
Second, the degree of complexity and interconnectedness has increased dramatically in recent years. 
Here I would point to market liberalisation, technological advance and the development of a range of 
new instruments for transferring risk. 
Third,  market  participants  need  to  be  aware  that  financial  stability  starts  with  them.  Integrity  and 
sensible restraint are the bedrocks of stability. This requires heightened awareness that the leverage 
in  the  system  as  a  whole,  encouraged  by  the  new  risk  transfer  techniques,  contains  its  own 
vulnerabilities. 
Fourth,  in  response  to  the  changing  environment,  the  financial  authorities  have  had  to  adapt  their 
models  and  procedures  for  regulation  and  oversight.  Greater  disclosure  and  transparency  can  be 
antidotes  to  the  information  deficits  in  an  increasingly  complex,  and  sometimes  opaque,  financial 
system. International cooperation is at a premium, both in delivering a consolidated view of globally 
active firms, and in seeking to clarify who is expected to do what when difficulties arise. They need to 
match this level of technical expertise with the private sector, and to contend with new or heightened 
risks in such areas as business continuity. 
Fifth, as a central bank, we need to be as clear as we can about the nature of our contribution to the 
oversight process. At the core is our concern with the maintenance of liquidity, and our capacity to 
inject it when necessary. Much of our financial stability work is aimed at identifying potential liquidity 
strains, and what responses are likely to be most effective. 
Lastly, whilst the challenges for oversight may be daunting, progress in addressing these challenges is 
significant. But do not expect a zero risk environment - and do not demand it. Fear of failure is the 
antidote for instability. It will go a long way to underpin the long term health of the financial system. 
                                                     
 
5   Governor  Lars  Heikensten  “The  Riksbank’s  Work  on  Financial  Stability”:  Speech  at  Göteborgs  University,  25  November 
2003. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 9
