Wu Xiaoling: China and Africa as developing countries 
Statement by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 39th Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  African  Development  Bank  (Group),  Kampala, 
25-26 May 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman, Mr. President, fellow Governors, ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, please kindly allow me, on behalf of the Chinese Government and the Chinese delegation 
as  well  as  in  my  own  name,  to  express  our  thanks  to  the  government  of  Uganda  for  hosting  this 
Annual Meeting, which gives us the pleasure of visiting the beautiful city of Kampala and receiving the 
warm hospitality of the Ugandan people. Our appreciation also goes to the management of the African 
Development Bank for their excellent arrangement for the Annual Meeting.  
This  year  marks  the  40th  anniversary  of  the  founding  of  the  African  Development  Bank  Group.  The 
past 40 years witnessed the unremitting efforts made by the African Countries to promote economic 
development, social progress and poverty alleviation. As the largest multilateral development financial 
institution  in  Africa,  the  African  Development  Bank  has  played  an  important  role  in  this  process.  I 
would like to express, on behalf of the Chinese government, our respect to the previous and current 
directors, management personnel and all the staff for their contribution to the development of the Bank 
over  the  past  40  years,  and  our  appreciation  for  the  important  role  the  Bank  has  played  in  the 
economic development of Africa. 
Mr. Chairman, China is the largest developing country in the world, and Africa is the continent with the 
largest number of developing countries. China and Africa have a long history of friendship with very 
fruitful  bilateral  cooperation.  We  not  only  share  similar  experiences  in  the  past,  but  also  face  a 
common task of promoting economic development and raising people’s living standard in the future. 
The  Chinese  government  pursues  independent  foreign  policy  for  peace  and  advocates  the 
establishment of an equitable and fair world order. Promoting the friendly cooperative relationship with 
the  developing  world  including  the  African  countries  has  always  been  a  fundamental  element  of 
China’s foreign policy. In October 2000, ministers of China and African countries gathered in Beijing 
and  jointly  set  up  the  Sino-Africa  Cooperation  Forum,  opening  a  new  chapter  in  the  cooperation 
between  China  and  Africa.  Over  the  past  three  years,  cooperation,  friendship  and  mutual  trust 
between  China  and  African  countries  have  further  strengthened.  In  the  area  of  bilateral  trade  and 
economic cooperation, in 2003, trade between China and African countries reached USD18.55 billion, 
an  increase  of  49.7  percent  over  the  previous  year.  The  Chinese  government  has  taken  active 
measures to increase imports from African countries, and encouraged domestic enterprises to invest 
in Africa. In addition, the Chinese government has provided training to nearly 7,000 African personnel 
in  various  areas.  Honoring  it  commitment  ahead  of  schedule,  China  reduced  the  bilateral  debts  of 
31 African  countries  totaling  USD1.3  billion.  In  the  coming  years,  China  will  take  further  steps  to 
enhance its support to African countries, including continuing to provide assistance within its capacity, 
expanding market access and strengthening cooperation in human resources and tourism.   
Since it became a member of the African Development Bank in 1985, China has actively supported 
the  work  of  the  Bank.  It  has  provided  funds  totaling  USD300  million  in  the  replenishments  of  the 
resources  of  both  the  African  Development  Bank  and  the  African  Development  Fund.  Up  to  now, 
China  and  African  Development  bank  have  had  nearly  20  years  of  cooperation.  Serving  as  a  link, 
African Development  Bank  has  played an  important  role  in  the cooperation  and  friendship  between 
China and Africa. 
We  are  pleased  to  note  that,  although  adversely  affected  by  the  generally  weak  global  economic 
performance,  African  economy  grew  by  3.7  percent  in  2003,  a  growth  rate  higher  than  the  global 
average  of  3.2  percent.  In  many  African  countries,  with  significantly  strengthened  macroeconomic 
management  capability,  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  improved.  In  particular,  fiscal  deficits 
have  been  kept  at  relatively  low  levels,  inflation  has  been  effectively  contained,  and  terms  of  trade 
have  improved.  Nevertheless,  the  African  economy  is  still  confronted  with  severe  challenges.  The 
primary task is to achieve sustained and rapid economic growth, a prerequisite to meet the Millennium 
Goals by 2015. China’s experiences show that, in the course of social development, countries need to 
formulate their poverty reduction and economic development strategies in light of their own conditions. 
In particular, attention should be paid to properly handling the following issues. First, countries need to 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
strike  a  proper  balance  between  stability,  development  and  reform.  In  other  words,  the  speed  of 
development and the pace of the reforms should be carefully weighted against people’s capability to 
absorb relevant shocks. The ultimate goal is to improve people’s living standard. Second, importance 
should be attached to properly addressing the issues in the development of agriculture and the rural 
areas,  particularly  in  those  countries  where  agricultural  population  constitutes  the  overwhelming 
majority. Third, the most effective way to reduce poverty is to help the poor people develop their local 
economy. African countries play a leading role in their own development. Meanwhile, cooperation and 
support  from  the  international  community  are  needed.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  economic 
development is unbalanced among African countries. While more financial support should be provided 
to countries with sound performance, necessary assistance should also be given to those small and 
weak  countries  that  have  just  emerged  from  war  to  help  them  resume  the  normal  political  and 
economic order and meet the basic living need of the people. 
In  2003,  the  African  Development  Bank  continued  to  promote  poverty  reduction  and  sustainable 
economic growth in the African region. Despite the difficulties resulted from the temporary relocation of 
the headquarters to Tunisia, the Bank successfully fulfilled the loan target of 2003. The total amount of 
the  projects  approved  in  2003  increased  significantly  by  11  percent,  with  total  loans  and  grants 
reaching UA1.76 billion. For countries of the African Development Fund, the Bank has taken measures 
to align their national strategy reports with the poverty reduction strategy reports, and to provide loans 
in  light  of  their  performance.  The  Bank  has  also  step  up  its  assessment  of  development  results  of 
these countries. We are satisfied with the above progress. 
New  Partnership  for  Africa’s  Development  (NEPAD)  clearly  points  out  the  way  forward  for  Africa’s 
future development. We encourage the Bank to actively participate in the implementation of this plan. 
The  roles  of  the  Bank  involve  policy  guidance,  technical  assistance  and  advisory  services  on  one 
hand,  and  coordination  among  African  countries,  African  regional  organizations,  international 
institutions  and  global  investors  and  donors  on  the  other.  Under  the  framework  of  Sino-Africa 
Cooperation Forum, China actively supports NEPAD and the regional and sub-regional cooperation of 
African countries. We call on the international community, particularly the developed countries, to take 
concrete actions to contribute to the achievement of the Millennium Goals by improving the terms of 
trade of African countries, further reducing their debts and increasing development assistance to them. 
Lastly, we sincerely hope that under the leadership of President Kabbaj and the Board of Directors 
and with the joint efforts of the management and all the staff, the African Development Bank Group will 
overcome  potential  difficulties,  and,  by  pursuing  earnest  reforms,  make  new  contributions  to  the 
economic and social development in Africa.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
