R Basant Roi: Banking in Mauritius 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the inauguration of the Mahebourg 
branch of MPCB Ltd, 8 July 2004. 
 Hon. Minister of Tourism and Leisure 
Chairperson and Members of the Board of the MPCB 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good afternoon 
I am pleased to be here with you all for the opening of the Mahebourg branch of the Mauritius Post 
and Cooperative Bank Ltd. In the last two years I have been asking Chief Executives of all the banks 
operating in Mauritius to upgrade the layout of their bank branches to international standards. I am 
particularly delighted to actually see that the premise housing the Mahebourg branch of MPCB Ltd. is 
of the desired standard. 
Having  a  pleasant  looking  building  is  a  good  thing.  The  quality  of  services  provided  as  well  as  the 
balance  sheet  of  any  bank  should  match  the  good  setting  of  the  premises.  Every  week  I  receive 
numerous complaints from bank customers from across the country. Seldom do I come across justified 
complaints. 
Let me clarify a fundamental point. Banking, as we are all aware, involves risk. No banker, anywhere 
in the world, is absolutely certain that money lent out will be fully repaid in time. The risk of default is 
ever present. And many borrowers do default - often in an obscene manner. In such circumstances 
bankers have no other alternative than to take unpleasant actions for the bankers are answerable to 
their shareholders. Never borrow sums of money if your repayment capacity is limited. Never borrow 
sums of money thinking that in the years ahead your own financial standing will somehow improve and 
along with it your repayment capacity will improve. Your financial standing might never improve. The 
securities you have provided to the bank would be at stake. Let not the infectious greed catch you. 
Borrow such sums of money that you are certain to be able to repay in time. 
Already  banks  have  become  mindful  of  risks  involved  in  their  lending  operations.  In  the  wake  of 
financial liberalization, regulatory and supervisory authorities are requiring banks to give due weight to 
credit risk, amongst other things, in their operations. Less than two weeks ago, the G10 Governors of 
central banks reached a consensus on Basel II that requires banks to exercise far greater discipline in 
their lending activities. All the banks in Mauritius have been requested to adhere to the principles laid 
down in the Accord. Gone are the days when one could obtain credit through a mere telephone call to 
the manager of a bank. 
Let  me  move  on  to  a  specific  development  that  has  been  of  serious  concern  to  me  as  well  as  to 
international bankers watching our banking industry from overseas. Financial institutions are subject to 
an obligation of secrecy. In a democratic society citizens are entitled to the protection of their privacy. 
The obligation to maintain banking secrecy applies to all those who are employed by banks as well as 
to the banks’ external auditors and board members. However, while the importance of public interest 
cannot  be  readily  disregarded  privacy  of  individuals  cannot  be  taken  that  lightly.  Confidentiality  of 
information  and  banking  secrecy  have  been  and  remain  an  important  pillar  of  banking  business 
throughout the world. Once the trust placed by individuals in banks is lost, it cannot but be a one-way 
ticket to irrecoverable damages to our financial system and to our economy as well. In the banking 
industry we are very much aware of the grave consequences of a loss of confidence in banks. All of 
us, particularly those of us having an elevated sense of responsibility should size up the gravity of the 
consequences  for  our  economic  and  financial  system,  more  so  at  a  time  when  the  present 
international environment is so inhospitable to the plight of small island economies like ours. 
Having  said  that,  I  am  pleased  to  learn  that  the  MPCB  is  proposing  to  increase  its  capital  from 
Rs 280 million to Rs 750 million by the end of next year. Let me wish the Chairman, members of the 
Board of Directors, the Chief Executive and staff of the Mauritius Post and Co-operative Bank Ltd. the 
very best of success. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
