Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent financial and economic developments in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2004. 
 The  economy  has  developed  in  line  with  the  expectations  expressed  in  our  monetary  policy 
assessments  of  December  and  March.  The  economic  recovery  has  increasingly  gained  hold  in 
Switzerland and abroad and has become broader-based. Against this backdrop, we have reached the 
conclusion that the time has come for a slight tightening of monetary policy. The target range for the 
three-month Libor is being raised by 25 basis points with immediate effect and the Libor is being kept 
around 0.5%. This move reverses half of the latest interest rate cut of 6 March 2003; then the three-
month  Libor  was  reduced  from  0.75%  to  a  historic  low  of  0.25%  due  to  fears  of  deflation  and  the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc at that time. The interest rate range extends from 0.0% to 1.0%. Even 
after  this  adjustment  our  monetary  policy  will  remain  expansionary  and  continue  to  support  the 
economic upswing. 
Let me offer some comments on our decision and the outlook for prices as summarised in the new 
inflation forecast. The graph provides you with the current and the last inflation forecasts. The dash-
dotted green curve is the March forecast, which presupposes that the three-month Libor rate would 
remain unchanged at 0.25% in the next three years. As the graph shows, inflation in the first quarter 
developed as predicted by us (blue curve). The dashed red curve represents the new forecast. This is 
based on a steady three-month Libor of 0.5%. The forecast begins in the second quarter of the current 
year and ends in the first quarter of 2007. 
In order to analyse the inflation prospects, it is useful to differentiate three phases. I shall begin with 
the short-term inflation prospects. In particular, I shall discuss the role of oil prices. Then I will present 
our outlook for the economy, which affects the medium-term inflation forecast. Finally, I shall talk about 
the long-term inflation prospects. For this, an analysis of monetary developments is helpful. 
The development of oil prices 
In the short term, i.e. for a period of approximately one year, monetary policy can hardly steer price 
developments.  Price  levels  are  largely  determined  by  monetary  policy  decisions  made  in  the  past. 
Inflation  may,  however,  be  temporarily  influenced  by  events  that  are  not  attributable  to  monetary 
policy. We are currently experiencing such an event in the form of higher oil prices. 
Price increases for oil products have contributed significantly to the rise in annual inflation measured 
by the national consumer price index (CPI) from 0.5% in April to 0.9% in May. The increase in the oil 
price  is  also  the  main  reason  why  our  inflation  forecast  exceeds  the  March  forecast  until  the  first 
quarter of 2005 despite the higher interest rate level. 
Such a rise in prices cannot and may not be corrected with monetary policy measures as long as no 
wage-price  spiral  is  set  in  motion.  First,  we  do  not  know  whether  this  price  rise  is  a  permanent  or 
merely a temporary phenomenon. Second, the change in oil prices impacts directly on the price level, 
whereas monetary policy changes act only indirectly and after a considerable time lag. Third, higher oil 
prices  constitute  a  cost  shock  that  cannot  be  countered  by  means  of  monetary  policy.  Experience 
shows  that  a  monetary  policy  which  attempts  to  counteract  the  effects  of  a  one-off  increase  in  oil 
prices  on  the  price  level  can  cause  considerable  damage  to  the  national  economy.  Furthermore,  it 
must  be  noted  that  the  present  price  increase  is  modest  in  a  historical  comparison.  For  example, 
during the second oil price shock at the end of the 1970s, oil cost approximately twice as much as 
today calculated at current prices. Our interest rate decision of today is thus not aimed at combating 
the effects of the oil price rise on inflation. 
The increase in oil prices nevertheless casts a shadow over the prospects for the economy, which are 
optimistic overall. We are not of the opinion, however, that the upswing is threatened by this. Model 
calculations have  shown that  higher  oil  prices  would  slow growth  in  Switzerland  only  moderately.  It 
must also be mentioned that, given the exchange rate developments, the increase in the oil price was 
less marked in Switzerland than in the US and in the euro area. Despite higher oil prices, inflation in 
our country has remained within the range that we equate with price stability. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
Economic prospects 
For a period of one to two years, the development of inflation depends decisively on the economic 
outlook.  Our  economy  has  already  been  on  a  growth  track  for  a  year  now.  Real  gross  domestic 
product in the third and fourth quarters of 2003 grew at an annualised rate of more than 2% compared 
with the previous quarter. In the first quarter of 2004 the trend continued at a slightly weaker rate of 
1.6%. 
Due to improved economic activity abroad and the favourable exchange rate, exports exceeded their 
year-earlier level by 7.4%. Equipment investment, which had expanded by as much as 7.5% in the 
final quarter of 2003, declined slightly due to special effects. The upswing has also made itself felt in 
certain  domestic  sectors.  This  is  evident  in  private  consumption,  which  increased  by  2.3%.  The 
uptrend,  which  had  begun  towards  the  end  of  last  year,  thus  continued.  Surveys  confirm  that 
consumer  sentiment  has  improved.  Construction  investment  also  topped  the  year-earlier  level  by  a 
hefty 2.8%. The expansion in mortgage loans by 5.5% confirms the revival in the construction and real 
estate sectors. 
The upswing is also evident from a stabilisation on the labour market. For the first time in five quarters 
employment  slightly  exceeded  the  corresponding  year-back  level.  The  job  vacancies  indices  reveal 
that  demand  for  labour  is  gradually  rising  again.  The  favourable  overall  picture  is  confirmed  by  the 
economic  barometer  of  the  Institute  for  Business  Cycle  Research  at  the  Swiss  Federal  Institute  of 
Technology. 
How  do  we  assess  economic  development  in  the  near  future?  For  this  year,  we  are  forecasting 
economic growth of close to 2.0%. Growth is therefore likely to be underpinned by both higher exports 
and stronger domestic demand and to lead to a gradual decline in unemployment as from the second 
half of 2004. Towards the end of 2005, the economy should again be working close to capacity, and 
this  will  influence  price  formation.  Our  inflation  forecast  of  March  already  showed  that,  given  an 
unchanged  interest  rate  of  0.25%,  inflation  would  exhibit  a  rising  trend  as  from  the  second  half  of 
2005. The reason was to be found in improved capacity utilisation and unemployment declining in step 
with  the  more  favourable  economic  conditions.  This  assessment  has  not  changed  in  any  way.  The 
new forecast, adjusted for the 25 basis points rise in the three-month Libor, now suggests that, as from 
the second quarter of 2005, inflation will fall short of the figure predicted by the last forecast. It makes 
it clear that the normalisation of the monetary policy course now initiated improves inflation prospects. 
The monetary development 
Our inflation forecast is much less certain over a longer horizon. For this period of time, it is particularly 
helpful to consider monetary factors. For the monetary analysis, I shall deal with the development of 
the money stock M3. When interest rates were last cut on 6 March 2003, short-term interest rates in 
Switzerland fell to a very low level. Since the opportunity costs for holding money were consequently 
reduced  to  practically  zero,  the  demand  for  liquidity  increased  markedly.  Immediately  following  the 
interest  rate  reduction,  annualised  monthly  growth  rates  of  more  than  15%  were  observed  for  M3. 
Once  the demand  for  liquidity  by  companies  and  households  has  reached  the  desired  higher  level, 
liquidity should only increase in line with nominal gross domestic product and should not pose a threat 
to  price  stability.  In  actual  fact,  the  growth  rates  of  M3  have  fallen  recently,  but  nevertheless  the 
economy has more liquidity at its disposal than is compatible with price stability in the medium term. 
According to our last forecast published in March, given an unchanged monetary policy and a three-
month Libor of 0.25%, inflation could have climbed to 3% in the fourth quarter of 2006. The current 
forecast shows that - on the assumption that the three-month Libor will remain stable at 0.5% in the 
next three years - inflation will only rise to 2.7% by the end of 2006. At the end of the new forecasting 
horizon in the first quarter of 2007, inflation would slightly exceed 3%. By taking a small step towards 
the normalisation of the short-term interest rate level, we are thus gradually and cautiously siphoning 
off excess liquidity in order not to jeopardise price stability in the long term either. 
Financial markets 
Is the economic analysis on which our inflation forecast rests in conformity with that of the financial 
markets?  In  the  recent  past,  a  flattening  of  the  interest  rate  curve  was  observed  in  Switzerland. 
Interest rates for maturities of up to ten years in particular moved up. This shows that the financial 
markets  have  anticipated  a  somewhat  less  expansionary  monetary  policy.  Since  economic  activity 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
began to pick up momentum more rapidly in Switzerland than in the neighbouring countries, it became 
evident  that  interest  rates would  rise  sooner,  which  enhanced  the  attractiveness  of  the  Swiss  franc 
somewhat.  Nevertheless,  the  competitiveness  of  Swiss  companies  remains  intact.  At  the  very  long 
end  of  the  interest  rate  curve  interest  rates  have  hardly  moved,  an  indication  of  consistently  low 
inflation expectations. The markets assume that the National Bank’s monetary policy is in conformity 
with its goal of ensuring price stability in the long term. 
Monetary policy still expansionary 
In March 2001, we initiated a series of interest rate reductions in response to the sluggish business 
climate and the enduring strength of the Swiss franc. In a particularly difficult international environment 
with deflationary trends we allowed the three-month Libor to finally fall to a historic low of 0.25% in 
March  2003.  For  five  quarters  it  persisted  at  this  level.  Today’s  adjustment  of  our  monetary  policy 
should not be seen as a changeover to a restrictive policy. Our interest rate increase is merely to be 
regarded as an appropriate step towards more neutral monetary conditions following a lengthy period 
of extraordinary circumstances. It is an indication that we view economic prospects more optimistically 
and  that  we  trust  the economic  upswing  in  Switzerland  to  be  robust.  Our  monetary stance  remains 
expansionary. 
Every forecast and every decision is fraught with uncertainty and risks. Should the economic recovery 
be delayed due to unexpected events or should the Swiss franc appreciate markedly, we shall react 
appropriately. As in the past, the Swiss National Bank shall keep all its options open. 
Observed inflation June 2004 
BIS Review 39/2004 
  3
Inflation forecast on March 2004 with Libor at 0.25% 
and of June 2004 with Libor at 0.5% 
Inflation forecast of June 2004 (98 kb) 
 4 
 BIS Review 39/2004
