David Dodge: The changing world economy - what it means for Canada 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Hamilton  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Hamilton, Ontario, 16 June 2004. 
 Good afternoon. I am very glad to be in Hamilton today. This city has undergone tremendous change 
over the past couple of decades, and it’s certainly exciting to see the revitalization efforts taking place 
here.  And  now,  Hamilton  is  working  to  diversify  its  economic  base.  It’s  obvious  that  adjusting  to 
change is not a new thing for Hamiltonians. 
The same is true of the Canadian economy, which must always adjust to changing domestic and world 
circumstances. During 2003 and so far this year, some of those adjustments may have felt more like 
overhauls, particularly for some manufacturing firms here in Ontario. 
One of  the most  important  changes  that  we  have all  seen  since  2002 has been  the realignment of 
major currencies in the face of global trade imbalances. This has been driven primarily by weakness in 
the U.S. dollar against other currencies, including our own. 
A second change has been the weaker demand for Canadian exports in 2002 and 2003. In addition to 
the exchange rate effects, some of this weakness has been linked to growing competitive pressures 
arising  from  the  rapid  integration  of  China  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  India,  into  the  global  economy. 
These  countries  are  becoming  increasingly  important  exporters  and  importers  of  a  wide  range  of 
goods and services. 
Third, last year, the Canadian economy faced a number of specific domestic shocks, such as SARS, 
mad-cow disease, floods, fires, and the power blackout in Ontario. All of these developments since 
2002 have left us with an economy that is operating below its production potential. 
I’ll come back to Canada’s specific economic outlook later on. But I’ll spend the bulk of my time today 
discussing  the  major  changes  that  are  taking  place  in  the  global  economy,  and  how  Canada  is 
adjusting to this new environment. I will also talk about how the macroeconomic framework we have 
developed in Canada during the past couple of decades gives us more flexibility to adjust to global 
economic shocks and to embrace the new opportunities that change brings. 
The only constant is change 
We’ve all heard the old saying that the only thing we can be sure of is change. And we have certainly 
seen  sweeping  changes  in  the  world  economy  over  the  past  20  years.  Today,  we  are  seeing 
significant swings in the balance of economic power, as large emerging markets have opened up to 
trade. 
But let’s remember that integrating new regions of the world into the international trade order is not a 
new  phenomenon.  Since  the  early  nineteenth  century,  various  countries  have  emerged  at  different 
times as major forces on the international economic scene. 
After the Second World War, the world trade order, which had broken down in the 1930s, had to be 
rebuilt.  The  war-torn  countries  of  Western  Europe  were  slowly  reintegrated  back  into  that  order. 
Through the 1950s and 1960s, Japan re-emerged as a major economic power. Then Korea took off in 
the 1970s, followed by other so-called “Asian tigers” during the 1980s and 1990s. Now, it’s China’s 
turn. And India is not far behind. 
What makes the ascent of China and India different from that of other countries is their sheer size. 
Together, these two countries represent close to 40 per cent of the world’s population. Their combined 
economies,  measured  on  the  basis  of  purchasing-power  parity  (which  compares  economies  by 
equalizing the purchasing power of their currencies for a similar basket of goods and services) add up 
to  more  than  85  per  cent  of  the  U.S.  economy.  In  fact,  by  that  measure,  China’s  economy  is  the 
second largest in the world, after that of the United States, and India’s is fourth, after Japan’s. Their 
influence  is  intensifying  the  competitive  pressure  facing  producers  in  other  countries,  including 
Canada. But it also means new, fast-growing sources of demand and new opportunities for us. Let’s 
remember  that  some  of  the  early  emerging-market  economies  have  become  important  markets  for 
Canadian goods and services. The integration of China and India into the world trade order is taking 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
place  as  other  emerging-market  economies, such as  Mexico and  Brazil, continue  to carve  out  their 
niches in world markets. 
Now, I’d like to spend a few minutes discussing the adjustments that all open trading nations must 
make in this changing environment, and recall some of the lessons that past adjustments have taught 
us. 
Benefits of international competition 
First, let me say a few more words about the competitive environment. Not surprisingly, some perceive 
the growing competition from China and India as a threat. Companies everywhere are under constant 
pressure to lower costs, and many of them are finding that China and India are attractive places to 
establish production facilities and service centres. The loss of certain jobs in the home countries of 
those companies is a sensitive social and political issue and can contribute to protectionist pressures, 
especially during periods of relative economic weakness. 
But as we consider the impact of increased competition from Asia, it is important to remember that 
economic  growth  in  Asia  is  lifting  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  out  of  poverty.  That’s  an  absolute 
good. And it is a new source of opportunity, creating more demand for goods and services from the 
industrialized countries and thus providing a boost to global economic growth. 
Healthy financial systems 
As our economies have become more open, we have also been reminded of the importance of a solid, 
efficient  financial  system.  In  any  country,  growing  firms  need  access  to  credit  from  a  sound,  well-
functioning financial sector, including a healthy banking sector. Countries with strong financial systems 
are much less likely to trigger or to amplify international financial crises than countries where those 
systems  are  weak.  With  the  increasing  integration  of  world  markets,  it  is  in  everyone’s  interest  to 
promote efforts to limit the impact and the spread of financial shocks. 
Since  the  Asian  and  Russian  financial  crises  of  1997-98,  countries  have  worked  to  improve  the 
transparency  and  reliability  of  their  domestic  financial  systems.  Mexico,  for  example,  has  made 
tremendous  efforts  to  improve  the  health  of  its  banking  sector,  partly  by  drawing  on  the  sound 
business practices of large banks from other countries, including Canada. In some countries, however, 
progress is less evident. And in China, the building of a strong commercial banking sector presents an 
enormous challenge. 
But it is not just domestic financial systems that need to be strong and flexible. As the global economic 
environment evolves, it is important that international financial institutions adjust in response. That is 
why  institutions  such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  must  continue  to 
modernize  themselves,  to  remain  relevant  in  a  changing  world.  While  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank 
have evolved somewhat since their creation in 1944, they have changed much less than the global 
economy they oversee. So it is encouraging that a strategic review of their mandates and operations 
has begun. This review is a first step towards a much-needed updating of these institutions. 
Commodity price adjustments 
I’ve spent some time outlining some of the structural forces at work in the world economy. Now I’d like 
to talk about some of the adjustments that are being made following the recent sharp rise in global 
demand. 
The  first  adjustment  is  to  higher  commodity  prices.  The  rapid  growth  of  some  emerging-market 
economies and the strong recovery in the United States are fuelling demand for raw materials. And 
that, in turn, is pushing up the prices of these raw materials. Certainly, we have seen the effect of this 
demand on most commodity prices. 
Of course, one price increase that we all feel acutely is that of oil. The recent surge in crude oil prices 
is another example of pressure stemming, at least in part, from strong world demand. This stronger 
demand has not yet been met by compensating growth in the supply of crude oil - although a recent 
agreement  by  OPEC  to  boost  production  will  help.  Nor  have  we  seen  substantial  efforts  by  price-
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
sensitive  consumers  to  use  less  oil  and  gas.  Meanwhile,  geopolitical  events  have  contributed  to 
concerns about potential supply disruptions, exacerbating the run-up in oil prices. 
It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  oil  prices  will  remain  relatively  high  until  some  of  the  geopolitical 
uncertainty dissipates, world production capacity expands, and further conservation efforts take hold. 
Higher energy costs mean that it will be more expensive to produce many goods and some services. It 
is  not clear  to  what  extent  companies will  be able  to  offset  rising  costs and  limit  price  increases  to 
consumers. 
What  is clear  is  that  economies  need  to  adjust  to  these  higher  costs  - and  economic  policies  must 
support  that  adjustment.  We  have  learned  this  from  the  mistakes  made  during  the  oil  crisis  of  the 
1970s,  when  many  countries,  including  Canada,  tried  to  shield  their  economies  from  the  effects  of 
rapidly rising energy prices. The result was an eventual adjustment that was slower and more painful 
than it needed to be. 
A return to more normal world interest rates 
A second adjustment underway in the global economy is the return to more normal interest rates and 
somewhat wider spreads on risky investments. 
After the global economic slowdown of 2000 and the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, central 
banks  around  the  world  lowered  their  policy  interest  rates  to  provide  the  liquidity  to  help  their 
economies recover and absorb excess capacity. The world economic recovery we are seeing is due, 
in large part, to accommodative monetary policy - that is, historically low interest rates. Through 2003 
and  the  early  part  of  2004,  interest  rates  in  some  countries  hit  their  lowest  levels  in  50  years,  and 
global credit conditions were very expansionary. 
But we know from experience that, as growth resumes and economies get closer to their production 
capacity,  inflationary  pressures  start  to  build.  And  so  central  banks  in  many  countries  will  have  to 
remove some of the stimulus, and interest rates around the world will have to return to more normal 
levels. This process has already started, with market rates adjusting in anticipation of future increases 
in policy interest rates. There is no doubt that over the next year, we will see upward adjustments in 
policy interest rates around the world. The timing and the magnitude of these adjustments will vary 
from country to country, according to each one’s economic circumstances. 
The  good  news  is  that  all  this  is  happening  before  economies  reach  the  limits  of  their  production 
capacity,  and  before  inflation  takes  off  and  inflation  expectations  start  to  rise.  That  bodes  well  for 
sustained economic growth without the credit crunches or accelerating inflation that occurred in earlier 
global business cycles. 
I have painted a reasonably sanguine view of the world economy and its ability to meet challenges. I 
don’t mean to suggest, however, that there aren’t any economic risks in the adjustments that I have 
outlined.  As  you  all  know,  we  are  again  facing  heightened  geopolitical  uncertainties.  And  there  are 
significant global economic imbalances that must be corrected over time. But, over the past couple of 
decades,  central  bankers  and  governments,  as  well  as  corporations  and  financial  institutions,  have 
learned a great deal about managing global risks. And most countries agree on the critical elements 
and policies necessary to adjust to global economic change. 
How well is Canada’s economy adjusting? 
So, just how well is Canada’s economy adjusting? Let me look at some of the important efforts we 
have  made  and  at  the  policies  that  are  necessary  to  help  us  manage  change  and  seize  new 
opportunities. 
First,  maintaining  solid  economic  growth  in  Canada  requires  confidence  based  on  well-managed 
monetary and fiscal policies. As you know, the Bank of Canada is responsible for monetary policy. You 
may  also  recall  that  in  1991,  together  with  the  federal  government,  we  agreed  on  an  anchor  for 
monetary policy. This anchor was an explicit inflation target that would gradually lower the annual rate 
of consumer price increases to 2 per cent - the midpoint of a range of 1 to 3 per cent. Since then, we 
have kept inflation around 2 per cent, on average. And inflation expectations have fallen in line with 
this target. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 3
Our inflation-targeting system means that the Bank of Canada lowers rates when we see the trend of 
inflation heading below 2 per cent. And it also means that we raise rates when it looks as if the trend of 
inflation will be moving above the target. This symmetric response helps to smooth the ups and downs 
of the business cycle. In our decision-making process, we must allow for the fact that it takes 18 to 
24 months  for  changes  in  interest  rates  to  have  their  full  effect  on  the  economy  and  on  inflation. 
Therefore,  we  must  constantly  look  ahead  to  make  timely  decisions  that  will  help  to  smooth  the 
business cycle, rather than exacerbate its volatility. 
Another  important  benefit  is  that  inflation  targets  have  enabled  the  Bank  to  explain  more  clearly  to 
business, labour, and the public what we are doing and why. Better public understanding of central 
bank policies and actions makes monetary policy more effective. 
Canada’s experience shows  that  monetary  policy works best  when  it  goes  hand  in  hand with  other 
sound economic policies. In particular, implementing and maintaining sound fiscal policy at all levels of 
government is fundamental to good economic performance. This gives a country the credibility and 
flexibility  to  manage  economic  challenges.  And  it  gives  citizens  confidence  that  the  authorities  will 
manage public finances prudently. 
I talked earlier about the impact of increased global competition. Canada has clearly felt that impact, 
and  we  continue  to  adjust  to  meet  competitive  pressures.  Canada  has  a  long  history  of  supporting 
multilateral trade agreements. Opening up to global competition and to new markets has made us a 
more innovative and competitive economy. 
As  we  see  the  integration of  major new  players  in  the  world  economy,  our  firms  must  continuously 
adapt,  innovate,  and  improve  their  efficiency.  That  means  continued  investments  in  research  and 
development, as well as education and training. And, in a changing world economy, our firms must 
continue to find and to exploit new opportunities. 
I noted earlier that the booming growth of large economies like China and India means that demand 
for both energy and non-energy commodities will likely remain strong. And so Canada will need the 
flexibility  to  shift  resources  into  the  production  of  those  commodities,  as  demand  requires.  It  is 
important  that  our  resource  sector  strives  to  remain  among  the  world’s  most  efficient,  and  that  our 
manufacturing sector continues to innovate. 
The steps that I have just described will help us meet the long-term challenges that we, as well as 
other  national  economies,  face.  Canada’s  economy  continues  to  adjust  to  global  economic 
developments.  Monetary  policy  has  been  facilitating  these  adjustments  by  supporting  aggregate 
demand, with the goal of keeping the economy near its full production capacity and inflation on target. 
Canadian economic outlook 
Before I close, I want to spend a couple of minutes on the Bank’s views about the current economic 
outlook and inflation in Canada. Growth in the first quarter of this year was 2.4 per cent, below the 
economy’s estimated potential growth rate of about 3 per cent. This implies that the level of output in 
the economy is still significantly below its production potential. However, both final domestic demand 
and exports grew strongly in the first quarter. These indicators, along with more recent data, suggest 
that growth in the first half of 2004 is likely to be somewhat above 3 per cent. 
In our April Monetary Policy Report, we said that we expected the economy to grow by about 2 3/4 per 
cent in 2004 and by about 3 3/4 per cent in 2005. We also said that core inflation - a measure of trend 
inflation obtained by removing eight volatile components from the consumer price index, as well as the 
impact of changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components - was expected to average 1 1/2 per 
cent over the remainder of 2004 and to move back up to 2 per cent by the end of 2005. Information 
received since the release of our April Report has been generally consistent with expectations about 
core inflation. 
But the sharp rise in world oil prices, in response to stronger-than-anticipated global demand for oil 
and heightened geopolitical uncertainties in the Middle East, means that total CPI inflation over the 
next several months will be higher than the Bank expected in April. It is important to note that while 
higher oil prices may push up the total CPI over the next few months, they should not feed through into 
higher trend inflation, as long as inflation expectations remain anchored around the 2 per cent target. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2004
Conclusion 
To conclude, the world economy has undergone tremendous change in recent years. And we can be 
sure that there is more to come. 
While  we  Canadians  can  remain  confident  of  our  ability  to  adjust  to  change,  we  must  not  be 
complacent. We should continue to work at strengthening our macroeconomic framework, enhancing 
our  productivity,  and  opening  up  further  to  trade.  That  is  the  best  way  to  ready  ourselves  for  the 
challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 5
