Niklaus Blattner: Recent financial and economic developments in Switzerland 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2004. 
 The  new  National  Bank  Act  obliges  the  Swiss  National  Bank  to  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system.  In  performing  this  task,  the  National  Bank  focuses  on  the  stability  of  the  banking 
sector  and  of  the  financial  market  infrastructure.  Implementation  rests  on  three  pillars:  first,  regular 
analysis  and  assessment  of  the  banking  system  (referred  to  as  “macroprudential  oversight  of  the 
banking  sector”);  second,  oversight  of  systemically  important  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems (referred to as “system oversight”); and third, if preventive oversight is not adequate, crisis 
management measures. 
Today I will be talking mainly about the first and second areas of our activities with reference to the 
Financial Stability Report 2004. You have already received this document (subject to an embargo). I 
will also talk about emergency liquidity assistance, which is one of the instruments used to deal with 
crisis situations. And I will draw your attention to another publication appearing today: the summary of 
the 2003 statistical yearbook “The Banks in Switzerland”. While this statistical publication focuses on 
reporting, the Financial Stability Report ventures into the domain of analysis and evaluation. 
Macroprudential oversight of the banking sector 
The Swiss National Bank follows developments in the banking sector from the macroprudential angle. 
This  task complements  those performed  by  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking Commission (SFBC), which 
oversees the individual banks (microprudential oversight). The Financial Stability Report takes account 
of this division of tasks. The National Bank limits its evaluation of the Swiss banking sector’s stability 
by focusing on trends observable at the levels of the banking system, the financial markets and the 
macroeconomic environment. It only focuses on individual banks when this is necessary in order to 
make  an  overall  assessment.  The  main  purpose  of  the  Financial  Stability  Report  is  to  allow  the 
National Bank to highlight any stresses or imbalances that could pose an immediate or longer-term 
threat to system stability. 
We evaluate the stability of the banking sector in two steps. First we analyse the development of the 
risk factors in the macroeconomic environment and on the financial markets. Then we evaluate the 
banking system’s robustness in the face of these risk factors. To do this, we consider profitability, the 
risks entered into and the capital adequacy of the banking sector. To complete our analysis, we use 
newly developed models that quantify both the stress to which the banking sector is subjected and its 
correlation  with  the  macroeconomic  environment.  The  main  characteristics  and  conclusions  drawn 
from these models are published for the first time today. The models will be presented in detail in a 
series of SNB publications. 
The analysis presented in the Financial Stability Report indicates that the banking sector is stable. In 
2003  it  was  able  to  raise  its  profits  substantially  in  spite  of  a  mixed  macroeconomic  and  financial 
environment.  Thanks  to  these  profits,  banks  were  able  to  bolster  their  capital  significantly,  thus 
enhancing their capacity to absorb shocks. The resulting capital ratios in the banking sector are high 
both in historical terms and by international standards. This impression of pronounced robustness in 
the Swiss banking sector is corroborated by the relatively low level (in historical terms) of the stress 
indicator. This is a new indicator calculated as a synthesis of different stress symptoms. The indicator 
considers in particular the capital ratios, profits, share prices and risk premiums on bonds in the Swiss 
banking sector. 
As far as the outlook is concerned, we believe that the macroeconomic environment and the financial 
markets  do  not  present  any  significant  threat  to  the  stability  of  the  Swiss  banking  system.  The 
forecasts  for  2004  point  to  a  rebound  in  economic  growth  in  Switzerland  and  the  European  Union 
along with a continuing upswing in the United States. Moreover, the rise in prices on the Swiss real 
estate market has remained moderate by both historical and international standards. It is thus unlikely 
that this market will see any abrupt downward adjustment - traditionally a major stress factor for the 
banking sector. And finally, the available indicators suggest that the major global banking sectors are 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
also relatively robust. At present, therefore, the risk of contagion - i.e. of a crisis having repercussions 
on Switzerland - is remote. 
Two sources of potential stress should, however, be mentioned. First, a slowdown in the economy - 
which, though unlikely, is still conceivable - could have negative repercussions on the quality of loan 
portfolios  and  on  stockmarket  prices.  Second,  in  the  more  likely  event  of  a  sustained  economic 
upswing, a sharper-than-expected rise in interest rates could also worsen the quality of loan portfolios 
by increasing the interest burden on households and companies more than expected. Analysis of the 
various scenarios suggests that sufficient capital is available in the Swiss banking sector to withstand 
even  a  substantial  deterioration  in  the  economic  or  stockmarket  climate  or  a  sharp  rise  in  interest 
rates. Nevertheless, some banks have announced that they now have an increased appetite for risk. A 
general rise in risk acceptance would render the banking sector more sensitive to deteriorations in the 
macroeconomic or stockmarket environment. 
System oversight 
At  the  media  conference  in  December  last  year,  I  reported  in  detail  on  the  background  to  system 
oversight, i.e. the oversight of payment and securities settlement systems. Today I am limiting myself - 
given the recent publication of the Financial Stability Report - to a briefing on the current situation. 
The day on which the new National Bank Act took effect - 1 May 2004 - also saw the entry into force of 
the  new  National  Bank  Ordinance.  Among  other  things,  the  Ordinance  contains  the  implementation 
provisions for system oversight. In particular, these set out the minimum requirements for systemically 
important financial market infrastructure and the principles of ongoing system oversight by the National 
Bank. 
The  task  for  the  next  few  months  will  be  to  determine  which  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems  are  to  be  classed  as  systemically  important.  Then  we  will  have  to  define  the  practical 
modalities that are best suited for implementing ongoing system oversight as effectively and efficiently 
as possible. 
Oversight is focused on infrastructure that is vital for the Swiss financial centre, i.e. especially those 
systems which together constitute the Swiss value chain. In addition to Swiss Exchange SWX, which 
will remain under the supervision not of the National Bank but of the SFBC, this infrastructure consists 
primarily  of  the  payment  system  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  (SIC),  the  securities  settlement  system 
SECOM and the central counterparty x-clear. The first talks have been held with representatives of 
these systems to establish the implementation of system oversight. Investigations over the next few 
months will clarify whether other systems are also to be subject to oversight. By the end of July, all 
payment and securities settlement systems in Switzerland must report to the National Bank. 
As mentioned earlier, system oversight was not the product of a crisis. This can also be seen from the 
new  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  examines  specific  aspects  of  the  current  financial  market 
infrastructure and gives them a clean bill of health. The aim of system oversight is to ensure that the 
high levels of safety and efficiency which characterise the market infrastructure of the Swiss financial 
centre are safeguarded for the future. 
Emergency liquidity assistance: a means of overcoming crises 
The National Bank is not only active in prevention - i.e. in the macroprudential oversight of the banking 
sector and in the oversight of the payment and securities settlement systems (system oversight) - but 
also contributes actively to overcoming crises. 
In a crisis, the National Bank - like any other central bank - is primarily responsible for maintaining 
liquidity. On the one hand, it can do this by ensuring that the market is amply supplied with liquidity. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  as  lender  of  last  resort  (LOLR)  it  can  also  provide  emergency  liquidity 
assistance  to  individual  banks  that  are  illiquid  but  still  solvent.  Here  too  we  adopt  internationally 
accepted procedures. 
Many central banks still prefer not to inform the commercial banks in too much detail about their role 
as LOLR. Quite understandably, they want to prevent the banks from being lulled into a false sense of 
security. The jargon term for this is “constructive ambiguity”. By contrast, the Swiss National Bank has 
opted - after carefully weighing up the moral hazard implications of its conduct - to communicate its 
terms to the banks both clearly and well in advance. The modalities are described in the Guidelines of 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
the Swiss National Bank on Monetary Policy Instruments of 30 April 2004. To receive an LOLR credit, 
a bank must on the one hand be systemically relevant and, on the other hand, be solvent and able to 
furnish  sufficient  collateral.  Without  collateral,  the  National  Bank  cannot  grant  any  credit.  This 
fundamental principle is enshrined in the National Bank Act. By disclosing our terms to the banks in 
advance, we are eliminating any possible misinterpretation of the liquidity risks and helping to ensure 
that preparations are in place for a liquidity crisis which can never be ruled out altogether. This is what 
we refer to as “constructive clarity”. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, I would like to reiterate that the situation of the Swiss financial system is stable. However, 
this  gratifying  conclusion  should  not  allow  us  to  rest  on  our  laurels.  Maintaining  a  stable  financial 
system in the long term calls for constant efforts to prevent and cope with crises. While this challenge 
must primarily be met by the private sector, the authorities can, should and must support its efforts. 
Financial Stability Report 2004 (424 kb) 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 3
