Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  SR-banken, 
Stavanger, 19 March 2004. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
11 March, Inflation Report 1/04 and on previous speeches. 
The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent over time. The target is symmetrical - it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low 
as an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for 
inflation  expectations.  It  therefore  influences  their  decisions concerning saving,  investment, budgets 
and  wages.  History  shows  that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  lower  unemployment  or 
stronger economic growth and higher inflation. We witnessed this in the 1980s when growth was low 
and inflation high. The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. Low and stable inflation 
is such an anchor. 
There are several reasons why it is an advantage for inflation to be higher than zero: 
• 
The  structure  of  the  economy  is  in  flux.  Demand  for  labour  with  different  qualifications  is 
changing.  This  requires  changes  in  relative  wages.  There  are  rigidities  in  nominal  wage 
growth. Nominal wages do not readily fall. With some inflation, relative wages can change 
without  a  fall  in  nominal  wages.  There  may  also  be  rigidities  in  the  pricing  of  goods  and 
services. Some degree of inflation will thus oil the economic machinery. 
In periods, inflation and economic growth will be low. It is then appropriate for real interest 
rates to be low, or even negative. Nominal interest rates cannot be set below zero. If inflation 
becomes entrenched at a low level or near zero, the interest rate will be less effective as an 
instrument. 
There  are  different  ways  of  measuring  inflation.  The  consumer  price  index  tends  to 
overestimate actual inflation. The most important source of measurement errors is probably 
the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between changes  in  the  quality  and  price  of  goods.  In  other 
countries, findings show that the consumer price index overestimates actual inflation to the 
order of ½-1 per cent. 
  The  inflation  target  is  a  vehicle  for,  not  an  obstacle  to,  monetary  policy’s  contribution  to  stabilising 
output  and  employment.  This  objective  is  also  expressed  in  the  Regulation  on  Monetary  Policy.  If 
demand  for  goods  and  services  is  high  and  there  is  a  shortage  of  labour,  there  will  normally  be 
prospects of higher inflation. When interest rates are increased, demand falls and inflation is kept at 
bay. If demand is low and unemployment rises, there will be prospects of lower inflation. The interest 
rate will then be lowered. 
In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour and capital and adaptability, but in the 
short and medium term monetary policy can also have an impact on the real economy. The economy 
grows over time. Output moves in waves. Output will in some periods lie below trend growth and in 
others above trend. The difference between trend output and actual output is called the output gap. 
Stabilising output growth means that one seeks to maintain actual output near trend. 
The output gap provides an indication of pressures in the real economy. Developments in the output 
gap provide a basis for assessing output stability and can thus also shed light on domestic inflationary 
pressures  in  the  economy.  When  the  economy  is  booming,  the  output  gap  is  positive.  When  the 
economy is at a low ebb, the output gap is negative. 
We have had pronounced economic cycles in the Norwegian economy. The downturn at the beginning 
of the 1990s was followed by an upturn from 1993. This upturn peaked in 1998. There was a shift from 
a  recovery  to  a  period  of  strong  expansion.  Growth  came  to  a  halt  in  2002.  An  upturn  is  now  in 
progress. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 1
Other  indicators  may  also  shed  light  on  stability  in  output  and  employment.  The  wage  gap  is  an 
indicator  of  the  social  partners’  perception  of  employment  and  labour  shortages.  The  wage  gap 
measures the difference between actual wage growth and the growth that over time is consistent with 
the inflation target, and is an indicator of labour market tightness. With estimated productivity growth at 
2 per cent, wage growth of 4.5 per cent over time will be consistent with an inflation target of 2.5 per 
cent. In the chart, the wage gap up to 2000, i.e. before the introduction of the inflation target, is defined 
as the difference between wage growth in Norway and in other countries. This wage gap appears to 
be closely in line with the output gap as measured by Norges Bank. 
Normally,  the  interest  rate  is  set  with  a  view  to  achieving  inflation  of  2½%  at  the  two-year  horizon. 
Norges  Bank  operates  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime,  so  that  weight  is  given  to  variability  in 
inflation as well as to variability in output and employment. Monetary policy affects the economy with a 
lag. The choice of a two-year horizon is thus based on striking a balance between variability in inflation 
and  variability  in  output  and  employment,  and  a  perception  of  how  interest  rates  influence  these 
variables. If extraordinary conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than two 
years, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. The same applies if special emphasis is placed on 
developments in financial markets. 
External cyclical developments and events have had considerable implications for developments in the 
Norwegian  economy.  The  international  upturn  came  to  a  halt  in  2000.  The  bubbles  in  the  equity 
markets  burst.  Many  years  of  high  investment  led  to  excess  capacity  in  some  industries,  and 
unemployment increased. The terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 put a new damper on economic 
activity.  From  the  summer  of  2002  to  the  spring  of  2003,  a  highly  extraordinary  accumulation  of 
negative events in the global community - accounting scandals, fear of terror, war and disease - put a 
brake on growth. 
US interest rates, which were sharply reduced at the beginning of the downturn, have subsequently 
been  reduced  further.  Interest  rates  have  also  remained  low  in  the  euro  area.  Key  rates  are  now 
historically  very  low  for several  of  our most  important  trading  partners.  Long-term  interest rates  are 
also very low. 
The economic situation in Norway remained firmer for a long period, and wage growth was surprisingly 
high in 2002. There was less scope for low interest rates than among our trading partners. As a result, 
the interest rate differential against other countries widened. This had an impact on krone exchange 
rate developments. In addition, special circumstances in the global economy led to a stronger krone 
than  might  have  been  expected  from  the  higher  interest  rate  differential  alone.  Themes  in  foreign 
exchange markets shift.  In  periods,  investor  focus  on  stock  returns  feeds through  to exchange rate 
movements.  During  periods  of  political  and  economic  unrest,  investors  may  choose  individual 
currencies as a safe haven. In the autumn of 2002, the Norwegian krone was probably also perceived 
as  a  safe  haven.  In  the  past  12-18  months,  developments  in  the  interest  rate  differential  between 
Norway  and  other  countries  appear  to  have  had  a  particularly  marked  impact  on  our  currency. 
Norwegian interest rates have been pushed down towards the level prevailing abroad. 
In 2003, the interest rate differential narrowed as a result of monetary policy easing. The interest rate 
has been reduced by 5¼ percentage points and is now approximately the same as among our trading 
partners. The krone has depreciated by about 6 per cent over the past year and the krone exchange 
rate, measured by the import-weighted index I-44, is now at the level prevailing in March 2002. This is 
approximately  on  a  par  with  the  average  for  the  1990s.  In  the  past  few  days,  the  krone  has 
appreciated again somewhat. 
In  February,  inflation  stood  at  –0.1  per  cent.  Apart  from  some  temporary,  technical  factors  that 
together  account  for  3-4  tenths  of  a  percentage  point,  three  main  factors  have  contributed  to  the 
substantial deviation from the inflation target: 
• 
First, the global downturn had considerable implications for the impact of interest-rate setting 
in Norway, via the exchange rate for instance. 
Second,  low  external  inflation  and  rapid  shifts  in  the  international  division  of  labour  has 
resulted  in  a  fall  in  prices  for  imported  goods  and  services.  This  also  applies  when  these 
prices  are  measured  in  terms  of  what  Norwegian  importers  pay  in  foreign  currency.  The 
change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices 
for clothing, footwear and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological advances have also 
pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment. 
BIS Review 16/2004
 2 
  Third, competition has probably increased in the retail industry and other service sectors in 
Norway in recent years. 
Initially,  heightened  competition  affects  companies’  profit  margins.  But  enterprises  will  respond  by 
reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the individual business, but subcontractors will also be 
required to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. 
Therefore,  increased  competition  usually  triggers  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  economy.  Low 
inflation may therefore be matched by growth in productivity. 
Prices for domestically produced goods and services are expected to rise towards the beginning of 
2005  due  to  higher  capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Strong  employment  growth  may 
contribute to somewhat higher wage growth than in 2004. At the same time, domestically produced 
goods and services are affected by exchange rate changes, albeit with a longer lag than is the case 
for imported consumer goods. 
There are clear signs that the global economy has passed the trough. However, while the outlook is 
brighter, price inflation is still low and interest rates are being kept unusually low. Economic growth is 
high again in the US, but  there is still excess production capacity and very low inflation. Workforce 
reductions may no longer be as severe, but companies are still not hiring new staff. It may take some 
time before interest rates are increased substantially in the US. Growth in Asia is solid, but a global 
rise in interest rates is unlikely to start there. 
Inflation is higher in the euro area than in the US and approximately in line with the objective defined 
by  the  European  Central  Bank.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  capacity  utilisation  is  very  low, 
unemployment high and the outlook for growth is weaker. Recently, inflation has moderated slightly. 
Against this background, it will probably also take time before interest rates rise markedly in the euro 
area. 
Interest rates abroad have been unusually low for 2½ years, and it appears they will remain low for a 
period ahead. This poses a challenge to monetary policy in Norway. 
Growth in the Norwegian economy has picked up. Lower interest rates have contributed to sustaining 
growth in private consumption. Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in 
the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  period  ahead.  Against  the  background  of  high  real  income  growth, 
improved job security and expectations of continued low interest rates ahead, household consumption 
is expected to exhibit strong growth. 
Petroleum investment exhibited brisk growth in 2003. Growth in petroleum investment would appear to 
continue  in  2004,  but  probably  at  a  slower  rate  than  in  2003.  Low  interest  rates  and  house  price 
inflation  imply  higher  housing  investment  in  the  period  ahead.  Fiscal  policy  also  contributes  to 
stimulating activity. 
The impact of the interest rate decline on private consumption is likely to be stronger this year than in 
2003. It takes time for changes in Norges Bank’s key rate to feed through fully to interest rates for 
households. Norges Bank’s calculations show that if we look at 2003 and 2004 as a whole, it appears 
that  the  impact  of  interest  rate  changes  will  result  in  an  overall  reduction  of  about  NOK  15bn  in 
household net interest expenses before tax. However, due to the increase in household net debt, net 
interest expenses will fall much less than this. 
The impact of the interest rate decline is also conditioned by the expected duration of the low interest 
rate  level.  When  the  sight  deposit  rate  was  reduced  last  autumn,  longer  interest  rates  showed 
relatively  little  change.  The  interest  rate  reductions  in  December  and  January,  combined  with  the 
decline in inflation, have had a stronger impact on long-term interest rates. This indicates that financial 
market participants expect interest rates to remain low for a longer period. 
The  fall  in  the  value  of  the  krone  over  the  past  year  has  strengthened  Norwegian  business  and 
industry. With lower wage growth in Norway and a pick-up global activity, the prospects for Norwegian 
manufacturing  and  the  business  sector  are  brighter  now  than  they  were  12-18  months  ago.  The 
business sector is, however, still feeling the effects of a sharp rise in labour costs over a period of 
several  years.  Relative  labour  costs  measured  in  a  common  currency  are  in  line  with  the  level 
prevailing  in  1990,  but  approximately  10  per  cent  higher  than  in  the  mid-1990s.  The  internationally 
exposed sector has been scaled back. Those companies that are still operating may be in a better 
position to bear the high wage level. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 3
In 2003, employment and investment both fell, although investment picked up somewhat towards the 
end of the year. Efficiency-enhancing measures are expected to continue to mark developments in the 
business sector this year. This will curb the demand for labour. 
The situation varies across business sectors. Distributive trades and enterprises supplying services to 
households  are  expanding  as  a  result  of  high  growth  in  private  consumption.  Production  for  the 
business market fell through 2003. Demand for services in this market segment will pick up in pace 
with a rise in manufacturing output and other industries. 
Strong competition has resulted in substantial restructuring. Manufacturing production is being moved 
both  from  Norway  and  other  countries  to  lower-cost  countries.  This  may  continue.  EU  and  EEA 
enlargement  by  10  new  members  from  1  May  may  also  increase  competition  in  some  industries, 
particularly in the service sector. 
Investment in onshore industries in Western Norway and Northern Norway has generated a positive 
impetus to the construction industry. Activity in 2003 in the rest of the country has mainly been held up 
by public investment projects. Information from our regional network indicates that construction activity 
has picked up markedly in most regions. This also applies to Rogaland. 
In recent year, non-residential investment has accounted for more than a third of total investment in 
services and distributive trades. The large investments in this sector in the latter half of the 1990s has 
led  to  a  high  non-residential  vacancy  rate.  Statistics  Norway’s  new  price  index  for  non-residential 
commercial property shows that in Norway as a whole, prices peaked in the first half of 2001 and have 
since  fallen  by  over  9  per  cent  up  to  the  first  half  of  2003.  This  situation  is  likely  to  curb  overall 
investment growth in the years ahead. 
In  2004,  many  companies  will  probably  realise  the  gains  provided  by  the  efficiency  measures  that 
have  been  implemented.  Continued  brisk  growth  in  household  demand  is  expected  to  boost 
investment activity in 2005 and 2006. Petroleum investment will also increase as a result of the Orme 
Lange project. 
This is also the case for Rogaland. Our regional network reports that demand is on the increase, the 
market  outlook  for  the  next  six  months  is  favourable  and  corporate  profitability  has  improved 
considerably.  The  economic  upturn  is  primarily  being  reinforced  and  driven  by  stronger  household 
demand, although without any substantial increase in investment or employment. 
The  upturn  has  both  broadened  out  and  gained  momentum  in  the  past  months.  All  sectors  report 
stable or increasing demand and sales. The market outlook for the next six months in this county is 
very positive. Optimism does not translate into a stronger willingness to invest, however. The picture 
for the petroleum and offshore supply industry is mixed. Operators’ production of oil and gas is high. 
Some  sectors  of  the  offshore  supply  industry  experienced  a  difficult  fourth  quarter,  but  are  more 
optimistic  about  this  year.  The  maintenance  and  modification  market  is  showing  steady,  although 
moderate, growth. 
Most companies report stable employment. Extensive rationalisation and restructuring measures are 
still on the agenda in organisations and enterprises, and so far, growth is being absorbed by excess 
capacity  or  by  increased  productivity.  Wholesale  and  retail  trade  and  the  building  and  construction 
sectors are increasing their workforces. All industries continue to report that highly qualified labour is in 
ample supply. 
Of the Norwegian counties exporting traditional goods, Rogaland is the third largest. The public sector 
and some private service industries are as important for employment in Rogaland as they are in the 
rest  of  Norway,  but  the  share  of  employment  in  these  sectors  is  lower  than  the  national  average. 
Manufacturing and oil and gas production are important in Rogaland, but the internationally exposed 
sector  is  also  relatively  large.  Employment  in  Rogaland  is  mainly  concentrated  in  engineering, 
shipbuilding  and  construction  of  oil  platforms.  Many  are  also  employed  in  the  food  and  beverage 
industry, and Rogaland is an important farming county. 
The labour market in Norway has improved. The number of persons employed in Norway began to 
increase  in  summer  2003  and  unemployment  stabilised.  Employment  in  distributive  trades  has 
increased. There are also signs that employment is rising in education, the public sector and health 
and social services, from the weak levels recorded in the first six months of last year. Manufacturing 
employment remained well below the level one year earlier in the fourth quarter of 2003, but is falling 
at  a  slower  pace.  Unemployment  has  been  fairly  stable.  Adjusted  for  seasonal  variations,  LFS 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2004
unemployment stood at 4.6 per cent of the labour force as measured by Statistics Norway’s Labour 
Force Survey (LFS) in the fourth quarter of 2003. 
Growth in household demand, petroleum investment and increased activity in the business sector are 
paving  the  way  for  a  rise  in  employment  in  the  period  ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  intensified 
competition  and  continued  rationalisation  in  the  business  sector  may  have  a  dampening  impact  on 
labour  demand.  This  year,  employment  growth  is  expected  to  be  fairly  moderate  even  if  there  is  a 
sharp rise in output. Only a slight decrease in unemployment is projected for 2004. Unemployment is 
projected to edge down in 2005 and 2006. 
After several years of high wage growth, pay increases in last year’s settlement were more moderate. 
Annual  wage  growth  was  nonetheless  4½%  as  substantial  increases  with  effect  from  2003  were 
awarded in the 2002 main wage settlement. Wage growth is projected to decline to 3¾% this year. 
The  labour  market  appears  to  be  improving  somewhat  more  rapidly  than  expected  previously.  In 
isolation, this may contribute to pushing up wage growth relative to previous projections. The effect is, 
however, expected to be more than offset by the prospects of very low inflation this year. In 2005 and 
2006, wage growth is projected to increase as a result of a tighter labour market and higher inflation. 
There has been a tendency in recent years for a larger portion of pay increases to be agreed in the 
first year of the two-year period covered by the main agreement. If we consider these two-year periods 
together, the estimated relationship between wage growth and developments in the labour market are 
approximately in line with that observed since the mid-1990s. 
Developments in real economic variables are mirrored in credit markets. In recent years, household 
income  has  shown  solid  growth,  and  household  confidence  has  been  high.  However,  corporate 
earnings have been low, and until recently enterprises have primarily focused on enhancing efficiency. 
Credit  developments  are  giving  ambiguous  signals  to  our  interest-rate  setting. Growth  in  household 
borrowing is high, but enterprises are reducing debt. The change in the breakdown of credit may have 
been amplified by banks’ increased eagerness to extend credit to households after a period of losses 
on loans to the business sector. Some reports from our regional network indicate that there are some 
restraints  on  credit  for  the  business  sector  in  some  areas.  Developments  in  credit  to  enterprises 
shadow  developments  in  their  investments.  Low  credit  growth  indicates  that  mainland  business 
investment  has  not  yet  picked  up.  Total  credit  is  expanding  broadly  in  line  with  normal  growth  in 
nominal GDP. 
Norwegian households generally finance their mortgages at an interest rate that follows the short-term 
money market rate. Floating interest rates tend to vary widely over time. The interest rate level is very 
low  at  present,  and  long-term  investments  cannot  rely  on  this  interest  rate  spanning  the  life  of  a 
housing  loan.  According  to  money  market  expectations,  the  interest  rate  will  eventually  stabilise 
around  5½  per  cent.  This  is  consistent  with  an  inflation  target  of  2½  per  cent  and  a  long-term  real 
interest  rate  in  line  with  the  level  abroad.  This  interest  rate,  with  a  mark-up  for  banks’  margins, 
provides a more realistic expression of the interest rate level that will apply over the loan’s life than the 
floating interest rate prevailing today. 
It may prove to be particularly challenging for borrowers to assess their debt-servicing capacity over 
time in a period when the interest rate is abnormally low. Such a low interest rate also places particular 
demands on banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. But experience has shown that the 
underlying cause of loan defaults can be overly optimistic assessments on the part of both the lender 
and borrower. 
House prices and developments in household credit influence consumption and housing investment. 
We seek to take account of these indirect effects in interest-rate setting. 
Household debt has increased sharply over the past decade. Developments in debt in the 1990s may 
partly be interpreted as a delayed adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in 
the 1980s after many households experienced financial difficulties following the relaxation. 
Household assets and debt and housing wealth have risen at a markedly faster pace than disposable 
income,  and  housing  wealth  has  grown  more  than  net  debt  from  1994  up  to  the  present.  The 
Norwegian  economy  has  experienced  both  upturns  and  downturns  since  1994,  and  activity  is  now 
approximately on a par with the level prevailing in 1994. These changes must therefore be regarded 
as structural changes. 
We have limited scope for restraining structural changes that occur when households increase their 
debt over several years to invest in housing and other property and assets. An interest rate that would 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 5
effectively  restrain  these  structural  adjustments  would  also  have  an  adverse  impact  on  output  and 
employment.  The  interest  rate can be used  to  reduce credit  demand.  At  present -  with  low  interest 
rates abroad and a close link between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy 
will restrain credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced. 
Household credit demand is closely linked to developments in the housing market. Home-owners who 
have  seen  the  value  of  their  dwellings  rise  have  the  possibility  of  taking  up  new  mortgage-secured 
loans.  They  free  up  a  portion  of  their  home  equity  value  to  finance  consumption  and  other 
investments. House prices in Norway have on average risen by 9 per cent annually between 1995 and 
2002. House prices have also increased considerably in other countries. A sharp and sustained rise in 
house prices might contribute to high credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a 
portion of the housing stock is sold each year, some dwellings will be sold at a higher price than when 
they  were  last  sold  for  a long  period.  This  has  contributed  to  sustaining  the  high  level  of  growth  in 
credit to households in Norway even after the rise in house prices moderated through 2002 and into 
2003. 
It is easiest to sell dwellings in the largest cities and some specific areas are particularly attractive. 
Residential property is now a fairly liquid and attractive investment. A persistently high rate of increase 
in house prices may in isolation engender expectations of a further rise and may thus prove to be self-
reinforcing for a period. Moreover, there now seems to be a tendency towards investing in property 
and incurring loans at a more mature age so that younger generations not only inherit dwellings, but 
debt as well. Both debt and wealth are on the rise for these more mature age groups. 
Sharp increases in asset prices and debt accumulation may pose a risk to economic stability. With a 
view to mitigating this risk, it will be appropriate in some situations to apply a somewhat longer-than-
normal  time  horizon  than  two  years  to  attain  the  inflation  target.  However,  at  present  debt 
accumulation is high only in the household sector. There is little borrowing activity in the enterprise 
sector.  House  prices  are  rising,  but  non-residential  property  prices  are  stable.  Prices  for  office 
premises are, however, stable. 
The  analyses  in  the  inflation  reports  indicate  that  inflation  will  remain  low  this  year,  picking  up 
thereafter.  The  krone  depreciation  since  January  2003  is  expected  to  push  up  prices  for  imported 
consumer goods. Overall, mainland GDP growth is projected to pick up markedly this year and remain 
relatively high in 2005 and 2006. GDP growth is projected to reach 3¼ per cent in 2004 and 2005, 
followed by a slight decline to 2¾ per cent in 2006. With this path for total output, the output gap, as 
measured here, will shift to slightly positive in 2005 and 2006 from slightly negative this year. 
Projections are based on the technical assumption that the interest rate will move in line with forward 
rates. The assumption implies that the interest rate will be somewhat lower in the near term, but that it 
will rise gradually from the summer, largely in parallel with the increase in interest rates among our 
trading  partners.  The  krone  is  assumed  to  follow  the  path  of  the  forward  exchange  rate,  which 
indicates expectations of a fairly stable exchange rate in the period ahead. A path that is in line with 
the projections in the previous Inflation Report (IR 1/04) provides a reasonable balance between the 
prospects for reaching the inflation target and stable developments in the real economy. 
The aim of monetary policy is higher inflation. It is appropriate to be particularly vigilant with regard to 
developments in consumer prices, but consumer prices may show random variations from one month 
to the next. Later this year, we will receive confirmation of whether consumer prices are rising in line 
with  our  projections.  When  inflation  increases  from  a  very  low  level,  this  will  provide  a  basis  for 
gradually moving towards a more normal short-term interest rate level in Norway. This may counter 
excessive credit growth and excessive pressures on domestic resources in the medium term. Interest 
rate developments in other countries may also have a considerable impact on the krone and hence on 
Norwegian interest rates. 
At  its  meeting  on  the  11  March,  the  Executive  Board  decided  to  reduce  the  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage  point.  In  reaching  its  decision,  the  Executive  Board  had  weighed  the  objective  of 
bringing inflation back to target and stabilising inflation expectations against the risk that output growth 
may eventually become too strong. Furthermore, according to the Executive Board’s assessment, with 
a sight deposit rate of 1.75 per cent at present, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be 
lower than 2½ per cent is greater than the probability that it will be higher. 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2004
