David Dodge: Adjusting to global economic change 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Brazil-Canada  Chamber  of 
Commerce, São Paulo, 10 March 2004. 
 Good morning. I am glad to have the opportunity to meet with business leaders in São Paulo today. I 
am  also  pleased  to  meet  with  my  counterpart,  Governor  Henrique  Meirelles,  and  with  some  of  his 
colleagues at the Banco Central do Brasil. 
Geographically, Brazil and Canada are far apart. But from an economic viewpoint, we have more in 
common than some might think. We share common issues and challenges. We both operate monetary 
policy systems based on inflation targets and floating exchange rates. We are both being affected by 
the  recent  slowdown  in  the  world  economy  and  by  global  economic  imbalances.  And  we  are  both 
working  on  the  structural  adjustments  that  are  necessary  to  weather  shocks  and  to  thrive  in  a 
changing environment. 
Today, I want to focus my remarks on Canada’s adjustment to changes in the global economy. I will 
talk  about  our  efforts  to  adjust  to  longer-term economic  forces and about  the  challenges  that  these 
forces present. Some of our experiences may be relevant to other economies that are making similar 
adjustments in the face of similar economic circumstances. 
Past adjustments 
Our experience over the last couple of decades has taught us that structural adjustments are key to 
adapting to change, and, just as important, that sound macroeconomic policies have a role to play in 
making those adjustments with a minimum of economic and social disruption. 
These  lessons  may  seem  self-evident.  But  Canadians  have  been  reminded  of  their  importance 
through some significant and painful economic adjustments during the past 30 years. 
For example, Canada was hit by an abrupt slowdown in productivity growth during the 1970s. That 
slower productivity growth made it impossible to continue to provide the gains in real wages to which 
Canadians  had  become  accustomed.  The  situation  was  exacerbated  by  the  OPEC  oil  embargo  of 
1973 and by the subsequent energy crisis that hit economies around the globe. The consensus of the 
day  was  that  the  impact  of  those events  on  Canada  would  be  temporary.  And  so Canadian  policy-
makers used macroeconomic and microeconomic policies to try to shield our economy from the impact 
of those events. Instead of making the necessary adjustments, we tried to avoid them. As a result, the 
eventual adjustment was slower and more painful than it needed to be. And we ended up with slower 
growth, relatively high inflation, and large government budget deficits. 
Canadians learned during this period that economic policies must be focused on adjusting to change - 
even if that adjustment causes short-term difficulties. By the beginning of the 1990s, it was clear that 
we  needed  a  framework  of  policies  to  help  with  adjustment,  to  bring  down  inflation,  and  to  put  our 
public finances in order. 
The first major change came in 1991, when the government and the Bank of Canada agreed on an 
explicit anchor for monetary policy. That anchor was a series of inflation-reduction targets that would 
gradually  lower  the  rate  of  inflation  to  2  per  cent,  the  midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  range.  The 
agreement has been extended three times and currently covers the period to the end of 2006. Each 
time, the midpoint of the target range has been kept at 2 per cent. 
I want to note here that while the Bank and the government established the monetary policy anchor 
jointly,  the  Bank  alone  takes responsibility  for  the conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  for achieving  the 
inflation target. I want to stress the importance of that independence. Experience around the world has 
shown  that  there  are  distinct  advantages  to  having  monetary  policy  carried  out  by  an  independent 
central bank, not the least of which is separating the power to print money from the power to spend it. 
Central bank independence is also a mechanism for building credibility among investors. 
Central banks have a choice to make as to how to anchor their monetary policy. Some countries have 
chosen a fixed exchange rate as their anchor. In doing so, their central banks give up the power to 
control  domestic  inflation.  In  contrast,  other  countries  -  such  as  Canada  -  have  chosen  domestic 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
inflation as their anchor. By doing this, they leave it to foreign exchange markets to set the external 
value of the currency. The key point is that, since capital is mobile, no central bank can successfully 
control inflation and the exchange rate at the same time. 
The choice of an inflation-targeting framework has served Canada very well. Since the end of 1994, 
inflation has averaged almost exactly 2 per cent. Moreover, not only has inflation fallen, it has become 
more stable than it was in the 1970s and early 1980s. Just as importantly, inflation expectations have 
fallen into line with the 2 per cent target and have remained there. As for the floating exchange rate, it 
helps the economy adjust to disturbances and fluctuations in the world prices of our products, notably 
commodities. It also helps our economy adjust to changes in global savings and investment flows. 
One of the most important advantages of adopting a system of inflation-control targets is that we at the 
Bank of Canada can now explain more clearly to business, to labour, and to the general public what 
we  are  doing  and  why.  We  do  this  through  eight  regularly  scheduled  interest  rate  announcements 
each year, plus our regular Monetary Policy Reports and Updates. One should not underestimate the 
benefits that arise from having the public understand the policies and actions of its monetary authority. 
This understanding makes it easier for us to conduct monetary policy, and it allows citizens to judge 
the performance of their central bank. 
It has been less than five years since Brazil adopted its own inflation-targeting system in July 1999, 
after floating its currency in January of that same year. The system is already proving to be extremely 
helpful in reducing inflation rates in this country, even in the face of some large shocks. Establishing a 
track  record  of  credible  inflation  targeting  leads  to  lower  inflation  expectations.  These  lower 
expectations  create  a  virtuous  circle  -  they  lead  businesses  and  consumers  to  make  pricing  and 
spending decisions that, in turn, help the central bank meet inflation targets. And consistently meeting 
inflation targets allows citizens to make investment and savings decisions with confidence that inflation 
will remain close to the target. 
The second major  adjustment  that Canada  had  to make  in  the 1990s was  to  get  its  fiscal  situation 
under  control.  In  the  early  part  of  that  decade,  the  combined  federal  and  provincial  primary  deficit 
(which excludes debt-service costs) peaked at just under 3 per cent of GDP, and the total deficit was 
close to 8 per cent. The combined public debt reached a peak of 100 per cent of GDP. While some of 
the shortfall reflected cyclical factors, it was clear that the situation was unsustainable. So between 
1993  and  1997,  both  federal  and  provincial  governments  in  Canada  made  a  determined,  and 
successful, effort to eliminate their deficits and run consistent primary budget surpluses. 
The  fiscal  adjustments  made  by  both  levels  of  government  helped  to  improve  the  credibility  of  our 
economic policies and reduced the risk premium that investors demanded on Canadian bonds. While 
this credibility is always useful, it is particularly beneficial during periods of crisis, when the spreads on 
riskier investments tend to widen. 
Consider Canada’s experience with the Mexican currency crisis of 1994, before the credibility of our 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  was  fully  established.  Spreads  on  Canadian  bonds  widened  significantly 
during that event, and consumption and investment slowed, leading to a period of weaker economic 
growth. 
Our credibility was better established by 1997, and so we were able to weather the financial crises in 
Asia and Russia with only a slight widening of spreads. There was minimal uncertainty, and growth 
actually strengthened in the wake of those events. When you compare these two experiences, you 
can see that there is a real payoff from the achievement of fiscal and monetary credibility. And it does 
not take too long for that payoff to be realized. 
Canada’s public and private sectors also made structural adjustments in the 1990s, leading to a more 
flexible economy. This added flexibility helped us to weather the recent global economic slowdown. 
Our governments, both federal and provincial, also took steps to reduce distortions in the economy. In 
the latter half of the 1990s, federal industrial subsidies were cut by more than 60 per cent. Provinces 
eliminated many of their own subsidy programs. The federal government reformed its unemployment 
insurance system, and Canada’s public pension plans were overhauled to make them self-financing in 
the decades ahead. This involved some restructuring of benefits and an increase in contribution rates. 
And contributions are now being invested in markets in order to generate the best possible returns - 
with due consideration for prudence - over the long term. 
Throughout this difficult period, governments worked hard to ensure that the burden of adjustment did 
not fall disproportionately on those segments of the population that were least able to bear it. It was 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
only  after  the  adjustment  process was  well  underway  that  the  federal  government  began  to  reduce 
corporate and personal income taxes. 
As  governments  take  steps  to  improve  the  structure  of  their  economies,  it  is  equally  important  that 
businesses  make  their  own  adjustments.  During  the  1990s,  Canadian  firms  responded  to  the 
challenges of freer trade by improving the quality of their products and by marketing them aggressively 
to new North American customers. These adjustments were not easy. But they did leave Canada in a 
better position to handle economic shocks and, therefore, to grow on a sustained basis. 
To  recap,  a  sound  monetary  policy  supported  by  a  floating  exchange  rate,  sound  fiscal  policy,  and 
appropriate  structural  adjustments  all  did  their  part  to  help  Canada’s  economy  respond  to  the 
changing circumstances of the 1990s. While these adjustments were difficult, the payoff came quickly. 
By the end of the decade, Canadians were beginning to see higher real incomes. 
Adjustments in the future 
So  that’s  a  quick  look  at  the  lessons  we  have  learned  from  past  experience.  Let’s  turn  now  to  the 
international forces at work in our economies and talk about what these forces will mean for economic 
policies in the future. 
In the global economy today, we see significant financial imbalances. The United States is faced with 
a large fiscal deficit and a high and growing current account deficit, while some Asian countries are 
accumulating record current account surpluses. The economies of China and India, as well as yours 
here  in  Brazil,  are  becoming  increasingly  powerful  players  on  the  world  stage.  This  increases  the 
competitive  pressure  facing  Canadian  producers.  But  it  also  means  new,  fast-growing  sources  of 
demand and new opportunities. 
So in the face of these forces, what kinds of adjustments are needed? I will talk about our situation in 
Canada, but what I have to say is applicable to most economies. 
The first thing I would say is that maintaining fiscal balance must remain a priority for Canada in the 
years ahead. Our federal and provincial governments have made great progress on this front, but we 
in Canada cannot afford to give back these hard-won gains. Neither can governments in this country. 
Maintaining fiscal balance is as important for Brazil as it is for Canada. 
This priority is heightened in Canada by our longer-term demographic challenges. Our ratio of public 
debt to GDP will need to decline further to give us the flexibility to meet the demands of our aging 
population. 
My  second  point  is  that  we  must  provide  the  appropriate  microeconomic  policies  in  areas  such  as 
labour  markets,  intellectual  property  law,  the  environment,  and  foreign  investment.  The  right 
microeconomic policies are essential in order to increase productivity and raise living standards in the 
future. This is true for every country. 
However, we know that implementing the right economic policies can mean that some groups will bear 
an unfair share of the burden of adjustment. This does not mean that we should shy away from the 
task. But it does lead to my third point, which is that authorities must put in place the right policies to 
facilitate  adjustment,  such  as  providing  access  to  training,  or  helping  workers  relocate  or  shift  into 
expanding areas of the economy. In doing so, we should keep in mind that government help should be 
directed towards people, and not towards specific businesses or industries. 
So  what  can  policy-makers  do  to  provide  a  supportive  economic  environment  for  business?  In  my 
view, promoting an efficient and robust financial system, including a strong banking sector, is critical. 
And  that  is  my  fourth  point.  This  is  particularly  true  in  countries  such  as  Canada,  where  small  and 
medium-sized businesses create the majority of jobs. Growing firms must have access to credit within 
a well-functioning financial system. Further, people need to have confidence in the banking sector, so 
that savings can be efficiently recycled to help businesses expand. 
A robust financial system can also be a country’s best defence against international financial crises. A 
key lesson from the Asian and Russian crises was that countries with strong banking sectors are much 
less likely to be affected than countries where the banking sectors are weak. 
Beyond  the  banking  sector,  countries  should  also  work  to  develop  healthy  and  efficient  financial 
markets.  This  is  not  a  new  idea.  Canada’s  efforts  to  build  domestic  money  markets  go  back  over 
50 years.  And  we  built  these  markets  living  next  door  to  the  country  with  the  deepest,  most  liquid 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 3
financial  markets  in  the  world  -  the  United  States.  Now,  and  in  the  future,  we  will  need  to  remain 
focused on promoting healthy and efficient markets. This topic is an ongoing priority for research at the 
Bank  of  Canada.  In  fact,  later  this  year  we  will  host,  along  with  the  German  Bundesbank,  a 
G-20 workshop on building strong domestic financial systems. 
My fifth and final point has to do with trade. Canada has a long history of supporting multilateral trade 
agreements. We have seen, first-hand, how our economy has benefited from opening our borders to 
trade. That is why we are committed to trying to extend the benefits of free trade to the whole of the 
Americas through the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). It is why we also support your efforts 
in Mercosur. And, most importantly, it is why we are committed to lowering trade barriers at the Doha 
round  of  multilateral  negotiations.  I  have  seen  many  examples  of  the  challenges  that  governments 
face in reducing trade barriers and subsidies. We in Canada have our own difficulties in this regard 
but, as an economist, I know that the economic benefits of freer trade make the effort worthwhile. 
So those are the five areas that should be priorities for Canada in the years ahead: fiscal prudence, 
the right microeconomic policies, appropriate social policies, a strong and stable financial system, and 
more  open  trade.  Monetary  policy,  for  its  part,  will  continue  to  be  focused  on  keeping  inflation  low, 
stable, and predictable, thus giving citizens, businesses, and investors confidence in the future value 
of their money. To achieve this, we will try to keep supply and demand in balance. 
Since the Bank of Canada has chosen low domestic inflation as its monetary policy anchor, we will 
continue  to  have  a  flexible  exchange  rate.  We  recognize  that  a  floating  currency  implies  some 
volatility.  But  I  can  tell  you  that  Canada  derives  enormous  benefits  from  having  a  floating  currency 
working in conjunction with a solid monetary policy anchor. It gives us the ability to set monetary policy 
tailored  to  Canada’s specific  economic  circumstances.  It  sends  important  price  signals  to economic 
participants and helps our economy to make the necessary adjustments. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. For many firms and many employees, adjustment can be painful and difficult. But in 
today’s world, not adjusting is not an option. 
Fortunately,  in  both  our  countries,  we  are  making  these  adjustments  under  relatively  favourable 
conditions.  Global  demand  is  strengthening,  and  credit  conditions  are  good.  We  have  a  better 
knowledge  of  what  we  need  to  do.  And  we  have  made  important  progress  in  strengthening  our 
economic policy frameworks. 
The challenges that we will face make it even more important for us to continue to strengthen those 
frameworks in order to adjust to changing circumstances and to take advantage of potential gains. The 
faster we are able to adjust, the greater the wealth that Canada and Brazil can create for their citizens. 
That is not to say that adjusting will be easy. Indeed, the experience of recent decades proves that it 
can be difficult, at least over the short term. But if we take the leap and seize the opportunities that 
change will bring, our societies will surely benefit. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2004
