Jean-Claude Trichet: Integration of the European financial sector 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
International Banking Event, Frankfurt am Main, 29 June 2004. 
 Introductory remarks 
Madam Lord Mayor, ladies and gentlemen, I am very glad to address this distinguished audience in 
the  prestigious  Römersaal,  surrounded  by  this  impressive  series  of  German  emperors’  portraits 
amongst whom, you will not be surprised, I would particularly distinguish the first one, Karl der Grosse, 
Charlemagne,  who  also  has  the  biggest  portrait.  These  paintings  highlight  very  well  the  major  role 
Frankfurt played in history. Besides its political influence, Frankfurt developed a key role in European 
banking. A young man called Rothschild started his business here before expanding all over Europe. 
Today, the large presence of major German, European and international banks and the dynamism of 
the  Stock  Exchange  demonstrate  well  the  great  importance  of  Frankfurt  as  a  city  of  banking  and 
finance at the heart of Europe. 
I  see  therefore  a  great  interest  in  addressing  tonight  the  issue  of  European  financial  integration. 
Furthermore, now is also the appropriate timing to reflect on the best approach to further progress. 
The  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  reaches  completion  and  the  gaps  that  remained  in  the  core 
legislative framework have been filled. Market participants should now grasp the opportunity to reap 
the full benefits of the Single Market. 
My talk today aims at providing some food for thought on financial integration. I would like to stress 
four  points.  First,  giving  an  overview  of  what  we  should  understand  by  financial  integration,  why  it 
matters  for  the  economy  and  for  the  ECB,  and  what  key  steps  have  been  achieved.  Second, 
underlining the progressive setting of the framework for a single financial market. Third, providing an 
overview  of  the  progress  made  so  far  in  banking.  And  fourth,  setting  out  the  actions  that  may  and 
should be undertaken to optimise the benefits from financial integration. 
The context of financial integration 
What does it actually mean to have an integrated financial sector in Europe? An integrated market is 
perhaps easiest understood when it concerns goods, and where it refers to a situation where there are 
no barriers to trade across borders. The same reasoning can also be applied to the wider context of 
financial  markets.  Market  participants  should  generally  not  be  discriminated  in  their  access  to  the 
market  on  the  basis  of  their  location,  and  cross-border  transactions  should  be  treated  equally  to 
domestic  ones,  notably  in terms  of  rules  and costs. Progressing  towards  such  an  ideal setting  with 
regard to all the segments of the financial markets is the challenge before us.  
Let  me  give  you  some  examples  of  what  integration  means  in  practice  in  financial  markets.  Near 
perfect  integration  has  already  been  achieved  in  the  unsecured  interbank  money  market.  Almost 
immediately  after  the  euro’s  introduction,  the  differences  in  rates  across  the  euro  area  became  so 
small  that  shifting  funds  across  borders  to  exploit  these  differences  became  unprofitable.  We  also 
observe that banks only very rarely resort at the same time to the Eurosystem’s credit and deposit 
facilities.  This  shows  that  geographical  borders  are  not  an  obstacle  anymore  to  shift  liquidity  in  the 
banking system quickly and efficiently. Integration has also advanced in the repo-market, probably one 
of  the  most  dynamic  segments  of  the  money  market.  Also  the  interest  rate  swap  market,  which  is 
crucial for banks’ interest rate risk management, has developed into one of the euro area’s most liquid 
and  integrated  markets.  Market  participants  are  now  using  this  market  to  define  their  interest  rate 
benchmark rather than the market of government securities, where some national differences are still 
relevant.  The  European  corporate  bond  market  is  still  young  but  has  grown  strongly  with  the  euro. 
Integration  seems  to  be  reasonably  well,  as  demonstrated  by  the  growing  competition  for  fees 
between  banks  that  arrange  and  underwrite  issues.  Finally,  with  regard  to  equity  markets  research 
conducted at the ECB shows that in the euro area local stock returns are more and more driven by 
common  European  news,  rather  than  purely  local  events,  which  points  to  considerable  integration. 
Large  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and  investment  funds  also  take  a  more  pan-European 
view in their portfolio decisions.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
Before such an audience I do not have to recall in detail that the benefits of financial integration are 
very  numerous.  But  similar  to  many  public  goods,  one  might  not  always  be  directly  aware  of  the 
benefits  although  they  are  very  substantial.  Financial  integration  results  in  deeper  and  more  liquid 
markets, more efficiency and a better allocation of risk. It further facilitates the allocation of capital to 
the  best  investment  opportunities,  leads  to  lower  prices  for  consumers  and  raises  the  economy’s 
growth potential. A recent study, for example, quantified that the overall level of EU-wide real GDP 
may  increase  by  more  than  1%  over  a  decade  or  so  as  a  result  of  further  integration,  and  that 
employment  would  also  benefit.  The  cost  of  equity  capital  was  estimated  to  fall  across  Europe  by 
about 40 basis points, with a further reduction of 10 basis points arising from reduced clearance and 
settlement costs.  
Apart from these more general benefits, there are also reasons why we at ECB in particular attach 
great importance to financial integration. Evidently, the financial system plays an essential role in the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  and 
the 
implementation all over the euro area of the ECB monetary policy. This holds especially for markets 
that are directly involved in our operations: the money market, but also the bond market since the vast 
majority of the assets we take as collateral are bonds. Another reason for our interest relates to our 
responsibility for the promotion of a smooth operation of payment systems. Integration, particularly at 
the  level  of  infrastructure,  facilitates  this.  Lastly,  integration  also  contributes  to  financial  stability, 
another key issue of interest for central banks, since a larger and more diversified financial system is 
better able to absorb economic shocks.  
integrated  European 
financial  markets 
facilitate 
A robust public policy framework as a precondition for integration 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  European  and  national  authorities  have  worked  hard  to  establish  a  sound 
public policy framework for the single financial market. I believe that the main pillars of such framework 
are now in place for financial integration to progress even further. Let me address its core elements, 
namely regulation, supervision and financial infrastructure. 
Regulation 
First, the regulatory component. Here, I have to mention foremost the impressive achievement of the 
Financial Services Action Plan. Set out in 1999, the Plan has led to the adoption of 39 Community 
measures  -  the  result  up  to  now  -  for  the  legislative  framework  of  the  single  financial  market.  Of 
course, the impact of the FSAP on financial markets will take some time to manifest itself fully, but I 
am convinced that the expected benefits of a modernised regulatory framework are very substantial. I 
will illustrate this with the new EU rules for the capital adequacy of banks and the accounting reform 
that is now underway in the EU. 
A robust capital adequacy framework for banks is a key condition for a single financial market. Indeed, 
an  efficient  and  stable  European  financial  system  requires  that  regulatory  capital  requirements  are 
sufficiently aligned with banks’ underlying risks. The authorities in the different countries should also 
implement the rules consistently. The need to revise the requirements is the result of an important gap 
that  exists  between  the  present  rules  and  banks’  risk  management  practices.  The  average  bank  of 
1988, when the Basel Accord was adopted, is a very different animal compared with the average bank 
today. Globalisation, the shift towards market-based financing and the speed of financial innovation 
have  all  significantly  changed  banks’  risk  profile.  The  current  Accord,  which  is  based  on  a  simple 
scheme  of  very  broad  risk  categories,  hence  needed  to  be  revised.  Moreover,  the  current  Accord 
applies in a uniform way to all types of credit institutions, from the smallest local savings banks to the 
largest global players, regardless of the quality of their risk management.  
The  new  framework,  which  I  presented  as  Chairman  of  the  G10  together  with  Jaime  Caruana, 
Chairman of the Basel Committee, last Saturday in Basel, addresses these concerns. Basel II is based 
on three pillars, namely minimum capital requirements, a review process by supervisors and market 
discipline. It also introduces more comprehensive and risk-sensitive rules. For example, in addition to 
the already existing capital requirements for credit risk, banks will for the first time have to set aside 
capital  for  their  operational  risk.  Basel  II  also  allows  for  different  ways  to  calculate  the  minimum 
requirements and the institutions that opt for the most advanced methods get a capital advantage. In 
this way, institutions have an incentive to further develop their risk management capabilities. The ECB 
strongly supports the new framework and considers that its incorporation in the European rules will be 
another milestone for the Single Market. But the consistent implementation of the new rules remains 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
an important area to watch. Close co-operation between supervisors will be of utmost importance to 
achieve effective convergence, both within the EU and on a world-wide basis. 
I  now  turn  to  the  current  endeavours  in  developing  an  internationally  harmonised  accounting 
framework.  This  reform  is  especially  important  for  the  EU  because  of  its  contribution  to  financial 
integration. I recall that from 1 January 2005 onwards, all listed companies in the EU will be required 
to publish their consolidated accounts in accordance with international accounting standards. A first 
step  in  this  direction  was  the  adoption  of  a  Regulation  endorsing  all  International  Accounting 
Standards, with the exception of two controversial standards concerning the recognition, measurement 
and disclosure of financial instruments, IAS 32 and 39. These standards are particularly important for 
the banking industry. It is therefore no surprise that they have triggered an extensive debate among 
the  industry,  supervisors  and  standard-setters.  The  ECB  has  a  keen  interest  in  these  new  rules 
because of their impact on banks. We therefore carried out work in this area, mainly from a financial 
stability  angle.  Our  concerns  relate  in  particular  to  the  reliability  of  calculated  fair  values,  the 
comparability across institutions, and the impact of changes in a bank’s own credit risk on its capital 
position. We conveyed our concerns to the IASB, which triggered additional discussions. We will follow 
with extreme attention the developments to come.  
Supervision 
Supervision is the second pillar I see of a framework for integration. The timely finalisation of the FSAP 
is a very impressive achievement. Its full benefits will now be reaped if the rules are implemented and 
enforced consistently among Member States. In this process I see a crucial role for the Lamfalussy 
approach to financial regulation and supervision. This new framework provides for the establishment 
of sectoral committees of national authorities to pursue a consistent implementation of European rules. 
The new arrangement will be very valuable for the FSAP, but also for the EU regulatory provisions in 
general.  
The Lamfalussy approach addresses the supervisory challenges arising in more integrated financial 
markets. Banking groups that perform a lot of their business in other Member States rightfully expect 
to  face  similar  attitudes  and  procedures  of  national  supervisors.  This  is  crucial  for  alleviating  their 
compliance  costs  and  also  to  ensure  that  no  major  competitive  distortions  are  introduced  through 
widely  diverging  supervisory  practices.  It  is  also  a  precondition  for  further  cross-border  activity. 
Regulatory convergence, which applies to high-level principles, has therefore to be complemented by 
supervisory convergence. In other words, in the day-to-day practice the high-level principles have to 
be  consistently  implemented  by  supervisors.  National  authorities  must  therefore  step  up  their 
information exchange and identify best work practices. Moreover, closer co-ordination of supervisory 
actions is needed, especially for the major EU financial groups.  
The Lamfalussy approach will not only foster financial integration, but also help to preserve financial 
stability. In integrated financial markets, risks can more easily spread from one institution to another 
and from one country to another. The so-called ‘systemic risk’ is therefore no longer confined to one 
Member  State  but  has  to be  looked  at from  an  EU-wide  perspective.  The  role  of  the  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors  to  enhance  the  cross-border  exchange  on  individual  institutions  is 
therefore  certainly  important.  At  the  same  time,  the  CEBS’s  work  is  complemented  by  that  of  the 
ESCB’s  Banking  Supervision  Committee.  The  BSC closely  monitors developments  in  the  European 
financial  system  from  a  macro-prudential  perspective.  It  has  also  been  working  successfully  on 
arrangements of co-operation in the area of financial crisis management, another important dimension 
of financial stability. 
Financial infrastructure 
I now come to the third important element of a robust framework for financial integration and that is 
often unknown to the general public, namely clearing and settlement. This particular infrastructure lies 
at the core of all financial markets and is indispensable for their proper functioning. Integration here 
means  that  the  place  where  securities  are  issued  do  not  affect  investors’  clearing  and  settlement 
costs. It also means that the conditions at which banks obtain central bank money is not affected by 
the location of the securities they use as collateral. Purely domestic retail payments as well as clearing 
and settlement activities in the EU are relatively cost effective and safe, but there is still progress to be 
made as regards cross-border arrangements.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
We at the ECB have a particular interest in the clearing and settlement infrastructure because of its 
role  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  a  major  malfunctioning  in  this  area  might 
have important implications for the financial system at large and threaten financial stability.  
The  ECB  is  active  in  this  field  in  various  ways.  First,  through  the  development  of  TARGET 2. 
Integration  in  payment  systems  and  the  euro  money  markets  was  achieved  very  quickly  after  the 
introduction  of  the  euro  because  of  the  existence  of  TARGET,  the  large-value  payment  system 
operated  by  the  Eurosystem.  This  will  soon  be  replaced  by  TARGET 2,  which  will  reinforce  the 
benefits from a common infrastructure. It will also provide for a harmonised level of services and a 
single  price  structure.  TARGET 2  is  a  clear  illustration  of  how  public  authorities  can  contribute  to 
financial integration by providing a common technical infrastructure. 
The second way the ECB is active in this area is through the removal of the remaining obstacles to 
integration. The report prepared by the Group headed by Alberto Giovannini identified three types of 
barriers  to  efficient  and  competitive  markets:  differences  in  technical  requirements  and  market 
practice;  tax  differences;  and  issues  relating  to  legal  certainty.  For  its  part,  the  ECB  contributes  to 
removing  these  obstacles  mainly  by  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  improvement  and  by  encouraging 
discussion  among  the  relevant  players.  We  also  try  to  harmonise  our  central  bank  procedures  and 
operations, which is beneficial to integration. 
Finally,  we  also  contribute  to  an  integrated  regulatory  and  oversight  framework  for  clearing  and 
settlement. We set risk management standards for the securities settlement systems that are used for 
our credit operations. We also regularly assess the systems that hold collateral for our operations. In a 
broader  perspective,  given  the  potential  effects  of  the  failure  of  a  major  clearing  and  settlement 
system, we think that public standards for risk management are essential. The ESCB, in co-operation 
with the Committee of European Securities Regulators, is currently developing such standards for EU 
clearing and settlement systems. 
Assessment of the progress that has been made in cross-border banking 
I  remain  very  much  convinced  that  the  framework  to  foster  financial  integration  in  Europe  is  now 
largely in place. My perception is supported by the many indications that we have seen over the past 
years  that  integration has advanced  rapidly  and  has  now  reached  a  very significant  level.  I  already 
gave you a number of illustrations in the financial markets. I will like now to say a few words on the 
banking sector. 
Let me start with the structure that European banking groups use for their cross-border business. The 
Banking  Supervision  Committee  has  done  some  background  work  on  this.  It  appears  that  a  major 
European banking group is on average present in five to six of the, former 15, EU Member States. 
Often, such groups have spread out to neighbouring countries through branches and subsidiaries. As 
we all know, regional financial groups have for example developed in the Benelux and Scandinavian 
countries.  But  groups  that  are  present  in  almost  every  EU  Member  State  are  still  a  very  rare 
phenomenon. I do not interpret these results as some kind of indication that integration would have 
failed in Europe. In that respect, I find it very instructive to look at what happened in the US over the 
past  decade  or  so.  In  the  mid  nineties,  the  restrictions  on  interstate  banking  were  significantly 
loosened in the US. But banks did not rush to set up branches all over the country; on the contrary, 
they preferred to expand in neighbouring states. US banks that choose to operate on a national basis 
also continue to be rare. Then we should not necessarily interpret the absence of truly pan-European 
banking groups as an indication of low integration, bearing in mind the US example. 
Another relevant point we have to look at is the mode through which banks prefer to enter other EU 
markets; they can provide their services directly across borders, or prefer to set-up a local branch or a 
subsidiary. In that respect it is important to bear in mind that the single passport applies to the direct 
provision of services and branches. But contrary to what one would perhaps expect, banks prefer to 
offer their services across the EU mainly through subsidiaries. Again, this is sometimes interpreted as 
a lack of integration, but I think the answer is more complex. It continues to be a fact that having a 
local establishment in a country is still an important factor to gain local business. A Spanish family or 
family-owned business will probably continue to have a preference for a local Spanish bank that has a 
clear local identity and that is aware of the needs of the local community. And this can be more easily 
achieved through a local subsidiary rather than a branch. 
We therefore see that at least until now the preferred way of banks to gain a foothold in another EU 
Member  State  is  through  mergers  and  acquisitions.  Over  time,  domestic  banking  consolidation  has 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2004
been consistently higher than cross-border consolidation. If one looks at deals with a significant value, 
then the total value of domestic transactions in the EU sum up to around EUR 280 billion for the period 
1999-2003  compared  to  EUR  50  billion  for  cross-border  deals  in  the  EU.  However,  domestic 
consolidation  might  be  a  prelude  to  cross-border  consolidation  as  banks  seek  to  reinforce  their 
domestic position before expanding abroad. In addition, the relative importance of cross-border deals 
has increased over time. For example for every EUR 100 of domestic consolidation in the five years 
preceding  the  euro,  there  were  cross-border  deals  of  EUR  6;  in  the  five  years  after  the  euro’s 
introduction the figure had tripled to EUR 18. 
As a result of cross-border M&As, and to a lesser extent also the expansion of branches, the share of 
banks  from  other  EU  Member  States  is  in  some  national  banking  systems  already  very  significant. 
This is foremost the case in the new Member States, where such shares often range between 70 and 
90%. 
I have concentrated here on the restructuring and reshaping of the pan-European commercial banking 
sector,  particularly  the  retail  banking.  As  regards  investment  banking  the  situation  is  already  pretty 
different, with a relatively small number of pan-European institutions and a number of non European 
institutions being very active. 
Challenges for the future 
Ladies and gentlemen, let us turn now to the challenges ahead.  
The  first  challenge  ahead  is  that  the  single  financial  market  should  be  equipped  with  a  consistent 
regulatory process. This is echoed by the financial industry in the current debate on the post-FSAP 
strategy. In particular, the private sector advises that further integration also depends on the extent to 
which regulation and supervision converge among national authorities. In this respect, I consider that 
the Lamfalussy process will allow for more flexible and uniform technical rules across Member States 
and lead to convergence in national supervisory practices. It will therefore be paramount to exploit the 
process to the maximum. I would urge all national banking supervisory authorities in the context of the 
newly  established  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  to  deliver  concrete  results  in  a 
reasonable period of time in the area of convergence of supervisory tools and practices. This should 
include supervisory reporting in order for the industry not to see any difference all over Europe when 
submitting data to supervisors. 
Second, the financial industry has the decisive role to play in the development of the single financial 
market.  Laws  and  regulations  alone  cannot  extend  the  boundaries  of  marketplaces  or  define  new 
products.  On  the  contrary,  market  forces should  ultimately  drive the  integration  progress. Collective 
action  by  market  participants,  perhaps  with  the  support  of  public  authorities,  has  therefore  to  be 
organised at the EU level to overcome possible co-ordination problems in this process. The integration 
of  money  markets  is  a  clear  example  of  how  actions  by  market  players  themselves  may  underpin 
integration. The EONIA, the reference rate for overnight unsecured interbank deposits, was developed 
by market participants with the facilitating role of the ECB. This example also illustrates how public 
authorities may also play the role of catalysts of collective action.  
And  third,  European  financial  integration  is  a  process  which calls  for  a  very  attentive  monitoring as 
regards its impact in terms of financial stability. A large number of complex processes are at stake: 
better  allocation  of capital resources all  over  a  vast continental  economy  of  450  million  inhabitants; 
better  assessment  of  risks  through  enhanced  quality  of  management  of  financial  institutions; 
enhanced  market  discipline;  concentration  of  investments  in  a  fewer  number  of  institutions; 
globalisation of the European financial institutions ; introduction of new non European institutions as 
major  European  players;  regional  regroupings,  etc,  etc…  Together  with  the  flexibilisation  of  the 
financial  system  fostered by  the  combination  of  market  innovation,  technological  improvements  and 
globalisation,  the  previously  listed  forces  should,  by  and  large,  foster  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
sector and its capacity to weather shocks. 
That  being  said,  it  is  not,  in  any  respect,  time  for  complacency.  The  exceptional  chances  and 
opportunities of the present times have their necessary counterparts in potential risks that have to be 
identified,  analysed  and  appropriately  weathered  if  materialising.  I  consider  that  improving  tirelessly 
the  resilience  of  the  European  financial  system  and  paving  the  conditions  for  enhanced  financial 
stability  in  an  ever  changing  environment  is  a  fundamental  responsibility  of  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 5
