Toshihiko Fukui: A review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Representatives, Tokyo, 23 March 2004. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the first 
half of fiscal 2003 to the Diet in December 2003. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan’s economy  
I. 
Japan’s economy is recovering gradually. Exports have recently increased substantially, and business 
fixed investment continues its path of recovery. Reflecting these developments, industrial production 
has also been increasing. The decline in household income is gradually coming to a halt, and private 
consumption is currently showing some positive movements. As for the outlook, Japan’s economy is 
anticipated to continue recovering moderately, reflecting the projection that overseas economies will 
continue growing relatively fast and final demand, particularly exports and business fixed investment, 
will continue recovering.  
The features of Japan’s current gradual recovery are as follows. First, reflecting the steady recovery of 
the world economy led by IT-related demand worldwide and the high growth of the Chinese economy, 
Japan’s  exports  are  increasing  substantially.  A  virtuous  cycle  is  starting  to  operate  in  the  economy 
initiated  by  the  increase  in  exports,  leading  to  an  increase  in  production  and  corporate  profits,  and 
then to a recovery of business fixed investment.  
Second,  firms’  efforts  to  tackle  their  structural  problems  such  as  excess  debt  and  labor  are  finally 
starting  to  show  results.  Large  manufacturers’  profitability  has  improved  considerably  as  a  result  of 
streamlining  of  business  operations  and  restructuring  of  industries,  although  adjustment  pressure 
remains at nonmanufacturers and small firms. As for the Japanese financial system, there are some 
encouraging  signs  that,  especially  at  major  banks,  various  efforts  to  restore  banks’  financial 
soundness are paying off, although the system is still in a difficult situation as a whole.  
Given this economic situation, domestic corporate goods prices are recently rising due mainly to the 
strengthening of overseas and domestic commodity prices, and are expected to continue increasing 
for some time. The year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices (excluding fresh food) has been 
close  to  zero  percent,  while  temporary  factors  such  as  the  rise  in  rice  prices  have  exerted  upward 
pressure, and is likely to be around zero percent for the time being. However, consumer prices are 
basically projected to continue falling slightly, since the imbalance between supply and demand in the 
economy remains considerable despite a gradual improvement.  
Financial markets have been stable on the whole, even during the approach of the fiscal year-end at 
the end of March 2004 as the Bank has been providing ample liquidity. The environment for corporate 
finance  is  becoming  somewhat  more  accommodative  on  the  whole,  although  it  remains  severe  for 
firms  with  high  credit  risks.  The  lending  attitude  of  private  banks  has  been  slightly  more 
accommodative, and the issuing environment in the corporate bond and CP markets continues to be 
favorable.  
Conduct of monetary policy  
II. 
The main features of current monetary easing policy are as follows. First, the Bank has been providing 
ample liquidity to the money market, with the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank as 
the operating target for money market operations. Second, the Bank is committed to maintaining the 
quantitative easing policy until the consumer price index (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis, 
hereafter the core CPI) registers stably zero percent or an increase year on year. And third, the Bank 
is working to strengthen the transmission mechanism to ensure that the effects of monetary easing 
permeate  through  the  economy.  The  Bank  has  been  implementing  additional  measures  since  the 
autumn of 2003, as in the past, in line with these three main features.  
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
With regard to the Bank’s provision of funds to the money market, it raised the upper limit of the target 
balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  by  2  trillion  yen  in  October  2003,  to  provide  scope  for 
conducting money market operations in a more flexible manner. In addition, in January 2004, the Bank 
raised the target range for the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank by 3 trillion yen to 
around 30 to 35 trillion yen in order to reaffirm its policy stance of overcoming deflation and to ensure 
a continued recovery.  
Regarding  its  commitment  to  maintain  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  the  Bank  released  a  more 
detailed  description  in  October  2003.  That  is,  the  commitment  to  maintain  the  quantitative  easing 
policy until the core CPI registers stably zero percent or an increase year on year is underpinned by 
the following two conditions. First, it requires not only that the most recently published core CPI should 
register zero percent or above, but also that such tendency should be confirmed over a few months. 
Second, the Bank needs to be convinced that the prospective core CPI will not be expected to register 
below zero percent. There may be cases, however, that the Bank will judge it appropriate to continue 
with quantitative easing even if these two conditions are fulfilled. The Bank considers that this clear 
commitment is contributing greatly to the appropriate formation of interest rates in financial markets.  
With regard to strengthening the transmission mechanism of monetary easing effects, the Bank has 
devised various measures including methods related to money market operations, partly with a view to 
contributing to the development of financial markets from a long-term perspective. As part of this effort, 
in July 2003, the Bank started outright purchases of asset-backed securities (ABSs). In January 2004, 
the Bank amended the terms and conditions for the outright purchases of ABSs, so that its aim would 
be achieved more effectively, taking into account the opinions of market participants. The total amount 
of ABSs purchased to date has reached around 500 billion yen. The Bank has also been hosting a 
workshop on securitization with market participants to encourage a constructive exchange of opinions 
to support the development of the ABS market.  
Purchases of stocks held by commercial banks  
III. 
The Bank started to purchase stocks held by commercial banks from November 2002 to reduce the 
risk that stock price fluctuations might impact negatively upon the business management of individual 
financial  institutions,  potentially  resulting  in  instability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Bank 
increased  the  maximum  total  amount  of  stock  holdings  it  can  purchase  from  banks  to  3  trillion  yen 
from 2 trillion yen in March 2003, and in September 2003 extended the period for purchasing stocks 
from banks by one year to the end of September 2004. The total amount of stocks purchased by the 
Bank as of March 10, 2004 was 1,928.8 billion yen.  
Conclusion  
In contrast to a year ago, positive signs are steadily increasing in Japan’s economy. At the same time, 
however, there remain many tasks in achieving sustainable growth of the economy and overcoming 
deflation.  The  Bank  is  also  fully  aware  that  there  is  a  disparity  in  the  level  of  business  confidence 
between  large  firms  and  small  firms,  manufacturers  and  nonmanufacturers,  and  metropolitan  and 
other areas. The Bank considers it essential that a wide range of economic entities, such as firms, 
financial institutions, and policymakers, continue to make efforts to revitalize the economy now when a 
virtuous  cycle  is  starting  to  work,  so  that  the  momentum  for  recovery  spreads  throughout  Japan’s 
economy.  
The Bank will continue to do its utmost to put the economy back on a sustainable growth path and 
overcome deflation, by firmly supporting the positive movements in the private sector from the financial 
side.  
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
