Jaime Caruana: Presentation of the Annual Report 
Address  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  presentation  of  the  Annual 
Report to the Governing Council of the Banco de España, Madrid, 18 June 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The recovery in the international economy - which was described as modest, hesitant and uneven in 
the speech presenting last year’s Annual Report - progressively gathered momentum during 2003 and 
early 2004, as well as extending to other regions. Adding to the initial buoyancy of the US economy 
was  the  considerable  dynamism  of  a  large  number  of  east  Asian  countries,  including  most  notably 
China. The Japanese economy, flagging in a marked depression during the previous decade, picked 
up clearly, and the central and eastern European countries sustained relatively high growth rates. Only 
the euro area, among the industrialised economies, and Latin America, among the emerging group, 
showed a more hesitant recovery in activity. 
The  favourable  developments  in  the  international  economy  were  compatible  with  continuing  low 
inflation,  despite  the  notable  rise  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices.  The  risk  of  deflation  which,  at 
times, it was feared might affect some of the main economies, including the United States, faded as 
the  recovery  firmed.  The  sound  behaviour,  on  the  whole,  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  trend  of 
confidence indicators seem largely to indicate that expectations about the future course of the world 
economy are now brighter again. 
The  firming  of  the  recovery  is  attributable  in  no  small  measure  to  markedly  expansionary 
macroeconomic policies which, in many countries, have resulted in significant increases in public and 
private  debt  levels.  Against  a  background  of  very  generous  monetary  policies  and  ample  global 
liquidity,  the  financial  markets  saw  asset  price  rises  and  very  low  interest  rates,  which  also  helped 
anchor  the  pick-up  in  demand.  Risk  premia  diminished  on  both  private-sector  bonds  and  on  the 
sovereign debt of emerging markets, which received greater capital flows. As a result, the economic 
recovery  and  the  soundness  of  financial  markets  fuelled  one  another,  in  a  virtuous  circle  that  has 
broadly been maintained in the opening months of 2004, although recently a rise has been seen in 
long-term interest rates and in emerging markets’ sovereign risk premia. 
Latin America was the emerging region which encountered most difficulty in joining the upturn in the 
world  economy  in  2003.  Crises  in  certain  countries  and  bouts  of  financial  instability  in  others  have 
prompted  heavy  exchange  rate  depreciations  and  upward  price  pressures  in  recent  years.  Against 
this,  the  authorities  reacted  with  more  restrictive  demand-side  policies  that  set  back  any  take-off  in 
their economies. As these policies have eased, and as external financing conditions have improved 
and  the  increase  in  commodity  prices  firmed,  the  Latin  American  economies  have  attained 
progressively higher growth rates, particularly as from the closing months of 2003. However, certain 
factors of vulnerability remain in the area. These relate to the high levels of public and foreign debt 
and  to  the  high  dependence  on  foreign  capital,  which  advise  perseverance  in  maintaining 
macroeconomic stability and in furthering structural reforms, especially those aimed at strengthening 
the institutional framework and the respect for property rights 
One salient aspect, in my view, which arises from the examination of the international situation is the 
fact that the firming of the economic recovery did not contribute to correcting the external imbalances 
between the main regions. On the contrary, despite the marked depreciation of the dollar, both the US 
external deficit end the surplus of Japan and the rest of Asia increased, while the slight surplus in the 
euro area hardly changed. Possibly, the deprecation of the dollar may not yet have had a corrective 
effect on foreign trade flows since, as we know, this tends to come about with a considerable delay 
and, in the short term, the exchange rate deprecation may even lead the deficit to widen. But the scant 
impact of the dollar depreciation on the current-account balances of the main areas appears also to be 
related to the asymmetry in the reaction of the main currencies: while much of the nominal effective 
depreciation  of  the  dollar  in  2003  was  bilaterally  against  the  euro,  the  Asian  economies  and,  to  a 
lesser extent, Japan, checked the rising trend of their currencies by means of heavy intervention on 
the foreign-exchange markets which has contributed to increasing their already high levels of reserves 
even further. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
It is something of a paradox that the decline of the dollar has been concentrated against the currences 
of the least dynamic economies whose current accounts are relatively balanced, while it has held very 
stable against the currencies of the highest-growth countries which account for most of the US trade 
deficit.  In  any  event,  the  contribution  exchange-rate  movements  may  be  expected  to  make  in 
correcting global external imbalances is limited; what are needed are economic policy adjustments by 
the  main  countries.  Not  only  was  no  headway  made  in  2003  in  this  area,  but  economic  policies 
remained  oriented,  in  certain  cases,  in  the  opposite  direction  to  what  was  needed  to  reduce  the 
imbalances, especially as regards the US budget deficit. 
As mentioned, the international economic outlook has improved appreciably in 2003 and early 2004. 
In turn, the recovery will foreseeably take hold in those countries most ahead in the cycle, while those 
most behind are expected gradually to join the upturn. Nonetheless, certain risks remain and should 
be borne in mind when assessing the future course of the recovery. 
An  initial  risk  is  that  the  persistence  of  current-account  imbalances  may  exacerbate  volatility  on 
international foreign exchange and financial markets. Achieving a distribution of world growth more in 
line with more balanced current-account positions without jeopardising the recovery is, therefore, one 
of the main challenges facing the world economy. 
In the case of the United States, the correction of the external deficit necessarily involves reducing the 
high budget deficit, which is a result of the highly expansionary fiscal policies pursued in recent years. 
The United States and other countries must, in the near future, adjust their monetary policy towards a 
stance more in keeping with a more advanced cyclical position, departing from what are at present 
very low official interest rates that entail a notable stimulus for activity. In this respect, an appropriate 
communication policy, avoiding the overreactions to which financial markets are prone, is essential. 
This is particularly important, moreover, given the continuing geopolitical uncertainties and the fact that 
the  recent  oil  price  rises,  were  they  to  become  entrenched,  would  bear  unfavourably  on  both  price 
stability and the cause of global recovery, making the task of central banks more complicated. 
In sum, ahead of the current upturn in the international business cycle, we should bear in mind one of 
the main lessons of previous cycles. This is, namely, the importance of taking advantage of the good 
times  to  make  the  adjustments  needed  to  correct  imbalances  and  to  equip  economic  policies  with 
greater room for manoeuvre that may be used when more difficult times arrive. It is therefore vital that 
the emphasis of economic policy shift from the short to the medium term, as regards both the fiscal 
and monetary strands of policy and structural reforms. 
And it is also crucial to harness the upswing to bolster the financial sector, the soundness of which has 
enabled the world economy to better withstand the severe shocks it has undergone in recent years. 
The euro area 
Last year the euro area remained in a period of low growth that began in 2001. In the second half of 
the year the first signs of recovery were detected, which appear to have strengthened in early 2004. 
That said, the area remains far less buoyant than the rest of the main regions and its prospects are 
still considerably uncertain. This prolonged phase of relatively sluggish economic activity has been the 
outcome,  among  other  things,  of  a  series  of  global  shocks  and,  more  recently,  of  the  pronounced 
appreciation of the euro amid heightening international financial imbalances. 
But the unsatisfactory results of recent years also appear to be indicative of the excessive vulnerability 
of the European economy to developments in its external environment and of the chronic weakness of 
its internal demand, which favourable monetary and financial conditions have been unable to counter. 
The  performance  of  the  euro  area  has  proven  somewhat  disappointing  when  set  against  the 
expectations generated at the outset of Monetary Union over five years ago. Among other objectives, 
the  Union  was  intended  to  increase  the  economic  prosperity  of  European  citizens.  However,  we 
should not ignore the progress made in overcoming some of the structural shortcomings during the 
process of monetary integration. In the past decade major headway has been made in many countries 
in  areas  such  as  the  downsizing  of  the  public  sector,  the  efficiency  of  the  tax  system  and,  more 
unevenly, the workings of markets. 
That should not prevent us from acknowledging the weaknesses the European economy still exhibits. 
In  particular,  in  a  more  competitive  international  environment,  the  continuing  rigidities  in  goods  and 
labour markets and the absence of sufficient incentives for innovation and the incorporation of new 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
technologies are  inhibiting  investment  in  Europe,  to  the  beneft  of  other  more dynamic geographical 
areas.  As  a  result,  growth  potential  is  being  significantly  impaired.  Likewise,  population  trends  in 
Europe are exerting growing pressure on the financial viability of the current public arrangements for 
social  security  and  health-care.  That  tends  to  make  those  aspects  of  labour  regulation  and  tax 
systems that act as a barrier to joining the labour market and to the reduction of the dependency ratio 
even more onerous. 
It may thus be the case in the current circumstances that agents perceive more clearly the potentially 
negative  influence  on  their  future  income  of  structural  deficiencies,  and  that  this  is  inhibiting  their 
propensity  to  spend.  Accordingly,  defining  and  boosting  the  reform  agenda,  in  line  with  the 
commitments made at the Lisbon and Barcelona Summits, is not just necessary for ensuring greater 
sustainable  growth  in  the  medium  tend;  it  is  also  a  crucial  requirement  for  improving  agents’ 
confidence and, thereby, contributing to the dynamism of activity, likewise in the more immediate term. 
In a situation such as the present one, in which the flatness of private spending is largely a result of 
uncertainty about the future course of the economy, demand-side policies should be acknowledged to 
be  of  limited  effectiveness  in  countering  the  weaknesses  of  output  growth.  When  agents  view  the 
future with some mistrust, measures that are intended to be expansionary and geared to increasing 
activity in the short term may well prove counter-productive if they are perceived as unsustainable or 
even harmful in the medium term. 
From  this  standpoint,  it  is  vital  for  monetary  policy  conduct  that  the  firmness  of  the  central  bank’s 
commitment to price stability be reiterated, as an essential requirement for ensuring a higher level of 
well-being  in  the  medium  term.  The  ECB’s  actions  have  been  consistent  with  this  analysis:  it  has 
squared  the  reduction  of  interest  rates  to  their  lowest  levels  in  recent  decades,  in  step  with  the 
sluggish growth, with its drive to keep - through its actions and its communications policy - inflation 
expectations in line with its own definition of the objective of monetary policy. 
The  medium  and  long-term  view  is  likewise  essential  for  orienting  budgetary  policy.  In  the  current 
economic  conditions  the  Annual  Report  describes,  discretionary  measures  entailing  a  significant 
deterioration in budgetary balances cannot be expected to have generalised expansionary effects on 
activity.  This  is  because  such  measures  may  inhibit  private  spending  and  tend  to  exacerbate  the 
challenges posed by population ageing. What is really important is that national budgets should not 
lead to structural imbalances that may jeopardise the sustainability of public finances and the proper 
functioning  of  Monetary  Union.  This  is  the  best  formula  for  contributing,  at  the  current  juncture,  to 
reinforcing agents’ confidence and boosting the favourable effects of European economic integration. 
Against  the  background  of  the  exceptional  institutional  characteristics  of  European  monetary 
integration, it cannot be ignored that fiscal indiscipline in specific countries has negative externalities 
for the area as a whole; consequently, it is vital to maintain rules - such as those ìn the EU Treaty and 
the Stability and Growth Pact - limiting the fiscal autonomy of the Member States. This requirement is 
even more pressing now that ten new countries have joined the EU and expressed their wish to adopt 
the euro once they meet the attendant conditions. 
Given the current difficulties with the EU’s fiscal discipline arrangements, the priority would appear to 
be  to  ensure  the  proper  functioning  of  the  multilateral  surveillance  and  control  procedures  of  the 
current  rules.  Such  rules  should  be  accepted  by  all  the  Member  States  as  the  sole  means  of 
maintaining the effectiveness and credibility of the regulatory framework. 
In  any  event,  the  upturn  in  activity  that  the  European  economy  appears  to  have  embarked  upon 
should prove conducive to pushing through national governments’ reform plans and to strengthening 
the  fiscal  commitments  currently  in  place.  That  said,  there  are  some  uncertainties  in  the  current 
situation,  namely  geopolitical  instability,  the  rise  in  oil  prices  and  the  global  macroeconomic 
imbalances which, naturally, affect the outlook for the euro area economy. 
Despite such uncertainties, the European economy should post notably higher growth this year than 
last, on the basis of expanding export markets and a gradual recovery in internal demand. At the same 
time,  the  momentous  step  taken  in  European  construction  with  EU  enlargement  should  be  an 
additional  incentive  for  seeing  through  the  economic  and  institutional  reforms  needed  to  revitalise 
European growth. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 3
to 
firmness 
financial  conditions,  giving  soundness  and 
The Spanish economy 
Addressing  the  behaviour  of  the  Spanish  economy  in  2003  and  in  2004  to  data,  I  should  begin  by 
pointing out that our economy has, once again, managed to improve on the trajectory followed by the 
euro  area.  Internal  demand  in  particular  has  continued  to  respond  to  the  expansionary  impulses 
provided  by  monetary  conditions  that  have  remained  very  generous  for  Spain’s  domestic  situation. 
The more disciplined application of other economic policies and a more flexible reaction on the supply 
side  of  the  economy,  in  line  with  the structural  reforms  undertaken,  have  helped  maintain  a  setting 
favourable to the progressive strengthening of activity. This confrms that the slowdown which touched 
bottom in May 2002 has been put behind. 
The growth differential with the euro area widened to almost two percentage points and held at around 
this level in 2004 Q1. As a result, real convergence continued apace last year and Spanish per capita 
GDP  vis-à-vis  the  former  EU-15  stood  at  87.4%,  one  point  up  on  2002.  Relative  to  the  enlarged 
25-member  EU,  this  percentage  rises  to  94.4%,  due  to  the  lower  level  of  development  of  the  new 
members. 
The buoyancy of the economy in 2003 and in early 2004 continued to be underpinned by the same 
foundations  as  in  previous  years,  following  a  similar  pattern.  Firstly,  as  earlier  mentioned,  highly 
favourable  financing  conditions  have  remained  in  place.  These  have  been  characterised  by  low 
interest rates (which were cut further to historical lows), high rates of credit expansion and a notable 
rise  in  the  value  of  non-financial  assets,  adding  to  which  in  2003  was  the  rally  on  stock  markets. 
Secondly, budgetary discipline has provided the necessary counterpoint to the stimuli stemming from 
monetary  and 
the  environment  of 
macroeconomic stability. The resolve with which fiscal consolidation has been pursued in Spain was 
manifest  in  2003  in  a  general  government  surplus  of  0.3%  of  GDP  and  in  a  fresh  reduction  in  the 
public debt ratio, which stood at 50.8% of GDP, far below the European average and the reference 
value set in the Treaty on European Union. 
Any overview of the bases underpinning economic growth should also highlight, albeit in third place, 
the  continuing  support  provided  by  strong  employment  generation.  The  moderation  of  labour  costs, 
which fell again in real terms in 2003, and the greater flexibility of hiring arrangements as a result, inter 
alia, of the successive reforms introduced, were the factors behind the improved working of the labour 
market  as  from  the  late  nineties  which  has  led  to  a  high  capacity  for  employment  generation.  The 
improvement has proved to be a firm support for the sound performance of the economy, as it has 
enabled  labour  supply  to  increase,  allowing  a  flexible  response  to  increasing demand.  Al  the  same 
time,  the  increase  in  employment  has  boosted  household  income  expectations,  which  has  helped 
sustain domestic demand. 
The  composition  of  the  Spanish  economy’s  growth  has  continued  to  be  essentially  underpinned  by 
household  consumption  and  construction.  The 
the  determinants  of  private 
consumption, which accelerated in 2003, was also assisted by the easing of the inflation rate last year. 
That  made  for  an  increase  in  the  purchasing  power  of  disposable  income.  Residential  investment, 
despite the strong increase in the relative price of housing, continued to rise at a high rate. And this, 
combined  with  notable  growth  in  public  infrastructure  works,  fuelled  the  sustained  increase  in 
construction. 
Investment  in  equipment  and  exports  of  goods  and  services  also  recovered  in  2003,  but  their 
contribution to GDP growth was still modest. Indeed, it was these components which kept the pace of 
recovery moderate. Investment in equipment increased by 1.9%, leaving behind the heavy contraction 
of 2002. However, the pattern of its recovery is, so far, relatively weak in comparison with other similar 
cyclical  phases.  The  financial  restructuring  being  implemented  by  certain  large  corporations,  which 
has limited their ability to spend on new projects, and persisting factors of uncertainty over the pick-up 
in demand may have been behind the as-yet subdued response of this investment component 
Goods  exports  expanded  at  a  faster  rate  than  their  markets,  despite  the  loss  of  competitiveness 
induced by the appreciation of the euro. This favourable result was offset, however, by the sluggish 
behaviour of tourism and by the rise in imports, boosted by the euro appreciation. Consequently, net 
external demand exerted a significant contractionary effect on GDP, which has run into the opening 
months  of  2004.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  moreover,  that  the  employment  adjustment  in  the 
industries most exposed to foreign competition may be reflecting the fact that the defence of market 
share  is,  in  some  cases,  based  on  unsustainable  processes  that  erode  the  economy’s  overall 
competitiveness in the medium term. 
improvement 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2004
Notable among the achievements in 2003 was the improvement in inflation which, after starting the 
year at a rate of 4%, ended it at 2.6%. This sizable downward adjustment partly reflects the removal of 
certain transitory elements from the index which had had an upward effect in 2002, but it was also the 
result of the restraining impact of import prices, favoured by the euro appreciation and the slowdown in 
oil prices. Overall, the reduction in inflation contributed to sustaining the purchasing power of income 
and provided for a narrowing of the inflation differential with the euro area to levels more in line with 
those experienced before the introduction of euro notes and coins. 
Into 2004, economic trends in Spain point to a continuation of the path of gradual recovery, with no 
far-reaching changes in the composition of growth in the short run. Growth remains buoyed by similar 
factors  to  those  driving  it  in  the  recent  past,  although  investment  in  equipment  can  be  seen  to  be 
firming.  Nonetheless,  the  fresh  outbreak  of  oil  price  rises  has  had  a  significant  inflationary  impact 
which has reversed part of the progress made last year and in early 2004. This new shock, to which 
the Spanish economy remains relatively sensitive, may, if it continues, entail a net drain on income. 
That would hamper the force of domestic demand, which would compound the foreseeably diminished 
momentum  under  such  circumstances  of  external  markets.  Despite  these  risks,  the  outlook  is  for 
growth in 2004 and 2005 of around 3%, close to the economy’s potential, which would be based on a 
very  gradual  change  in  its  composition,  as  productive  investment  progressively  strengthens  in 
response to improved corporate earnings and to the completion of the restructuring currently under 
way. 
The longer-term projection of this trajectory, to ensure the sustainability of growth rates above the euro 
area average, nevertheless requires far-reaching changes in the growth pattern to dispel the risks that 
have been incubated. It is crucial that investment in equipment should gain in momentum and that its 
greater  vigour  be  accompanied  by  more  expansionary,  export-led  net  external  demand.  The 
improvement  in  these  components  would  then  provide  for  a  situation  in  which  the  necessary 
moderation  in  household  spending,  especially  on  house  purchases,  did  not  lead  to  a  loss  of 
dynamism. 
It should not be forgotten that some of the factors behind the buoyancy of expenditure may tend to 
lose  steam  or  even  disappear  The  most  patent  case  here  is  that  of  the  prolonged  expansionary 
influence exerted by lower interest rates. The current scenario of exceptionally low interest rates is the 
result  of  a  very  particular  economic  situation  at  the  European  and  international  level.  And  although 
EMU membership ensures moderation in rates, it is likely these will return to more neutral levels as the 
recovery  in  the  area  takes  hold.  Nor  is  it  conceivable  that  the  exceptional  intensity  of  employment 
generation  per  unit  of  output  in  recent  years  can  become  a  permanent  feature.  Probably,  once  the 
labour market has been fully adjusted to a situation of price and wage stability and to a more flexible 
regulatory framework, the relationship between job creation and growth in the economy will resume a 
pattern more in step with long-term trends. 
In this respect, it should further be borne in mind that the maintenance over a prolonged period of time 
of a strong expansion in domestic demand, driven by substantially generous monetary and financial 
conditions, entails pressures which, if they build up, may emerge precisely when some of the factors 
upholding growth begin to show signs of petering out. 
The foregoing comments indicate that the favourable growth prospects for the coming years cannot be 
taken as guaranteed over the longer term. The Banco de España has been signalling the fact that the 
prevailing  growth  pattern  harbours  certain  risks  that  may  emerge  in  the  form  of  a  deterioration  in 
competitiveness  and  financial  imbalances  in  the  households  and  non-financial  corporations  sector. 
Although  the  trajectory  of  the  Spanish  economy  has  not  yet  been  hampered  by  the  emergence  of 
these risks, any future deterioration could impair further progress in real convergence. 
Competitiveness  can  be  undermined  on  several  fronts.  The  first  of  these  is  the  maintenance  of  a 
persistent  inflation  differential  with  the  euro  area.  This  differential  is  partly  related  to  the  fact  the 
Spanish economy is ahead in the cycle, but it has also to do with the presence of elements of inertia in 
wage  and  price  formation  in  Spain  associated  with  structural  shortcomings  in  certain  markets  for 
factors, goods and services. Another significant front is limited productivity growth, which is not only 
lower  than  in  the  United  States  but  also  than  in  most  of  the  European  countries.  Admittedly,  low 
productivity  gains can  be explained  in terms  of  the intense  employment  generation  in  the economy 
and of a composition of growth which, in recent years, has been largely based on construction and on 
services.  But  they  nevertheless  reflect  low  productive  investment,  a  limited  incorporation  of 
technological improvements into the stock of productive capital and the relative lack of competition in 
certain segments of the economy. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 5
Safeguarding  a  sound  competitive  position  for  the  Spanish  economy  is  undoubtedly  a  priority  for 
economic  policy  management  within  EMU.  As  I  have  said,  the  activities  most  exposed  to  foreign 
competition  have  begun  to  feel  the  effects  of  the  losses  in  competitiveness  that  have  built  up.  And 
after squeezing their margins in recent years, they have begun to adjust their staff levels. Competitive 
pressures are heightening, moreover, as new competitors emerge on the international scene with a 
similar  specialisation  pattern  to  Spain  and  with  a  notable  edge  due  to  their  low  labour  costs.  In 
particular, the enlargement of the EU to 25 countries, while entailing the opening up of potential new 
markets  for  Spanish  products,  means  above  all  a  substantial  increase  in  competition.  The  Spanish 
productive system must prove itself able to respond to this with dynamism, innovation and flexibility, as 
it has in the past when opening up to its external environment. 
The  second  source  of  risk  lies  in  the  patterns  of  financial  behaviour  of  the  private  sector  of  the 
economy.  It  is  well  known  that  the  strong  growth  of  household  and  corporate  demand  has  been 
accompanied by a notable rise in borrowing and in their debt ratios. Although this has not led to any 
deterioration in the financial position of these sectors (because their assets have also risen in value) or 
to  rises  of  the  same  magnitude  in  their  debt  burden  (thanks  to  lower  interest  rates),  their  higher 
indebtedness  has  made  them  more  vulnerable  to  adverse  changes  in  economic  and  financial 
conditions. 
Household debt cannot grow indefinitely at the rapid pace of recent years. The higher indebtedness 
and the increasing weight of floating rate loans, along with the rising share of equities and real estate 
in households’ asset portfolios, have made their spending decisions more sensitive to interest rate and 
asset price movements, in a situation complicated by the limited disposable savings remaining after 
debt service. 
The property market is particularly significant in this respect because most household indebtedness is 
linked  to  house  purchases.  Although  the  supply  of  housing  has  responded  fairly  flexibly  to  the 
increased  demand  and  the  price  trajectory  has  not  departed  substantially  from  the  pattern  seen  in 
previous  upturns,  a  certain  degree  of  overvaluation  of  these  assets  is  detectable  in  Spain.  This 
overshoot, which was not corrected in 2003, makes it particularly necessary for buyers and sellers in 
this market to act cautiously. A gradual absorption of the overvaluation would establish a frarmework 
of greater financial stability for households and forestall interference in their consumption decisions. 
To  address  the  risk  factors  mentioned  above  appropriately,  it  is  necessary  to  embrace  a  gradual 
change  towards  a  growth  pattern  that  is  better  balanced  and  more  squarely  based  on  those 
expenditure  items  that  most  contribute  to  building  the  economy’s  productive  potential  and 
competitiveness. The economic authorities can contribute to this by focusing the available economic 
policy instruments on sustained macroeconomic stability, market flexibility and higher potential growth. 
In the case of fiscal policy, a primary role must continue to be played by budgetary stability to prevent 
demand-side pressures from exacerbating the existing risks, particularly in the present circumstances 
of monetary conditions that are overly generous given the degree of firmness prevailing in domestic 
spending.  Consequently,  the  restrictive  fiscal  policy  stance  should  be  maintained  and  the  budget 
balance  further  improved,  in  step  with  the  foreseeable  firming  of  the  recovery.  This  stance  is  also 
needed to meet the medium- and long-term challenges to public finances. Here, the possibility that the 
current  pace  of  revenue  growth  may  not  be  sustainable  in  the  future,  the  probable  rise  in  financial 
expenditure (which has so far assisted consolidation), the foreseeable cutback in European funds from 
2007 onwards and, in the longer term, the uncertainties over the sustainability of the pension system, 
are  factors  that  strengthen  the  case  for  surpluses  in  public  finances  in  good  times  to  stave  off  the 
reappearance of major imbalances in the future. 
From  this  standpoint,  the  allocation  of  pensions  to  the  Reserve  Fund  with  a  charge  to  the  social 
security surplus is unquestionably an essential part of this strategy, although the amount of the funds 
involved so far is small in comparison with the magnitude of the risk of increased pension expenditure 
due  to  population  ageing.  Therefore,  an  attempt  will  have  to  be  made  aver  the  next  few  years  to 
entrench the social security surplus and thus ensure that this practice continues for a sufficiently long 
period at a sustained rate. That said, achieving a soundly based social security system in the medium 
term may require more ambitious policies, including reform of certain aspects of the pension systems. 
At the same time, the maintenance of sustained growth over time requires a more efficient economy 
with a more flexible pattern of specialisation and a more intensive incorporation of new technologies. 
However,  with  a  view  to  the  future,  this  pattern,  which  has  enabled  a  part  of  the  considerable 
unemployment  generated  in  the  past  to  be  absorbed,  cannot  be  considered  satisfactory.  First, 
because  the  scant  headway  in  productivity  undermines  the  basis  of  competitiveness  and,  second, 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2004
because demographic developments indicate that, within a few years, employment will tend to make a 
lower contribution to growth. 
I am not going to list here the measures for raising productivity, but I would like to remind you of the 
fundamental  role  of  structural  reform  in  this  respect.  As  pointed  out  in  the  Annual  Report,  it  is 
particularly important to push ahead with labour market reform (in the areas of wage negotiation and 
hiring), improve the workings of the housing market (and of the related land market) and continue with 
the liberalisation of the network industries. Measures are similarly required to foster the incorporation 
of technological innovation in productive processes and to improve the stock of infrastructure and of 
public capital. The current house price situation means that urgent action is needed to overcome the 
restrictions on the supply of land via more flexible town planning to make building land more readily 
available and to improve the workings of the rental market. Finally, although the improvement of the 
services sector depends on many structural considerations, the importance of more flexible retail trade 
regulation for price formation and the economic system’s overall efficiency should not be overlooked. 
In short, without making any attempt to cover the entire scope of the economic policy requirements in 
the present situation, I do feel it is important to emphasise that fiscal stability and structural reforms 
can provide an appropriate means of addressing risks arising in relation to competitiveness and to the 
growing indebtedness of the non-financial private sector, which are the ones that could jeopardise the 
continuity of real convergence. 
Financial system 
2003  brought  an  improvement  in  the  situation  of  the  international  financial  markets  and,  in  this 
favourable setting, the financial institutions of a good number of countries reported better results and 
higher  profitability.  The  difficult  times  of  past  years,  during  which  most  institutions  showed  notable 
resilience,  led  many  of  them  to  undertake  reforms  designed  to  reduce  costs,  such  as  the  sale  of 
non-strategic assets, and these decisions should now be bearing fruit. 
The improved situation of financial institutions at the international level seems to be borne out by the 
favourable outlook for their future performance that agents operating in the markets have. In 2003 this 
perception was reflected in rising stock market prices, reduced implied volatilities and narrowing risk 
premia. 
Spanish  deposit  institutions,  thanks  to  their  sound  initial  position  and  the  fact  that  the  Spanish 
economy outperformed the EU average, were less severely hit by the difficulties of past years. They 
were thus in a position in 2003 to benefit from the favourable international financial situation, from the 
rebound of the securities markets, and from the continued strong relative performance of the Spanish 
economy. 
In particular, Spanish deposit institutions enjoyed higher growth of earnings and profitability in 2003. 
This allowed the effects of a more competitive environment and low interest rates to be offset by larger 
business volumes and tighter control of operating expenses. Also, lower doubtful assets allowed bad 
debt provisioning to be reduced thanks to the smaller need for provisions to the specific fund (partly 
counteracted by changes in the statistical and general funds), thereby boosting the institutions’ profit 
and loss accounts. 
Solvency ratios held steady and default ratios stood at historical lows. Indeed, the solvency levels of 
institutions were not impaired by the faster credit growth because of the increase in Tier 1 and Tier 2 
capital.  The  solvency  of  institutions  was  strengthened  by  the  statistical  fund,  which  has  grown 
uninterruptedly since it was created in July 2000. 
The improvement in earnings and ROE was, as mentioned above, due partly to the high growth in the 
business  volumes  of  Spanish  institutions  and  especially  to  lending  to  mortgage  borrowers  and  to 
construction and property development firms. In particular, the growth of credit to property developers 
in 2003 was notable, and was not attributable to just a small number of institutions. It should be taken 
into account that this lending is markedly cyclical and that in past recessions it has shown high default 
rates. Moreover, the strong credit growth is an additional cause for concern, basically for two reasons. 
First,  because  Spanish  household  indebtedness  is already  higher  than  the euro  area  average.  And 
second,  because  the  growth  of  credit  extended  by  institutions  is  not  being  accompanied  by  a 
commensurate  increase  in  deposits.  This  produces  a  greater  need  for  recourse  to  international 
financial markets, which may raise the average cost of bank liabilities and hinder profitability gains. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 7
It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  have  a  strong  profit  and  loss  account;  instituions  must  also  look 
particularly hard at the sustainability of their current business model based on strong growth in lending 
volume,  and  at  the  possible  alternatives  to  this  model.  In  the  medium  term,  cost  contanment  and 
continuous  improvement  in  efficiency  will  be  pivotal  in  ensuring  sound  profit  and  loss  accounts. 
Spain’s  membership  of  the  euro  area,  which  has  made  its  economy  more  stable,  has  nevertheless 
enabled  a  faster  pace  of  credit  expansion  than  traditionally  seen  in  this  country,  without  Spanish 
institutions having suffered notable financial imbalances. That said, their managers have to continue to 
act prudently and responsibly, considering possible changes in the economic situation that may arise 
during the course of the cycle and adopting strategies designed for the medium and long term. 
Another matter on which institutions should reflect from this medium-term standpoint is the quality of 
their own funds. Indeed, it should be borne in mind that their strengthened ROE has been driven in the 
last  decade  by  increased  leverage  of  the  quality  of  their  capital  (i.e.  the  growing  weight  of 
subordinated  debt  relative  to  capital  stock  and  reserves).  Insofar  as  that  leverage  is  reaching  a 
maximum,  no  further  improvements  in  ROE  derived  from  changes  in  the  composition  of  regulatory 
capital should be expected. 
The challenges to be faced by financial institutions are, however, not limited to those deriving from the 
more  conjunctural  factors;  they  are  in  fact  largely  traceable  to  the  important  changes  in  financial 
systems  in  the  last  few  years.  These  changes  include  most  notably  the  increasing  degree  of 
internationalisation  of  institutions;  the  ongoing  emergence  of  more  sophisticated  and  complex  new 
products; the increase in risk transfer processes and, finally, the growing importance of a whole set of 
risks that not long ago were difficult to quantify. 
Financial institutions have to respond to these challenges by improving their services to consumers 
and  to  society  and  simultaneously  intensifying  their  efforts  in  two  areas  requiring  a  wide  range  of 
actions. 
First,  they  have  to  step  up  the  efforts  made  to  date  in  designing  and  implementing  robust  risk 
management  systems  firmly  based  on  corporate  governance  best  practices.  In  recent  years, 
institutions have become fully aware of their importance and have made considerable headway in this 
direction,  supported  by  improvements  in  calculation  methods,  available  technical  capabilities  and 
databases,  among  others.  At  the  same  time,  they  must  not  neglect  the  need  to  invest  in  human 
capital, an essential factor in banking. But these investments in technical and human resources - and 
this is an additional challenge - must not involve any let-up in the pursuit of greater efficiency, which is 
the key competitive factor in a world of increasingly integrated markets. 
Financial  institutions  must  therefore  redouble  their efforts  to  enhance  their capabilities  in  relation  to 
risk identification and the quantification of committed exposures. They need to design their strategies 
for managing risk, as well as their capital and liquidity, bearing in mind that economic and financial 
conditions vary over the cycle. The need for responsible and prudent action by managers is even more 
important in the context of the significant transformations financial systems are undergoing. As I have 
already mentioned, these have raised the profile of a whole set of risks that have been addressed only 
marginally in the past. 
In particular, off-balance sheet operations, guarantees and forward operations, for example, require 
extreme  vigilance  on  the  part  of  financial  institutions.  This  is  because,  among  other  reasons, 
identifying  and  assessing  the  risks  they  entail  is  sometimes  not  straightforward.  Moreover, 
international  corporate  scandals  have  shown  the  great  importance  of  reputational  risk.  In  all  such 
scandals  the  firms  involved  had  excessively  complex  and  insufficiently  transparent  organisation 
structures. employing in their operations special purpose vehicles located in opaque jurisdictions. In 
many  of  these  cases  the  most  basic  mechanisms  underpinning  good  corporate  governance  also 
failed. 
The complexity of structure and the lack of firmly established corporate governance mechanisms in 
organisations is also conducive to operational risk, which has significant potential to cause institutions 
damage that is hard to repair. The latter have increased their efforts to develop methods to improve 
the measurement of this risk, but there is still a long way to go before this is achieved. 
Such complex and opaque organisational structures also make it difficult for the institutions to know 
their customers properly. That brings me to the second element institutions need to focus on: getting 
to  know,  as  far  as  they  are  able,  their  customers’  activities.  This  would  be  in  line  with  the  greater 
concern at all levels to avoid the funds extended through the banking system being used, among other 
activities, for terrorist financing or money laundering. 
8 
 BIS Review 39/2004
Customer  knowledge  on  the  part  of  financial  institutions  has  a  second  but  no  less  important 
dimension. The products offered to financial-services consumers must be tailored to their needs, with 
the institutions helping them to assess the risks that they wish to and are able to assume. In a context 
of rapid credit growth like that in Spain, it would seem to be enormously important to help customers 
assess the commitments they are capable of assuming on the basis of both their present and future 
circumstances. 
The challenges I have referred to justify the need for a response by supervisors and regulators. The 
focus of our concern is currently the promotion of the stable functioning of the financial system, and 
the need to boost the incentives offered to ensure that it continues to enhance the scope and quality of 
the services that it has traditionally offered to society. 
The  New  Capital  Accord  is  undoubtedly  a  significant  step  in  this  direction  and  represents  a  great 
opportunity for the banks to review, update and improve their capital strategies and risk management 
systems. It is, therefore, a suitable framework for boosting financial stability. 
The New Capital Accord proposes a comprehensive approach based on the combined operation of a 
number of complementary elements and considering a broader set of risks than its predecessor. It is, 
moreover,  a  model  for  regulation  based  on  the  introduction  of  the  incentives  needed  to  stimulate 
prudent and responsible action by the institutions. These incentives will promote the establishment of 
appropriate risk measurement and management systems, such that the better they are, the lower the 
capital requirements applied to the institutions in recognition of this superiority. 
The  desire  to  offer  alternatives  and  incentives  is  clear  in  the  design  of  the  Accord.  For  example,  it 
proposes  that  institutions  should  have  various  alternatives  for  calculating  their  regulatory  capital, 
ranging  from  the  simplest  possibilities  based  on  the  use  of  external  rating  systems,  to  other  more 
complex  ones  based  on  internal  rating  systems  designed  by  the  institutions  themselves.  The 
requirements  to  gain  access  to  the  most  advanced  methodologies  are,  undoubtedly,  considerably 
more  demanding.  That  said,  it  is  up  to  the  institutions  themselves  to  decide,  on  the  basis  of  their 
specific operations and of their needs in general, which methodology they wish to apply. In fact, it is 
not  clear  that  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  should  opt,  at  least  initially,  to  use  the  most 
advanced approaches. In particular, the Banco de España foresees that, both on account of the type 
of operations carried out by Spanish institutions and owing to the minimum requirements for access to 
the  different methodologies,  the  number  of  those  adopting  the  most  sophisticated  methods  (i.e.  the 
advanced IRS approach) will be limited and will be the result of a gradual process over time. In short, 
the adoption of the advanced Basel II models should be seen from a perspective of realism and the 
pursuit of excellence. As far as the Banco de España is concerned, quality takes precedence over any 
consideration of timing in the adoption of the advanced approaches. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  implementation  of  the  New  Capital  Accord  will  pose  serious 
challenges for the institutions, which will be expected to step up the efforts they have no doubt already 
begun to make. The need to increase these efforts has become even more pressing since 11 May this 
year, when the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision approved the text of the Accord, which will 
be released at the end of June. 
Also prominent in the area of regulatory reforms, which will involve significant challenges and whose 
implementation  is  imminent,  is  the  introduction  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS).  In 
accordance with the mandate of the European Union, these standards will affect the preparation of the 
annual accounts of groups with securities listed on any regulated market of the Union from 1 January 
2005.  The  challenges  associated  with  the  introduction  of  the  IAS  not  only  relate  to  the  technical 
adaptation that will be required to comply with them; some of these standards may affect institutions’ 
business strategy, since aspects such as provisions and the consolidation and amortisation of goodwill 
will  be  changed.  Moreover,  the  new  accounting  rules  will  alter  the  role  traditionally  played  by  the 
managers of the institutions and their auditors; the proposed framework is more open and gives them 
a greater degree of responsibility in relation to the information supplied to the market. 
The aims of the IAS relate, firstly, to the need for a single financial market within the EU and, secondly, 
to  convergence  between  these  rules  and  Anglo-American  standards  in  the  medium  term,  such 
convergence being an element that will strengthen the integration of the international financial system. 
The Banco de España certainly acknowledges the benefits arising from the objectives of the IAS; but it 
also  detects  a  need,  owing  to  the  complexity  of  the  process  and  calendar  problems,  to  make  the 
transition simpler and to give it a greater degree of certainty. Also, the Banco de España considers 
that, from a supervisory standpoint, accounting is an essential element of credit institutions’ regulatory 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 9
and prudential framework. That is to say, accounting standards aiming to promote transparency and 
comparability  among  institutions  must  be  compatible  with  good  banking  practice  in  relation  to  risk 
management. 
As a result, the Banco de España, in accordance with its regulatory powers, and taking as its starting 
point  the  positive  experience  of  the  Spanish  supervisory  model,  based  on  prudent  accounting 
standards, is drawing up a new accounting/prudential circular. This will aim to ensure continuity with 
the  aforementioned  framework,  as  well  as  compatibility  with  the  IAS,  permitting  a  far-reaching  and 
consistent  reform  of  the  current  model.  Accordingly,  the  new  circular  will  assist  institutions  in 
complying  with  the  IAS;  it  will  select  the  most  prudent  options  when  the  international  standards 
propose  more  than  one,  so  recognising  the  particularities  of  financial  institutions;  and,  finally,  by 
permitting a common accounting framework, it will prevent the choice of accounting options from being 
a factor that may distort competition. 
Allow  me  to  end  this  review  of  the  challenges  facing  financial  institutions  by  pointing  out  that  their 
responses  must  be  supplemented  by  market  discipline  and  by  the  action  of  financial-services 
consumers. 
In  effect,  market  discipline  is  an  essential  supplement  for  supervisors;  market  participants,  by 
rewarding those institutions that act appropriately, generate the necessary incentives for managers to 
behave  prudently.  Yet,  for  market  discipline  to  be  possible,  market  participants  need  to  have  the 
necessary  information.  This  is  why  the  promotion  of  transparency  is  of  paramount  importance,  to 
ensure that institutions report information that is reliable and based on generally accepted valuation 
principles in a timely and opportune fashion. This qualitative and quantitative information must enable 
the results obtained by institutions, the risks they are assuming and the practices employed in their 
management and control to be assessed. 
Finally,  in  a  non-zero-risk  world,  the  action  of  consumers  of  financial  products  and  servces  is,  as  I 
have  already  mentioned,  very  important.  They  should  be  expected  to  be  responsible  and  active, 
searching for information and understanding the risk profile of products, especially those with a greater 
degree  of  complexity.  With  an  approach  based  on  these  principles  they  will  be  able  to  take  their 
decisions  responsibly,  assuming  levels  of  debt  that  are  reasonable,  not  only  in  the  light  of  their 
sustainability at present, but also in the future. 
However, consumers must not only have access to information, they must also be able to assess it. 
Institutions must play a role in this respect, offering their customers the products that best suit their 
needs and informing and advising them accordingly. In addition, in recognition of the importance of 
raising  the  acumen  of  bank  customers,  the  Banco  de  España  is  developing  a  project  to  educate, 
through  the  lnternet,  the  users  of  financial  products  and  services.  The  project’s  first  phase  will  be 
available at the beginning of next year. 
Allow me, like every year, to conclude by referring to other aspects of the management of the Banco 
de España. As part of our ongoing effort to increase the transparency and improve the communication 
of the Bank’s activities, this year’s Annual Report includes an additional chapter on the management 
of the Banco de España in 2003. 
This  chapter  summarises  the  main  tasks  performed  and  the  organisational  changes  made  at  the 
Banco de España. I should like to stress that the Banco de España has continued to press ahead with 
the reforms necessary to adapt the institution to its new challenges. All this has been possible thanks 
to the dedication, hard work and initiative of every member of staff, and I should like to express my 
sincere gratitude to all of them. There remain projects to be carried out and objectives to be achieved, 
and  I  therefore  wish  to  express  my  desire  that  we  will  continue  to  work  with  resolve,  striving  to 
combine our efforts. 
Lastly, my thanks to you, ladies and gentlemen, for your contributions, collaboration and support. 
10 
 BIS Review 39/2004
