Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing the soundness of the banking sector -  
The New Capital Accord 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Risk 
Management Seminar on the New Capital Accord (Basel II), Kuala Lumpur, 15 April 2004. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Risk  Management  seminar  on  Basel  II  organized  for  the 
directors and senior management of banking institutions. The objective of this seminar is to promote 
greater  understanding  of  the  impending  changes  to  the  international  capital  adequacy  regulation. 
Given the importance of the subject and its implications on the banking industry, it is important for the 
industry  to  understand  the  intentions  and  the  challenges  arising  from  these  changes  so  that  the 
necessary  action  may  be  taken  in  a  manner  in  which  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  it  can  be 
maximised.  While  there  has  been  global  acceptance  of  the  broad  principles  of  the  new  accord, 
differing  implementation  approaches  are  being  adopted  by  different  countries.  I  will  take  the 
opportunity to discuss the new Accord from our perspective and the approach that will be adopted for 
Malaysia. This seminar will provide you with the opportunity to engage in discussions on the issues 
concerning the new Accord.  
Philosophy and objective of capital regulation 
A well functioning and efficient banking sector is vital to the economic growth process. The banking 
institutions  perform  the  important  intermediation  function  of  mobilizing  funds  to  finance  productive 
activities. This intermediation process needs to be performed in an environment of financial stability. 
Therein lies the importance of confidence and soundness of the financial system. Banking business 
inherently  involves  risks  and  these  risks  need  to  be  rigorously  managed.  In  an  environment  of 
heightened uncertainty and increased volatility, this needs to be reinforced with the development of a 
more robust and resilient banking system. Hence the importance of prudential regulations to ensure 
the soundness and stability of the financial system. 
An important component of prudential regulation is having a sound capital framework that measures 
risks accurately and allocates adequate capital to the risks. The current capital accord issued in 1988 
has served as the international benchmark for capital adequacy assessment for banking institutions. 
While  it  has  achieved  the  desired  results  in  terms  of  developing  more  well-capitalized  banking 
institutions  globally,  the  rapid  developments  in  the  financial  markets  over  the  years,  including  the 
growth  of  off-balance  sheet  financing  such  as  asset  securitisation  have  rendered  the  broad-brush 
measurement of the existing accord to be less effective. 
Risk and risk management - the need for new accord 
New  institutional  structures  and  evolving  market  practices  have  reduced  the  effectiveness  of  the 
existing  accord.  While  the  basic  categorization  of  risks  have  not  changed  significantly,  the  ways  in 
which  risks  present  themselves  have  changed  quite  substantially.  With  the  introduction  of  new 
products and more complex financial transactions enabled by technological innovations, risks can be 
disaggregated  and  rebundled  in  new  ways.  Similarly,  the  advances  in  financial  engineering  and 
improved  expertise  have  allowed  the  introduction  of  new  hedging  instruments  to  facilitate  risk 
management.  Significant  enhancements  have  been  achieved  in  the  measurement  of  market  risk 
where the use of internal value-at-risk models is fast becoming the industry standard. 
The advances in the quantitative approach to the management of market risks have also expanded to 
the areas of credit as well as operational risks. Despite the significant data constraints, new research 
has  strengthened  the  theoretical  foundation  for  internal  credit  and  operational  risk  modeling.  The 
development  of  new  hedging  instruments  such  as  credit  derivatives  has  also  increased  the  use  of 
credit risk transfer mechanisms within the financial system, thus promoting more active credit portfolio 
risk  management.  Key  developments  have  also  taken  place  in  the  area  of  operational  risk.  The 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
experience of large corporate failures due to fraud and lapses in internal controls has focused greater 
attention  on  improving  operational  risk  management  in  banking  institutions.  This  has  prompted  the 
need  for  banking  institutions  to  provide  capital  for  operational  risk  and  to  put  in  place  a  more 
integrated risk management framework on an enterprise-wide basis. 
The essence of the new accord 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The efforts of the BIS to introduce an enhanced framework for capital adequacy regulation through 
Basel II is in the context of these developments. The accord seeks to bring into greater alignment the 
more  advanced  concept  of  capital  management  into  the  regulatory  equation.  The  assessment  of 
capital adequacy needs to look beyond the computed capital ratio. The new Basel Accord therefore 
comprises three pillars. The first pillar provides a minimum capital measurement framework for credit 
and operational risks. In essence, the regulatory capital requirement is aligned more closely with the 
actual degree of underlying risk that the banking institution faces. It provides the capital measurement 
that has three options with different levels of complexities for both credit and operational risks to better 
reflect actual risk. The second pillar focuses on strengthening the supervisory process, particularly in 
assessing the quality of risk management in the banking institutions. The supervisory process aims to 
provide the mechanism to ensure that other risks such as concentration risks and market risks in the 
banking  books  being  managed.  Under  such  an  environment,  prudent  lending  such  as  that 
characterized by a high degree of portfolio diversification, could justify lower capital requirements. The 
third  pillar  specifies  minimum  disclosure  requirements  on  capital  adequacy  to  enhance  market 
discipline. 
Despite its relatively more complex architecture, the implementation of the new framework provides a 
number of options and flexibility to banking institutions. This is to ensure that the approach adopted 
reflects and is commensurate with the nature of risk-taking activities and the level of sophistication of 
individual institutions. In adopting the standardized approach for credit risks, the credit exposures are 
weighted  based  on  recognized  external  credit  ratings.  However,  for  large  banking  institutions  with 
businesses  which  are  highly  complex,  the  more  advanced  approaches,  that  is,  the  foundation  or 
advanced internal rating based (IRB) approach may be more appropriate to reflect their actual risk 
profile. Similarly, there are three alternative approaches that may be adopted in allocating capital for 
operational risks, that is the basic indicator approach, the standardised approach and the advanced 
measurement approach. 
The objective of the new framework is to emphasise on the need for refined measurement of risks, 
more  efficient  capital  management  and  the  adoption  of  sound  risk  management  practices  that  will 
ultimately contribute to greater financial stability. This will be complemented with efforts to enhance the 
corporate  governance  framework,  the  robustness  of  the  internal  control  systems,  and  to  introduce 
greater  transparency  and  market  discipline.  Within  the  context  of  these  developments  is  the 
importance of the ability of the board members and top management of banking institutions to assess 
risk from a broader perspective and its strategic impact on the institution. 
In view of the significant implications of this new capital framework, Bank Negara Malaysia has been 
directly  involved  in  the  consultative  process  through  regional  forums  to  ensure  that  issues  and 
concerns of the emerging markets are considered by the BIS in designing the new accord. We are 
pleased to note that many of these issues have been taken into consideration.  
Motivation for migration to the new accord 
The  adoption  of  the  new  accord  is  consistent  with  building  strong  risk  management  capability.  The 
enhanced risk management practices required by the new accord not only can result in greater capital 
savings  but  becomes  vital  as  the  domestic  banking  system  becomes  increasingly  competitive  and 
integrated  with  the  global  marketplace.  Effective  and  efficient  decision  making  is  enhanced  with 
relevant and timely information supported by more quantitative analysis. This can be achieved through 
having a more robust data architecture and information system, integrated processes and enhanced 
information flow and reporting. Having a robust risk management framework would also allow banking 
institutions to better assess the marginal contribution of existing as well as new business lines to the 
institution’s overall financial performance. This would allow for more-informed decision-making, thus 
contributing towards greater competitive advantage.  
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
Moving  forward,  there  will  be  increased  expectation  for  more  efficient  use  of  internal  resources.  A 
more  enhanced  and  integrated  risk  management  framework,  and  the  adoption  of  a  risk  adjusted 
performance  management  model  would  serve  to  further  facilitate  shareholders’  activism  and  drive 
greater efficiency among banks.  
Risk management however does not operate in a vacuum or in isolation and it should not be viewed 
merely  for  the  purpose  of  regulatory  compliance.  Priority  should  be  given  to  ensure  that  the  risk 
management  framework  is  well-aligned  and  well-integrated  with  the  strategic  business  directions  of 
the banking institution. The benefits of refined risk quantification and more robust risk management 
should be translated into improvements in business operations and more effective functioning of the 
institutions. This will in turn ultimately bring benefits to the consumers and the economy at large. 
Implementation challenges and considerations 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Given  the  complexity  of  Basel  II,  the  ability  to  comply  appears  to  be  the  main  concern  within  the 
banking  community.  This  is  truly  a  major  undertaking  with  respect  to  the  IRB  approaches  or  the 
internal rating based systems. The resources involved and data constraints are often cited as the two 
main challenges in implementing the IRB approach, particularly for banks in the emerging markets. At 
this stage, data on default and credit migration for certain market segments is too limited to facilitate 
any meaningful analysis. It is therefore recognized that some lead time would be needed for banking 
institutions  to  produce  a  robust  and  meaningful  validation  of  internal  estimates  of  probabilities  of 
default  and  loss  given  default.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  banks  should  wait  until  all  the 
requisite data is in place. Banks can initiate work to establish the framework for analytical functions.  
While the industry survey conducted by Bank Negara Malaysia revealed a strong preference among 
Malaysian  banking  institutions  to  adopt  the  IRB  approach,  many  had  indicated  the  need  to  further 
strengthen their business case and undertake more comprehensive gap and impact analysis. This is 
indeed a critical process. Of importance is to be able to extract the benefits out of the new accord. This 
would however, take time even for large and internationally active banking institutions that have made 
substantial enhancements over the years. 
Standardised approach offers benefits with much less complexity 
While capital savings from the adoption of the standardized approach may be relatively lower than the 
IRB  approach,  the  benefits  to  be  gained  under  the  standardized  approach  are  still  considerable 
compared  to  the  current  accord.  It  includes  the  lower  risk  weights  to  be  assigned  to  the  mortgage 
portfolio,  which  would  be  reduced  from  50%  currently  to  35%  under  the  standardized  approach. 
Similarly, substantial capital savings could be generated from lending to small and medium enterprises 
(SME) that would qualify as retail exposures where the risk weights would be lowered from 100% to 
75%. The potential impact of lower risk weight for this sector under the standardized approach could 
result in greater participation by banking institutions in this market segment.  
Bank Negara Malaysia’s initial estimates on the impact of the standardized approach indicated that 
benefits would be derived by individual institutions in terms of capital savings. However, improvements 
in a number of areas such as loan identification systems as well as collateral management systems 
would  result  in  higher  capital  savings  for  credit  risks  under  the  standardized  approach.  Continuous 
calibration would be required to ensure that banks under the standardized approach would continue to 
maximize capital savings for credit risks in view of the requirement for an explicit capital charge for 
operational risk under the new accord.  
While  the  IRB  approaches  promise  greater  capital  savings  in  the  longer  term,  the  adoption  of  the 
standardized  approach  in  the  transition  is  considered  a  more  pragmatic  option  even  for  some 
internationally  active  banking  groups.  Under  the  IRB  approaches,  banks  would  need  to  reach  an 
agreement  with  the  regulator  in  the  countries  they  operate  on  the  robustness  of  group  internal 
estimates and validation. The standardized approach is therefore seen to provide the breathing space 
for a smooth transition to IRB approaches while at the same time allowing banking institutions to avail 
themselves of the benefits of capital savings.  
BIS Review 21/2004 
 3
Different approaches are adopted by regulators 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While  there  has  been  global  acceptance  of  the  broad  principles  of  the  new  accord,  differing 
implementation  approaches  are  being  adopted  by  different  countries.  In  some  countries,  regulators 
have  opted  for  the  accord  to  be  applied  to  all  institutions  while  in  others  selected  banks  are  being 
mandated specific approaches. Some other regulators have given greater flexibility for banks or have 
extended  the  timeline  for  the  implementation  of  the  new  accord.  These  reflect  the  different 
considerations and priorities accorded by the various regulators in their policy agenda. In essence, the 
decision  by  national  regulators  are  based  on  a  number  of  common  factors,  namely,  the  stage  of 
industry  development  and  market  infrastructure,  the  size  and  types  of  institutions  involved,  the 
regulatory philosophy and priorities, as well as the economic environment. Of importance is to ensure 
that the implementation of the new accord is consistent with the overall agenda and objectives for the 
financial sector to facilitate growth and economic expansion.  
Implementation principles for Malaysia 
In  Malaysia  the  appropriateness  of  the  new  accord  is  being  assessed  in  the  context  of  our  own 
objective to develop a more effective and resilient banking system that is best able to serve the nation. 
In  view  of  the  significant  and  special  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  economy,  a  well-capitalised 
banking system has always been a priority in the regulatory framework. In this context, the principles 
advocated by the new accord are consistent with our regulatory philosophy that encourages capacity 
building and enhancing risk management.  
Effective  Basel  II  implementation  strategies  would  be  premised  on  the  industry  having  the  correct 
understanding of the new framework. To implement the required changes, it is therefore vital that the 
management  of  banking  institutions  understands  the  principles  of  the  new  accord.  One  common 
misperception  is  that  the recognition  of  financial collateral  under the  new  framework will  encourage 
more  collateral-based  lending  within  the  banking  sector.  This  is  a  simplistic  conclusion  given  the 
stringent minimum standards for the recognition of such financial collaterals before banks can qualify 
for the capital savings. Moreover, the potential capital savings under the new framework is not from 
the recognition of financial collateral, but rather from the much lower risk weights attached to higher 
rated loans.  
Indeed, the real benefit to be gained under Basel II environment comes from improved standards of 
loan  underwriting  and  more  accurate  quantification  of  risks  that  can  subsequently  translate  into 
enhanced performance. Acceptance of collateral is only to mitigate loss severity should a default take 
place. In an increasingly more competitive marketplace, the emphasis is on maximizing risk-adjusted 
returns on capital and maintaining an optimal asset portfolio that reflects the risk tolerance level of the 
institution. In such an environment, overemphasis on collateral is certainly not viable.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Bank Negara Malaysia will adopt four key principles in the implementation of Basel II in Malaysia: 
Firstly,  the  need  to  accommodate  capacity  building  efforts,  with  strong  emphasis  on  gradual 
enhancement to risk management framework for all banking institutions; 
Secondly, a more flexible timeframe that allows capacity building measures to be implemented; 
Thirdly, an emphasis on strong business justification instead of regulatory mandate for the adoption of 
IRB approaches; and 
Finally,  an  enhanced  supervisory  methodology  to  assess  internal  models  and  advanced  risk 
management systems.  
Malaysia will adopt a two-phased approach for Basel II 
These  principles  would  be  implemented  in  a  two-phased  approach.  The  first  phase  will  begin  in 
January 2008 where all banks will adopt the standardized approach for credit risks and basic indicator 
approach  for  operational  risks.  Banking  institutions  would  be  required  to  submit  to  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  parallel  calculation  of  capital  adequacy  on  a  monthly  basis  for  one  year  prior  to  the 
implementation of the standardized approach.  
4 
 BIS Review 21/2004
In Phase I, Bank Negara Malaysia may also allow banking institutions to remain on the current accord 
if  they  intend  to  adopt  the  Foundation  Internal  Rating  Based  (FIRB)  approach,  instead  of  the 
standardized  approach.  However,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  would  require  a  submission  of  business 
case justification as well as a blueprint for implementation that has been approved by the Board of 
Directors of the banking institutions concerned. These banking institutions would be expected to have 
undertaken  a  comprehensive  gap  and  business  impact  studies  to  justify  their  roll-out  plans.  In  this 
regard, a broad guideline on the required processes and expectations will be issued to facilitate the 
process.  
Banking  institutions  intending  to  adopt  the  FIRB  approach  are expected  to  do  so  by January  2010. 
This is when the second phase of implementation will commence. These institutions will be required to 
submit to Bank Negara Malaysia parallel calculation of capital adequacy on a monthly basis for one 
year prior to implementation. However, during the second phase, banks on the standardized approach 
will  not  be  mandated  to  migrate  to  the  FIRB  approach.  For  purposes  of  regulatory  validation  and 
approval, Bank Negara Malaysia would expect that all parameters and assumptions used for the FIRB 
approach will be based on local data inputs.  
Conclusion - capital is key, but not the sole factor to ensure soundness 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Despite the increased sophistication of the regulatory capital framework and internal economic capital 
model  in  banks,  capital  remains  the  last  line  of  defence.  Capital  regulations  will  have  to  be 
complemented with prudent banking that includes enhanced underwriting standards, effective internal 
controls and risk management, as well as strong corporate governance. In achieving your future goals 
and  aspirations,  significant  benefits  can  be  derived  from  Basel  II  provided  that  your  institutions 
undertake  the  necessary  efforts  to  align  your  strategy  and  business  orientation  with  the  new 
standards. Your interest, participation and decisive actions on the new accord are therefore important 
in positioning your institution in this increasingly competitive and more dynamic environment.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 5
