Alan Greenspan: The state of the banking industry 
Statement of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington, 
20 April 2004.  
 to 
the 
invest 
incentives 
industry  with  proper 
Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here this 
morning to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking system and various related matters. They include 
improved risk-management practices of banks, the current status and direction of our regulatory efforts 
to  revise  capital  standards  for  internationally  active  banks,  deposit  insurance,  and  the  ongoing 
consolidation process within our domestic banking industry. 
Growth in the size and complexity of the largest U.S. and foreign banking organizations, in particular, 
has  substantially  affected  financial  markets  and  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  practices  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  and  other  bank  regulatory  agencies  around  the  world.  It  has,  in  part,  required 
authorities to focus more than before on the internal processes and controls of these institutions and 
on  their  ability  to  manage  risk.  Only  through  steady  and  continued  progress  in  measuring  and 
understanding risk will our banking institutions remain vibrant, healthy, and competitive in meeting the 
growing financial demands of the nation while keeping systemic risk at acceptable levels. Therefore, 
the  regulatory  authorities  must  provide 
in 
risk-management systems that are necessary to compete successfully in an increasingly competitive 
and efficient global market.  
When  I  last  discussed  the  condition  of  the  banking  industry  with  this  committee  in  June  2001,  the 
industry’s asset quality had begun to decline, but from a relatively high level, and banks were generally 
well positioned to deal with the emerging problems. Moreover, as early as the late 1990s, both the 
industry and bank supervisors had begun to address the slippage in credit standards that was one of 
the causes of the drop in asset quality. By most measures, this was an unusually early stage in the 
economic cycle to begin addressing such deterioration.  
Today, with the benefit of hindsight, we can see that the weaknesses I cited then have indeed been 
mild  for  the banking system  as  a whole  and  that  the  system  remains strong  and  well  positioned  to 
meet customer needs for credit and other financial services. During the past two years, in particular, 
the  industry  extended  its  string  of  high  and  often  record  quarterly  earnings.  For  the  full  year 2003, 
commercial  banks  reported  net  profits  of  more  than  $100  billion  while  maintaining  historically  high 
equity  and  risk-based  capital  ratios  and  enjoying  brisk  asset  growth.  Although  the  demand  for 
business  loans  and  the  underwriting  of  equity  securities  have  been  weak  over  the  past  few  years, 
banking organizations have continued to benefit from strong demand for household credit, not least for 
residential mortgage products as interest rates declined substantially.  
Moreover,  the  volume  of  problem  assets  in  commercial  banks  declined  each  quarter  last  year, 
including a drop in the fourth quarter of nearly 10 percent, which brought the ratio of problem assets to 
total loans and foreclosed assets to less than 1 percent - its lowest level since year-end 2000. As a 
result  of  this  favorable  performance,  both  the  size  and  the  number  of  bank  failures  in  recent  years 
have been exceptionally small. Last year, for example, only two banks, with combined assets of just 
$1.5 billion, failed.  
The results of last year’s interagency review of large syndicated loans and internal reports about the 
level and distribution of their criticized and classified credits lead us to expect still further improvement 
in the industry’s asset quality this year. Notably, the pool of “special mention” credits that are weak but 
still performing (and which tend to produce the more serious problem assets) has shrunk both in the 
annual Shared National Credit review and in the quarterly bank reports.  
Risk  measures  derived  from  prices  of  publicly  traded  bank  securities  -  stocks,  debt  securities,  and 
credit default swaps - also signal that market participants are taking an increasingly positive view of 
the future of banks. Indeed, these measures suggest the lowest level of market concern about these 
companies that we have seen during the five-years in which we have tracked them.  
The banking industry’s relatively benign experience with loan losses these past few years may not be 
surprising  given  that  the  recession  was  mild  by  most  measures.  The  experience  is  more  notable, 
however,  when  one  considers  the  broader  range  of  shocks  and  developments  that  have  occurred 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
during this period, including the September 11 attacks, Argentina’s credit default, the continuing shift 
by  large  and  not-so-large  firms  in  this  country  from  bank  to  capital  market  financing,  and  the 
concentration of recent economic pressures on specific industries and business sectors. These events 
tended to reduce the overall quality of corporate loan portfolios at banks and contributed significantly 
to  banks’  efforts  to  improve  their  measurement  and  management  of  risks,  especially  after  the 
substantial credit losses they suffered in the late 1980s and early 1990s. These efforts, aided by the 
continued  trend  toward  industry  consolidation,  helped  moderate  previous  concentrations  of  credit 
exposures in bank portfolios and fueled greater use of new methods of hedging and managing risk.  
At  present,  credit  risk-management  practices  are  perhaps  least  developed  in  measuring  risk 
associated  with  exposures  related  to  construction  projects  and  to  the  financing  of  commercial  real 
estate,  which  have  grown  rapidly,  particularly  among  regional  and  community  banks.  At  all  banks, 
such lending represented nearly 19 percent of all bank loans at year-end 2003 - the highest level thus 
far  recorded  -  and  accounted  for  essentially  all  the  loan  growth  last  year  at  banks  with  less  than 
$1 billion in assets.  
Despite  the  limited  development  of  formal  risk-management  practices,  credit  standards  applied  to 
these loans have apparently been quite high. At least, we see as yet no signs of rising credit losses 
from such lending, and supervisory and market sources indicate that the poor lending practices of the 
late  1980s  and  early  1990s  have  been  largely  avoided.  Nonetheless,  the  historical  record  provides 
ample  evidence  of  the  risks  associated  with  this  form  of  lending  and  of  accumulating  large  credit 
concentrations in any form of exposure. Supervisors continue to monitor these concentrations and the 
lending  practices  and  market  conditions  that  will  ultimately  determine  their  effects  on  the  banking 
system.  
These and other gradual changes in the balance sheets of banks, along with the sustained decline in 
market rates, helped compress net interest margins at many banks, as they chose not to reflect the full 
effect of lower market rates into rates paid on deposits without a specified maturity. As a percentage of 
earning assets, net interest income of all insured commercial banks declined 27 basis points last year, 
to  3.80 percent,  the  lowest  level  in  more  than  a  decade.  Although  this  compression  eased  slightly 
during the fourth quarter, we cannot yet tell whether margins have begun to rebound.  
This compression of margins needs to be understood in the fuller context of the banks’ sensitivity to 
changes  in  interest  rates  and,  in  particular,  the  effect  of  historically  low  rates  on  banks’  financial 
performance  and  condition.  At  the  same  time  that  declining  rates  were  adversely  affecting  the 
industry’s interest margins, they were also spurring growth in mortgage-related assets and associated 
loan-origination fees and were producing significant capital gains in bank investment portfolios. Lower 
interest  rates,  along  with  the  decline  in  equity  valuations  experienced  during  2000-2002,  also 
contributed to a substantial inflow of liquid deposits by lessening their opportunity cost.  
Under these circumstances, and with a steep yield curve, a banker’s natural inclination might be to 
shift the credit mix and extend the maturity of assets in an attempt to bolster asset yields. To some 
extent such actions have been taken. Residential mortgage loans and pass-through securities have 
increased from 17.5 percent of assets in 2000 to 20 percent in 2003. But the manner in which this 
growth  has  occurred  suggests  a  balanced  assessment  of  risk.  Call  Report  data  indicate  that  a 
substantial  portion  of  the  increase  in  mortgage  assets  has  been  in  adjustable-rate  or  shorter-term 
mortgages, particularly at smaller banks. For their part, large institutions also have significant capacity 
to offset on-balance-sheet exposures through off-balance-sheet transactions.  
All  told,  the  available  data,  industry  and  supervisory  judgments,  and  the  long  and  successful 
experience  of  the  U.S.  commercial  banking  system  in  dealing  with  changing  rates  suggest  that,  in 
general, the industry is adequately managing its interest rate exposure. Many banks indicate that they 
now  either  are  interest-rate  neutral  or  are  positioned  to  benefit  from  rising  rates.  These  views  are 
based partly on specific steps that they have taken to adjust portfolios and partly on judgments about 
the effects that rising interest rates would have in easing pressure on interest margins. That is, many 
banks seem to believe that as rates rise - presumably along with greater economic growth - they can 
increase lending rates more than they will need to increase rates paid on deposits. Certainly, there are 
always  outliers,  and  some  banks  would  undoubtedly  be  hurt  by  rising  rates.  However,  the  industry 
appears  to  have  been  sufficiently  mindful  of  interest  rate  cycles  and  not  to  have  exposed  itself  to 
undue risk.  
In other areas, earlier concerns about the effect of the century date change on computer systems, the 
destruction  of  infrastructure  in  the  September  11  attacks,  and  the  increased  volume  and  scope  of 
banking transactions generally have also required financial institutions, particularly large institutions, to 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
devote  more  effort  and  resources  to  contingency  planning  in  order  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  their 
operations. Last fall’s power outage and Hurricane Isabel may have offered only limited tests of the 
industry’s improved procedures, but financial firms handled those challenges extremely well.  
As the nation’s central bank and as a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve has a strong interest in 
the continued operation of the U.S. financial system after a disruptive event. To that point, last year, 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller of the Currency jointly issued an interagency paper, “Sound Practices to Strengthen the 
Resilience  of  the  U.S.  Financial  System.”  That  paper  provides  guidance  that  supplements 
long-standing principles of business continuity planning and disaster recovery and is directed at the 
entities that pose systemic risk to the financial system, particularly in the context of their clearing and 
settlement activities. Through the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, we also issued 
revised  examination  guidance  on  business  continuity  planning.  This  guidance  covers  a  variety  of 
threats to business operations, including terrorism, and will be used in future examinations.  
Improved risk management in banks 
Independent of continuity planning for unusual events, the basic thrust of recent efforts to improve the 
management of risk has been better quantification and the creation of a formal and more-disciplined 
process for recognizing, pricing, and managing risk of all types. In the area of credit risk, by providing 
those  involved  with  a  stronger,  more-informed  basis  for  making  judgments,  this  development  has 
enhanced the interaction between lending and risk-control officers. Operating with better information 
does not mean that banks will necessarily reduce credit availability for riskier borrowers. It does mean 
that  banks  can  more  knowingly  choose  their  risk  profiles  and  price  risk  accordingly.  Better, 
more-informed  lending  practices  should  also  lead  to  a  more-efficient  allocation  of  scarce  financial 
capital to the benefit of the economy at large.  
Greater internal transparency and quantification of risk have helped bank managers monitor portfolio 
performance and identify aspects of the risk-measurement and credit-granting process that begin to 
move  off  track.  As  risk-measurement  and  disclosure  practices  evolve,  investors  and  uninsured 
creditors will also become more motivated and better positioned to understand the risk profile of banks 
and  convey  their  own  views  of  banking  risks.  Indeed,  accommodating  greater  and  more-informed 
market discipline is an important goal of bank supervisors.  
Perhaps  most  important,  better  risk  management  has  already  begun  to  show  real  potential  for 
reducing  the  wide  swings  in  bank  credit  availability  that  historically  have  been  associated  with  the 
economic  cycle.  Sound  procedures  for  risk  quantification  generally  lead  to  tighter  controls  and 
assigned responsibilities and to less unintended acceptance of risk during both the strengthening and 
weakening  phases  of  the  business  cycle.  Earlier  detection  of  deviations  from  expectations  leads  to 
earlier corrective actions by bank managers and, as necessary, by bank supervisors.  
Better methods for measuring credit risk have also spurred growth in secondary markets for weak or 
problem assets, which have provided banks with a firmer, sounder basis for valuing these credits and 
an  outlet  for  selling  them  and  limiting  future  loss.  Insurance  companies,  hedge  funds,  and  other 
investors  acquire  these  assets  at  discounts  that  they  judge  are  sufficient  to  meet  their  expected 
returns and balance their portfolio risks. The result is greater liquidity for this segment of bank loan 
portfolios and the earlier removal of weakening credits from bank balance sheets. Portfolio risks have 
also been increasingly hedged by transactions that do not require asset sales, such as derivatives that 
transfer credit risk.  
With  greater  use,  more-thorough  review,  and  more-extensive  historical  data,  risk  modeling  has 
improved in accuracy and will continue to do so. Supervisors are also learning these techniques and 
are  pressing  banks  to  improve  their  own  methods  and  systems  to  keep  up  with  the  latest 
developments. In the United States, our leading banking organizations began the process years ago 
and,  in  many  respects,  were  in  the  vanguard  of  the  effort  worldwide.  Nevertheless,  they  and  the 
risk-measurement process itself have much further to go.  
Recent  initiatives  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  to  revise  international  capital 
standards have helped focus attention on risk-measurement practices and have encouraged further 
investment in this area. Moreover, the very improvements in technology that facilitated better bank risk 
measurement  and  management  have  undermined  the  current  regulatory  capital  regime  by  creating 
transactions  and  instruments  that  were  not  conceived  when  the  current  regulatory  standard  was 
developed.  
BIS Review 22/2004 
 3
Although these developments have sometimes helped banks circumvent existing rules, they have also 
enabled  banks  to  hedge  portfolio  risk  in  ways  that  the  current  accord  does  not  address  well.  As  a 
result, the current regulatory capital standard is increasingly unable to establish capital requirements 
for  our  largest  and  most-complex  banking  organizations  that  reflect  their  true  underlying  risks.  We 
need a more accurate, more risk-sensitive measure of capital adequacy to provide these institutions 
with appropriate risk-management incentives and to provide ourselves with a more reliable basis for 
supervising  them  in  a  way  that  focuses  on  true  risks.  In  the  process,  such  a  measure  should  also 
enhance  our  efforts  in  taking  prompt  corrective  action.  For  all  these  reasons,  I  believe  the  U.S. 
banking  agencies  must  remain  committed  to  the  process  of  developing  and  applying  a  revised 
regulatory capital standard for the world’s international banks.  
Proposed capital standards 
Last summer, the U.S. banking agencies took another step toward adopting the new capital standard 
by issuing for public comment an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR). The conception and 
design of the proposed standard, referred to as Basel II, are based on techniques developed in recent 
years by the largest banks, especially those, as I noted, in this country. As the scale and complexity of 
their activities grew, the banks needed to find better and more efficient ways to understand, manage, 
and control their risk-taking activities; to promote and respond to the emergence of new markets, such 
as those for securitized assets; and to make greater use of available technology and financial theory in 
measuring and managing their risks.  
Before  the  agencies  issued  the  ANPR,  numerous  changes  in  the  proposed  Basel  II  Accord  had 
already been made in light of earlier comments. Reflecting the comments received on the ANPR, the 
Basel Committee agreed to extend the period for reaching an agreement in principle until mid-2004 to 
permit more time for revisions of the proposal to be formulated. Indeed, we have already negotiated 
some  major  changes  in  the  international  proposal  to  reflect  U.S.  public  comments.  These  changes 
include  the  adoption  of  a  framework  based  on  unexpected  loss  and  a  revised  set  of  rules  on 
securitization.  We  have  also  modified  the  implementation  process  to  ease  the  burden  on  banking 
organizations  that  operate  across  borders.  These  technical  changes  were  high  on  the  list  of 
modifications suggested by commenters.  
The  shift  from  a  combined  “expected”  and  “unexpected”  loss  framework  to  one  that  focuses  on 
unexpected  loss  only  is  crucial  to  ensuring  that  the  regulatory  capital  framework  is  consistent  with 
standard internal banking practices, both here and abroad. That change will also simplify other parts of 
the  proposal.  The  modification  on  securitization  was  imperative  to  permit  U.S.  banks  to  continue 
participating in important funding markets that they pioneered and to ensure a prudent risk-sensitive 
capital treatment for securitization exposures. Beyond these achievements, working groups in Basel 
are considering other U.S. proposals related to refining measures of expected loss, an issue that a 
number of commenters raised. The U.S. agencies are still trying to reach a consensus on a revised 
proposal  for  capital  charges  on  retail  credit  to  put  before  our  colleagues  in  Basel.  The  Federal 
Reserve, for its part, will continue to make every effort to reach consensus on this issue that is both 
risk-sensitive and workable.  
I believe that all the federal banking agencies are committed to achieving a revised accord that reflects 
the  realities  of  the  twenty-first  century;  that  meets  our  needs  for  a  safe,  sound,  and  competitive 
banking  system;  and  that  addresses  the  legitimate  concerns  of  the  industry.  The  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  has  raised  important  issues  about  capital  adequacy,  and  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  has  expressed  significant  concerns  about  a  capital  structure  that  may 
inadvertently disrupt retail credit operations of banks. All the agencies are addressing these concerns 
by jointly developing proposals to bring to Basel. In working to reach full agreement among ourselves, 
and  ultimately  with  our  colleagues  abroad,  we  all  seek  a  solution  that  promotes  sound  banking 
practices  and  that  we  can  adequately  implement  and  enforce.  I  hope  that  in  the  days  ahead  the 
agencies can close the gap on credit cards within such an overarching framework.  
If  we  can  do  so,  the  Basel  Committee  should  be  able  to  reach  agreement  in  principle  on  a  new 
proposal  around  midyear,  and  the  U.S.  banking  agencies  expect  to  evaluate  that  proposal  through 
another “quantitative impact study” that we plan to conduct at large U.S. banks this fall. Committee 
members  are  aware  that  this  survey  and  public  comments  on  a  forthcoming  Notice  of  Proposed 
Rulemaking  may  raise  still  further  issues  that  will  need  to  be  addressed  before  we  can  implement 
Basel II  in  the  United  States.  Of  course,  other  countries  have  their  own  national  and  European 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2004
Union-wide  review  processes  to  conclude,  and  those  consultations  too,  may  raise  issues  that  will 
require additional attention.  
As this committee knows, the U.S. agencies have proposed that in this country the most-advanced 
version of Basel II is to be required only of the largest, most-complex banking organizations, although 
we anticipate that some of the other larger banks also will choose to adopt that version. Non-adopters 
in  the  United  States  will  continue  to  operate  under  the  current  capital  rules.  The  current  regulatory 
capital regime, as I noted, has become less effective for the largest organizations while consolidation 
has  sharply  increased  the  scale  and  scope  of  their  activities.  In  this  country,  the  Basel II  proposal 
focuses on them. The current rules remain appropriate and prudent for other banking organizations in 
the  United  States,  and  the  agencies  have  decided  that  imposing  the  cost  of  new  rules  on  these 
banking organizations does not pass a cost-benefit test.  
Nonetheless,  change  in  the  procedures  for  calculating  regulatory  capital  for  larger  banks  creates 
uncertainty among those entities to which the new rules would not apply. The comments we received 
on the ANPR and from the Congress last year indicate that some smaller banks are concerned that 
their  competitive  environment  will  change.  More  specifically,  these  fears  include  the  possibility  that 
Basel II will induce adopters, who are likely to have reductions in regulatory capital requirements, to 
redeploy their capital by acquiring non-adopters or to gain a competitive advantage, particularly in the 
markets for small business and residential mortgage loans.  
To judge the merits of these concerns, the Federal Reserve conducted two technical and empirical 
analyses  of  the  underlying  issues  and  made  the  papers  available  to  the  public  last  month; 
congressional staff members were also briefed. A third study will be completed shortly, and a fourth 
will commence soon.  
The first of these papers, dealing with mergers and acquisitions, found virtually no statistical support 
for the view that either the level of, or changes in, excess regulatory capital have played a role in past 
merger and acquisition decisions, which suggests that any future effect of Basel II on such decisions is 
also  likely  to  be  quite  small.  Moreover,  reductions  in  regulatory  capital  requirements  for  adopters 
relative  to  the  requirements  for  non-adopters  are  unlikely  to  lead  to  an  acceleration  in  the  pace  of 
consolidation.  
The  second  study  evaluated  the  likely  effect  of  Basel  II  on  the  competition  between  adopters  and 
non-adopters in the market for small- and medium-sized business loans. It estimated that the marginal 
cost of such loans at adopting banks would decline no more than about 16 basis points, on average, 
and is likely to decline by less than that in most cases.  
Importantly,  the  study  also  found  that  most  small  business  loans  made  by  community  banks  are 
sufficiently different from those made by either required or likely adopters of Basel II as to make any 
marginal cost differences virtually irrelevant. Moreover, being riskier, the small business loans made 
by  most  community  banks  are  priced  so  much  above  the  loans  made  by  the  large  banks  that  the 
marginal  cost  benefit  to  adopters  would  not  be  a  material  competitive  factor.  The  study  did  find, 
however, that the types of small- and medium-sized business loans made by adopters and other large 
banks are, indeed, similar and similarly priced, so that adopting institutions may have a competitive 
advantage in many cases over other large banks that choose not to adopt Basel II. I will return to the 
implication of this finding in a moment.  
A  paper  analyzing  competitive  effects  in  the  residential  mortgage  market  will  be  available  later  this 
spring, and once the U.S. agencies agree on a proposal regarding the treatment of credit cards, staff 
members can begin analyzing potential competitive effects of the proposal in that market, as well. All 
four  papers  will  then  be  re-evaluated  early  next  year  when  new  data  become  available  from  the 
agencies’ next quantitative impact study.  
If the evidence following these reviews and a public comment process suggests that implementation of 
bifurcated capital standards in this country may affect competition in certain markets, the proposals for 
Basel II may need to be reconsidered. We may need, for example, to modify the application of Basel II 
in the United States, where permissible under the Basel agreement; negotiate further changes in the 
international agreement itself; or change the way the current capital rules are applied to institutions 
that do not adopt the new standard.  
In short, if we have sufficient indications that implementation of a new capital standard will distort the 
balance of competition, we can and will apply policies to mitigate this effect consistent with the risk 
profile of individual institutions. We cannot, however, respond to an unsubstantiated and generalized 
fear  of  change.  Such  concerns  should  not  halt  the  evolution  of  regulatory  capital  standards  for  the 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 5
large, complex banking organizations that play such an important role in our banking system and in 
global financial markets.  
Bank consolidation  
Legislation  designed  to  deregulate  U.S.  banking  markets,  technology,  and  other  factors  have 
contributed  to  significant  structural  change  in  the  banking  industry  and  to  a  decline  of  nearly 
40 percent in the number of banking organizations since the mid-1980s, when industry consolidation 
began. Consolidation activity has slowed sharply in the past five years, but a recent uptick in merger 
announcements,  including  a  couple  of  very  large  transactions,  may  signal  a  return  to  a  more  rapid 
pace of bank merger activity. Since 1995, the ten largest U.S. banking organizations have increased 
their share of domestic banking assets from 29 percent to 46 percent at year-end 2003. Yet, over the 
past decade, roughly 90 percent of bank mergers have involved a target with less than $1 billion in 
assets, and three-quarters have involved an acquiree with assets of less than $250 million.  
This ongoing consolidation of the U.S. banking system has not, in my judgment, harmed the overall 
competitiveness of our banking and financial markets. Although they have facilitated consolidation, the 
reduced  barriers  to  entry  -  such  as  were  provided  by  the  Riegle-Neal  Act’s  relaxation  of  interstate 
banking laws - have provided net competitive benefits to U.S. consumers of financial services.  
Other economic forces, such as technological change and globalization, have stimulated competition 
among depository institutions and between depositories and nonbank providers of financial services. 
In addition to other credit-extending businesses, our system of depository institutions alone continues 
to be characterized by many thousands of commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions. 
Measures  of  concentration  in  local  banking  markets,  both  urban  and  rural,  have  actually  declined 
modestly not just since 2000 but since the mid-1990s. Significantly, most households and small and 
medium-sized businesses obtain the vast majority of their banking services in such local markets.  
Deposit insurance  
I would like to turn now to the issue of deposit insurance reform and to the need for some legislative 
change in this area. As the committee knows, most depository institutions have not paid any deposit 
insurance premiums since 1996, and in fact, some large institutions that have been chartered in the 
past  eight  years  have  never  paid  them  at  all.  Under  current  conditions,  not  only  is  a  government 
guarantee being provided free, but also depositories having similar or identical risks are exposed to 
potentially disparate treatment should one, but not the other, of the deposit insurance funds fall below 
its  funding  target.  In  that  situation,  the  FDIC  would  be  required  to  impose  a  charge  on  one  set  of 
depository  institutions while  continuing to  provide  free  deposit  insurance  to  those  in  the  other  fund. 
Because  some  depository  institutions today  have commingled  BIF-  and  SAIF-insured  deposits  as  a 
result  of  bank  and  thrift  mergers,  this  disparate  treatment  could  apply  even  to  different  deposit 
accounts within the same depository institution.  
At  this  time,  the  Congress  has  the  opportunity  to  provide  the  FDIC  with  greater  flexibility  to  charge 
risk-based premiums, possibly using market data (for example, rates on uninsured deposits) for the 
largest  banks,  to  allow  such  premiums  to  increase  or  decrease  in  a  gradual  manner  over  a  wider 
range of fund reserve ratios, and to treat all depositories with similar risk ratings equally and equitably. 
Such reforms should be implemented in a manner that does not unnecessarily create additional moral 
hazard and that strengthens, rather than erodes, market discipline.  
Higher coverage limits, for example, would exacerbate moral hazard problems without apparent and 
offsetting  benefits.  The  current  level  of  coverage  seems  adequate  to  meet  the  needs  of  an 
overwhelming  majority  of  depositors.  First,  depositors  have  certain  flexibility  in  distributing  large 
balances  among  multiple  accounts  and  depository  institutions  to  obtain  higher  insurance  coverage. 
Second,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  latest  survey  of  consumer  finances  indicates  that  at  year-end  2001 
less than 4 percent of U.S. depositor households had any uninsured deposits. Moreover, the median 
bank IRA/Keogh account balance was only $15,000, well below the existing insurance limit. Finally, 
community banks have shown themselves just as adept as the largest banks in attracting uninsured 
deposits when necessary to fund customer loan demand.  
6 
 BIS Review 22/2004
Conclusion 
In  closing,  Mr.  Chairman, let  me reiterate  that  the past  decade  has been  one  in which  the  banking 
industry  has  recorded  persistent  record  profits while  providing  an  ever-wider  range  of  products and 
services  to  much  more  diverse  groups.  The  industry’s  experience  during  the  past  several  years  in 
dealing with clear weakness in key economic sectors demonstrates the importance of strong capital 
positions  and  sound  risk-management  practices.  Bank  supervisors  worldwide  are  working  to 
encourage  further  progress  in  these  areas,  through  more-accurate  and  more-effective  regulatory 
capital standards based on even better internal risk-management procedures.  
BIS Review 22/2004 
 7
