David Dodge: Adjusting to a changing economic world 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Board of Trade of Metropolitan 
Montréal, Montréal, 11 February 2004.  
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It’s a pleasure to be with you here in Montréal today.  
These are turbulent times, not just for business people, but for all Canadians. We have come through 
a very difficult year, a year filled with surprises that have challenged us all. At times like these, it is 
easy to focus on the near-term issues and problems. But by doing that, we risk losing sight of the big 
picture.  The  Bank  of  Canada  had  plenty  to  say  about  the  near-term  outlook  in  its  Monetary  Policy 
Report Update a few weeks ago. So today, I want to talk about the longer-term trends at work in the 
economy. 
In doing so, I want to take a quick look back at some of the major economic events of recent decades, 
and  examine  how  we  approached  the  issues  of  adjustment  at  the  time.  Then,  I  will  discuss  the 
adjustments that are needed now and in the future. In this way, I hope to draw on the lessons learned 
from  the  past.  I  will  frame  this  discussion  in  terms  of  structural  economic  policies,  macroeconomic 
policies, and the role of the exchange rate in facilitating adjustments. 
Previous adjustment policies 
I will start by going back to the 1970s. There were at least two forces at play that highlighted the need 
for economic adjustments. The first was a significant drop in the rate of productivity growth. Canada, 
like the United States, had become accustomed to productivity rising at a rapid pace during the 1950s 
and  1960s.  With  this  growth  in  productivity  came  steady  advances  in  real  incomes.  But  the  trend 
towards higher productivity slowed abruptly in the early 1970s.  
At the time, policy-makers, business, and labour assumed that the slowdown was cyclical. It wasn’t. 
Economists still don’t have a complete explanation for it. But what we now understand more clearly is 
that the productivity increases of the 1950s and 1960s had a lot to do with the application throughout 
the  economy  of  earlier  advances  in  general-purpose  technology.  Businesses  took  advantage  of 
various technological advances in many diverse fields, enabling them to realize significant productivity 
gains.  
When  productivity  growth  slowed  in  the  1970s,  many  people  assumed  that  the  slowdown  was 
temporary  and  that  rapid  growth  would  resume  on  its  own.  This  was  a  mistake.  Without  solid 
productivity gains, the economy was unable to deliver the increases in real incomes that everyone had 
come to expect. This situation was compounded by the second major event of the 1970s: the energy 
crisis. Unfortunately, we in Canada didn’t recognize the full implications of the energy crisis. We were 
slow to realize that higher oil prices also meant a reduction in the economy’s production capacity.  
Canadian policy-makers tried to cushion the impact of the higher energy prices and slower productivity 
through increased transfers, subsidies, and easier monetary and fiscal policies. For example, the Bank 
of Canada added to liquidity by expanding the money supply too fast in relation to the slower growth in 
the  economy’s  production  capacity.  In  the  wake  of  these  structural  and  macroeconomic  policies, 
inflation rose, and fiscal deficits grew. This slowed the structural-adjustment process in the late 1970s 
and  early  1980s.  All  of  this  was  made  worse  by  the  shared  misperceptions  about  the  productivity 
slowdown. Businesses, households, and governments all thought that economic growth would recover 
and  that  real  incomes  could  continue  to  rise  at  their  previous  rate.  But  without  strong  productivity 
growth the economy could no longer satisfy these demands. 
But that difficult period from 1975 to 1985 taught us a lesson. We learned that structural adjustments 
are  important  and  inevitable,  and  that  macroeconomic  policies  have  a  role  to  play  in  making  those 
adjustments work quickly and with less disruption. Canada had the opportunity to apply those lessons 
in the 1990s. Let me explain how. 
To  begin,  recall  the  state  of  Canada’s  economy  as  the  1990s  began.  Although  inflation  had  come 
down from the very high levels seen in the early 1980s, it was still relatively high by today’s standards. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  picture  was  pretty  grim  and  getting  worse.  Public  sector  deficits  eventually 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 1
peaked  at  around  8  per  cent  of  Canada’s  GDP,  and  public  debt  levels  were  continuing  to  mount. 
Clearly, the situation was not sustainable. Changes were urgently needed.  
The first major change came in 1991, when the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed on a 
series  of  explicit  inflation-reduction  targets.  The  agreement called  for  an  inflation  target  - defined  in 
terms  of  the  annual  rate  of  increase  of  the  consumer  price  index  -  that  descended  gradually  to 
2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. The agreement has been extended three times, 
with the latest one covering the period to the end of 2006. Each time, the midpoint of the target range 
has been kept at 2 per cent. 
This framework has worked very well. From the end of 1994 to today, inflation has averaged almost 
exactly 2 per cent. Moreover, not only has inflation fallen, it has become more stable. Indeed, the trend 
of inflation - as measured by what we call “core inflation” - has stayed within the target range almost 
continuously  for  the  past  10  years.  More  importantly,  we  found  that,  after  a  few  years  of  inflation 
targeting,  the  inflation  expectations  of  Canadians  fell  into  line  with  the  2  per  cent  target.  And 
expectations have remained close to the target in recent years. 
Another  major  adjustment  began  in  the  middle  of  the  1990s.  At  that  time,  Canada  was  facing  an 
unsustainable fiscal situation. Spending had to be put on a viable long-term course, and the ratio of 
public debt to GDP put on a steady downward track.  
By the middle of the decade, governments - federal and provincial - had begun to take the painful but 
necessary steps to balance their books and reduce their debt burdens. This fiscal adjustment helped 
improve  the  credibility  of  Canada’s  economic  policies  and  reduced  the  risk  premium  that  investors 
demanded  on  Canadian  government  bonds.  Lower  interest  rates  reduced  debt-servicing  costs  and 
stimulated economic growth, which brought in more revenues for governments. The federal debt-to-
GDP  ratio  has  fallen  to  about  44  per  cent,  from  a  peak  of  close  to  70  per  cent.  The  ratio  of  total 
government liabilities to GDP has declined from a peak of about 100 per cent to about 80 per cent, 
according to the OECD.  
The other major change in the 1990s was the structural adjustments that took place in the public and 
private sectors. In both cases, these adjustments were enormously helpful, because they made the 
Canadian economy more flexible.  
In the public sector, governments moved to reduce distortions in the economy, by eliminating many 
industrial subsidies, lowering income taxes, and putting the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans on a 
sustainable basis. Further, the government made changes to its system of unemployment insurance, 
basing  the  program  more  on  insurance  principles  and  improving  the  employability  of  labour.  In  the 
private sector, businesses and employees faced restructuring in the wake of free-trade agreements, 
as  Canada  opened  up  further  to  international  competition.  None  of  this  was  easy,  but  it  did  leave 
Canada’s economy more flexible, and in a better position to handle economic shocks and, therefore, 
to grow sustainably. 
Canada’s  floating  exchange  rate  helped  facilitate  the  adjustments  that  were  taking  place  on  these 
various fronts. It helped by sending signals to businesses about the kinds of adjustments that were 
needed. Firms that produced traded goods and services, and that were able to take advantage of free-
trade  agreements  and  strong  foreign  demand,  saw  their  profits  increase.  And  because  the 
depreciating  Canadian  dollar  raised  the  cost  of  machinery  and  equipment  relative  to  labour, 
businesses  in  expanding  sectors  of  the  economy  were  encouraged  to  absorb  some  of  the  excess 
labour  that  had  been  released  by  shrinking  sectors.  The  floating  exchange  rate  also  helped  on  the 
macroeconomic side. The depreciating Canadian dollar in the late 1990s helped to encourage foreign 
demand, as demand from the government sector was being restrained.  
So you can see how these three factors converged in the 1990s to lay the groundwork for a stronger 
economy in the future. A sound macroeconomic policy framework, appropriate structural adjustments, 
and  a  floating  exchange  rate,  all  did  their  part  to  help  the  economy  adjust  to  the  changing 
circumstances of the 1990s. 
Economic adjustments in the future 
That’s a quick look back. Now, I’d like to talk about some of the longer-term forces we can expect to 
see  at  work  in  the  economy  in  the  years  ahead  and  the  economic  adjustments  that  will  likely  be 
necessary.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2004
The first point I would make is that we have an opportunity in the next few years to again register solid 
productivity gains. This time, the information and communications technology sector is providing the 
general-purpose technologies that can drive sustained gains in productivity and incomes. Of course, 
the  mere  presence  of  technology  is  not  enough  to  guarantee  higher  productivity.  We  also  need 
investment,  as  well  as  training  and  organizational  changes  and  flexibility.  In  the  latter  part  of  the 
1990s, Canadians had begun to invest in these productivity-enhancing technologies. After a pause at 
the beginning of this decade, such investments seem to have resumed.  
These efforts are particularly important, especially in light of the serious demographic challenges we 
will face over the next few years. That is my second point: our workforce is aging. Current projections 
are that the share of the population that is of working age - those aged 15 to 64 - will begin to decline 
in  about  15  years.  We  will  need  to  take  these  population  shifts  into  account,  and  to  remove 
impediments for older workers who wish to remain in the labour force.  
The  third  point  I  would  make  is  that  there  are  powerful  forces  in  the  global  economy  that  bear 
watching. The significant imbalances that we now see in the world’s current- and capital-account flows 
need  to  be  corrected.  Emerging  markets,  particularly  in  Asia,  are  becoming  increasingly  powerful 
players in the global economy. All these forces will have an impact on the Canadian economy in the 
years ahead.  
Against  this  backdrop,  what  kinds  of  economic  adjustments  will  be  needed  in  the  future?  Let  me 
suggest a few.  
First,  Canada’s  economic  structures  must  continue  to  adjust  to  changing  circumstances.  There  will 
need to be more high-productivity activities in the economy and fewer low-productivity ones. But for 
significant gains in productivity to resume, governments must ensure that their microeconomic policies 
encourage flexibility and do not hinder innovation in the public and private sectors. Workers will need 
to  have  the  training  and  skills  to  take advantage  of  new  technologies.  And  businesses  will  need  to 
ensure  that  their  organizations  and  practices  allow  the  potential  of  new  technologies  to  be  fully 
realized. 
Second, Canada must keep its fiscal house in order. Canada’s ratio of public debt to GDP will need to 
decline further. This will free up more resources to help us support our aging population. At the same 
time, this implies that governments at all levels will be keeping their budgets more or less balanced, if 
not in surplus.  
What about monetary policy in the future? In the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report Update last month, 
we said that the role of monetary policy is to facilitate adjustments by helping to sustain aggregate 
demand.  
What does this mean? As always, it means that we will aim to return inflation to its 2 per cent target, 
by trying to keep the economy operating as close as possible to its full production capacity. That is our 
constant goal. But it also means that we will be aware of the forces that are driving adjustments in the 
economy in the years ahead. We know that, with a stronger currency, the economy will have to rely 
more on domestic demand and less on foreign demand for ongoing, solid growth. We will take this into 
account as we set monetary policy.  
This  leads  me  to  my  last  point,  which  concerns  the  exchange  rate.  A  floating  exchange  rate  will 
continue  to  be  an  important  part  of  our  monetary  policy  framework,  facilitating  the  necessary 
adjustments and sending important price signals. Canadian businesses should continue to be guided 
by  price  signals,  including  those  being  sent  by  exchange  rates.  Just  as  businesses  reacted  to  the 
signals of a weaker Canadian dollar in the 1990s, they should now respond to the signals of a stronger 
currency against the U.S. dollar, as well as to the changing exchange rates against other currencies. 
A stronger Canadian currency is consistent with the adjustments that are going to be needed in our 
economy,  even  if  the  speed  of  the  recent  appreciation  has  made  these  adjustments  more  difficult. 
Because it makes machinery and equipment less expensive relative to labour, a stronger currency is 
in line with our need to increase productivity, as well as with the future demographic pressures on our 
labour force. A stronger currency is also consistent with the increase in commodity prices relative to 
those of manufactured goods and services. And it increases the price of non-tradable goods relative to 
that of tradable goods. This should encourage the shifting of labour and capital into those sectors that 
are oriented to meeting domestic demand. 
We  are  already  seeing signs  that  Canadian  businesses  are  indeed  adjusting to  the  stronger  dollar. 
Each quarter, the Bank of Canada surveys Canadian firms about the state of their business. Recent 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 3
surveys  show  that  Canadian  firms  are  reasonably  optimistic  about  the  future.  Obviously,  the 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar has affected different companies in different ways. In particular, 
some manufacturers who have not benefited from rising commodity prices have struggled to adjust. 
But most firms are acting to raise productivity, as well as cutting costs, adjusting supply chains, and 
hedging their currency exposure, among other efforts. Those businesses that have been helped by the 
stronger  currency  are  also  adjusting, by  lowering prices, strengthening  their balance sheets,  and  in 
some cases, increasing productivity. Information from the Bank’s latest survey can be found on our 
Web  site.  Our  surveys,  as  well  as  those  conducted  by  the  Export  Development  Canada  and  the 
Conference Board of Canada, suggest that business investment will increase. 
I can appreciate that making some of these adjustments is not easy. For many firms and employees, it 
can be a painful and difficult process. But in today’s world, not adjusting is not an option. Fortunately, 
thanks to a sound economic policy framework, we have a relatively favourable climate in which to take 
these necessary steps. Many elements currently support investment: inflation remains low, stable, and 
predictable, and credit conditions are favourable. Business confidence and balance sheets are strong, 
and equity markets are performing well.  
Conclusion 
Let me close by talking about the lessons we can learn from the past. To me, the key points are clear. 
Economies must have the flexibility to adjust as circumstances change. This means having the right 
structural  policies  in  place,  as  well  as  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies.  Along  with  the  right 
economic policies, a floating exchange rate will help the economy make adjustments more smoothly. 
All of us, whether as economic policy-makers or business people, must be quick to recognize the need 
to adjust. We ignore economic realities at our own peril. When adjustments are too slow, the economy 
suffers. When inappropriate policies are followed, the damage can take years to undo. But when the 
right adjustments are made quickly, the whole economy can benefit.  
As business people making your own adjustments to future economic challenges, you can count on 
the Bank of Canada to pursue the appropriate monetary policy to help you get on with the job.  
4 
 BIS Review 10/2004
