Lim Hng Kiang: Dynamism, confidence, collaboration - regional exchanges in 
the new financial landscape 
Keynote address by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister, Prime Minister’s Office, Second Minster for Finance 
and Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 23rd East Asian and Oceanian Stock 
Exchanges Federation (EAOSEF) General Assembly, Singapore, 15 April 2004. 
 Mr JY Pillay, Chairman, EAOSEF and Chairman, SGX 
Mr Toshitsugu Shimizu, Secretary General, EAOSEF 
Dr Yu-Kyung Kim, Chairman, EAOSEF Working Committee 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
A  warm  welcome  to  everyone,  especially  to  many  of  you  who  have  travelled  to  join  us  here  in 
Singapore. I understand that the EAOSEF General Assembly was previously hosted by Singapore in 
1988.  Today,  we  meet  here  again,  but  amidst  a  global  setting  that  has  changed  significantly.  The 
world is quite different today. Economies and markets alike, are increasingly intertwined. Globalisation 
of markets and rapid advances in technology have altered the global marketplace. This is especially 
so  in  the  world  of  exchanges  and  clearing  houses,  where  the  competitive  landscape  is  changing 
rapidly worldwide.  
Challenges facing exchanges 
The  late  1990s  saw  a  flurry  of  mergers,  alliances  and  demutualisation  among  leading  exchanges. 
They were gearing up for a battle with the alternative trading systems. But the threat from alternative 
trading systems did not materialise. No established exchange has been supplanted. Even in the U.S., 
which has the highest number of alternative trading systems, none have made significant inroads into 
the dominance of established exchanges. 
The  wave  of  consolidation  has,  however,  created  mega-exchanges  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe,  and 
competition among them has proceeded at a furious pace. The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) faces 
a serious challenge on its home turf from Eurex, the all-electronic exchange owned by Deutsche Börse 
and the Swiss Stock Exchange. Eurex is now offering electronic trading in U.S. dollar denominated 
fixed  income  futures  which  have  been  the  mainstay  of  the  CBOT.  The  pan-European  exchange, 
Euronext.Liffe,  is  offering electronic  trading  in  Eurodollar  futures  contracts  in direct  competition  with 
the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  (CME).  CME  has  responded  quickly,  announcing  initiatives  to 
accelerate the migration of its flagship Eurodollar contract to GLOBEX, its electronic trading platform. 
And  just  this  month,  it  was  reported  that  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  may  enter  the  derivatives 
market too. Hardly a week passes without press reports of strategic moves by the exchanges. 
Securities exchanges have not been spared from the competition. London Stock Exchange (LSE) will 
launch its Dutch Trading Service, euroSETS, in May this year. This will allow the most liquid stocks 
listed on Euronext-Amsterdam to be traded through LSE. This bold move is being watched closely by 
the industry, and may challenge conventional wisdom on the contestability of stock exchange liquidity. 
The outcome of these contests could significantly alter the competitive landscape for exchanges in the 
next few years.  
Key drivers of consolidation and competition 
One  key  driver  behind  the  consolidation  and  competition  is  technology.  Exchanges  and  clearing 
houses are very much technology businesses today. Trading pits have given way to electronic trading 
engines  in  many  jurisdictions.  Central  counterparties  can  no  longer  operate  without  sophisticated 
IT-based  risk  management  systems.  Technology  has  allowed  exchanges  to  offer  different  types  of 
instruments - equities, bonds, futures and options - on a single platform. It has enabled improvements 
in risk management processes, and open access by participants and alliance partners.  
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
The cost of investments in technology, however, is high and can only be justified if it is supported by a 
large volume of trades. Shareholders will also demand that these exchanges earn competitive returns 
on their investments in technology. Small exchanges will thus, find it difficult to make the necessary 
investments to compete. This has been a key driver behind the formation of mega-exchanges, and will 
continue to fuel their drive for expansion. 
Another  key  driver  is  the  need  for  economies  of  scale.  Exchanges  and  clearing  houses  thrive  on 
liquidity and scale. The likelihood of a cost efficient execution of a trader’s order is higher the larger the 
pool of traders on the same platform. Similarly, in the case of clearing houses, the benefits of netting 
and the efficiency of collateral management are greater the larger the number of counterparties using 
the  facility.  The  pressure  to  seek  economies  of  scale  and  competitive  returns  is  accentuated  for 
demutualised exchanges. 
Implications for regional exchanges 
Exchanges in this region are unlikely to be insulated from competitive pressures for long. Analysts are 
of the view that the cost of competition will drive greater consolidation in the U.S. and Europe. Once 
this wave of growth opportunities mature, the mega-exchanges will look to Asia as the next frontier of 
growth.  
Regional  exchanges  need  to  gear  up  for  the  competition  and  find  ways  of  staying  relevant  to  the 
international network of traders and investors. Shutting out competition and maintaining the status quo 
is not a viable option. More companies will seek alternative pools of liquidity and investors if domestic 
exchanges cannot satisfy their need for greater liquidity and connectivity to a larger network of traders 
and investors. Investors will also bypass local exchanges to invest overseas.  
Engaging in deeper regional collaboration 
What can governments and exchanges do? There are several initiatives that we should consider. 
Capacity building 
Firstly, capacity building in the region. Regional capital markets, particularly Asian bond markets, have 
made significant progress in recent years. There is however, scope for us to continue to explore ways 
to further grow and develop our capital markets. Capacity building plays a critical role in this respect. 
Concerted efforts to enhance the skills and sophistication of market players and regulators will not only 
strengthen  markets  but  also  provide  an  essential  pre-condition  for  closer  collaboration  amongst  the 
regional capital markets. To this end, ASEAN finance officials have agreed to collaborate on a training 
initiative  to  enhance  regional  expertise  in  capital  market  development.  The  initiative  will,  as  a  start, 
place  focus  on  four  broad  areas,  namely:  (a)  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  (b)  risk 
management,  (c)  liquidity  enhancement,  and  (d)  market  infrastructure  for  trading,  clearing  and 
settlement. The Asian Bond Market Initiative also encourages technical cooperation amongst ASEAN 
and the plus 3 countries of China, Japan and Korea. 
Profiling Asia 
Secondly, profiling Asia. More than 6 years have passed since the Asian financial crisis. Most Asian 
economies  have  fully  recovered.  Confidence  has  returned  and  growth  momentum  restored.  Asian 
countries  can  continue  to  engage  international  investors  at  an  individual  country  level.  There  are, 
however, merits to working together to profile Asia in a more concerted manner. A collective effort will 
have  greater  pulling  power  and  generate  far  greater  interest  from  investors.  The  region  has  taken 
large strides in stepping up the pace of reforms since the Asian crisis. It is perhaps timely for regional 
governments to join hands and raise the profile of the region. As a start, the ASEAN countries have 
agreed at the recent ASEAN Finance Ministers’ Meeting to organise efforts to profile ASEAN better. 
International investors can then have the opportunity to appreciate more fully the progress and reforms 
ASEAN economies have made since the Asian crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
Exchange alliances 
Thirdly, extending regional collaboration to the exchanges. The region can derive greater benefits by 
working  together.  The  successful  launch  of  Asian  Bond  Fund  I  and  the  impending  launch  of  Asian 
Bond Fund II clearly demonstrate this.  
Exchanges  in  the  region  have  already  taken  steps  to  adapt  to  the  evolving  competitive  landscape. 
Many have restructured, demutualised, and expanded their product offerings. One area where more 
can be done is to explore deeper strategic collaboration amongst exchanges in the region. Liquidity is 
vital to the development of a stock market. Markets with higher levels of liquidity tend to have higher 
stock valuations. Asian stock markets are, however, generally smaller in size and less liquid than the 
stock markets of the more developed countries. Asian exchanges’ share of trading typically account 
for less than 20% of global trading volumes. Asian savings are thus still largely intermediated through 
the more developed markets. It is sensible to work towards greater integration of Asian stock markets 
to  attract  both  international  investors’  interest  as  well  as  the  growing  pool  of  Asian  savings.  The 
regional exchanges should consider closer collaboration in order to create a larger network. 
Strategic  alliances  amongst  exchanges,  whether  in  the  areas  of  trading,  or  clearing  and  settlement 
initiatives, may therefore be a way for Asian exchanges to create value in the increasingly competitive 
marketplace. An exchange alliance, which can take various forms, is not only a means to provide a 
more efficient mode to service cross-border trading but is also a step towards building a pan-Asian 
market place. Market linkages will help broaden product offerings for investors and generate greater 
international interest in Asian securities. A more centralised counterparty arrangement will allow better 
management  of  collateral  and  counterparty  risks.  This  will  ultimately  enhance  the  liquidity  of  our 
markets.  Recognising  the  potential  benefits  of  establishing  linkages,  the  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers 
have recently agreed to explore ways to forge alliances within the ASEAN securities markets. 
Forging  successful  exchange  linkages  is,  however,  not  without  its  challenges.  But  these  are  not 
insurmountable. Let me briefly outline three of them. Firstly, exchanges’ technology and infrastructure 
will have to be updated and enhanced to cater to an increasingly integrated marketplace and a more 
sophisticated  investor  base.  There  is  a  need  to  ensure  that  the  various  IT  infrastructures  are  inter-
operable  and  scalable,  so  as  to  allow  partner  exchanges  to  share  common  platforms  and  reap  the 
benefits of economies of scale.  
Secondly, greater harmonisation of standards and regulatory requirements is a prerequisite for deeper 
linkages  and  alliances  amongst  the  regional  exchanges.  Some  regional  exchanges  and  regulators 
have made a start by committing to work together under various MOUs. We should take the next step 
of looking at other initiatives to bring about greater convergence of standards in corporate governance, 
trading conventions, rules and regulations. 
Finally, the success of exchange linkages is highly  dependent on investors’ interest in cross-border 
trades  via  the  linkages.  To  achieve  this,  the  linkages  must  provide  a  cost  efficient  solution  for 
investors’  trading  needs.  There  is  also  a  need  to  cultivate  Asian  investors’  interest  in  cross-border 
investments.  Asian  investors’  investment  portfolios  traditionally  reflect  a  strong  home  bias.  To  help 
profile  non-domestic  securities  and  enhance  investors’  trading  interest  in  these  securities,  regional 
exchanges  could  explore  the  possibility  of  cross-trading  or  cross-listing  of  securities,  particularly  in 
neighbouring exchanges where information barriers are low. More efforts should be taken to facilitate 
local and foreign investors’ participation in our markets. However, investors’ interest in cross-border 
trades is also in part, driven by their level of confidence in how markets are characterised by sensible 
regulation and high standards of corporate governance. 
Enhancing corporate governance and regulation 
There  has  been  much  focus  on  the  corporate  governance  and  regulation  of  exchanges  in  many 
jurisdictions. As institutions of system-wide or systemic importance, the issues relating to the corporate 
governance  of  exchanges  are  for  the  most  part  similar  to  the  issues  for  banks  and  insurance 
companies. Weak corporate governance of such institutions can undermine public confidence in the 
financial system.  
However,  unlike  other  financial  institutions,  exchanges  perform  varying  degrees  of  supervisory  and 
regulatory  functions  over  their  members  and  listed  companies.  Potential  conflicts  of  interests  exist 
between these regulatory functions and the exchanges’ commercial functions. These conflicts may be 
accentuated  for  demutualised  and  listed  exchanges.  While  profits  are  not  irrelevant  to  other 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 3
exchanges, they are the primary motive for shareholders of listed exchanges. Regulators worldwide 
have been grappling with these issues as more exchanges demutualise and list. 
MAS believes that credibility in governance and regulation is a vital commercial asset for exchanges. 
Investors are more likely to invest and trade on an exchange if they are confident that they can do so 
without  being  defrauded  or  without  other  investors  having  an  unfair  advantage.  Exchanges  that 
operate fair, efficient and transparent markets, where rules are enforced in an impartial way, will have 
a competitive advantage. MAS and SGX share a strong commitment to maintaining high standards of 
corporate  governance.  We  take  a  collaborative  approach  in  working  together  to  continually  keep 
abreast of best practices. No single model has gained universal acceptance, and no model is good for 
all time. We will continue to work closely together to further enhance the governance and regulatory 
arrangements relating to SGX where appropriate. 
Conclusion 
East Asian economies have seen robust growth in 2003. The ADB expects this momentum to continue 
in  2004.1  Capital  has  started  to  flow  back  into  the  region  and  stock  markets  have  rebounded.  Net 
capital inflows into emerging market portfolio equity investment reached a high of US$30bn in 2003, 
almost  double  that  seen  before  the  internet  bust  in  early  2000.2  This  positive  economic  outlook, 
coupled  with  growing  intra-regional  trade  and  investment,  augurs  well  for  the  region.  Trade  and 
investment  links  should  however,  be  complemented  by  greater  financial  market  cooperation  and 
integration. 
The  governments’  resolve  to  forge  deeper  collaboration  will  give  an  added  boost  to  the  region’s 
progress. The exchanges should however, also contemplate possible collaborative initiatives to create 
new value. Notwithstanding the competitive forces, regional exchanges have much to gain by working 
together.  This  is  not  a  zero-sum  game.  It  is  in  the  region’s  interest  that  we  should  cooperate  to 
increase our collective strength. I hope you, as key decision makers of your exchanges, will take this 
opportunity  to  consider  possible  ways  of  working  together.  EAOSEF  is  well  placed  to  facilitate  this 
process. I wish you a fruitful discussion at this forum. 
                                                      
1  Asia Economic Monitor, Asian Development Bank, December 2003. 
2  The  Asia/Pacific  region  accounted  for  90%  of  total  flows  into  emerging  markets.  Reference:  Capital  Flows  to  Emerging 
Market Economies, The Institute of International Finance, Inc., 15 Jan 2004. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2004
