David Dodge: Cooperation and the conduct of economic policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  European  Economics  and 
Financial Centre, Paris, France, 24 June 2004.  
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here and to have the opportunity to speak 
at this conference.  
The theme of this event is “Policy Coordination in an Integrated Global Economy.” It seems as if the 
idea of policy coordination is making a comeback these days. This is probably because of the growing 
interconnectedness of the global economy and the series of shocks that have recently reverberated 
around  the  world.  While  globalization  has  affected  different  countries  to  varying  degrees,  it  has 
brought many benefits to the world economy - including increased trade, broader sources of financing, 
and  more  rapid  diffusion  of  technology.  But  globalization  has  also  left  countries  more  exposed  to 
developments beyond their borders. 
From a central bank perspective, globalization has made the conduct of monetary policy somewhat 
more  challenging.  In  order  to  gauge  the  prospects  for  the  domestic  economy,  it  is  more  and  more 
necessary  for  central  bankers  to  take  into  account  how  their  economy  will  be  affected  by  events 
elsewhere. And of course, central bankers in very large economies must be cognizant of the effects 
that their actions may have on the global economy and, hence, on their own economy. Canada has 
had a very open economy for many years. So, not only is it in our interest to ensure that our domestic 
economic policies are the right ones, it is also in our interest that other countries pursue appropriate 
policies.  As  globalization  continues,  it  will  increasingly  be  in  everybody’s  interest  that  all  countries 
follow sound economic policies. 
Given this growing integration of the world economy, it might appear that there is a need for closer 
international  coordination  of  economic  policies.  Traditionally,  talk  of  coordination  has  made  people 
think of more formal arrangements, such as the Plaza and Louvre Accords of the 1980s. Not only did 
those agreements attempt to influence global exchange rates, they spelled out detailed prescriptions 
for individual countries in areas such as fiscal and monetary policy. 
I will argue today that the scope for macroeconomic policy coordination is very limited, although it is 
vital for policy-makers to co-operate in the sharing of information and views on monetary and fiscal 
policy. But I will also argue that there are some areas where coordination is required, most particularly 
in establishing and maintaining rules and standards that will allow global financial markets to function 
well and global trade to expand.  
The right economic policies 
Let me start with macroeconomic policies and information sharing. I’ll begin with a question. If there is 
no international macroeconomic policy coordination, how can countries determine which policies they 
should choose to strengthen their domestic economies and thus contribute to global growth?  
In answering that question, I would say that policy-makers should always look to their own economies 
first. Promoting policies that encourage sustainable growth and financial stability in their own domestic 
economy is the best contribution that national authorities can make to the growth and stability of the 
global economy. 
But which policies are the right ones? The OECD, among other organizations, has been working on 
this question for decades. I can recall attending OECD meetings here in the 1980s, when a consensus 
began  to  take  shape  on  a  set  of  policies  that  would  provide  the  strongest  base  for  sustainable 
economic growth. These policies relate to four basic areas. First, monetary policy should be directed 
at  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  Second,  fiscal  policy  should  take  a  disciplined  approach  to  the 
public  purse.  Third,  structural  policies  should  encourage  economic  flexibility.  And  fourth,  countries 
should work towards trade liberalization. Let me take a few minutes to discuss these areas, beginning 
with monetary policy. 
In  Canada,  as  in  many  other  countries,  the  goal  of  monetary  policy  is  to  maintain  the  public’s 
confidence  in  the  future  value  of  money.  We  do  so  by  working  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
predictable. Over the years, the Bank of Canada, like many other central banks, has struggled to find 
the right anchor for its monetary policy - an anchor to guide its actions and to give the public a way to 
measure its performance. 
Since 1991, our monetary policy anchor has been our system of explicit inflation targeting. Under this 
system, we aim for a 2 per cent annual rate of consumer price inflation over the medium term. This 
target is spelled out in a formal agreement between the Bank and the Government of Canada. But the 
Bank is solely responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  
It’s important to note that we conduct our policy symmetrically around the 2 per cent target. We will 
lower interest rates to stimulate total demand when we see that the trend of inflation is threatening to 
fall below the target over the next 18 to 24 months. Similarly, we will raise interest rates to dampen 
demand when we see that the future trend of inflation is poised to rise above the target. In this way, 
monetary policy acts as the primary tool for stabilizing the economy. 
Although  inflation  targeting  has  a  relatively  short  history,  the  experience  of  many  countries  so  far 
suggests that this approach brings with it important economic benefits. By smoothing the peaks and 
valleys of the economic cycle as a whole, inflation targeting helps the economy to achieve maximum 
sustainable growth over the medium term.  
But  if  a  central  bank  wants  to  have  the  monetary  policy  independence  needed  to  pursue  low  and 
stable  domestic  inflation,  then  it  has  to  be  prepared  to  allow  the  external  value  of  its  currency  to 
fluctuate. That independence, which is typically lost under a fixed exchange rate regime, has been a 
tremendous asset for Canada. Further, given the somewhat sticky nature of both wages and prices, a 
floating  exchange  rate  can  serve  as  an  important  economic  stabilizer,  helping  to  facilitate  the 
adjustment to shocks and the resolution of global imbalances. 
It is true that under a floating exchange rate regime, currencies can experience short-term volatility. 
This volatility can certainly be unnerving. However, in my view, central bankers ought to be extremely 
cautious about trying to smooth these fluctuations. It is extraordinarily difficult to judge whether sharp 
currency movements simply represent market “noise” or more fundamental forces. So, there is great 
potential for policy error when central bankers try to smooth currency volatility. Besides, businesses 
can take advantage of highly efficient hedging tools available in financial markets to help them deal 
with short-term currency movements.  
Let me now turn to fiscal policy. A country should have a medium-term fiscal plan that is appropriate to 
its  particular  situation.  Citizens  and  investors  need  to  know  that  their  government  will  not  let  debt 
levels  get  out  of  hand.  When  public  debt  is  controlled,  people  can  have  confidence  that  their 
governments  will  not  inflate  the  debt  away,  impose  an  overly  onerous  tax  burden  in  the  future,  or 
simply repudiate the debt.  
In  attempting  to  keep  levels  of  public  debt  under  control,  governments  should  be  wary  of  using 
“discretionary”  fiscal  policy  to  stabilize  the  economy.  Let  me  be  clear  that  I  am  talking  here  about 
discretionary  action  and  not  the  use  of  automatic  stabilizers,  such  as  unemployment  insurance 
payments. For one thing, it is very difficult to get the timing of discretionary action correct. For another, 
as we know from bitter experience around the world, tightening fiscal policy is politically much more 
difficult than easing it. And so the use of discretionary fiscal policy as an economic stabilizer increases 
the chances of a country getting into an unsustainable debt situation. Further, the economic evidence 
suggests that in open economies under a floating exchange rate regime, monetary policy can be a 
much more effective stabilizer than discretionary fiscal policy. 
In the 1990s, governments in Canada - both federal and provincial - struggled not only to eliminate 
budget deficits, but to run surpluses in order to bring down public debt-to-GDP ratios. Given Canada’s 
demographics, with an aging population and a workforce that is likely to stop growing within 15 years 
or so, aiming to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio is an entirely appropriate fiscal anchor. Of course, other 
countries may have different considerations that shape their medium-term fiscal plans. 
The importance of information sharing 
So far, I have argued that formal coordination of macroeconomic policies is unlikely to lead to better 
economic outcomes than if all countries simply followed the right policies for their own circumstances. 
In addition, coordination risks amplifying the effects of a mistake in judgment about the state of the 
global economy. But co-operation in the form of information sharing does play an extremely important 
role in the development of macroeconomic policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
Let me elaborate. Countries can put an appropriate policy framework in place; but, without accurate 
and reliable information on the state of other economies, it is difficult to determine what policy actions 
will  deliver  optimal  results.  The  Canadian  economy  provides  a  clear  example.  Given  Canada’s 
dependence on international trade, the Bank of Canada needs to thoroughly understand the forces at 
work  in  the  world  economy  in  order  to  adopt  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  at  home. 
Otherwise, we risk misjudging the state of total demand in the domestic economy, and that can lead to 
policy errors. 
The increasingly interconnected nature of the world economy means that policy-makers in all countries 
must have a thorough understanding of global economic and financial developments. It is fitting that 
we should be discussing this topic here, in this building, given the OECD’s long history in economic 
co-operation.  
How does this information sharing among countries take place? In addition to OECD meetings, central 
bankers gather at the Bank for International Settlements every two months. In fact, I will be headed to 
Basel for such a meeting in a couple of days. One of the most important features of these meetings is 
our systematic, detailed discussion of the world economic situation. These meetings, as well as the 
periodic meetings of the International Monetary Fund, the G-7 and G-20, and the Financial Stability 
Forum,  are  important  opportunities  for  policy-makers.  Not  only  can  we  hear  directly  from  our 
counterparts, but we also have the chance to ask questions about their policies and prospects. And 
between these meetings, senior officials from finance ministries and central banks talk frequently to 
each other. 
This  kind  of  information  sharing  can  also  be  useful  in  areas  other  than  macroeconomic  policy.  I 
mentioned before that the OECD policy consensus includes the idea that countries should strive for 
economic  flexibility  through  their  structural  policies.  In  particular,  that  means  the  creation  and 
maintenance  of  effective  and  efficient  labour  and  capital  markets.  Again,  the  sharing  of  information 
about  experiences  and  best  practices  can  be  invaluable  in  helping  authorities  design  policies  and 
programs that are appropriate to their own economies. Information sharing can also help to reduce 
uncertainty and to promote economic security by demonstrating the most effective ways to strengthen 
the rule of law and reduce the risk of abuses. And information sharing is an important part of the effort 
to combat money laundering and terrorist financing - an effort led by the Financial Action Task Force 
here in Paris.  
Where coordination can be helpful 
So is there any scope for outright policy coordination in a global economy? As I said at the beginning, I 
would  argue  that,  when  it  comes  to  international  trade  and  finance,  actual  coordination  is  not  only 
desirable,  it  is  probably  necessary  to  facilitate  the  expansion  of  commerce  and  to  promote 
well-functioning global financial markets. 
Let  me  explain,  starting  with  international  trade.  A  moment  ago,  I  said  that  trade  liberalization  is  a 
crucial part of an appropriate economic policy framework. But in order to have freer trade worldwide, 
countries  need  to  come  together  to  draw  up  and  enforce  a  set  of  rules  governing  the  exchange  of 
goods  and  services.  In  this  regard,  Canada  has  been  a  consistent  supporter  of  the  World  Trade 
Organization (WTO) and its earlier incarnations. 
Unfortunately, in recent years, there has been insufficient international support for strengthening the 
global  trade  order,  and  talks  on  difficult  sectors,  such  as  agriculture,  have  floundered.  Collectively, 
developed countries still have a considerable way to go in terms of reducing subsidies and liberalizing 
trade for a number of goods, including agricultural products. In my view, we have a responsibility to do 
this  in  order  to  promote  growth  in  the  most  impoverished  nations.  That  is  why  Canada  has  been 
pushing  for  an  early  resumption  of  the  Doha  round.  And  there  are  other  sectors,  such  as  financial 
services,  where  major  effort  is  required.  This  effort  must  be  made  so  that  the  global  economy  can 
benefit. It won’t be easy; but, in the long run, it will be worth it. 
International  coordination  is  also  important  in  efforts  to  establish  a  framework  to  allow  financial 
markets  to  function  efficiently.  In  recent  years,  this  has  been  reflected  in  the  drive  towards  greater 
transparency.  Unless  countries  develop  and  implement  a  clear  and  coherent  way  of  disseminating 
relevant information, global financial markets will be unable to function at peak efficiency. This applies 
to both the public and the private sectors. Following the Asian and Russian crises of 1997-98, the IMF 
and  the  World  Bank  launched  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  to  identify  strengths  and 
weaknesses  in  national  financial  systems.  This  effort  is  backed  by  Reports  on  Observance  of 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
Standards  and  Codes,  which  are  conducted  by  the  IMF.  These  reports  can  bolster  confidence  by 
demonstrating to markets the level of commitment that countries have to boosting their transparency. 
Other efforts to improve transparency in the wake of Enron and similar scandals include initiatives to 
improve corporate reporting, accounting, and dissemination of financial market information.  
These  efforts  to  further  domestic  transparency  will  certainly  be  helpful  on  their  own.  But  if  we 
coordinate our efforts, we can spread the benefits of transparency and help global financial markets to 
operate more efficiently. This applies to the development of market codes of conduct, as well as to 
compliance and enforcement efforts. And it also applies to the development of accounting standards 
that  are  universally  applicable.  It  is  only  through  coordination  that  we  will  all  get  the  full  benefit  of 
improved standards and codes. 
Unlike macroeconomic policy, where the best collective outcome depends on each country following 
appropriate domestic policies, when it comes to international trade and global financial markets, the 
best collective outcome will require strong, coordinated efforts. 
Conclusion 
Let me sum up. As globalization continues, it may appear that there is a need for national authorities 
to  coordinate  their  macroeconomic  policies  through  formal  agreements  and  arrangements.  I  have 
argued that this is not the case. I hope that I have convinced you that such coordination is unlikely to 
be  helpful.  But  I  hope  that  I  have  also  convinced  you  that  information  sharing  among  countries 
remains  extremely  important.  What  is  crucial  is  that  national  authorities  pursue  sound  domestic 
policies,  while  being  fully  cognizant  of  what  is  happening  elsewhere  in  the  world.  These  policies 
include  a  well-anchored  monetary  policy  focused  on  inflation  control  and  a  prudent  fiscal  policy 
conducted within an appropriate medium-term plan. Such policies should be supplemented by a set of 
structural policies that foster economic flexibility, as well as by policies that encourage openness to 
international trade. By strengthening their domestic economies while taking global developments into 
account, policy-makers will be helping to improve the world economy. 
Where  I  think  we  do  need  coordination  is  in  the  establishment  of  frameworks  that  facilitate 
international  commerce  and  strengthen  the  global  financial  system.  We  do  need  a  coordinated 
international trade order, and the strengthening of that order remains a worthy goal for us all. We do 
need  a  coordinated,  transparent  framework  to  support  and  maintain  effective  and  efficient  global 
capital markets. And we do need to promote the coordination of accounting standards. 
Finally, let me say that, as we take part in this conference here, at the home of the OECD, economic 
co-operation  remains  as  important  now  as  it  was  on  the  day  that  organization  was  founded.  The 
sharing  of  information  among  national  governments  and  regulatory  bodies  is  absolutely  essential. 
Co-operation helps policy-makers follow sound domestic economic policies appropriate to their own 
circumstances while being cognizant of the actions of others. That, in turn, should lead to better global 
economic performance. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2004
