Zdeněk Tůma: Forecasting at central banks 
Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Forecasting Dinner 2004, 
20 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is my pleasure to be here tonight to share with you some thoughts on the forecasting process at 
central banks, and the Czech National Bank in particular. It is generally recognised that central bank 
policies must be forward-looking. As emphasised by Milton Friedman, for example, there are long lags 
between  monetary  policy  actions  and  their  impact  on  the  economy.  This  means  that  policies 
responding only to the current state of the economy might miss the turning points and be pro-cyclical 
rather than stabilising. 
Therefore, central banks have always been among the leaders in the macroeconomic forecasting field. 
The actual way in which forecasts are produced and used at central banks has, however, changed 
substantially  over  the  past  few  decades.  The  changes  have  reflected  developments  in  both  the 
economic (and econometric) theory and in monetary policy regimes. 
First  of  all,  the  large-scale  models  that  were  used  in  the  1950s  to  1970s  were  subject  to  strong 
criticism.  They  were  hit  by  a  series  of  structural  breaks,  which  made  the  previously  observed 
relationships unreliable. Consequently, it was argued that these breaks were not a result of bad luck 
only, but also reflected a lack of microeconomic foundations of the models, neglect of forward-looking 
expectations and ad hoc econometric restrictions. The terms “Lucas critique” and “Goodhart law” have 
become  standard  warning  signs  for  all  macroeconomic  modellers.  As  a  result,  the  profession  has 
started  to  prefer  smaller-scale  models  with  a  sounder  microeconomic  background,  built  in  recent 
decades usually along the lines of New Keynesian Economics. As the first generation of these new 
models became mature, though, the second generation started to be more detailed again. The recent 
third  generation  of  models  has  added  the  aspect  of  stock-flow  consistency,  which  has  pushed  the 
number of equations even further. The state-of-the-art forecasting models have consequently become 
quite  big  animals  again,  but  their  philosophical  foundations  remain  very  different  from  those  of  the 
1950s to 1970s, as the third generation has extended the microeconomic foundations considerably. 
Secondly, the ever-changing world map in terms of monetary policy regimes has also modified the role 
of forecasting at central banks. In the past, most countries had pegged exchange rates against the 
major  currencies.  Under  such  a  system,  the  role  of  forecasting  is  smaller  than  with  the  floating 
exchange rate regime and concentrates on balance of payments analysis and perhaps also monetary 
analysis.  The  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates,  on  the  other  hand,  often  experimented  with 
money targeting, which pushed monetary analysis to the forefront. However, since the early 1990s the 
number  of  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates  has  increased  dramatically,  reflecting  numerous 
currency  crises  and  a  growing  consensus  on  the  undesirability  of  conventional  currency  pegs. 
Moreover, the inflation targeting regime has gained much more weight among the group of countries 
with floating rates. Inflation targeting, or following Svensson “inflation forecast targeting,” has placed 
the forecasting process at the heart of monetary policy decision-making. 
Under inflation targeting, the forecasting process centres around future price developments. This does 
not  necessarily  mean,  though,  that  central  bankers  are  obsessed  with  inflation.  In  fact,  inflation 
targeting  requires  assessing  all  the  available  information,  including  real  economic  developments, 
monetary analysis and external balance of the economy, in a systematic and complex way. It is hence 
more demanding from this point of view than the alternative monetary strategies. 
The  inflation  forecast  is  not  only  an  important  internal  decision-making  tool,  but  also  a  crucial 
communication  device.  Monetary  policy  has  become  considerably  more  transparent  over  recent 
decades. It is now commonly believed that open communication of monetary policy is beneficial to the 
stability and predictability of its transmission into the economy, and is also crucial for the accountability 
of an independent central bank. As a result, the inflation forecast, including its underlying assumptions 
and policy implications, is openly explained to the public. 
Nonetheless, we must always bear in mind that even highly developed, technically advanced and well-
organised forecasting procedures are not an automatic pilot for inflation-targeting central banks. They 
are no more - but also no less - than an important input into the monetary policy process. Eventually, 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
the decision is always based not only on the central forecast itself, but also on the decision-makers’ 
discussions about all the associated risks. Good analytical tools, however, can be helpful even in this 
respect, by enabling the simulation of different alternative scenarios in a consistent manner. 
After this general introduction, let me now briefly speak about the progress we have so far achieved in 
forecasting at the Czech National Bank. We now have more than five years of experience with inflation 
targeting. The new regime was introduced in a challenging situation, after a period of currency turmoil 
in May 1997, which ended the fixed exchange rate period and resulted in higher inflation and rising 
inflation expectations. The economy needed a new nominal anchor in order to return to a disinflation 
path. Inflation targeting was chosen as “the best of all bad” alternatives at the time. 
Such a sudden switch from a fixed exchange rate system to inflation targeting required a radical and 
fast change in the central bank’s mentality. This was perhaps the biggest challenge that the CNB had 
to face. Over the past five years it has involved much work on improving our forecasting tools, leading 
to substantial development in our internal analytical processes. 
These  changes  culminated  a  year  ago,  when  the  CNB  settled  on  a  new  forecasting  process.  This 
integrates  expert  judgement  and  short-term  analyses  -  which  were  the  key  pillars  of  the  CNB’s 
forecasting tool-kit in the first years of inflation targeting - with a small-scale macroeconomic model 
developed  by  the  CNB’s  staff  with  the  assistance  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  An  important 
element  of  this  step  was  a  switch  from  a  forecast  with  a  fixed-interest-rate  assumption  to  an 
unconditional forecast that includes a reaction-function of the central bank. 
Our  current quarterly  projection  model  is a small-scale  model  belonging  to  the  first  generation.  It  is 
thus  fairly  simple  and  arguably  misses  many  important  links  in  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
already quite close to the state-of-the-art among the inflation-targeting central banks around the world, 
and intense work is in progress to build a higher-generation model. The good standard of our current 
forecasting  know-how  is  reflected,  among  other  things,  in  our  ability  to  start  providing  technical 
assistance  in  the  forecasting  field  to  some  other  central  banks  in  transition  and  emerging  market 
economies. 
In  line with  the  transparency  philosophy  of  inflation  targeting,  the  Czech  National  Bank  published a 
book called “The Czech National Bank’s Forecasting and Policy Analysis System” last year. This book 
describes not only the core forecasting model itself, but also the whole process of creating the final 
integrated forecast. The model has also been published in a professional journal, the Czech Journal of 
Economics  and  Finance.  To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  development  of  our 
forecasting and analysis system has been part of a wider evolutionary process that the Czech inflation 
targeting  regime  has  gone  through.  During  the  first  years,  many  of  the  details  were  adjusted  in 
response  to  the  changing  needs,  challenging  experience  and  evolving  thinking  of  the  central  bank. 
The  first  years  of  the  new  regime  were  not  easy,  and  included  frequent  numerical  target  misses. 
Nevertheless,  the  Czech  Republic  enjoys  low  inflation,  and  inflation  expectations  seem  to  be  firmly 
anchored  at  low  levels  at  present.  Monetary  policy  decision-making  is  rule-based  and  transparent, 
thereby enhancing the credibility of the CNB. Such a framework allows an independent central bank to 
commit  credibly  to  its  long-term  goal  of  price  stability,  and  at  the  same  time  preserves  enough 
discretion for an active anti-cyclical monetary policy that takes into account not only inflation, but also 
other factors such as variability of output. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
