Jean-Claude Trichet: Announcement of Basel II 
Opening remarks of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank and Chairman 
of the G10 Governors and Heads of Supervision, at the Press Conference announcing the publication 
of Basel II, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 26 June 2004. 
 On behalf of the G10 central bank governors and heads of bank supervisory agencies, I am pleased to 
announce that we endorsed the publication of the revised framework for capital adequacy known as 
“Basel II” at our meeting today. 
This  work,  which  was  conducted  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  represents  a 
landmark  achievement.  In  particular,  its  comprehensive  approach  to  risk  management  and  bank 
supervision  ensures  that  capital  regulation  will  remain  a  cornerstone  of  safety  and  soundness  for 
banking  in  the  twenty-first  century.  In  the  same  vein,  Basel  II  will  enhance  banks’  safety  and 
soundness, thereby strengthening the stability of the financial system as a whole. That, in turn, will 
improve the ability of the financial sector to serve as a source of sustainable growth for the broader 
economy. I am pleased to offer this revised framework to the international community. 
Today marks the culmination of nearly six years of challenging work. During those years, the Basel 
Committee  sought  to  develop  significantly  more  risk-sensitive  capital  requirements  that  are 
conceptually sound. At the same time, the Committee wanted to be sensitive to the characteristics of 
markets  and  supervisory  systems  in  numerous  countries.  For  such  an  effort  to  be  successful,  the 
Committee undertook a careful review of the existing rules and of the recent advances achieved in the 
industry.  It  consulted  widely  and  publicly  with  industry  representatives,  other  public  authorities,  and 
outside observers. The governors and heads of supervision believe that the Committee’s efforts and 
dedication  have  been  fruitful  and  invaluable,  and  we  appreciate  the  dedication  that  all  Committee 
members demonstrated. 
Basel  II  builds  on  the  solid  foundation  set  out  by  the  1988  Basel  Capital  Accord.  Indeed,  the  new 
framework will preserve key elements of the existing capital rules. This includes retaining the definition 
of eligible capital components; maintaining the general requirement that banks should hold total capital 
equivalent to at least 8% of their risk-weighted assets; and continuing the basic structure of the capital 
requirements for market risk that are outlined in the Committee’s 1996 Market Risk Amendment. 
The new framework marks a substantial step forward in creating incentives for banks to improve the 
quality of their risk management. One of the most significant innovations of the new framework is that 
it  will  allow  banks  to  make  greater  use  of  their  own  assessments  of  risk  as  inputs  to  capital 
calculations.  In  that  vein,  Basel  II  will  provide  banks  with  a  range  of  options  for  determining  their 
capital requirements for credit and operational risk. This will allow both banks and supervisors to select 
approaches that are most appropriate for banks’ operations and local financial markets. 
National authorities in the G10 countries will now continue their focus on adopting and implementing 
the new framework through domestic rule-making processes. Consistent implementation of the new 
framework  across  borders  through  enhanced  supervisory  co-operation  will  become  a  critical  and 
challenging task in the years ahead. We are also circulating the Basel II Framework to supervisory 
authorities worldwide. We encourage them to consider adopting this revised framework at a time that 
they  believe  may  be  consistent  with  their  broader  supervisory  priorities  and  readiness.  Yet  we 
recognise that adopting Basel II in the near future may not be the first priority for supervisors in these 
other  jurisdictions.  They  may  wish  to  take  some  steps  first  to  strengthen  the  capitalisation  and  risk 
management capabilities of their banks and to enhance the quality of bank supervision. 
The text of Basel II will be released today on the website of the Bank for International Settlements. As 
the  product  of  three  global  consultations  and  several  quantitative  impact  studies,  the  Basel  II 
Framework has evolved and strengthened considerably since it appeared first in 1999. On behalf of 
the  G10  governors  and  supervisors,  I  would  like  to  warmly  thank  all  of  those  organisations  and 
individuals who contributed to the process and supported the work of the Basel Committee by sharing 
their views over the years. 
I welcome now the remarks of my colleague, Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and the 
Chairman of the Basel Committee. Governor Caruana has devoted considerable energy and efforts to 
BIS Review 38/2004 
 1
completing the work on the Basel II Framework that was launched so capably by Bill McDonough, the 
previous chairman of the Committee. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2004
