T T Mboweni: The restructured South African economy 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the South Africa ten 
years on - empowerment, finance, trade and investment conference, Cape Town, 20 May 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies  and  Gentleman,  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this  conference.  After  ten  years  of 
democracy in South Africa, I think it is useful to consider what we have achieved and what challenges 
we will still have to face. My address this morning is a summary of a more detailed chapter that I wrote 
on this same subject for a book to be published by the World Economic Forum entitled “South Africa, 
The Miracle Continues”. This may be a book of interest to many of you. I believe it will be launched at 
the Africa Economic Summit 2004, which will be held from 2 to 4 June in Maputo, Mozambique. 
The South African economy in 1994 
2. 
When the first democratically elected South African government came to power in 1994, the country 
was  to  a  large  extent  economically  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  Trade  boycotts,  economic 
sanctions, disinvestment, the withdrawal of other capital and the declaration of a partial debt standstill 
from  September  1985,  forced  the  authorities  to  pursue  an  inward-oriented  policy  that  had  a  severe 
impact on domestic economic performance. At the time of the standstill, the affected debt amounted to 
US$13,6 billion and the total debt amounted to US$23,7 billion. As a consequence living standards 
deteriorated, economic growth was constrained, unemployment rose, productivity growth slowed down 
and economic management became less effective. 
The refusal of foreign creditors to roll over the short-term credit facilities of domestic borrowers led to a 
shortage  of  foreign  exchange  and  a  confidence  crisis  in  1985.  Despite  the  debt  standstill  on  the 
repayment of foreign debt, capital continued to flow out of the country. At first this consisted mainly of 
short-term  capital  that  was  not  affected  by  the  standstill  arrangements.  Blocking  this  capital  would 
have  jeopardised  trade  flows.  Later  these  capital  outflows  also  included  amounts  which  became 
payable  in  terms  of  the  various  standstill  agreements.  From  the  beginning  of  1985  to  1993  the  net 
financial outflow from South Africa amounted to about R45 billion, or to 11 per cent of gross domestic 
fixed investment. 
As  a  result  of  this  outflow,  the  South  African  authorities  were  forced  to  generate  current  account 
surpluses. The gold and other foreign reserves of the country remained at low levels and domestic 
savings  had  to  be  used  to  finance  the  withdrawal  of  capital.  The  balance  of  payments  constraint 
effectively  limited  the  policy  options  the  authorities  had  at  their  disposal.  Although  the  forced 
repayment of loans improved the overall foreign debt position of the country, the policy of constrained 
domestic expansion called for huge sacrifices by the South African population and continued to affect 
the domestic economy for a long time after 1994. 
Global integration 
3. 
Even before the new government came to power, many countries started to normalise trade relations 
with  South  Africa  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  political  transition  would  be  negotiated  in  a 
peaceful  manner.  Trade  boycotts,  economic  sanctions  and  the  disinvestment  campaign  were 
suspended. However, debtors in South Africa had to continue making repayments on debt affected by 
the standstill arrangements for a number of years. The standstill only ended on 15 August 2001 when 
the final repayment on the affected debt was made. In the meantime, the South African government 
started  raising  funds  again  on  international  capital  markets  from  1995  and  non-residents  resumed 
investing in private entities in the country. 
This  normalisation  of  international  relations  allowed  the  newly-elected  democratic  government  to 
gradually reintegrate the domestic economy into the global environment. High priority was given to the 
reform of trade policy in this process. 
BIS Review 30/2004 
 1
The  trade  regime  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  was  characterised  by  three  interrelated  strategies, 
namely the promotion of domestic industries through import substitution, the development of specific 
industries to attain self-sufficiency and the promotion of mineral beneficiation. South Africa’s industries 
therefore became heavily protected by formulae, specific and ad valorem duties and surcharges. High 
tariff levels were complemented by quotas that limited the quantity of imports. The tariff structure was 
extremely  complicated.  Overall  the  strategies  pursued  by  the  authorities  resulted  in  a  complex 
discretionary regime with an anti-export bias. 
After  the  transition  in  1994,  government  became  committed  to  a  policy  of  import  liberalisation,  and 
agreed to import tariff reductions to levels even lower than that required by GATT, i.e. the predecessor 
of the World Trade Organisation. Key aspects of the trade reform included a five-year tariff reduction 
and tariff rationalisation programme; a decrease in tariffs and subsidies on agricultural products and 
the conversion of all quantitative restrictions on agricultural imports to ad valorem rates; an increase in 
the number of binding rates applicable on industries as well as in the percentage of zero tariff lines to 
total tariff lines; a phasing out of the export subsidy scheme applicable at that time, which was called 
the “General Export Incentive Scheme (GEIS)”. 
As a result of these changes to the tariff regime, the number of tariff categories was reduced from over 
100 to only six and the average weighted import duties on manufactured goods to the total value of 
manufacturing  imports  decreased  from  14,0  per  cent  in  1994  to  4,7  per  cent  in  2002.  Several  free 
trade agreements were also signed to dismantle trade barriers and to gain increased market access. 
In  addition  to  these  measures  undertaken  to  promote  competition,  industrial  policy  was  adjusted  to 
enhance  the  competitiveness  of  manufacturing  enterprises  in  export  markets.  In  particular  more 
emphasis  was  placed  on  supply-side  measures,  rather  than  demand-side  measures  such  as 
expensive  export  support  programmes.  These  measures  included  investment  incentives  for  large 
investments of a strategic nature and for small and medium enterprise development; training grants to 
firms investing in the promotion of skills; the development of industrial development zones; improved 
access to finance; and support for investments in economic infrastructure. 
A  new Competition  Act  was  passed  in  Parliament  in  1998  to,  among other  things,  create  a  greater 
spread  of  ownership  in  enterprises,  to  expand  opportunities  for  South  African  participation  in  world 
markets  and  to  provide  consumers  with  competitive  prices  and  product  choices.  The  Act  further 
focuses on preventing any form of anti-competitive conduct by a firm or a group of firms arising from 
agreements.  Institutions  were  established  in  terms  of  the  Act  to  ensure  that  these  objectives  are 
achieved and to monitor implementation and adherence to the law. 
A  further  step  to  reintegrate  the  South  African  economy  into  the  world  economy  was  the  gradual 
dismantling  of  exchange  controls.  The  financial  rand  system  was  already  abolished  in  1995  and 
considerable success has been achieved in relaxing all the other controls. Limits are still applicable on 
the amounts that residents and emigrants may repatriate from South Africa, but these limits have been 
increased progressively over the past ten years. Moreover a foreign exchange control amnesty and 
accommodating tax dispensation were announced in February 2003 to allow individuals to bring funds 
back that are held illegally offshore or to pay a 10 per cent charge on funds remaining offshore. The 
amnesty offers individuals an opportunity to regularise their affairs. The period for filing for amnesty 
relief ran up to 29 February 2004. 
Fiscal policy 
4. 
The  liberalisation  of  South  Africa’s  trade  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  world  was  accompanied  by 
considerable  changes  in  the  management  of  public  finances.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  an 
unsustainable  fiscal  situation  had  started  to  develop,  and  the  deficit  before  borrowing  and  debt 
repayment  of  the  government  reached  7,3  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  in  the  fiscal  year 
1992/93.  Government  expenditure  continued  to  rise  relative  to  domestic  production,  the  tax  burden 
increased,  the  public  sector  made  increasing  demands  on  the  domestic  capital  market,  the  ratio  of 
government’s  interest  payments  to  gross  domestic  product  rose  steeply  and  government  dissaving 
increased to unacceptably high levels. 
The  post-apartheid  South  African  government  therefore  placed  considerable  emphasis  on  restoring 
fiscal  stability.  The  economic  strategy  at  first  was  to  create  stable  macroeconomic  conditions  as  a 
necessary  precondition  for  sustained  growth  and  employment  creation.  It  was  believed  that  by 
improving  fiscal  sustainability,  poverty  reduction  and  income  redistribution  would  become  attainable 
objectives  over  the  medium  term.  The  expenditure  restraint  applied  by  the  national  and  provincial 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2004
governments reduced the fiscal deficit before borrowing and debt repayment to 1,5 per cent of gross 
domestic product in fiscal 2001/02. 
This successful fiscal consolidation allowed the government to adopt a more expansionary fiscal policy 
stance  from  fiscal  2001/02.  More  emphasis  was  placed  on  infrastructural  development  and  social 
upliftment than in the previous years. The government, however, continued to apply fiscal discipline 
and despite a decline in the growth of tax revenue, was able to contain the main budget deficit to an 
estimated  2,4  per cent  of gross  domestic  product  in fiscal 2003/04.  Economic growth was primarily 
promoted  by  microeconomic  reforms  to  boost  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  rather  than  by 
stimulating demand through rapid increases in expenditure and the lowering of taxes. 
An  important  aspect  of  the  budget  reform  was  the  adoption  of  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure 
Framework in the fiscal year 1998/99 and the Public Finance Management Act of 1999. The Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework consists of three-year rolling expenditure and revenue projections for 
the national and the provincial governments. This creates greater certainty and transparency to the 
budgetary  process.  The  Public  Finance  Management  Act  has  enhanced  the  accountability  of  public 
sector  managers  by  emphasising  disciplines  such  as  regular  financial  reporting,  sound  internal 
expenditure controls, improved accounting standards, performance monitoring and independent audit 
and supervision systems. 
The asset and liability management of government has also changed considerably over the past ten 
years.  After  years  of  isolation,  the  South  African  government  established  itself  again  as  a  credible 
borrower in the international capital markets. This is reflected in the upgraded credit ratings received 
from international rating agencies since 1994 and the continued interest in investing in bond issues of 
the  national  government.  However  the  government  has  maintained  its  foreign  debt  well  within 
appropriate  levels.  At  the  end  of  December  2003  the  foreign  debt  of  the  national  government 
amounted to only 6,0 per cent of gross domestic product. 
In the domestic market the government’s strategy has been aimed at reducing borrowing costs and 
risk, managing maturity profiles, diversifying funding instruments, increasing transparency and building 
credibility.  The  marketing  of  government  debt  through  primary  dealers  was  introduced  in  1998, 
followed by a debt consolidation programme in 2002. The funding instruments were also diversified 
from  fixed  income  bonds  and  treasury  bills  to  inflation-linked  bonds,  variable  rate  bonds  and  retail 
bonds.  Moreover,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  cash  management  through 
investments in interest-bearing deposits. 
As a result of all these measures the government has been able to reduce its net loan debt from a 
peak of 48,1 per cent of gross domestic product in fiscal 1996/97 to 36,8 per cent in 2003/04. This not 
only contributed to lower interest payments on total public debt, but also to generally lower long-term 
yields in the South African capital market. The prudent measures applied by government have brought 
about  a  decline  in  government  net  dissaving  from  the  high  level  of  7,3  per  cent  of  gross  domestic 
product in 1992 to 1,1 per cent in 2003. 
Monetary policy 
5. 
The more normalised relations with the rest of the world made it possible for the authorities to focus 
monetary policy on the creation of a financial environment that would be conducive to the attainment 
of the growth potential of the country. The objectives of monetary policy at the beginning of the 1990s 
were to reduce the rate of inflation to the average rate of inflation in trading partner and competitor 
countries;  to  manage  the  money  creation  process  in  such  a  way  that  an  adequate,  but  not  an 
excessive amount of new money would be supplied to the system; to maintain positive real interest 
rates; to increase the gold and other foreign reserves to a comfortable level and to develop a sound 
financial infrastructure consisting of healthy financial institutions and financial markets. 
In the 1990s the Reserve Bank also intervened heavily on its own initiative in the spot and forward 
market  to  influence  supply  and  demand  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  These  operations  were 
undertaken to smooth out large short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate, but it was explicitly stated 
by  the  Bank  that  it  did  not  target  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate.  The  extent  to  which  the  Bank 
intervened  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  clearly  reflected  in  the  changes  in  the  net  open 
position in foreign reserves (NOFP), i.e. the net gold and other foreign reserves of the Bank less the 
balance on its net oversold forward book. For example, on 30 September 1998 the NOFP reached a 
peak of US$23,2 billion. 
BIS Review 30/2004 
 3
Despite this active intervention, large fluctuations occurred in the weighted average external value of 
the  rand,  particularly  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  in  an  environment  of  more  liberalised 
exchange  controls.  The  monetary  policy  measures,  however,  achieved  considerable  success  in 
bringing the rate of inflation down. After inflation in the consumer price index had generally fluctuated 
around a level of about 15 per cent in the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s it moved below 
double digits in 1993 and declined to 5,2 per cent in 1999. 
In  February  2000  the  government  announced  that  South  Africa  had  formally  adopted  an  inflation-
targeting monetary policy framework to make monetary policy more transparent and accountable and 
to promote a more co-ordinated approach with other policy measures. In the application of inflation 
targeting in South Africa, it was decided to leave the external value of the rand to the market and not 
to intervene in the foreign-exchange market to influence the exchange rate. It was realised that this 
could lead to volatility in the exchange rate of the rand. Although the Bank would have preferred to 
operate  in an  environment  characterised  by  exchange rate stability,  cognisance  is  taken  of  the  fact 
that fluctuations in the external value of the rand are unavoidable in the current international monetary 
system of generally floating exchange rates. In these circumstances the authorities can only aim at 
creating underlying economic conditions that are conducive to exchange rate stability. 
Fluctuations in the exchange rate of the rand have nevertheless complicated the implementation of 
monetary policy. For example in 2002 monetary policy was dominated by inflationary pressures arising 
from a substantial depreciation in the external value of the rand in late 2001, combined with a sharp 
rise  in  international  oil  prices  as  well  as  in  domestic  food  prices.  These  external  shocks  were 
responsible for a surge in the twelve-month rate of increase in the CPIX from a low of 5,8 per cent in 
September 2001 to a peak of 11,3 per cent in October 2002. Restrictive monetary policy measures 
and the subsequent recovery in the exchange rate of the rand then brought the rate of increase over 
twelve months in the CPIX down to 4,4 per cent in March 2004. 
With  the  adoption  of  the  inflation  targeting  framework,  it  also  became  the  stated  objective  of  the 
Reserve Bank to reduce the NOFP because of the negative effect that this position had on foreign 
investments  into  South  Africa and  the  assessment of  domestic  economic conditions of  international 
rating  agencies.  The  NOFP  was  accordingly  reduced  from  the  peak  oversold  position  of 
US$23,2 billion at the end of September 1998 to an overbought position of US$0,9 billion at the end of 
July 2003. 
The  Reserve  Bank  then  shifted  its  focus  to  reducing  its  oversold  forward  book  and  to  gradually 
strengthen  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserve  position.  As  a  result  of  the  appreciation  in  the 
exchange rate of the rand, the oversold forward book of the Reserve Bank amounting to US$4,1 billion 
at the end of July 2003 and was quickly turned around to an overbought position of US$38 million at 
the end of February 2004. The official foreign exchange reserves of the country was also increased 
from US$7,6 billion at the end of December 2002 to US$10,0 billion at the end of April 2004. It is now 
the  objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  to  increase  its  foreign  reserves  further  in  a  gradual  manner 
whenever the underlying circumstances allow it to do so. 
The financial sector 
6. 
In  the  period  of  political  and  economic  isolation  during  the  1980s  the  domestic  financial  sector 
continued to grow rapidly. Many improvements were made to the regulatory framework such as the 
creation  of  a  uniform  legal  framework  for  all  deposit-taking  institutions;  the  establishment  of 
appropriate structures for the markets in new financial instruments; and the revision to rules governing 
the marketing of equities, bonds and derivatives. Moreover, the authorities endeavoured to promote 
proper  risk  management  procedures  and  internationally  accepted  principles  with  the  objective  to 
preserve the soundness of financial institutions. 
The efforts made to maintain an effective and efficient financial sector were hampered by the lack of 
co-operation with foreign regulators due to the political circumstances at that time. As a consequence, 
some  regulations  and  practices  started  to  deviate  from  international  best  practices.  With  the 
re-establishment of normal relations with the rest of the world in the 1990s, great efforts were made to 
bring the rules and regulations on the activities of financial institutions in line with international norms 
and standards. 
From  1994  South  African  financial  institutions  started  operating  on  an  increasing  scale  in  major 
international financial centers as well as opening branches or subsidiaries in other African countries. 
As part of this process, five large domestic companies transferred the primary listing of their stock to 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2004
foreign  bourses.  This  change  gave  them  greater  access  to  capital  resources  at  lower  cost  and 
provided them with opportunities to promote their core business into other countries and regions. All 
these companies maintained secondary listings on the JSE Securities Exchange South Africa (JSE), 
and their market capitalisation on the JSE actually increased from R126 billion in 1997 to R471 billion 
in 2003. 
Over  this  same  period  foreign  financial  institutions  were  encouraged  to  conduct  business  in  South 
Africa  by  the  creation  of  a  level  playing  field  between  local  and  foreign  service  providers.  The 
regulatory  authorities  also  actively  encouraged  the development  of  appropriate  clearing,  settlement, 
ownership-transfer  and  market  information  systems  and  insisted  on  proper  intra-market  and  cross-
market risk management systems, including capital adequacy requirements for market participants. 
The operations of the financial markets in South Africa were improved considerably to bring them in 
line with international standards. In 1996 bond trading was shifted from the JSE to the Bond Exchange 
of  South  Africa.  This  led  to  a  substantial  rise  in  the  turnover  in  the  secondary  bond  market  from 
R2 trillion  in  1995  to  nearly  R12  trillion  in  2003.  Improvements  to  the  JSE  included  the  electronic 
clearing and rolling contractual settlement, the dematerialisation of equity scrip and the implementation 
of an electronic trading system. The value of shares traded on the JSE increased from R62 billion in 
1994 to R752 billion in 2003. 
An important further development since 1994 has been the importance attached to the provision of 
access  to  finance  and  banking  activities  to  small,  medium  and  micro  enterprises  and  underbanked 
communities.  This  challenge  has  been  accepted  with  due  recognition  of  the  regulatory  objective  of 
achieving  a  high  degree  of  economic  efficiency  and  consumer  protection  in  the  economy.  This 
requires  an  approach  that  introduces  changes  to  achieve  greater  participation  in  banking  while 
financial stability is maintained at the same time. 
Developments in the regulatory framework of South Africa’s financial markets during the past years 
have  been  aimed  at  addressing  empowerment  issues.  For  this  purpose,  the  financial  sector  has 
developed  a  Financial  Sector  Black  Economic  Empowerment  Charter  to  promote  increased  black 
ownership of and access to financial institutions. This Charter, which was made public on 17 October 
2003,  sets  out  targets  that  will  be  pursued  up  to  December  2014  regarding,  among  other  things, 
investment  in  human  resource  development;  a  procurement  policy  that  favours  accredited  black 
economic empowerment companies; improved delivery of and access to financial services to a greater 
segment  of  the  low-income  population;  the  mobilisation  of  resources  for  empowerment  financing; 
increased  direct  black  ownership  at  the  holding  company  level;  the  encouragement  of  shareholder 
activism in promoting the objectives of the charter; and directing a percentage of after-tax operating 
profits to corporate social investment aimed at education, training and job creation. 
Conclusion 
7. 
The  normalisation  of  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  world  made  it  unnecessary  to  follow  relatively 
restrictive fiscal and monetary policies to maintain a surplus on the current account of South Africa’s 
balance of payments and created leeway for the promotion of economic growth. In the past ten years 
a deficit was therefore recorded on the current account, but this deficit as a ratio of gross domestic 
product remained low and averaged only 1 per cent per year. Over the same period a net financial 
inflow was recorded from the rest of the world amounting to nearly R204 billion, compared with the net 
financial outflow of about R45 billion from 1985 to 1993. As a result, the level of foreign investment in 
South Africa amounted to R736 billion at the end of 2002. 
These developments allowed the authorities to pursue more liberal policies while maintaining financial 
stability, which contributed materially to a better growth performance of the domestic economy and the 
improvement in the living standards of the population. South Africa’s real economic growth doubled 
from an average annual rate of 1½ per cent during the 1980s to about 3 per cent between 1994 and 
2003. In addition, the average growth in real gross national income per capita, an indicator of living 
standards, improved from a negative figure of 1,1 per cent per annum during the 1980s to a positive 
figure of 0,8 per cent between 1994 and 2003. Moreover, between 2000 and 2003 the average growth 
in real gross national income per capita amounted to about 1,5 per cent. 
The challenge is to further increase the growth performance of the domestic economy. The foundation 
has been provided over the past ten years to make this achievable. So the future looks promising. 
BIS Review 30/2004 
 5
List of references 
Calitz, Estian and Krige, Siebrits, Changes in the role of government in the South African economy, 
Economic Perspective, Absa Group Limited, Second Quarter 2002. 
Cassim,  Rashad,  et  al,  The  state  of  Trade  Policy  in  South  Africa,  Trade  and  Industrial  Policy 
Strategies, Department of Trade and Industry, December 2002. 
Cross,  James,  Global  integration  and  capital  liberalisation  in  South  Africa,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Paper No 15, 2001. 
De  Kock,  G.P.C.,  The  Monetary  System  and  Monetary  Policy  in  South  Africa,  Final  Report  to  the 
Commission of Enquiry into the Monetary System and Monetary Policy in South Africa, Government 
Printers, Pretoria, 1985. 
Falkena, H.B. et al, Financial Regulation in South Africa, S.A. Financial Sector Forum, Johannesburg 
2001. 
Republic of South Africa, National Treasury, Budget Review 2004, RP18/2004, Pretoria, 18 February 
2004. 
Republic of South Africa, National Treasury, Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, October 2003, 
RP201/2003, Pretoria, 2003. 
South African Reserve Bank, Governor’s Address, 1994 to 2003. 
South African Reserve Bank, Bank Supervision Department, Annual Reports, 1994 to 2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2004
