Panayotis Thomopoulos: Great expectations for 2004 - a year of optimism? 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Economist 
Conference, Athens, 7 May 2004. 
 I am glad that I can answer the question posed for this session in the affirmative. Yes, 2004 is a year 
of optimism, and, provided that appropriate policies are introduced, optimism should continue in 2005 
as  well.  However,  since  we  are  living  in  a  rapidly  changing  world,  single  global  periodic  shocks  of 
various  origins  are,  unfortunately,  becoming  a  routine  and  since  macroeconomic  equilibria  and 
“harmonious” growth are mirages, the answer cannot be a simple Yes. It is more propitious to say yes, 
but.  Ôhe  but  refers  to  two  factors.  First,  there  are  growing  divergences  in  economic  performance 
across the globe, with the result that the dividends of the recovery are not being evenly spread among 
the major regions of the world. Although the differences in economic performance can be attributed 
mainly  to  domestic  factors,  the  policies  of  certain  economic  powers  are  also  contributing  to  the 
sub-optimal performance of other regions. Second, looking further ahead, it is appropriate to sound a 
warning  that  in  an  uncertain  international  environment  governments,  central  banks  and  financial 
supervisors  as  well as  the  private  sector  should  not  take  for  granted  the  recent  good  performance. 
Rather they should take decisive action to prolong this recovery and avoid the realization of downside 
risks. 
After three miserable years of below par growth, it is now clear that the world economy has entered a 
period of improving economic performance. World output is expected to increase by 4.6 percent this 
year, 50% faster than in the previous two years, while world trade, which practically stagnated in 2001 
and  2002,  will  increase  by  nearly  8  percent  this  year.  Although  this  performance  falls  short  of  the 
heady days of the late 1990s, it is a significant improvement over the recent past. 
This  rebound  now  covers  practically  the  whole  world,  albeit  to  varying  degrees,  with  most  major 
countries benefiting from accelerating growth. However again the rate of growth in certain regions will 
continue to be considerably below their potential rate. Even Japan is now looking forward to a durable 
recovery  in  part  as  a  result  of  the  decrease  in  banks’  contingent  liabilities  and  of  strong  export 
demand, especially from China. Many Latin American countries have turned the page of distress and 
have been recording fast, though still fragile, growth. Argentina’s growth is impressive, some 10%, but 
unless it clears its foreign debt hurdle there is no guarantee that the recent performance will continue 
over the medium term. Russia and a few transition economies also show strong growth, although, as 
in  the  case  of  many  Latin  America  countries,  the  boom  in  raw  materials  and  energy  prices  has 
significantly contributed to this outcome. To a large extent, this world recovery is due to the strength of 
the Asian economies, which have overcome the trauma of the crisis in 1997-98 and are now growing 
again at rates around 6-7 percent. It is not only the Asian dragons and China (the latter leading with a 
rate of growth of slightly above 10% annually), but particular mention should also go to India, which is 
now reaping the benefits of the liberalization it introduced after the mid-1990s and is now growing at 
7%, a rate more than double its customary 3 percent. It should be recalled that the US is also growing 
rapidly and its import demand has continued to be a source of growth for the world economy. Whereas 
some 10 years ago the E.U. was the main beneficiary of dynamic US demand, nowadays the center of 
gravity has moved to the Pacific rim. This is reflected in a rate of growth of world trade in the Pacific 
rim  estimated  at  about  11%  on  average  in  2003/2004,  which  is  more  than  three  times  the 
corresponding rate of growth of the overseas trade of the EU. In 2003 more than one quarter of the 
increase in world trade was due to China, whose international trade grew at almost 40% last year. The 
east  Asian  tigers  (Korea,  Taiwan,  Thailand,  Malaysia)  have  been  dwarfed  by  a  Colossus  which, 
however,  has  the  vitality  of  a  tiger.  In  order  to  better  gauge  the  growing  role  of  China  in  the  world 
economy, assuming that its high growth rate continues, we can calculate that the annual increment of 
its GDP in the years to come is as if a country of almost the size of Spain (the 9th biggest market 
economy worldwide) was being integrated into the world economy every year. 
Accelerating growth is taking place in a non-inflationary climate, with price increases remaining at or 
below 2 percent in the developed world and in many emerging economies. We can now take comfort 
that we have, at least temporarily, tamed the beast of inflation that bedeviled our economies in the 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
1970s and 1980s, while the fears of deflationary pressures that were widespread last summer have 
certainly not materialized. These improvements are partly due to improved macroeconomic policies, 
but  they  also  reflect  fundamental  changes  as  a  result  of  new  technologies,  as  well  as  a  more 
competitive and pro-business climate all over the world. The rapidly growing share of world exports 
originating  from  the  low  labor  cost  countries  (China,  India  and  others)  is  also  exerting  a  downward 
pressure  on  prices  globally.  The  much-maligned  dotcom  bubble  did  reflect  an  improvement  in 
technological possibilities, which we are now observing as increasing productivity in many countries. It 
is not for nothing that much of the global investment revival now comes from the technology sector. 
Within  this  overall  booming  environment,  it  is  slightly  distressing  that  the  core  economies  of  the 
eurozone remain the laggards. Although all European economies have now emerged from recession, 
the  three  main  economies,  Germany,  France  and  Italy,  will  see  very  modest  growth  of  less  than 
1 ½ percent in total this year. Certainly, this slow growth cannot be blamed on macroeconomic factors, 
which remain conducive to growth. The external environment is improving fast, monetary policy, as 
conducted by the ECB, remains supportive of growth, and fiscal policy, as reflected in an overall fiscal 
deficit in the eurozone of close to 3 percent, is expansionary. Even the euro’s appreciation has been 
halted  and  wage  growth  remains  moderate  at  2¾%  annually.  While  it  is  easy  to  eliminate 
macroeconomic policy as the cause of slow growth in the eurozone, it is much more difficult to pinpoint 
the culprits of this sluggish recovery. 
Maybe  there  is  no  single  cause,  and  the  situation  differs  from  country  to  country.  Some  eurozone 
members,  like  Italy,  have  difficulty  adapting  to  a  situation  where  the  nominal  exchange  rate  is 
appreciating  and  the  country  faces  growing  competition  from  low-cost  producers  in  many  of  its 
traditional  industrial  sectors  (textiles,  shoe  making,  garments  etc.).  Prior  to  Eurozone  membership, 
many,  especially  in  the  business  sector,  had  taken  it  for  granted  that  the  exchange  rate  only 
depreciates. In other countries, the uncertainties induced by the stubbornly high unemployment rate 
and the slow progress in structural changes are depressing economic sentiment and are holding back 
consumption  and  investment,  despite  the  marked  improvements  in  corporate  profitability  across 
sectors  in  2003  &  2004.  I  do  not  think  that  the  Eurozone  is  facing  the  fundamental  problems  that 
Japan faced over the last ten years. It is more the confluence of many factors that exert a negative 
influence  on our economies.  Pessimism  is  one  of  them  and  has  permeated many  economic circles 
and is in itself a worrying phenomenon. This is reflected in the fact that the recent recovery, instead of 
being compared to stronger previous cyclical recoveries, is compared to the worst phases of the cycle 
- the declining output towards the end of 2002 and the first half of 2003. In the same vein, a very low 
potential  rate  of  growth  of  barely  above  2%  per  year  for  the  Euroarea  is considered  by  many  as  a 
normal benchmark against which outcomes are measured. Therefore, a 0,5% shortfall, i.e. a rate of 
growth  in  the  Euroarea  of  about  1.5%  as  is  projected  for  2004,  is  implicitly  considered  broadly 
satisfactory,  despite  the  fact  that  there  is  still  a  negative  output  gap.  Given  the  interaction  between 
actual  GDP  growth  and  potential  growth,  a  sharper  rebound  of  the  Euroarea,  as  was  the  case  in 
cyclical upturns in the past, would by itself have raised the rate of growth of potential GDP. Indeed, if 
assisted by bold structural reforms the rate of growth of potential in the Euroarea could be raised to 
over 2.5%, the same rate as in the 1980s and a rate more normal for mature economies. The potential 
rate  of  growth  of  the  US  has  averaged  just  over  3%  over  the  last  twenty  five  years.  If  too  much 
pessimism regarding the potential rate of growth dampens actual growth and, therefore, may to some 
extent  be  self-fulfilling,  equally  dangerous  is  over-optimism,  or  better  (to  use  the  famous  words) 
irrational exuberance, that is quickly disproven. What is needed is a sober assessment of the situation 
and the introduction urgently of appropriate structural reforms, so that not only macro - but also micro - 
economic policies are geared to supporting a stronger non-inflationary growth than today. 
Though the cause of to-day’s ills in the Euroarea are essentially of domestic origin, I hinted earlier that 
exchange rate policies followed by certain heavy weights in international trade have resulted in a real 
effective appreciation of the euro more than is warranted and, moreover, it seems that from a dynamic 
point of view the appreciation is much greater than the published figures show, which are necessarily 
based on past data. As a result, whereas the Euroarea, one of the richest regions of the globe should 
have had a sizeable current account surplus so as to fulfill its natural world role as a sizeable capital 
exporter (a surplus would also be expected because of its weak cyclical phase), the current account 
surplus of the Euroarea has averaged only $17 billion annually since 2000, compared to $26 billion for 
China  and  $ 80  billion  for the dragons, whose per capita  income  is  still  relatively  low.  Of  course,  if 
Euroarea  growth  was  faster,  this  aspect  would  not  be  so  important  since  more  market  determined 
exchange rates in these countries would probably only add not more than one quarter of a percentage 
point  to  Euroarea  growth.  However,  with  average  growth  in  the  Euroarea  of  less  than  0.7%  in 
2002/2003, even a small stimulus matters. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
In this context I would like to say something about the Greek economy itself. Unlike our partners in the 
EU, we are now enjoying strong growth that will stay close to 4 percent this year as in the last five 
years. Admittedly, the stimulus from the forthcoming Olympic Games and the inflow of EU structural 
funds has contributed to the good economic performance; but I think it is true to say that endogenous 
factors have been significantly more important. Public expenditure on the Olympic Games, amounting 
to  just  over  1%  of  GDP  in  the  last  few  years,  has  also  had  the  negative  effect  of  raising  the  fiscal 
deficit to about its upper limit of 3%, set by the European Treaty, and has also intensified inflationary 
expectations. As a result external competitiveness will again probably be eroded somewhat in 2004, in 
turn  restraining  GDP  growth.  As  for  financial  support  from  the  E.U.,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  net 
inflows  from  the  E.U.  have  fallen  from  over  5%  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  1990s  to  2.8%  in  2003.  The 
Greek  economy  has  succeeded  in  absorbing  this  negative  shock  without  strains  and  the  probable 
further decline in net E.U. funds, after 2007, which is related to E.U. enlargement, does not pose a 
serious threat to growth. Against these negative influences there is an array of positive factors, starting 
from  the  fundamental  changes  in  the  economy  that  have  occurred  in  the  last  fifteen  years  and  are 
easily visible to the naked eye. Not only is the economy functioning more efficiently, and reflecting a 
high  investment-to-GDP  ratio  of  26%,  the  capital  base  both  in  the  private  and  public  sector  has 
broadened and deepened, but also business initiative is on the rise, and the factors in combination 
with the removal of exchange rate risk and low interest rates creates a more stable environment and 
helps  promote  both  consumption  and  private  investment.  Greece,  being  close  to  the  fast-growing 
economies of Eastern Europe and the Balkan area, benefits from its ever-improving economic links 
with them and is becoming a hub for many of them. We are also seeing the first fruits of the heavy 
infrastructure  investment  and  structural  reforms  we  undertook  in  recent  years,  which  underpin  a 
relatively  fast  rate  of  underlying  productivity  growth, at  almost  3%,  or  nearly  three  times  that  of  the 
Euroarea. While some deceleration of growth immediately and for a short period after the Olympics 
may  occur,  I  remain  confident  that  Greece  will  stay  on  a  dynamic  growth  path  for  years  to  come 
provided that fiscal consolidation accelerates and bureaucratic blockages are eliminated. 
While one can be fairly confident about the world economy’s prospects for 2004, I have already hinted 
that challenges may emerge in 2005 and beyond. Real GDP growth is not expected to accelerate in 
2005, while the downside risks loom larger. These challenges are a bit further down the road, but in a 
fast-moving world prevarication is not a good strategy and I shall mention the most important: 
Certainly, the largest threat looming over the world economy in the medium-to-longer term is the “twin 
deficits” in the US. The fiscal deficit is the most worrying and despite plans for a drastic cut over the 
next few years, it may be difficult to achieve it in the light of the U.S. involvements worldwide, the likely 
increase in the interest rate on Treasury Bills, and a projected slowdown of economic growth from the 
high rate of 4.7% estimated for 2004. Only ambitious measures could make a significant dent in the 
fiscal deficit and this is needed both for the US and for the stability of the world economy. 
A decline of the fiscal deficit will by itself reduce somewhat the current account deficit. But, given the 
asymmetry between the high income elasticity of demand for imports in the US of over 2 and the low 
foreign income elasticity for US exports only of 1, only a partial correction is possible. Elimination of 
the current account deficit cannot, therefore, be envisaged under present conditions and, moreover, it 
is not needed. Given the safe heaven status and high profitability in the US, financing the balance of 
payments  deficit  is  less  of  a  problem.  Indeed  the  fears  that  the  deficit  would  trigger  further  rapid 
depreciation of the US dollar, equal to that seen in the last two years, have not materialized and most 
likely will not materialize. The world is finally getting accustomed to the idea that a structural deficit of 
around 3% of GDP over the medium term can be sustained, and this should be the goal. 
The rise in the price of oil close to $40 per barrel is a serious threat to the world economic recovery 
and needs to be urgently addressed. If maintained, such a high price could impact negatively to the 
tune of 0.5% of GDP over the next eighteen months and will exacerbate inflationary pressures. Fast 
rising world demand, especially in China with its low energy and raw-material efficiency (as in the case 
for energy in the US), is an important factor behind the steep rise of oil and particularly of raw and 
intermediate material prices. On the supply side, the policy of some big oil producing countries, which 
have  subordinated  the  goal  of  a  stable  international  environment  conducive  to  sustainable  growth 
world-wide  to  their  short-run  need  for  revenues  to  cover  fiscal  deficits,  is  also  contributing  to  the 
maintenance of high oil prices. Political factors may have also played role in the changing attitude of 
some producers. The rise in oil and raw material prices is accentuating inflationary pressures and may 
lead to a premature monetary policy tightening in many countries, especially if these pressures are 
allowed  to  spill  over  to  wages.  Such  a  move  would  definitely  lead  to  even  slower  growth  than  the 
mechanical impact of the rise in the oil price would suggest. Especially in the US, which has followed 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
an  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  last  few  years,  a  rise  in  interest  rates  may  have  a  strong 
cumulative  impact  on  growth.  Though  such  a  development  would  help  reduce  the  current  account 
deficit it will certainly make fiscal consolidation in the US even more difficult. 
Last, but not least, Chinese growth may slow, but this is a welcome development since recent very 
strong growth was exacerbating disequilibria in China and world-wide. The authorities seem to have 
realized  that  growth  close  to  10-12%,  as  recorded  in  the  last  few  quarters,  intensifies  inflationary 
pressures  and  encourages  investments  in  uneconomical projects,  which  have  no chance to  service 
their debt. The official inflation rate of 3% is being questioned in financial circles, which estimate that 
actual inflation is closer to 6% and if we include real estate and asset prices, inflation probably is even 
higher. Recently, the central bank tightened monetary conditions and introduced credit restrictions and 
the authorities ordered the postponement and even cancellation of many projects not only in order to 
prevent overheating but also in order to encourage banks to clear their non-performing portfolio and 
increase  their  capital  base.  The  authorities  seem  also  to  be  considering  an  appreciation  of  the 
renminbi, though not immediately, which would ease inflation and contribute to a better management 
of their financial resources. We have to see whether these measures will contribute to a soft-landing, 
thus allowing China to avoid the bitter experience of some of its neighbors in 1997-1998, when their 
credit and asset inflation bubble burst. The rate of growth of potential output in China is estimated at 
around 7% per annum, which is still high, and thus China will continue to be a dynamic player in the 
world economy, while at the same time help to stem the rising disequilibria world wide. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
