Alan Greenspan: Economic outlook and current fiscal issues 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System before the Committee on the Budget, US House of Representatives, 25 February 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today and to offer my views on 
the outlook for the economy and current fiscal issues. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and 
not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. 
As you know, the U.S. economy appears to have made the transition from a period of subpar growth 
to one of more vigorous expansion. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose briskly in the second half 
of last year, fueled by a sizable increase in household spending, a notable strengthening in business 
investment, and a sharp rebound in exports. Moreover, productivity surged, prices remained stable, 
and financial conditions improved further. Overall, the economy has lately made impressive gains in 
output and real incomes, although progress in creating jobs has been limited. 
The most recent indicators suggest that the economy is off to a strong start in 2004, and prospects for 
sustaining  the  expansion  in  the  period  ahead  are  good.  The  marked  improvement  in  the  financial 
situations of many households and businesses in recent years should bolster aggregate demand. And 
with short-term real interest rates close to zero, monetary policy remains highly accommodative. Also, 
the impetus from fiscal policy appears likely to stay expansionary through this year. At the same time, 
increases  in  efficiency  and  a  significant  level  of  underutilized  resources  should  help  keep  a  lid  on 
inflation. 
This favorable short-term outlook for the U.S. economy, however, is playing out against a backdrop of 
growing concern about the prospects for the federal budget. As you are well aware, after having run 
surpluses for a brief period around the turn of the decade, the federal budget has reverted to deficit. 
The unified deficit swelled to $375 billion in fiscal 2003 and appears to be continuing to widen in the 
current fiscal year. According to the latest projections from the Administration and the Congressional 
Budget Office (CBO), if current policies remain in place, the budget will stay in deficit for some time. 
In part, the recent deficits have resulted from the economic downturn in 2001 and the period of slow 
growth  that  followed,  as  well  as  the  sharp  declines  in  equity  prices.  The  deficits  also  reflect  a 
significant step-up in spending on defense and higher outlays for homeland security and many other 
nondefense  discretionary  programs.  Tax  reductions  -  some  of  which  were  intended  specifically  to 
provide stimulus to the economy - also contributed to the deterioration of the fiscal balance. 
For  a  time,  the  fiscal  stimulus  associated  with  the  larger  deficits  was  helpful  in  shoring  up  a  weak 
economy.  During  the  next  few  years,  these  deficits  will  tend  to  narrow  somewhat  as  the  economic 
expansion  proceeds  and  rising  incomes  generate  increases  in  revenues.  Moreover,  the  current 
ramp-up  in  defense  spending  will  not  continue  indefinitely.  Merely  maintaining  a  given  military 
commitment, rather than adding to it, will remove an important factor driving the deficit higher. But the 
ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP has already stopped falling and has even edged up in 
the past couple of years - implying a worsening of the starting point from which policymakers will have 
to address the adverse budgetary implications of an aging population and rising health care costs. 
For  about  a  decade,  the  rules  laid  out  in  the  Budget  Enforcement  Act  of  1990,  and  the  later 
modifications and extensions of the act, provided a procedural framework that helped the Congress 
make  the  difficult  decisions  that  were  required  to  forge  a  better  fiscal  balance.  However,  the  brief 
emergence  of  surpluses  eroded  the  will  to  adhere  to  those  rules,  and  many  of  the  provisions  that 
helped  to  restrain  budgetary  decisionmaking  in  the  1990s  -  in  particular,  the  limits  on  discretionary 
spending  and  the  PAYGO  requirements  -  were  violated  more  and  more  frequently  and  eventually 
allowed to expire. In recent years, budget debates have turned to choices offered by those advocating 
tax  cuts  and  those  advocating  increased  spending.  To  date,  actions  that  would  lower  forthcoming 
deficits have received only narrow support, and many analysts are becoming increasingly concerned 
that, without a restoration of the budget enforcement mechanisms and the fundamental political will 
they signal, the inbuilt political bias in favor of red ink will once again become entrenched. 
In 2008 - just four years from now - the first cohort of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the 
earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits may be claimed and the age at which about 
half of prospective beneficiaries choose to retire; in 2011, these individuals will reach 65 and will thus 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 1
be eligible for Medicare. At that time, under the intermediate assumptions of the OASDI trustees, there 
will  still  be  more  than  three  covered  workers  for  each  OASDI  beneficiary;  by  2025,  this  ratio  is 
projected  to  be  down  to  2-1/4.  This  dramatic  demographic  change  is  certain  to  place  enormous 
demands on our nation’s resources - demands we almost surely will be unable to meet unless action 
is taken. For a variety of reasons, that action is better taken as soon as possible. 
The budget scenarios considered by the CBO in its December assessment of the long-term budget 
outlook  offer  a  vivid  -  and  sobering  -  illustration  of  the  challenges  we  face  as  we  prepare  for  the 
retirement of the baby-boom generation. These scenarios suggest that, under a range of reasonably 
plausible assumptions about spending and taxes, we could be in a situation in the decades ahead in 
which rapid increases in the unified budget deficit set in motion a dynamic in which large deficits result 
in  ever-growing  interest  payments  that  augment  deficits  in  future  years.  The  resulting  rise  in  the 
federal debt could drain funds away from private capital formation and thus over time slow the growth 
of living standards. 
Favorable productivity developments, of course, can help to alleviate the impending budgetary strains, 
but no one should expect productivity growth to be sufficient to bail us out. Indeed, productivity would 
have to grow at a rate far above its historical average to fully resolve the long-term financing problems 
of  Social  Security  and  Medicare.  Higher  productivity,  of  course,  buoys  expected  revenues  to  the 
system, but it also raises Social Security obligations.1 Moreover, although productivity has no direct 
link  to  Medicare  spending,  historical  experience  suggests  that  the  demand  for  medical  services 
increases with real income, which over time rises in line with productivity. 
Today, federal outlays under Social Security and Medicare amount to less than 7 percent of GDP. In 
December, the CBO projected that these outlays would increase to 12 percent of GDP by 2030 under 
current  law,  using  assumptions  about  the  growth  of  health-care  costs  similar  to  the  intermediate 
assumptions of the Medicare trustees; when spending on Medicaid is added in, the rise in the ratio is 
even steeper. To be sure, the rise in these outlays relative to GDP could be financed by tax increases, 
but  the  CBO  results  suggest  that,  even  if  other  non-interest  spending  is  constrained  fairly  tightly, 
ensuring fiscal stability would require an overall federal tax burden well above its long-term average. 
Most experts believe that the best baseline for planning purposes is to assume that the demographic 
shift associated with the retirement of the baby-boom generation will be permanent - that is, it will not 
reverse  when  that  cohort  passes  away.  Indeed,  so  long  as  longevity  continues  to  increase  -  and 
assuming  no  significant  changes  in  immigration  or  fertility  rates  -  the  proportion  of  elderly  in  the 
population  will  only  rise.  If  this  fundamental  change  in  the  age  distribution  materializes,  we  will 
eventually  have  no  choice  but  to  make  significant  structural  adjustments  in  the  major  retirement 
programs. 
One change the Congress could consider as it moves forward on this critical issue is to replace the 
current measure of the “cost of living” that is used for many purposes with respect to both revenues 
and outlays with a more appropriate price index. As you may be aware, in 2002, the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics introduced a new price index - the chained consumer price index (CPI). The new index is 
based on the same underlying individual prices as is the official CPI. But it combines those prices so 
as  to  remove  some  of  the  inadvertent  bias  in  the  official  price  index,  and  thus  it  better  measures 
changes in the cost of living, the statutory intent of the indexing.2 All else being equal, had a chained 
CPI been used for indexing over the past decade, the cumulative unified budget deficit and thus the 
level  of  the  federal  debt  would  have  been  reduced  about  $200  billion;  higher  receipts  and  the 
reduction in debt service associated with those higher receipts account for roughly 60 percent of the 
saving, with the remainder attributable to lower outlays. Shifting to the chain-weighted measure would 
not  address  perhaps  more  fundamental  shortcomings  in  the  CPI  -  most  notably  the  question  of 
whether quality improvement is adequately captured - but it would be an important step toward better 
implementation of the intention of the Congress. 
                                                      
1  Under current law, faster productivity growth would not affect individuals who are already retired because their benefits are 
indexed by the consumer price index (CPI). However, it would raise initial benefits for future retirees through its effect on 
real wages over time. In the end, productivity would have to rise about 3-1/2 percent per year, about 2 percentage points per 
year faster than the trustees’ current intermediate assumption, to eliminate the Social Security imbalance over seventy-five 
years; productivity growth would have to be even more rapid to achieve balance in perpetuity. 
In particular, the chained CPI captures more fully than does the official CPI the way that consumers alter the mix of their 
expenditures in response to changes in relative prices. 
2 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2004
Another possible adjustment relates to the age at which Social Security and Medicare benefits will be 
provided.  Under  current  law,  and  even  with  the  so-called  normal  retirement  age  for  Social  Security 
slated to move up to 67 over the next two decades, the ratio of the number of years that the typical 
worker will spend in retirement to the number of years he or she works will rise in the long term. A 
critical step forward would be to adjust the system so that this ratio stabilizes. A number of specific 
approaches have been proposed for implementing this indexation, but the principle behind all of them 
is to insulate the finances of the system, at least to a degree, from further changes in life expectancy. 
Sound  private  and  public  decisionmaking  will  be  aided  by  determining  ahead  of  the  fact  how  one 
source of risk, namely demographic developments, will be dealt with. 
The  degree  of  uncertainty  about  whether  future  resources  will  be  adequate  to  meet  our  current 
statutory obligations  to  the  coming  generations  of  retirees  is daunting.  The concern  is  not  so  much 
about Social Security, where benefits are tied in a mechanical fashion to retirees’ wage histories and 
we have some useful tools for forecasting future outlays. The outlook for Medicare, however, is much 
more  difficult  to  assess.  Although  forecasting  the  number  of  program  beneficiaries  is  reasonably 
straightforward, we know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and 
how those innovations will translate into future spending. To be sure, technological innovations can 
greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in theory, reduce the costs of existing treatments. 
But because medical technology expands the range of treatment options, it also has the potential of 
adding to overall spending - in some cases, significantly. As a result, the range of possible outlays per 
recipient is extremely wide. This uncertainty is an important reason to be cautious - especially given 
that government programs, whether for spending or for tax preferences, are easy to initiate but can be 
extraordinarily difficult to shut down once constituencies for them develop. 
In view of this upward ratchet in government programs and the enormous uncertainty about the upper 
bounds  of  future  demands  for  medical  care,  I  believe  that  a  thorough  review  of  our  spending 
commitments - and at least some adjustment in those commitments - is necessary for prudent policy. I 
also  believe  that  we  have  an  obligation  to  those  in  and  near  retirement  to  honor  what  has  been 
promised  to  them.  If  changes  need  to  be  made,  they  should  be  made  soon  enough  so  that  future 
retirees have time to adjust their plans for retirement spending and to make sure that their personal 
resources, along with what they expect to receive from the government, will be sufficient to meet their 
retirement needs. 
I certainly agree that the same scrutiny needs to be applied to taxes. However, tax rate increases of 
sufficient  dimension  to  deal  with  our  looming  fiscal  problems  arguably  pose  significant  risks  to 
economic growth and the revenue base. The exact magnitude of such risks is very difficult to estimate, 
but they are of enough concern, in my judgment, to warrant aiming to close the fiscal gap primarily, if 
not wholly, from the outlay side. 
The dimension of the challenge is enormous. The one certainty is that the resolution of this situation 
will  require  difficult  choices  and  that  the  future  performance  of  the  economy  will  depend  on  those 
choices.  No  changes  will  be  easy,  as  they  all  will  involve  lowering  claims  on  resources  or  raising 
financial obligations. It falls on the Congress to determine how best to address the competing claims. 
In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy change but also the 
broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and private saving. 
History has shown that, when faced with major challenges, elected officials have risen to the occasion. 
In  particular,  over  the  past  twenty  years  or  so,  the  prospect  of  large  deficits  has  generally  led  to 
actions  to  narrow  them.  I  trust  that  the  recent  deterioration  in  the  budget  outlook  and  the  fast-
approaching  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation  will  be  met  with  similar  determination  and 
effectiveness. 
BIS Review 13/2004 
 3
