Michael C Bonello: The banking environment in Malta 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Raiffeisen Economic 
Forum, St Julians, 21 May 2004. 
 The history of banking in Malta goes back at least to the earliest decades of the nineteenth century, 
when the island’s strategic importance as a centre for entrepot trade encouraged the establishment of 
banking institutions. Among the better known foreign names before World War II was that of Barclays 
Bank DCO. This was a time when Malta was a British colony and part of the sterling area. Barclays 
remained in Malta after independence and the subsequent break with sterling in 1972, and contributed 
to the development of a cadre of bankers trained in the British banking tradition. It left only when the 
larger banks were nationalised during the 1970s. 
This  coincided  with  the  adoption  of  a  policy  of  economic  autarchy.  The  major  banks  were  publicly 
owned and lending rates were set by the Minister of Finance, while the Central Bank controlled deposit 
rates.  Nominal  interest  rates  were  kept  artificially  low,  often  resulting  in  negative  real  rates.  Strict 
exchange controls were imposed to sustain the value of the Maltese lira. 
In the absence of money and capital markets, the banking sector dominated the financial system. In 
the circumstances, however, the sector did not operate efficiently. In particular, the banks were unable 
to adjust lending rates according to the perceived creditworthiness of borrowers, and resorted instead 
to significant collateral requirements and to credit rationing. Furthermore, because the scarcity of land 
in  Malta  seemed  to  guarantee  that  its  value  would  never  go  down,  property  has  always  been 
considered  a  safe  investment,  so  that  Maltese  banks  relied  heavily  on  real  estate  as  collateral, 
attaching insufficient importance to the viability of projects. As a result, many potential customers were 
denied access to credit. This, together with the absence of a capital market, meant that savings could 
not be channelled effectively into productive private investment and tended to flow instead either into 
inefficient Government-owned enterprises, into the property market or, despite exchange controls, into 
overseas assets. 
This situation created imbalances in bank balance sheets, which, when the economy was liberalised 
and exposed to market forces, came to represent a potential threat to financial stability. For example, 
the  changes  in  relative  prices  that  occurred  in  the  wake  of  liberalisation  tended,  in  some  cases,  to 
result in a deterioration in loan quality. Furthermore, bank balance sheets included a large number of 
Government-guaranteed  loans  to  public  corporations  and  utilities  that  were  largely  shielded  from 
competition.  Despite  these  distortions,  however,  no  major  bank  collapse  or  financial  crisis  was 
experienced. 
A  major  change  occurred  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s  when  a  programme  of  financial 
liberalisation  and  privatisation  fundamentally  transformed  the  economic  climate.  For  a  start,  the 
Government’s  shareholding  in  the  banks  was  reduced.  In  addition,  on  account  of  the  high  liquidity 
levels prevailing in the banking system, reserve requirements were introduced. The capital structure of 
the banks was also strengthened through new share issues and an augmentation of internal reserves, 
while a  capital  market,  in the  form  of  the  Malta  Stock  Exchange,  was  set  up.  Supporting economic 
reforms included a relaxation of the extensive system of import controls, the partial lifting of wage-price 
controls and an overhaul of the income tax system. 
The introduction of reserve requirements and of open market operations by the Central Bank of Malta 
in 1994 opened the way for the removal of administered interest rates. At the same time, the Bank 
encouraged banks to manage their liquid assets more actively, setting the stage for the development 
of an interbank market. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Malta’s  engagement  in  open  market  operations  was  followed  by  the 
establishment of a market-driven interest rate structure, which is, of course, of paramount importance 
for the transmission of monetary policy signals. The Bank began to use weekly auctions to influence 
the size of the monetary base, while gaining control over the excess liquidity in the banking system. 
Maximum interest rates on bank loans and advances were linked to the Central Bank’s discount rate, 
injecting  some  flexibility  into  the  interest  rate  structure.  Soon  after,  preferential  lending  rates  were 
abolished, with a margin of three percentage points above the discount rate being permitted for almost 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 1
all categories of lending. Furthermore, the Central Bank removed the ceiling on bank deposit rates, 
although it maintained a minimum rate to protect savers. 
Also in 1994 a strategic decision was taken to turn Malta into an international financial centre, and a 
comprehensive package of legislation consisting of a number of new financial laws complemented by 
amendments to existing ones was enacted. These included a new Banking Act, a Financial Institutions 
Act, an Investment Services Act, a Prevention of Money Laundering Act, an Insider Dealing Act and a 
Professional Secrecy Act. This legislation was backed by a number of Directives, Bye-Laws, Policy 
Documents, Codes and Regulations. 
At the same time the Central Bank of Malta was given responsibility for monetary policy and lending 
rates.  The  Bank  responded  by  widening  the  margin  above  the  discount  rate  from  three  percentage 
points to ten, thus effectively freeing lending rates. The lifting of restrictions on both domestic lending 
and  deposit  rates  simultaneously  ensured  adequate  profit  margins  for  the  banks.  In  1999  all 
restrictions  on  deposit  rates  were  abolished,  while  in  2002  domestic  lending  was  completely 
liberalised. 
With  financial  markets  in  an  early  stage  of  development,  exchange  control  liberalisation  had  to 
proceed cautiously. It was felt that domestic markets should be allowed to grow, and financial asset 
prices to adjust, before being exposed to free cross-border movements of capital. A sequencing policy 
was adopted aimed at easing controls on longer-term capital flows while continuing to restrict short-
term flows. 
Exchange control liberalisation began in earnest in the mid-nineties when Malta accepted the Article 
VIII obligations of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement and the process was completed immediately prior to 
Malta’s accession to the European Union on May 1st this year. 
The deregulation measures I have described were accompanied by institutional restructuring, which 
ensured that throughout the reform process the financial system was not subject to shocks. 
The  new  1994  Banking  Act  and  the  related  Directives  brought  Malta’s  legislation  in  line  with 
EU standards governing bank solvency, capital adequacy and large exposures. At the same time, the 
Malta  Financial  Services  Centre  was  established  as  the  regulator  for  financial  services  other  than 
banking, which remained the responsibility of the Central Bank of Malta. 
At  this  time,  the  Central  Bank  undertook  a  number  of  initiatives  to  develop  a  properly  functioning 
money market, focusing mainly on the three-month Treasury bill. An interbank market also began to 
operate and the Bank began to trade actively in the money market through regular auctions of term 
deposits and repos. The Central Bank also ceased to extend credit to the Government, thus further 
underlining its independence. 
To reduce its influence further, the Government privatised a small bank in 1994 and one of the larger 
banks the following year. In 1999 it sold its majority shareholding in the other major bank to a global 
banking institution, HSBC. The arrival of this bank spurred competition and helped to promote better 
practices.  In  addition,  operating  licences  were  granted  to  several  foreign-owned  banks,  including,  I 
should add, Austrian banking institutions, whose presence here is most welcome. 
Thus, from a highly regulated system dominated by the public sector, the Maltese banking system was 
transformed into a modern market-based system, geared to meet the financial needs of a growing and 
increasingly outward-looking economy. As at the end of 2003, there were sixteen banks licensed to 
operate in or from Malta. Of these, eight were deposit money banks catering largely for the domestic 
market and licensed to transact in both the domestic and in foreign currencies. The other eight were 
international banks licensed to carry on banking business almost exclusively with non-residents and in 
foreign currency only. 
It  should  be  noted  that  the  distinction  between  domestic  and  international  banks  is  administrative 
rather than legal, and is based simply on each institution’s choice as to whether or not to apply for a 
licence to operate domestically or to deal only with non-residents. Otherwise all banking institutions 
are subject to the same regulatory and supervisory regime. With the coming into force of the single 
European Passport for Credit Institutions, moreover, even this administrative distinction will become 
largely irrelevant. Nevertheless, the international banks are without exception wholesale banks, while 
at least half of the domestic banks are retail banks, of which two have an extensive branch network. 
The impact of the international banks on employment and national income is still modest, although it is 
growing  steadily.  But  they  contribute  substantially  to  the  transfer  of  financial  and  technological 
know-how  and  to  increased  competition,  as  well  as  to  the  international  integration  of  the  Maltese 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2004
financial  system.  Last  year,  for  instance,  one  of  these  banks,  which  specialises  in  trade  finance, 
acquired  a  controlling  share  in  the  London  Forfaiting  Company  plc,  and  more  recently  concluded  a 
deal for factoring in India. 
As for the domestic banking sector, which at the end of 2003 accounted for over 60% of the lending 
portfolio  and  80%  of  the  deposit  liabilities  of  the  entire  banking  system,  this  remains  highly 
concentrated,  reflecting  the  small  size  of  the  market  and  the  history  of  the  industry.  In  fact,  until 
recently, the two largest banks accounted for over 90% of the sector’s assets, though this share is now 
closer to 75% as another two banks have since been licensed to operate domestically. 
Today  Maltese  banks  are  almost  entirely  in  private  hands,  and  at  least  five  of  the  domestic  banks, 
including  one  of  the  major  ones,  are  foreign  owned,  while  another,  smaller  bank  is  partly  foreign 
owned. The Government still retains a 25% stake in Bank of Valletta, one of the two larger domestic 
banks, but it has stated its intention to divest itself of this holding and is currently looking for a strategic 
partner. 
As  the  economy  developed  and  confidence  in  the  banks  increased,  bank  intermediation  in  Malta, 
which  was  rather  low  in  the  1970s,  reached  very  high  levels.  By  the  end  of  2003  for  example,  the 
domestic banks’ assets amounted to over 277% of GDP, compared with a euro area average of 273%, 
while the ratio of domestic bank credit to GDP stood at 155%, as against 143% in the euro area. More 
significantly, spreads between short-term lending and deposit rates in Malta, at 2.41 percentage points 
in 2003, were even narrower than the euro area average of 3.48 points. This suggests that the local 
banks compare favourably in terms of efficiency with banks elsewhere in the European Union. 
Furthermore, despite the global economic slowdown and the recent weak performance of the Maltese 
economy,  the  profitability  of  banks  in  Malta,  as  evidenced  by  the  return  on  assets,  has  been  fairly 
stable at around 0.8%. This compares with an average return of 0.6% recorded by European banks in 
2001. At the same time, bank liquidity remains very high, with the domestic banks’ holdings of liquid 
assets as a share of short-term liabilities, just under 50% at the end of 2003, consistently exceeding 
the 30% prudential requirement. Maltese banks are also strongly capitalized. Their aggregate capital 
adequacy ratio, defined as the ratio of own funds to risk-weighted assets, stood at 16.7%. 
On the other hand, the banks’ loan portfolio still tends to be concentrated on a few sectors, reflecting 
the  structure  and  small  size  of  the  Maltese  economy.  Furthermore,  they  still  rely  too  heavily  on 
property as collateral. In addition, the level of non-performing loans has been on the high side, and 
certainly  higher  than  the  EU  average,  even  though it  has  recently  started  to  decline.  Here  I  should 
perhaps point out that in Malta we adopt a relatively conservative definition of non-performing loans. 
The expanded economic role of the banks has been accompanied by significant progress in creating 
an  independent  and  effective  regulatory  framework  in  line  with  international  standards.  In  2002  the 
Malta Financial Services Centre was renamed the Malta Financial Services Authority, and took over 
from the Central bank the responsibility for supervising the banks and the Malta Stock Exchange to 
become  the  single  supervisory  and  regulatory  body.  The  division  of  responsibilities  between  the 
Authority  and  the  Bank  requires  effective  cooperation,  and  for  this  purpose  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding has been signed. 
At the same time, the Central Bank was given formal independence in the conduct of monetary policy, 
in overseeing payment systems and in safeguarding the overall stability of the financial system. The 
Bank uses a number of approaches to identify possible threats to the system. It analyses data from 
prudential  returns  submitted  by  the  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  This,  coupled  with  further 
analysis  of  the  corporate  sector  in  terms  of  leverage,  profitability  and  liquidity,  complements  the 
monitoring of credit risk within the banking system. Stress testing is also carried out in order to identify 
potential  losses  resulting  from  abnormal  market  conditions.  This  is  applied  both  to  the  banks’  loan 
portfolio  and  to  market  risks  arising  from  their  foreign  currency,  interest  rate,  liquidity,  equity  and 
commodity risk exposures. 
Finally,  a  Financial  Intelligence  Analysis  Unit  was  established,  thus  completing  the  institutional 
framework  for  strengthening  the  anti-money  laundering  regime  and  for  combating  the  financing  of 
terrorism. 
It is worth noting here that both the 1994 and the 2002 financial reforms were unanimously approved 
by Malta’s Parliament - a rare event, and one that should inspire investor confidence. 
A  further  important  development  in  Malta’s  efforts  to  establish  itself  as  a  reputable  financial  centre 
occurred  in  late  2002  when  Malta  requested  the  IMF/World  Bank  to  conduct  a  Financial  Sector 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 3
Assessment Programme (FSAP). The assessment, which was published in August 2003, noted that 
Malta’s financial system appeared to be healthy and well supervised, and that its domestic banks were 
profitable, liquid and well capitalised. Moreover, it had a comprehensive legal framework and adhered 
strongly to most international standards and codes. At the same time, the report noted that, mainly 
because of the predominance of two large banks, the system was highly concentrated and exposed to 
the country’s narrow economic base. 
Among the more recent developments on the banking scene has been the introduction of a number of 
innovative  products  and  delivery  channels,  such  as  equity-linked  deposits  and  mobile  and  internet 
banking.  On  the  legislative  front,  a  major  development  has  been  the  introduction  of  a  Depositor 
Compensation  Scheme.  Malta  has  also  adopted  the  European  Directive  of  4th  April  2001  on  the 
reorganisation and winding up of credit institutions and their branches in Member States, which should 
facilitate the harmonisation of any eventual measures that may have to be taken in this regard. 
In compliance with EU legislation on the promotion of international payments, the Central Bank has 
meanwhile  brought  into  force  the  Directive  on  Cross-border  Credit  Transfers.  Another  Directive,  on 
Electronic Payments Services, which seeks to ensure a high level of consumer protection in the field 
of electronic payment instruments, came into force on May 1st this year. 
from 
Looking 
EU membership.  While  the  banks  may  face some challenges  from  increased competition,  there  will 
also  be  opportunities  for  growth.  In  particular,  Malta  is  well  positioned  to  serve  as  a  bridgehead 
between Europe and North Africa, and some Maltese banks have already been exploiting this market 
niche, participating actively in the Mediterranean Bank Network set up after the Barcelona Declaration 
of  1995.  The  recent  emergence  of  Libya  on  the  international  scene,  a  country  with  considerable 
potential  with  which  Malta  has  long  maintained  close  commercial  ties,  should  also  open  up  further 
opportunities in this direction. 
Malta’s inherent qualities, moreover, make it an attractive location. The island has a stable economic 
and political environment as well as a highly qualified and motivated workforce in the legal, accounting 
and consulting services professions and in banking and finance. Indeed, the University of Malta and 
other  specialized  institutions  provide  training  and  tuition  leading  to  professional  qualifications  in  all 
these fields. In addition, Malta benefits from a wide network of Double Taxation Agreements, covering 
some 40 countries, while investment by both the public and private sectors has provided a modern 
and  efficient  telecommunications  system  and  airport  facilities  (the  latter  now  under  Austrian 
management),  good  hotels  and  office  space  and  housing  of  high  quality.  These  attributes, 
complemented  by  Malta’s  favorable  geographical  position  and  climate,  make  the  island  a  profitable 
place to do business from. 
forward,  we  believe 
financial  system 
is  well  placed 
that  Malta’s 
to  benefit 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2004
