Zdeněk Tůma: The importance of statistics - a central banker’s view   
Introductory  speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  conference 
“Statistics - investment in the future”, Prague, 6 September 2004. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me join my distinguished colleague, Head of the Czech Statistical Office, Mr Fischer and welcome 
you to this conference at the Czech National Bank’s Congress Centre. One reason the Czech National 
Bank is co-organising this event is our own involvement in the statistical field and consequently a close 
co-operation with the Czech Statistical Office.  
Statistics is somewhat overlooked by the general public who does not perceive it as an area of primary 
significance,  unlike  matters  such  as  privatisation,  corruption,  bankruptcies,  problems  of  the  banking 
sector, functioning of the courts, law enforcement and the other major transformation issues. The less 
statistics  is  the  subject  of  attention-grabbing  articles  and  reports  in  the  media,  the  more  systematic 
work it requires. Work that is often very demanding, particularly as regards to data consistency and 
detailed profiles. Indeed, it is the level of detail which is subject to sensitive evaluation. That is why, 
one of the most difficult tasks in statistics is to strike a balance between the amount of information 
required and the burden laid on respondents.  
Statistical  information  is  used  not  only  for  passive  monitoring  of  past  developments  and  their 
disclosure  in  statistical  publications,  but  also  as  a  basis  for  real-life  decision-making  by  economic 
agents. Statistical data is used in various negotiations. There are many examples. Wage bargaining is 
strongly  affected  by  the  evolution  of  prices.  So-called  “inflation  clauses”  form  part  of  many 
agreements, for example rental contracts. Statistical data also serve as a basis for the decisions of 
various  authorities.  Central  banks  are  a  specific  category.  They  significantly  affect  the  economic 
environment.  To  be  able  to  perform  their  duties  properly,  central  banks  need  high-quality  statistical 
information.  “Nothing  is  more  important  for  monetary  policy  than  good  statistics”.  This  is  how 
Alexander Lamfalussy, the former President of the European Monetary Institute, the predecessor of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  characterised  the  importance  of  statistics  for  successful  monetary 
policymaking.  
This  year  marks  the  fifteenth  anniversary  on  the  path  of  transformation  from  a  centrally  controlled 
economy to a market economy. All areas of our life underwent dramatic changes, statistics being no 
exception.  In  the  early  1990s,  the  Czech  National  Bank  worked  in  close  co-operation  with  the 
International Monetary Fund. Individual missions visited us several times a year. Statistics was one of 
the first areas in which such co-operation was established. This is entirely logical, since without the 
creation of a basic statistical framework it would not have been possible to communicate on monetary 
policy matters. Among the most important outcomes was a creation of monetary survey. This survey 
made it possible to compile monetary and credit aggregates. One of the preconditions for influencing 
the money supply was to establish what is known as the “monetary base”. The ongoing liberalisation 
process meant that it was no longer important to divide the balance of payments statistics into koruna 
and  foreign  currency  transactions.  This  classification  was  replaced  by  a  standard  breakdown  into 
transactions  between  residents  and  non-residents.  Numerous  statistics  linked  with  regulation  were 
gradually abolished as individual areas of economic activity were liberalised. These examples merely 
illustrate how the central bank’s entire statistical system was rebuilt from scratch.  
Let me now move on to the more recent past. In 1999 we began to co-operate closely with European 
institutions. The main topics included monetary and banking statistics, balance of payments statistics 
and  more  recently  also  financial  accounts,  government  financial  statistics  and  general  economic 
statistics. The development of statistics was influenced by a need to standardise each area to ensure 
compatibility between the EU Member States and the candidate countries. Hand in hand with these 
contacts,  we  began  to  work  much  more  closely  with  the  Czech  Statistical  Office.  In  the  area  of 
statistics the Czech Statistical Office is the natural and closest partner of the Czech National Bank, 
since these two institutions are the major producers of statistical information in the Czech Republic.  
The  Czech  Statistical  Office  conducts  a  far  wider  range  of  statistical  surveys,  providing  aggregate 
information on the national economy, territory, climate, environment, population, elections and other 
areas  of  life  and  activity  of  our  country.  The  Czech  National  Bank  is  above  all  a  user  of  economic 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
statistics and collaborates most closely in this area. As both a user and a partner, we can affirm that 
the quality of the Office’s statistical output has increased immensely over the transformation period. 
Examples  include  the  publication  of  national  accounts  according  to  international  standards  and  the 
compilation of data on the government debt and deficit. The Czech National Bank focuses mainly on 
monetary  and  banking  statistics  and  balance  of  payments  statistics.  The  harmonisation  of  the 
monetary  statistics  with  European  standards  was  recently  completed  in  both  main  components  - 
balance sheet statistics and interest rate statistics. Monetary and credit aggregates and interest rates 
are  now  methodologically  comparable  with  the  data  of  other  EU  Member  States.  Speaking  of 
harmonisation,  I  must  mention  the  calculation  of  another  convergence  criterion  -  long-term  interest 
rates. This calculation is based on long-term government bond yields on the secondary market. The 
Czech National Bank thus provides the statistical foundation for assessing this criterion.  
International standards such as the IMF’s 5th Balance of Payments Manual are also observed when 
compiling the balance of payments. The balance of payments is now published every month and the 
required  items  are  also  broken  down  geographically.  In  recent  years,  much  attention  has  been 
devoted  to  the  category  of  foreign  direct  investment,  where  the  data  are  published  in  very  detailed 
geographical and sectoral breakdowns.  
The balance of payments is perhaps the best example of co-operation between the Czech Statistical 
Office  and  the  Czech  National  Bank.  Co-operation  is  essential  in  many  areas,  since  the  basic 
indicators  of  the  country’s  economic  performance,  for  example  gross  domestic  product,  cannot  be 
compiled  without  data  on  trade  in  services,  which  is  supplied  by  the  Czech  National  Bank,  and, 
conversely, the balance of payments cannot be compiled without data on foreign trade in goods, which 
is supplied by the Czech Statistical Office. However, our working contacts run much deeper, among 
other  things  the  exchange  of  information  for  maintaining  up-to-date  registers  or  collaborating  to 
eliminate duplication of effort in collecting statistical data from respondents. There is very close co-
operation in the field of methodology. One recent example is the joint preparation of a new method of 
monitoring real estate prices to ensure that the data is as up-to-date as possible. Daily contacts are 
also maintained in the area of data publication, for example when presenting information under the 
Special Data Dissemination Standards project, an IMF standard adopted by the Czech Republic at the 
end of the 1990s. There is not enough time at this forum to list all our other joint activities. I do think, 
however,  that  the  Czech  National  Bank’s  involvement  in  organising  this  conference  proves  that 
co-operation between the two institutions is fruitful.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish this statistical conference every success and do hope that all sessions 
live up to your expectations. I also wish you a pleasant stay at the Czech National Bank as well as in 
Prague.   
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
