Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards world-class banking - efficient, effective and resilient 
banking system  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Malaysian 
Banking Summit 2004, Kuala Lumpur, 14 May 2004. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim 
The turn of the century has seen a significant transformation of our banking sector. The changes have 
been  driven  by  the  new  emerging  economic  opportunities,  changing  customer  requirements,  new 
technology,  the  more  competitive  environment  and  changes  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework.  This  period  has  also  seen  significant  progress  achieved  in  the  strengthening  of  the 
domestic  banking  system.  The  strengthening  of  the  banking  sector  has  been  driven  by  the 
restructuring,  re-engineering,  rationalisation  and  consolidation  that  has  been  undertaken  during  this 
period.  Indeed,  this  progress  has  been  achieved  against  a  background  of  a  challenging  global 
financial  and  economic  environment.  As  we  strive  for  high  performance  benchmarked  against 
international  standards,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  context  of  the  financial  and  economic 
environment  in  which  we  operate.  Central  to  this  is  a  common  vision  of  developing  a  world  class 
banking  system  that  is  best  able  to  serve  the  nation  and  thus  contribute  to  economic  growth  in  an 
environment  of  financial  stability.  The  expectations  are  thus  for  the  banking  system  to  be  able  to 
provide the intermediation function that is effective, efficient, resilient, and that supports sustainable 
economic growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  indeed  my  pleasure  to  be  invited  again  to  this  year’s  Malaysian  Banking  Summit.  This  annual 
summit,  organised  by  ASLI,  has  become  an  important  forum  for  the  industry  to  share  and  discuss 
issues that are of importance to the financial sector.  
To ensure that the financial system is best placed to serve the economy, important attention has been 
directed to enhance the financial infrastructure to increase access to financing to meet the new, more 
complex and differentiated demands of the various sectors of the economy, to enhance efficiency in 
the  banking  institutions  and  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets,  and  to  put  in  place  other 
supporting infrastructure that reinforce the achievement of these objectives. These efforts have been 
complemented by measures to ensure the soundness and stability of the system.  
High performance of the industry would require the banking institutions to increasingly offer greater 
product differentiation and value added services. This requires resources to be directed to research 
and development to introduce a wider range of structured and customised products and to become a 
one-stop  financial  services  solution  provider.  The  ability  of  the  banking  institutions  to  address  the 
needs and preferences of specific segments and focus on customer relationships in a timely and cost 
effective manner is key to achieving competitive advantage and long-term sustainability.  
The journey towards realising the vision  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  banking  system  policy  has  evolved  from  financial  sector  restructuring  during  the  late  1990s  to 
institutional  development  and  capacity  building,  and  the  development  of  supporting  infrastructure  to 
enhance efficiency and the strengthening of prudential regulation to enhance resilience and preserve 
stability.  In  terms  of  the  development  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  efforts  were  intensified  towards 
evolving a more diversified financial infrastructure to facilitate the economic transformation into a more 
diversified  economic  structure.  This  has  involved  the  development  of  a  more  diversified  financial 
structure  anchored  by  a  more  efficient  and  resilient  banking  system,  to  support  economic 
transformation and growth. The strategies to achieve this vision are outlined in the Financial Sector 
Masterplan launched in March 2001.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
Three  years  into  the  Financial  Sector  Masterplan,  positive  results  have  been  achieved  on  several 
fronts.  
• 
The capacity of the banking sector now has strengthened with the level of capitalisation at its 
strongest, reflected by the risk-weighted capital ratio of the banking system that has been 
consistently  maintained  at  above  13%.  This  has  enhanced  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
sector and is reflected in the ability of the banking system to weather a number of adverse 
external  developments  in  the  recent  period,  without  any  destabilising  and  disruptive 
consequences.  
Following the consolidation exercise in 2002, the banking system today is characterised by 
larger  and  better-capitalised  domestic  banking  institutions  operating  within  larger  banking 
groups,  benefiting  from  economies  of  scale  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  products  and 
services to cross sell, and therefore widen the reach nationwide.  
Domestic banking institutions have also embraced a higher level of technology and improved 
business processes.  
There have been marked improvements in the level of efficiency. Operating cost of domestic 
banking institutions has declined from 41.2% in 2001 to 40.3% of total income in 2003. There 
have also been improvements in turnaround time in processing loans and in response time 
in resolving customer problems. 
There  has  also  been  a  higher  level  of  innovation  and  introduction  of  new  products  and 
services  to  meet  the  customer  needs  that  are  becoming  increasingly  complex  and 
sophisticated. These services include wealth management, structured investment products, 
bancassurance and Islamic financial products.  
New  delivery  channels  through  innovative  technology-based  mechanisms such  as  internet 
and mobile banking have enhanced the delivery of products and services as well as widened 
access to banking services. 
Despite  a  more  competitive  environment,  domestic  banking  institutions  have  been  able  to 
sustain  their  market  share  at  80%.  The  domestic  banks  commanded  a  83%  share  of  the 
outstanding loans to the small and medium enterprises, while their market share in the credit 
card business has increased from 46% in 2000 to 54% of total credit cards issued in 2003. 
With the increased investment in risk management systems, the risk management capability 
in  the  banking  sector  has  been  further  strengthened  on  all  fronts  through  increased 
availability  of  risk  management  tools.  This  has  been  reinforced  by  enhanced  prudential 
policies. Banking institutions are now better positioned to withstand challenges arising from 
unfavourable developments. 
The resumption of credit growth has now gathered momentum to meet the growing financial 
demands  of  the  economy,  while  keeping  risks  at  acceptable  levels.  There  has  also  been 
significant shifts in the asset portfolio composition. Following the initiatives to promote SME 
access  to  financing,  banking  sector  loans  to  this  sector  have  increased  significantly  to 
account for 38% of total business loans. Retail lending for consumption has also increased. 
The strong banking system has been well positioned to meet customer demand for financial 
services.  Indeed,  the  banking  industry  has  continued  to  benefit  from  strong  demand  for 
household credit. 
The enhancement  to  the  legal  infrastructure  including  enactment of  the  Payment  Systems 
Act 2003 will serve to strengthen Bank Negara Malaysia’s payment system oversight, and to 
provide the legal framework to ensure that payment systems are protected from disruptions 
and its consequent effects on financial stability. 
The  Islamic  financial  system  has  evolved  to  form  a  vital  component  of  the  Malaysian 
financial  system.  The  Islamic  banking  system  now  accounts  for  almost  10%  of  the  total 
assets of the banking system, from 6.9% in 2000. Significant milestones have been achieved 
in  developing  the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  as  well  as  in  the  development  of  the 
prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  meeting  the  changing  requirements  of 
the new economy.  
          2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
 Following  the  intensified  consumer  awareness  and  literacy  programme  that  has  been 
implemented,  there  is  evidence  of  growing  consumer  involvement  in  product  development 
and delivery. Customers are demanding greater service quality and product offerings to fulfil 
their preferences and requirements.  
Philosophy of financial regulation 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  ability  of  regulators,  banking  institutions  and  market  participants  to  respond  to  the  changing 
financial landscape is key to the development of an efficient, effective and resilient banking system. 
Given the unique role of the banking system in the economy, and the importance of maintaining public 
confidence  and  trust  in  the  banking  system,  regulation  and  supervision  is  a  vital  component  of  a 
well-developed financial system.  
In designing and implementing financial regulation, a careful balance is made between achieving the 
objective  of  promoting  efficiency  in  the  banking  system  and  the  objective  of  maintaining  financial 
stability.  Consideration  also  needs  to  be  given  to  the  socio-economic  agenda.  In  addition,  a  fine 
balance needs also to be made between the objective of promoting competition and innovation and 
that of maintaining prudence and stability in the financial system. 
In line with this, the regulatory approach has become increasingly more “principle-based” rather than 
“rule-based”. To ensure that regulation remains relevant in preserving financial stability, while allowing 
sufficient  flexibility  for  banking  institutions  to  design  their  own  strategies  and  market  niches,  the 
regulatory approach is increasingly focussed on developing broad prudential guidelines and principles, 
rather than prescribing common requirements across institutions and activities. The Central Bank is 
therefore  moving  away  from  prescribing  detailed  rules  and  regulations  to  govern  the  activities  of 
banking  institutions.  Regulation  will  instead  focus  on  identifying  risks  at  the  system  level,  and  on 
ensuring that individual banking institutions have the necessary capacity in terms of internal controls 
and systems to undertake and manage risks. This, therefore, does not mean less regulation. 
As  the  strength  of  individual  institutions  is  often  the  first  line  of  defence  against  any  crisis,  the 
responsibility  is  therefore  increasingly  on  the  board  and  management  of  individual  institutions  to 
strengthen the resilience of the institutions. The Central Bank’s focus is increasingly on the need for 
banking institutions to adopt and promote good governance, integrity, strong internal controls and risk 
management  practices.  Greater  regulatory  scrutiny  is  undertaken  to  ensure  that  the  shareholders, 
board of directors and management of banking institutions are “fit and proper” and have the capacity 
to discharge their responsibilities and accountabilities. This is reinforced by greater transparency and 
disclosure  requirements.  Integrity  and  transparency  is  critical  for  financial  institutions  to  gain  public 
trust and investor confidence. 
Strategic ICT investment as driver for performance  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In an era where advancements in technology have significant impact on our daily activities, we are 
constantly presented with the challenge to make decisions on the best ICT products that will meet our 
preferences and requirements. Similarly, in the financial industry, advancements in ICT have certainly 
had a significant impact on how businesses operate and on the landscape that they operate in. The 
financial services industry is one of the single largest users of technology. The rapid advancement of 
technology  will  indeed  continue  to  drive  improvements  in  the  banking  system,  particularly  new 
technology with respect to information management systems, product development, risk management 
and  delivery  of  products  and  services.  A  recent  industry  survey  has  estimated  that  the  global  ICT 
spending  on  enhancement  of  branch  network  alone  was  more  than  USD15  billion  in  2001  and 
expected to increase to USD20 billion by 2005. 
Not all of such investments however, will produce the desired improvements. IT investments need to 
be backed by strong business justification and implementation consideration. New technologies need 
to be adopted with adequate review as to how it will operate within the broader organisational context. 
This also applies to initiatives to implement organisation-wide IT enhancements, so that it will bring 
about  the  intended  results.  Indeed  such  investments  as  in  the  CRM  application  need  to  be  well 
tailored to individual business models.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
Wasteful  investment  needs  to  be  avoided.  The  key  is  to  align  and  integrate  ICT  into  the  business 
models.  As  technology  end-users,  the  industry  is  faced  with  a  multitude  of  product  offerings  with 
solutions to improve processes and business activities. This has required sound decision making. The 
assessment on the return on IT investment needs to be based on a longer time horizon, incorporating 
both qualitative and quantitative benchmarks to ensure that it will translate into improved performance. 
A  key  part  towards  achieving  such  return  targets  would  be  to  ensure  smart  deployment  of  IT 
applications within the organisation. Underlying this process is the need for close interaction between 
technology  and  business  operators  in  the  customisation  stage.  Such  new  applications  need  to  be 
reviewed as to how they will contribute towards improving product and services delivery, aid in risk 
management activities, and enhance management capability.  
Opportunities from regional integration  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Another  important  development  that  is  taking  place  is  the  growing  regional  integration,  driven  by 
increasing intra-regional trade and investment flows. Asia has seen a rising pattern of intra-regional 
trade  and  investment  where  trade  between  countries  in  the  region  now  accounts  for  almost  half  of 
Asia’s  trade  from  just  a  fifth  over  a  decade  ago.  Malaysia’s  share  of  trade  with  ASEAN  member 
countries  now  accounts  for  24%  of  our  total  trade  reflecting  higher  intra-regional  trade  (notably, 
increased  imports  from  lower-cost  suppliers  such  as  Thailand,  Indonesia  and  the  Philippines)  and 
better  economic  performance  of  ASEAN  countries.  In  2003,  Malaysia  recorded  strong  growth  in 
exports of 29.6% to China and 26.7% to Hong Kong. Large businesses and corporations have begun 
to  review  their  business  architecture  more  aggressively  and  have  moved  to  relocate  their  business 
operations.  Such  structural  shifts  driven  by  new  demand  patterns  and  new  ways  of  organising 
production have led to increased specialisation and complementarity within the region.  
ASEAN alone offers a huge growing market of 500 million people. Therein lies the opportunities for the 
domestic banking institutions, opportunities to support Malaysian businesses and investors who are 
venturing abroad and opportunities to diversify across geographical sectors and across product range. 
The  role  of  banking  institutions  needs  to  extend  beyond  the  traditional  role  of  being  a  financier,  to 
manager  of  financial  relationships.  Each  time  a  borrower  ventures  abroad,  new  opportunities  are 
created. As managers of such financial relationships, banking institutions can be part of this process 
by fostering the banking relationship into a long-term strategic partnership, and by providing the right 
range of financial products.  
These opportunities may also be realised by setting up presence in new markets. It can also be in the 
form  of  partnerships  or  strategic  acquisition  of  an  existing  banking  institution  in  a  foreign  market. 
Mergers or alliances in services and products can be pursued through co-branding or complementary 
products, delivery channels and marketing or product development. Alliances can also be formed to 
capitalise on intangible assets such as human capital. Such alliances can also translate into increased 
innovation  in  processes,  structures,  business  models  and  ultimately  innovation  in  products  and 
services. Indeed, strategic alliances have been growing, cutting across many industries and business 
segments. As banking institutions are able to fulfil the differentiated demands and expectations, this 
would enhance their capacity to compete in both the domestic and external markets and thus be able 
to capture the opportunities accorded from liberalisation and globalisation. 
Customer-centric banking system 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
As the financial landscape evolves and competition intensifies, banking institutions need to respond to 
the  changing  market  needs,  and  continually  reassess  strategies  and  alternatives  in  this  rapidly 
changing and dynamic market and shift from just the traditional offerings. Consumers are becoming 
increasingly  discerning  and  demanding.  Strategic  decisions  about  the  future  needs  to  be  made  to 
sustain the ability to offer and deliver unique value propositions to customers whilst at the same time 
effectively managing customers’ expectations.  
An  area  that  banking  institutions  may  venture  into  is  micro-financing.  Micro-enterprises  perform  an 
important  economic  activity  for  a  large  segment  of  the  country’s  population.  While  institutional 
arrangements are being put in place to increase access to financing for such micro-enterprises, the 
banking sector with its large network of branches can become an important channel for such financing. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
These could be provided via a micro-financing window. Global experience has shown that such micro-
financing operations can be successful and profitable with good loan portfolio quality.  
As part of the efforts to raise the quality performance in the financial services sector, Bank Negara 
Malaysia  initiated  a  nation-wide  survey  in  2003  to  assess  the  requirements,  expectations  and  the 
satisfaction level of consumers on the quality of products and services offered by banking institutions. 
While the primary objective of the study is to develop an index on the levels of quality of customer 
service, the findings indicate that the real issues in enhancing the industry’s level of performance goes 
beyond  this,  towards  developing  a  stronger  customer-centric  orientation.  The  findings  provide  a 
discernable  indication  of  the  differences  in  customer  needs  and  requirements,  and  identify  specific 
areas where customer-orientation issues tend to arise.  
Let me briefly share some of the key findings of the survey. The findings reveal that while the general 
level  of  customers’  satisfaction  is  favourable,  the  relationship  between  customers  and  the  banking 
institutions  needs  to  be  improved.  While  one  in  three  customers  is  satisfied  with  the  banking 
relationship, it did not imply loyalty.  
The survey also identified factors that customers are looking for in their banking relationship. Among 
the primary needs are the quality of interface with bank staff; and the effectiveness and efficiency of 
delivery channels, in particular branch banking and ability to deliver effective service in transacting and 
the efficiency in application processing. 
Secondary  requirements  represent  potential  leverage  factors  which  can  be  used  to  substantially 
improve  overall  customer  relationship.  These  include  product  innovativeness  with  value-added 
features  and  electronic  banking  including  internet  banking.  These  secondary  core  needs  would 
become primary drivers and important elements in banking relationship.  
Additionally,  the  survey  indicated  that  younger  and  middle-income  individuals,  a  growing  customer 
segment,  prefer  to  use  ATMs  and  electronic  channels.  Another  growing  segment  is  the  “Older 
Affluent”, in the middle and higher income levels. Given the growing size of this customer segment and 
their higher income level, they require a wider range of innovative investment products that offer safe 
and steady returns as well as personalised financial advisory services.  
The  challenge  therefore  is  for  the  industry  to  pro-actively  respond  to  these  customer  priorities  now 
rather 
to  achieving  greater 
customer-centricity is to ensure that the staff, processes and orientations are aligned towards fulfilling 
customers’  expectations  and  delivering  superior  customer’s  experience.  Of  importance  is  to  have 
clarity of purpose that is communicated, shared and understood by all levels of staff, especially the 
front-office  staff.  Having  a  culture  that  is  built  around  such  commonality  of  purpose  will  ensure 
consistent service performance. Another further aspect is the design of the operational processes with 
customers’ perspective in mind to ensure easy access, speedy and accurate execution of transactions 
that  are  responsive  to  many  facets  of  customers’  demands.  To  facilitate  this,  it  is  essential  that 
banking  institutions  embrace  the  relevant  technology  to  support  business  processes,  enhance  risk 
management  capabilities  while  at  the  same  time  provide  seamless  access  to  customers  through  a 
wider range of delivery channels. All these need to be supported with an effective human resource 
management framework that ensures the availability of best talent and the right skills. 
As competition intensifies, banking institutions increasingly must be able to deliver personalised and 
customised financial solutions. Therefore, it is important for institutions to understand the dynamics of 
customer  segmentation,  build  customer  relationship  and  address  requirements  and  preferences  of 
specific  segments.  Understanding  specific  segments  requires  banking  institutions  to  understand 
complex intangibles such as customer behaviour, motivation and life events. Sustainable growth will 
be very much dependent on the ability to develop lasting and profitable relationships with customers.  
Investing in new products in meeting the complex customer needs and demands is important. Equally 
important is the need to develop an effective communication plan or strategy as a package to product 
delivery. Even the best of products would not have a good chance of success without a well-conceived 
communication strategy. This goes beyond marketing and advertisement. It would include educating 
customers to adapt to the new ways of doing banking transactions or changes being introduced and to 
use the innovative products being offered. It is also interesting to note that the survey findings clearly 
indicated  the  importance  of  quality  interface  between  customers  and  banks.  As  such,  numerous 
interface  points  need  to  be  reengineered  to  ensure  the  right  mix  of  the  virtual  and  physical 
environment. New branch models have emerged, incorporating features from both virtual and physical 
environment, to fulfil the varying needs of different localities and market segments.  
increased  customer  churning.  Fundamental 
than  waiting 
for 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 5
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
While  the  new  emerging  trends  in  both  the  domestic  and  global  economy  will  have  significant 
implications  on  the  domestic  financial  landscape,  each  banking  institution  will  need  to  be  able  to 
formulate differentiated strategies to effectively respond to these forces in a strategic manner. Thus, 
the  ability  to  precisely  assess  the  institutions  individual  capabilities  and  strengths  as  well  as 
opportunities in  this  changing  environment  is  key  to  facilitate  effective  strategic  management  at  the 
organisational level. Through this process, I envisage that the domestic financial landscape will evolve 
into  a  banking  environment  characterised  by  three  types  of  banking  institutions  that  will  emerge  to 
meet the future demands of the economy. 
a. 
First, large Malaysian banks with nationwide and regional and international presence that are 
able to compete with global financial players; 
Second, banking institutions with nationwide presence that are able to offer a broad range of 
financial products and services; and 
Third, specialist niche players delivering specialised value added products and services for 
specific segments of the market.  
b. 
c. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The financial services industry has evolved considerably over the recent period. New emerging trends 
have provided us with new opportunities in our quest to create a dynamic financial system that will 
best  serve  our  economy.  In  striving  towards  high  performance  and  world-class  standards  in  the 
industry, we look forward to working with you in this dynamic and challenging environment to achieve 
this common goal. Let me now conclude and wish you a most productive Summit. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2004
