European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 2 September 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by the President of the ECOFIN Council, 
Mr Zalm, and Commissioner Almunia. 
We  noted  that  the  information  which  has  become  available  in  recent  months  indicates  that  the 
economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  has  maintained  its  momentum  and  should  remain  firm  in  the 
coming  quarters.  We  have  also  witnessed  somewhat  higher  inflation  rates,  mainly  due  to 
developments  in  oil  prices.  At  present,  our  judgement  is  that  although  some  upside  risks  to  price 
stability  exist,  the  overall  prospects  remain  in  line  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  term. 
Accordingly,  we  have  retained  our  monetary  policy  stance  and  left  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
unchanged. The level of interest rates is very low by historical standards, both in nominal and in real 
terms,  lending  support  to economic  activity.  We  will remain  vigilant  with  regard  to  all  developments 
which could imply risks to price stability over the medium term.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. 
The latest data releases confirm that the economic recovery in the euro area is continuing. According 
to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP grew by 0.5% quarter on quarter in the second quarter of this 
year, having recorded a 0.6% increase in the first quarter. These growth rates are the strongest in the 
euro area for some time. The latest indicators of output and demand remain consistent with ongoing 
growth in real activity, increasingly supported by domestic demand, also in the third quarter of 2004.  
Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  for  a  continuation  of  the  recovery  remain  in  place.  Economic  growth 
outside  the  euro  area  continues  to  be  robust  overall,  even  if  subject  to  temporary  fluctuations,  and 
should continue to support euro area export growth. On the domestic side, investment should benefit 
from the positive global environment and the very favourable financing conditions. Improvements in 
corporate  efficiency  and  higher  profits  are  also  supporting  business  investment.  Moreover,  private 
consumption  should  continue  its  gradual  recovery,  broadly  in  line  with  growth  in  real  disposable 
income which, with the usual lag, should be further underpinned by an increase in employment growth 
later on.  
Against  this  background,  we  expect  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  to  continue  and  to 
become more broadly based over the coming quarters, leading to a somewhat stronger upswing in the 
course of 2005. This is also reflected in the ECB staff projections, which will be published today. They 
envisage  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  of  between  1.6%  and  2.2%  on  average  in  2004,  rising  to 
between  1.8%  and  2.8%  in  2005.  These  growth  rates  are  close  to  estimates  for  long-run  potential 
growth and, for both years, they are slightly higher than was expected in the June Eurosystem staff 
projections. Available forecasts from international organisations and other sources convey a broadly 
similar picture. 
Overall,  the  risks  to  these  projections  seem  to  be  broadly  balanced.  On  the  upside,  the  ongoing 
momentum of the recovery may again imply more positive developments for economic growth in the 
coming quarters. On the downside, there are still concerns about continuing economic imbalances in 
other parts of the world. These imbalances could affect the sustainability of the economic recovery.  
Another downside risk to the growth projections relates to oil prices. If these were to remain higher 
than  currently  expected  by  markets,  this  could  dampen  both  foreign  and  domestic  demand.  In 
assessing  these  risks,  however,  it  should  be  taken  into  account  that,  when  expressed  in  euro,  the 
recent  rise  in  oil  prices  has  been  significantly  smaller  than  in  previous  episodes  when  oil  price 
increases  had  a  major  impact  on  the  world  economy.  In  addition,  in  real  terms,  oil  prices  are 
significantly below the peaks they have reached in the past. Moreover, when compared with the 1970s 
and  1980s,  the  oil  intensity  of  production  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere  has  fallen  significantly. 
Finally, it should be kept in mind that, in contrast to previous periods of oil price turmoil, this year’s rise 
in oil prices is not only due to supply-side factors, but is also driven by the strong global expansion. All 
these factors put the downside risks to economic activity coming from oil prices into perspective. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 1
However, recent oil price developments have had a visible direct impact on price developments in the 
euro area. Eurostat’s flash estimate for annual HICP inflation in August was 2.3%, unchanged from 
July. On the basis of current market expectations for oil prices, it appears unlikely that annual inflation 
rates will return to levels below 2% in the remainder of this year. 
Looking  ahead,  however,  there  are  no  indications  at  present  of  stronger  underlying  inflationary 
pressures building up domestically. Recent wage developments have been moderate, and this trend is 
expected to continue for some time to come in view of the continued high level of unemployment in the 
euro area. If this is the case, and provided that one-off shocks to prices from other sources such as 
those seen in 2004 are not repeated, annual inflation rates should drop below 2% in 2005. 
Against this background the ECB staff projections put average annual HICP inflation at between 2.1% 
and 2.3% for 2004 and between 1.3% and 2.3% for 2005. The lower end of these ranges is slightly 
higher than what was projected in June for both 2004 and 2005. The ECB staff projections for inflation 
are broadly consistent with other recently released forecasts.  
However, several upward risks to the projections for inflation exist. Concerns relate in particular to oil 
price developments, which may continue to have a visible impact on inflation. Oil price rises also imply 
the risk of second-round effects emerging in wage and price-setting, a risk which intensifies when the 
economic upswing strengthens. A further upward risk relates to the future evolution of indirect taxes 
and administered prices. Indeed, upside risks to inflation are also reflected in the continued elevated 
levels of measures of long-term inflation expectations derived from financial market indicators. While 
these  indicators  should  always  be  interpreted  with  caution,  their  current  level  calls  for  particular 
vigilance. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual rate of M3 growth has moderated significantly since the 
summer of 2003. This moderation largely represents a normalisation of portfolio allocation behaviour 
following  the easing of  the  exceptional economic  and  financial  uncertainty  which prevailed  between 
2001 and early 2003.  
Nonetheless,  M3  growth  remains  resilient.  It  appears  that  the  reversal  of  past  portfolio  shifts  is 
proceeding more slowly than would have been expected on the basis of historical regularities. This 
may reflect an increased risk aversion of households and firms, given the stock market losses they 
experienced between 2000 and the spring of 2003. In addition, the low level of interest rates continues 
to support monetary expansion, especially of the most liquid assets included in the narrow aggregate 
M1.  
The low level of interest rates also seems to be fuelling the growth of loans to the private sector, which 
has risen to a relatively robust rate over recent months. In this respect, the growth rate of mortgage 
loans to households is rather high and is associated with fairly dynamic housing market developments 
and real estate prices in several euro area countries.  
There remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary 
growth. At present, it is not clear how this excess liquidity will be used in the future. If significant parts 
of these liquid holdings were to be transformed into transaction balances, particularly at a time when 
confidence  and  economic  activity  were  strengthening,  inflationary  risks  would  rise.  In  addition,  high 
excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a source for strong asset price increases. 
To  sum  up,  while  the  economic  analysis  indicates  that  prospects  are  consistent  with  price  stability 
being  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  a  number  of  upside  risks  need  to  be  carefully  monitored. 
Cross-checking with the monetary analysis also supports the case for strong vigilance with regard to 
the materialisation of risks to price stability. 
As regards fiscal policy, first data for 2004 indicate that most euro area countries are likely to miss the 
original budgetary targets set in their updated stability programmes. In some cases, countries seem to 
have  based  their  programmes  on  overly  optimistic  assumptions  for  economic  developments.  In 
addition,  some  countries  have  been  implementing  fewer  consolidation  measures  than  originally 
planned. As a consequence, the aggregate fiscal balance for the euro area is not likely to improve in 
2004. Progress in fiscal consolidation needs to be prioritised and should be part of a comprehensive 
and growth-friendly reform agenda.  
The Governing Council remains convinced that there was and there is no need for changes to the text 
of the Treaty and of the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact is an appropriate framework for dealing 
with  countries’  fiscal  developments  on  a  level  playing-field.  At  the  same  time,  we  consider  that 
improvements could be introduced in the implementation of the Pact.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2004
In  line  with  the  Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines,  macroeconomic  policies  need  to  be  oriented 
towards  growth  and  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  also  requires  sustained  efforts  to  increase  the 
flexibility of labour and product markets in the euro area. In this respect, several governments in the 
euro area have taken courageous steps over recent months. It is important that the reform momentum 
is maintained, taking advantage of the economic recovery. This will not only increase overall economic 
efficiency  and  enhance  longer-term  growth  prospects  in  the  euro  area,  but  will  also  strengthen  the 
basis for a sustained economic upswing in the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 3
