Linah K Mohohlo: 2004 Monetary Policy Statement 
Statement by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, Gaborone, 17 February 2004. 
 Introduction 
The 2004 Monetary Policy Statement I am presenting to you tonight is the sixth in a series issued on 
an annual basis by the Bank of Botswana. The Statement and its mid-year review play a central role in 
the  Bank’s  efforts  to  convey  to  stakeholders  and  the  public  at  large  information  on  inflation  and 
monetary developments. The Statement also presents an opportunity for the Bank to outline in detail 
the  monetary  policy  framework,  to  communicate  the  annual  objective  for  inflation,  and  to  state  the 
approach that will be taken in formulating the Bank’s response to inflation-related developments, so as 
to ensure that the inflation objective will be met. 
In this respect, the Monetary Policy Statement provides an opportunity for the Bank to be transparent, 
with  a  view  to  influence  economic  and  financial  expectations  of  economic  agents.  The  Bank  aims 
specifically to engender an expectation of low and stable inflation, consistent with the broad objective 
of macroeconomic balance as a basis for sustainable growth in the country. 
In  line  with  past  practice  in  delivering  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  I  will  present  only  the  main 
highlights,  and  ask  that  you  find  time  to  read  the  full  Statement,  copies  of  which  will  be  provided 
shortly, in order to derive its full benefit. 
I will begin by briefly reviewing current trends in inflation and their underlying causes, before assessing 
the  extent  to  which  monetary  policy  succeeded  in  achieving  related  objectives  in  2003.  I  will  then 
present the Bank’s analysis of the economic and financial factors likely to have a bearing on inflation in 
Botswana through the year ahead, as a basis for the policy outlook. 
The Bank’s monetary policy framework and objectives 
For a start, I wish to remind you of the Bank’s policy objectives and the framework in which they are 
formulated  and  pursued.  The  principal  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  Botswana  is  the  control  of 
inflation, as it is for most central banks. Specifically, it is the achievement of a sustainable low and 
predictable level of inflation. Precisely how low inflation should be is a matter for debate; what is not 
debatable (you will concur) is that we have not yet achieved the goal in Botswana. Be that as it may, 
achieving domestic price stability is not just an end in itself; it is also the means by which the Bank 
contributes,  along  with  other  government  policies,  to  the  fundamental  objectives  of  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment and rising incomes and living standards for Botswana. 
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  this  task  is  not  pursued  in  isolation;  it  is  aimed  at  supporting  other 
national objectives, such as economic diversification. In broad terms, this means being mindful of the 
needs of both savers and investors when pursuing the inflation objective, by setting domestic interest 
rates high enough to provide a positive return to savers but not so high that they discourage private 
sector  investment.  It  also  means  taking  account  of  expected  inflationary  developments  in  trading 
partner countries in setting the annual inflation objectives, such that monetary policy will contribute, 
along with other policies, to maintaining Botswana’s international competitiveness. The Bank can do 
this by seeking to achieve, at a minimum, a rate of inflation that is no higher than the average inflation 
rate of the major trading partner countries. 
Given that the Bank’s primary concern is controlling inflation, it is important that the sources of change 
in the rate of inflation are examined closely, so that the Bank responds only to those changes that are 
due  to  domestic  demand  pressures,  and  not  those  that  may  be  due  to  transitory  factors  or  supply 
fluctuations  over  which  monetary  policy  has  little  or  no  direct  influence.  Hence,  in  addition  to  the 
inflation data published by the Central Statistics Office, the Bank examines measures of the underlying 
inflation trend (core inflation), which exclude the impact of transitory factors and exceptional changes 
in  administered  prices  or  indirect  taxes.  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  these  price  developments  are 
ignored. The Bank recognises the need to be prepared to respond, if necessary, to any impact these 
items might have on underlying inflation through inflation expectations and second-round effects. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 1
Other indicators of progress in meeting the inflation objective include the rate of growth of commercial 
bank  credit  to  the  private  sector  and  changes  in  government  spending.  Commercial  bank  credit  is 
monitored because it is an important contributor to the growth of private consumption and investment 
and  can  be  directly  influenced  by  monetary  policy  through  interest  rates.  Government  spending  is 
important for monetary policy because of its large contribution to overall domestic demand. It is this 
continuing 
for 
complementarity between fiscal and monetary policies in achieving the inflation objective. 
that  underscores 
the  Government 
large  role  of 
the  economy 
the  need 
in 
Domestic inflation trends in 2003 
Let me briefly review monetary policy developments and actions undertaken last year, and share with 
you what the Bank believes is possible for 2004. This will include a comment on the monetary policy 
implications of the actual and potential developments. 
You  will  recall  that  in  the  context  of  its  longer-term  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  the  Bank’s 
inflation objective for 2003 was 4 - 6 percent. Through this objective, the Bank sought to influence and 
maintain expectations of sustainable low inflation in an environment of a high risk of a VAT-induced 
increase in inflationary expectations. Moreover, the Bank considered that aiming for an inflation level 
lower  than  what  was  expected  in  trading  partner  countries  would  help  regain  some  of  the 
competitiveness that was lost in 2002 as a result of higher relative inflation in Botswana. 
The  external environment was  generally  supportive  of  these  efforts.  Imported  inflation  fell  as  global 
inflation  stayed  low,  while  in  South  Africa  inflation  declined.  Here  at  home,  domestic  demand 
pressures eased as the earlier high rates of credit growth came down and the growth in government 
expenditure  was  contained.  The  combination  of  low  global  inflation  and  reduced  domestic  demand 
pressures led to a lower rate of inflation in Botswana as the year progressed, most notably from July 
onwards, once the effect of VAT on inflation had run its course and began to drop out of the inflation 
calculation. 
VAT had a major impact in the initial 2 - 3 months following its introduction in July 2002. By the end of 
that year, inflation had risen from the annual rate of 6 percent, where it had been in the months prior to 
the introduction of the tax, to just over 11 percent. It rose further in the first half of 2003, peaking at an 
annual rate of 12.2 percent in June; inflation then began to decline as the effect of VAT waned, and 
demand  pressures  eased.  By  December  2003,  inflation  was  almost  back  to  pre-VAT  levels,  at 
6.4 percent - just above the upper end of the Bank’s inflation objective of 6 percent. When the impact 
of VAT is discounted, which the Bank has estimated increased consumer prices by 4 to 5 percent, 
underlying inflation was slightly above the upper end of the inflation objective for most of 2003. 
Monetary policy implementation during 2003 
While  a  major  concern  for  monetary  policy  in  2003  was  to  contain  the  inflationary  impact  of  the 
introduction of VAT, it was also important that policy continued as much as possible to support the 
downward  trend  in  underlying  inflation  that  had  begun  to  develop  in  2000  and  2001.  In  the 
circumstances, monetary policy remained relatively restrictive for much of the year. However, as credit 
growth  slowed  and  inflation  rates  declined,  as  had  been  expected,  and  the  global  inflation  outlook 
remained  supportive  of  continuing  low  inflation  abroad,  the  Bank  took  the  opportunity  to  reduce  its 
lending  rate  (Bank  Rate)  twice,  by  50  basis  points  in  October  and  by  another  50  basis  points  in 
December, taking it to 14.25 percent. 
These  reductions  in  the  Bank  Rate  were  followed  by  reductions  in  commercial  bank  lending  and 
deposit interest rates. Indeed the prime lending rate was reduced in two steps by a full one percentage 
point to 15.75 percent, to match the reduction in the Bank Rate. Deposit interest rates, on the other 
hand, were reduced by a lesser amount; for instance, the average 88-day deposit rate fell by 65 basis 
points to 9.5 percent. 
Despite this decline in domestic short-term nominal interest rates, inflation-adjusted (or real) interest 
rates  remained  high  as  inflation  declined.  By  year-end,  the  real  three-month  Bank  of  Botswana 
Certificate (BoBC) middle rate was 6 percent, and higher than comparable rates in major economies 
and in South Africa. 
The Bank’s operations in the money market were conducted during the year to ensure that short-term 
interest rates, in particular the yield on three-month BoBCs, were consistent with this policy stance. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2004
Market operations were also used to sterilise the large increase in liquidity arising from the continued 
funding by the Government of the Public Officers Pension Fund. However, the growth in outstanding 
BoBCs  slowed  towards  the  end  of  2003,  as  an  increasing  volume  of  funds  shifted  to  government 
bonds and to offshore markets. 
As most of you will know, P2.5 billion worth of government bonds were issued in 2003 with maturities 
of  2  years,  5  years  and  12  years.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  the  resulting  yield  curve  was  downward 
sloping and all yields had fallen, which was an indication that the market expected that a decrease in 
inflation would increase the possibility of a further easing of monetary policy. 
I  have  already  noted  (with  some  satisfaction,  I  must  say)  that  inflation  in  Botswana  had  fallen  by 
year-end  to  levels  close  to  the  upper  end  of  the  Bank’s  desired  range.  Inflation  in  trading  partner 
countries had also declined, even well beyond levels that had been expected earlier in the year. By 
December  2003,  average  inflation  in  trading  partner  countries  was  more  than  2  percentage  points 
lower than the earlier estimates of between 5.5 percent and 6 percent. As a result, the relatively high 
inflation  in  Botswana, compared  to  that  of  trading partner countries,  meant  that  there was  a  further 
increase through the year in the real effective exchange rate, a development that raised concern that it 
was  contributing  to  a  deterioration  of  Botswana’s  international  competitiveness  and,  in  turn, 
undermining diversification efforts. 
This  is  a  valid  concern,  because  it  is  important  that  Botswana  continues  to  pursue  a  development 
policy aimed at diversifying the economy away from its current dependence on relatively few products, 
especially diamonds. Of course, there are different ways of achieving this policy goal, and while an 
exchange rate strategy aimed at real exchange rate stability and international competitiveness can be 
part of whatever approach is taken, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that real and durable 
competitiveness and diversification must ultimately come from improvements in productivity. 
It is in this context that, earlier this month, the Government took the decision to devalue the Pula by 
7.5  percent  against  the  basket  of  currencies  to  which  it  is  pegged  (South  African  rand,  US  dollar, 
Japanese yen, UK pound sterling and euro). For its part, the Bank will continue to pursue a monetary 
policy  that  complements  this  development  and  I  will  highlight  in  a  moment  the  detail  of  what  this 
means  for  the  Bank’s  policy  stance  for  2004.  I  hasten  to  emphasise  at  this  point  that  the  most 
sustainable way to achieve and maintain a competitive real exchange rate is through the maintenance 
of  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  the  Bank’s  focus  on  bringing  inflation  down  to  low  and  sustainable 
levels reflects both the national objective of export-led economic growth and diversification, as well as 
the Bank’s own statutory objective of achieving and maintaining monetary stability. 
The outlook for inflation in 2004 
Looking  ahead,  global  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  gather  momentum  in  2004,  with  current 
estimates of world GDP growth moving up to around 4 percent and higher, compared to an estimated 
range  of  2.5 - 2.75  percent  for  2003.  Global  inflation,  however,  is  expected  to  remain  low  and  may 
even decline further in the face of continuing excess capacity in major industrial economies. Although 
oil prices continue to be volatile, they are currently not expected to move much outside OPEC’s target 
price range. 
Inflation  in  South  Africa,  which  is  the  most  important  external  influence  on  inflation  in  Botswana, 
declined sharply  in  2003, with  the  South  African Reserve  Bank’s  target  measure of  inflation  (CPIX) 
falling within the 3 - 6 percent target for the first time since its inception in 2000. It is expected that 
inflation  in  South  Africa  will  remain  within  the  target  range  for  most  of  2004  in  response  to  low 
international inflation and the strength of the rand, although it is uncertain whether the appreciation of 
the rand that has taken place recently will be sustained in 2004. 
Despite this relatively supportive external environment, it is a fact that Botswana’s import prices will 
rise because of the recent devaluation of the Pula. The timing and extent of the rise will depend on 
how much and how quickly importers adjust to the higher costs of their products. On the basis of the 
proportion of imports in the consumer price index, it is estimated that higher import costs could directly 
add up to 4 percentage points to inflation over the next 6-12 months, in the absence of any offsetting 
declines in inflation elsewhere in the economy. There is also a danger that traders could exploit the 
devaluation by raising prices across a range of goods and services by more than is justified by the 
change in import costs, although this will be constrained to the extent that competition is effective. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 3
Against  this  background,  prospects  are  mixed.  Domestic  demand  pressures,  as  indicated  by  the 
growth of commercial bank credit and government expenditure, were lower in 2003, and the budget for 
the 2004/05 fiscal year projects a welcome further reduction in spending growth. It remains to be seen, 
however, whether this will be sufficient to offset the demand effects of the pickup in credit growth likely 
to result from the 15 percent average wage increase for the public sector, which may spread to the 
broader  economy  as  private  businesses  concomitantly  adjust  their  wage  levels.  Another  risk  to  the 
outlook for domestic inflation is the stronger expectations of higher future inflation that the devaluation 
will  engender.  However,  this  year’s  increases  in  administered  prices  are  not  expected  to  exceed 
average underlying inflation and this should mitigate the impact on the overall price level. 
In the circumstances, it is possible that, despite the effects of the devaluation on imported inflation, the 
more positive environment I have noted will prevail during the first half of the year, thus offsetting the 
initial  inflationary  impact  of  the  devaluation.  Beyond  this  period,  the  balance  of  risks  is  much  less 
favourable.  While  the  global  impact  on  domestic  prices  is  likely  to  be  benign,  the  impact  of  the 
devaluation on import prices will feed through to prices of domestically produced goods and services. 
Furthermore, there is uncertainty with respect to the value of the rand, a depreciation of which may 
lead to an increase in inflation regionally. Domestically, acceleration in the rate of credit growth outside 
the range consistent with the Bank’s inflation objective is likely, given the imminent increase in civil 
service  salaries  and  a  consequent  similar  action  by  the  private  sector.  However,  the  impact  of  the 
likely credit expansion on domestic demand will be mitigated to some extent if the rate of growth of 
government expenditure does not increase by more than the forecast 5 - 6 percent contained in the 
2004/05 fiscal year budget, and businesses take measures to offset any possible wage rises. 
Monetary policy stance in 2004 
All  of  these  factors  must  be  considered  when  setting  the  monetary  policy  objective  for  2004. 
Importantly, in order to achieve a level of inflation that will contribute to maintaining relative stability in 
the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  the  objective  for  the  year  must  reflect  expectations  of  inflation  for 
trading partner  countries. The  forecast inflation  for  these  countries  this  year  is  lower  than  the  2003 
estimate that was used to establish last year’s inflation objective of 4 - 6 percent. This implies a need 
for the Bank to lower its 2004 inflation objective in order to meet the goal of a stable real effective 
exchange  rate.  You  will  agree  that  it  would  be  unrealistic  and  costly,  in  terms  of  output  and 
employment, for the Bank to try and counter the full inflationary fall-out of the devaluation completely 
over too short a period of time. It will be necessary, as a result, to accept some of the direct rise in 
inflation from higher import costs, while focusing on preventing these costs from spilling into underlying 
inflation and into inflation expectations. 
To  accommodate  all  these  considerations,  the  Bank  has  concluded  that  an  inflation  objective  of 
4 - 7 percent during 2004 is appropriate. This will allow room and time for the economy to adjust to the 
higher  imported  inflation  arising  from  the  devaluation,  while  ensuring  that  the  potential  gain  in 
competitiveness will not be eroded by higher inflation. 
The widening of the range (in an upward direction) should not be seen as a loosening of monetary 
policy.  If  anything,  it  implies  the  contrary,  since  it  only  allows  overall  inflation  to  rise  by  about 
1 percentage  point  as  a  result  of  the  recent  devaluation  of  the  Pula,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that 
import prices are likely to rise by significantly more than this amount. The key task for monetary policy, 
given this inflation objective, will be to prevent these import price increases from feeding through to the 
prices of domestically produced goods and services. Inflation for these commodities will have to be 
significantly lower than it would have been without the devaluation. 
Without a relatively tight monetary policy stance, there is a real danger that inflation will rise, driven by 
higher import prices and inflation expectations, to the point where the initial benefits to international 
competitiveness resulting from the devaluation would be dissipated. It is essential that this is avoided if 
the potential benefits of devaluation are to be realised. In this regard, it will help as well if other policies 
that  affect  aggregate  demand  are  tightened  to  help  keep  demand-related  inflationary  pressures  in 
check. As I have already noted, the Government’s budget for 2004/05 goes some way in this direction 
by  limiting  expenditure  growth.  Restraint  by  parastatals  in  raising  their  prices  would  further  help 
moderate inflationary pressures that arise from such administered price increases. 
As I indicated earlier, the Bank’s principal intermediate target is the rate of growth of bank credit to the 
private  sector,  which  is  an  important  contributor  to  the  growth  of  consumption  and  investment,  and 
hence to aggregate demand. A desired range for credit growth is specified in order to facilitate keeping 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2004
it  at  levels  that  are  consistent  with  the  Bank’s  inflation  objective.  The  range  for  the  growth  rate  of 
commercial bank credit that is considered to be compatible with achieving the 2004 inflation objective 
of  4 - 7  percent  is  12 - 15  percent.  This range  is  derived  from  the  Bank’s  expectation  of  the  rate  of 
growth of the non-mining sector of the economy (aggregate supply), and the desired inflation for the 
year, with an allowance for the process of financial deepening as the economy develops. 
Conclusion 
I wish to conclude by underscoring the fact that this year’s inflation target of 4 - 7 percent will prove to 
be challenging. As you know, the path to price stability is neither smooth nor easy, and the Bank’s 
inflation objectives need to take this into account. The raising of the upper end of the range in 2004 is 
a short-term tactical measure in response to a specific set of factors relating to inflation in 2004. The 
expectation  is  that  future  inflation  objectives  will  again  relate  directly  to  expected  trading  partner 
inflation rates, in order to ensure real exchange rate stability and the Bank’s longer term objective of 
low and stable inflation. 
Against the background of the recent devaluation, it will be difficult to ensure that the downward trend 
in inflation that occurred in the second half of 2003 is sustained throughout 2004, but I can assure you 
that the Bank will conduct monetary policy with the objective of ensuring that inflation falls within the 
desired  range  of  4 - 7  percent  by  the  end  of  2004.  The  Bank  remains  committed  to  respond  as 
necessary and appropriately to monetary and inflation developments, in particular to any deviation of 
credit and government spending growth from levels that are consistent with the inflation objective. 
I thank you for both your patience and attention. 
BIS Review 15/2004 
 5
