Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Current issues and developments in Islamic banking and 
finance 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  ASLI’s 
Conference on Developing Islamic Banking and Capital Market: “New Opportunities, New Market and 
New Frontier in Islamic Banking and Finance”, Kuala Lumpur, 25 August 2004. 
 Islamic banking and finance has emerged as a financial intermediation process that is competitive and 
resilient  and  that  contributes  to  the  overall  wealth  creation,  growth  and  development  of  our  nation. 
Amidst  an  increasingly  challenging  and  competitive  financial  environment,  the  evolution  of  a 
comprehensive Islamic financial system seeks to meet the range of requirements of a rapidly changing 
economic  environment,  with  its  soundness  and  stability  secured  through  the  robustness  of  its 
regulatory framework supported by the strength of its financial infrastructure and the sophistication of 
its products and services. Indeed, the strength of the respective components of the system and the 
interconnections  of  its  markets  will  open  new  frontiers  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance  and  will 
maximize the potential and opportunities that it accords.  
Distinguished guests, 
It is my pleasure to be here today at this conference organised by ASLI to speak on the current issues 
and developments in Islamic banking and finance. 
The Islamic financial system in Malaysia has evolved as a viable and competitive component of the 
overall  financial  system,  complementing  the  conventional  financial  system  as  a  driver  of  economic 
growth and development. The rapid progress of the domestic Islamic financial system, reinforced by 
significant  developments  in  the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure,  including  the  legal  and  Shariah 
infrastructure  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  has  strengthened  the  position  of  the 
Islamic  financial  system  as  an  increasingly  important  component  in  meeting  the  changing 
requirements  of  the  new  economy.  The  Financial  Sector  Masterplan  launched  three  years  ago 
provides the strategic direction envisioned for the development of the Islamic financial sector looking 
beyond the near term and taking a longer-term perspective into the needs and requirements of the 
future.  The  strategies  outlined  in  the  Plan  have  emphasized  the  development  of  the  respective 
building blocks of the various parts of the financial sector that need to be put in place to form the solid 
foundation  on  which  sustainable  future  progress  can  be  achieved.  The  expansion  of  the  Islamic 
financial system in Malaysia has therefore taken place with attention given for the development of a 
comprehensive system.  
Towards a more diversified Islamic financial system 
At  the  onset  of  our  journey  in  the  development  of a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  that  is 
progressive, efficient, dynamic and sustainable, due attention was thus given to the development of 
the key structural components of the Islamic financial system, comprising the Islamic banking industry, 
the takaful industry and the Islamic money and capital markets. The intra-dependency of these key 
components creates the enabling environment for the Islamic financial system to effectively perform its 
role  as  an  efficient  conduit  for  mobilizing  resources  and  channeling  the  funds  to  finance  productive 
economic  activity.  The  absence  of  any  particular  component  could  reduce  the  effectiveness  and 
efficiency  and  thus  affect  the  viability  and  sustainability  of  the  system.  While  the  Islamic  banking 
system has an important role in mobilizing deposits and providing financing, the Islamic capital market 
has  an  equally  important  role  in  providing  a  stable  source  of  long-term  funds  for  financing  large 
investments  and  development  projects  as  well  as  for  capital  and  business  expansion.  The 
development of the Islamic capital market not only allows for a more balanced allocation of financial 
and economic resources within an economy but more importantly, ensures greater diversification of 
risks within the Islamic financial system. This enhances the resilience and robustness of the Islamic 
financial  system  to  withstand  financial  shocks  and  contributes  to  the  overall  stability  of  the  Islamic 
financial system. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 1
In terms of the development of our Islamic financial system, as at June 2004, the assets mobilized by 
the Islamic banking sector have increased to RM89.1 billion, accounting for a market share of about 
10%  of  the  banking  system.  At  the  same  time,  deposits  have  also  increased  to  RM64  billion, 
constituting  a  market share  of  10.4% while  financing  mobilized amounted  to RM54  billion to  garner 
11%  of  the  market  share.  Product  offerings  have  also  increased  in  sophistication  from  the  deposit 
products to hybrid products that are able to enhance returns to depositors. A further advancement was 
made  with  the  introduction  of  the  Islamic  variable  rate  financing  mechanism  that  provides  an 
alternative to the fixed-rate financing. This will assist the Islamic banking institutions in mitigating part 
of the risks emanating from asset and liability mismatches.  
The Islamic capital market, in particular, the Islamic debt market, has also experienced rapid growth 
since its emergence in the 1990s. The issuance of Islamic bonds has expanded steadily at an average 
growth  rate of  33.7%  since  1995.  In  2003,  the  total  funds  raised  via  the  issuance  of  Islamic  bonds 
amounted  to  RM8.1  billion,  constituting  19%  of  the  total  funds  raised  in  the  bond  market.  New 
innovative Islamic financial instruments such as Islamic asset-backed securities have also emerged 
and the financial structures underlying Islamic securities have become more diversified. The number 
of Shariah-based unit trust funds has also grown consistently over the years to reach 55 in 2003 with a 
net asset value of RM4.75 billion, constituting a market share of 6.8%. The rapid growth of Islamic unit 
trusts comprising a variety of bond funds, equity funds and balanced funds increases the efficiency 
and  potential  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  as  an  intermediation  channel  by  providing  investors 
access to professional asset management that is based on their distinct risk tolerance levels. 
The development of a vibrant, efficient and effective Islamic capital market requires the creation of a 
broad  spectrum  of  innovative  Islamic  financial  instruments  and  the  infrastructure  to  promote  active 
trading so as to enhance the breadth and depth of the market. In the development of Islamic financial 
instruments, the challenge is to develop innovative and more diverse Islamic financial structures that 
are not only able to accord flexibility to issuers in managing their distinct financing requirements but 
also able to meet investor’s demand in accordance with their risk and return preferences. 
At  the  international  level,  the  successful  issuance  of  the  first  sovereign  global  Islamic sukuk  by  the 
Government of Malaysia which attracted significant interest from a wide international investor base, 
acted as a catalyst for other countries and corporations to tap the international Islamic financial market 
and provided the impetus to the development of the International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM). The 
IIFM  is  entrusted  with  the  task  of  creating  an  enabling  environment  that  will  encourage  active 
participation by both Islamic and non-Islamic financial institutions in the secondary market for Islamic 
financial instruments. Strategic alliances such as those forged between IIFM, the Labuan International 
Financial Exchange and the Bahrain Stock Exchange will further pave the way for cross-border listing 
and trading of Islamic financial products. This will increase international investors’ access to Islamic 
financial  instruments,  enhance  liquidity  and  spur  the  development  of  an  Islamic  capital  market  with 
greater global reach. 
Strengthening the foundations for the development of a sound, progressive and sustainable 
Islamic financial system 
The  strengthening  of  the  financial  infrastructure  is  a  key  pre-requisite  for  the  development  of  a 
dynamic and progressive Islamic financial system. An important feature of a comprehensive and well-
developed financial infrastructure is the diversity of the players and institutions in the system that have 
been  developed  based  on  their  distinctive  capabilities  and  competitive  advantage  thus  raising  their 
performance level, valued added and contribution to overall growth and development. In addition, as 
part of the strategy to enhance our integration with the international financial system and to strengthen 
our  inter-linkages  with  other  economies,  the  liberalization  of  the  Islamic  banking  industry  has  been 
brought  forward  to  take  place  in  2004.  The  issuance  of  new  Islamic  banking  licences  to  qualified 
foreign financial institutions will allow for the presence of foreign Islamic banking players to act as a 
bridge between Malaysia and other global Islamic financial markets and increase the potential to tap 
new  markets  and  growth  opportunities.  It  will  also  contribute  to  spur  financial  innovation  as  well  as 
facilitate international trade and investment flows between Malaysia and the rest of the world. 
An  important  dimension  of  the  financial  infrastructure  is  a  comprehensive  and  effective  legal 
infrastructure  for  legal  redress  arising  from  Islamic  financial  transactions.  The  legal  infrastructure 
needs to comprise both effective regulatory and substantive laws as well as appropriate adjudicative 
fora for parties to resolve disputes relating to Islamic financial transactions. This will instill confidence 
and promote the sound expansion of the Islamic financial industry. Towards meeting this objective, the 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2004
High Court of Malaysia has assigned a dedicated High Court to preside over litigated cases on matters 
relating  to  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  To  complement  the  court  system,  disputes  may  also  be 
referred to the arbitration centre for resolution. In this regard, the Kuala Lumpur Regional Centre for 
Arbitration will be enhanced to serve as a platform to deal with dispute cases on Islamic banking and 
finance,  and  to  extend  these  services  beyond  our  borders.  In  addition  to  the  dispute  resolution 
mechanisms,  the  Central  Bank  has  formed  the  Law  Review  Committee  to  review  the  common 
law-based  domestic  legislations  to  assimilate  Shariah  principles  with  the  aim  of  removing  any 
impediments to ensure the unhindered and efficient functioning of the Islamic banking and financial 
system. This review covers tax and stamp duty laws, company laws, land laws and procedural laws. 
An important consideration in the development of an effective legal framework for Islamic banking and 
finance is the need to ensure enforceability of Islamic financial contracts in accordance with Shariah 
principles. In this regard, the Central Bank of Malaysia Act 1958 was amended to position the Shariah 
Advisory  Council  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  as  the  sole  authority  on  Shariah  matters  pertaining  to 
Islamic  banking  and  finance  that  fall  under  the  purview  of  the  Central  Bank.  With  this  stature,  the 
Shariah  Advisory  Council  will  therefore  serve  as  the  reference  point  for  the  court  or  arbitrator  in 
dispute resolution that involves Shariah issues in Islamic banking and finance cases.  
To further strengthen the Shariah infrastructure, guidelines will be issued to define the new structure, 
roles  and  functions  of  the  Shariah  Committees  of  the  Islamic  banks,  the  Islamic  Banking  Scheme 
banks and the takaful operators. The guidelines would specify among others, the requirements for the 
appointment of the Shariah Committee members and the duties and responsibilities of Islamic financial 
institutions  to  facilitate  the  effective  functioning  of  the  Shariah  Committee.  In  the  Islamic  capital 
market,  the  establishment  of  a  strong  Shariah  infrastructure  is  equally  pertinent  to  ensure  that  the 
structuring of Islamic capital market instruments, the construction of Islamic investment funds and the 
execution of Islamic investment fund strategies are Shariah-compliant. This is important to preserve 
the integrity of the Islamic financial system and promote confidence that Islamic banking and financial 
operations do not deviate from the dictates of the Shariah. 
The  hallmark  of  a  well-developed  financial  infrastructure  is  an  effective  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  which  underpins  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The  regulatory  and  supervisory 
function  is  an  indispensable  and  vital  component  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  In  a  dual  financial 
environment,  the  prudential  regulatory  design  needs  to  take  into  account  the  unique  characteristics 
peculiar  to  Islamic  banking  and  finance  as  well  as  provide  a  level  playing  field  in  relation  to 
conventional banking and finance so as to ensure that Islamic financial institutions and transactions 
are not at a comparative disadvantage. It also needs to assess and mitigate any potential regulatory 
arbitrage practices between the conventional and Islamic financial system that could undermine the 
stability  of  the  overall  financial  system.  While  conventional  banking  is  primarily  premised  on  an 
interest-based  debtor-creditor  relationship,  Islamic banking  transactions  are  relatively  more  complex 
arising  from  the  diverse  contractual  relationships  between  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  their 
customers,  ranging  from  the  low  risk  sales  and  lease-based  modes  of  finance  to  the  higher  risk 
equity-based modes. Each of these modes of finance has a distinct intrinsic characteristic dictated by 
its  underlying  Shariah  principles  and  thus,  entails  different  risk  profiles.  Therefore,  the  risk 
management  infrastructure  in  Islamic  financial  institutions  must  be  in  place  to  identify,  unbundle, 
measure, monitor and manage all the specific risks in Islamic financial transactions and instruments to 
provide for their effective quantification and management.  
The  establishment  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  in  2002  marks  an  important 
milestone  in  the  development  of  internationally  accepted  prudential  regulatory  standards  and  best 
practices  for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry.  Since  its  establishment,  the  IFSB  has  attracted 
wide  participation.  To  date,  there  are  13  full  members,  4  associate  members  and  35  observer 
members in the IFSB. The technical committee of the IFSB is now in the final stages of the formulation 
of  the  prudential  standards  on  capital  adequacy  and  risk  management.  The  IFSB  has  also 
commenced work on standards for corporate governance. 
Whilst  appropriate  regulations  and  standards  are  vital  to  mitigate  the  risks  involved,  of  equal 
importance  is  the  oversight  and  monitoring  of  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  through  effective 
supervision by the regulatory authority to ensure that the prudential requirements are observed. Lack 
of oversight, inadequate check and balances, and over exposure to risks are amongst the factors that 
may result in vulnerabilities to the system. The best of regulations and financial safety nets would not 
be able to avoid vulnerabilities if early warning systems are not in place. To effectively perform the 
supervisory function it is important to not only identify the risks involved in the various Islamic financial 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 3
transactions  but  also  to  be  able  to  detect  any  contravention  of  Shariah  principles  in  financial 
transactions and operations. 
A central feature of the regulatory framework for Islamic financial institutions is financial transparency 
and disclosure. This is particularly pertinent for Islamic financial transactions. For example, investment 
depositors  in  the  Islamic  banking  institutions  have  the  role  of  quasi  shareholders  that  are  not  only 
entitled to share the profits of the Islamic banking business but are also exposed to the risks of losing 
their capital in the event of losses. In this connection, the issuance of a standard framework for the 
derivation  of  the  rate  of  return  in  Islamic  banking  business  has  an  important  role  in  addressing  the 
information asymmetry between the Islamic banking institutions and the depositors so as to ensure 
depositors receive their appropriate share of returns on the investment. In addition, the issuance of the 
guidelines on the model financial statement for Islamic banks will provide for greater disclosure on the 
risk and return profiles of the different categories of deposits. This will enable depositors to obtain the 
true and fair assessment of the Islamic banks’ financial performance and hence, promote confidence 
and strengthen the competitiveness of the Islamic financial industry. 
Enhanced  financial  disclosure  needs  to  be  complemented  by  customer  education  and  awareness 
programmes to elevate the level of financial literacy of consumers and businesses to be able to make 
informed financial decisions and instill market discipline amongst financial players. The launching of 
the Consumer Education Programme and the organization of the Islamic Banking and Takaful Week 
are  aimed  at  achieving  these  objectives.  These  programmes  have  contributed  to  enhance  the 
understanding and appreciation of the unique characteristics of Islamic banking and finance, Islamic 
financial  products  and  services  and  their  underlying  Shariah  principles  and  concepts.  Enhanced 
awareness  on  the  manner  in  which  Islamic  financial  transactions  are  being  conducted  and  Islamic 
financial contracts are being executed will not only strengthen the role of market discipline in driving 
Islamic  financial  institutions  towards  ensuring  Shariah  compliance  in  the  operations,  but  also 
contribute  towards  improving  operational  efficiency,  strengthening  risk  management  infrastructures 
and instituting sound and dynamic risk management practices.  
Conclusion 
To harness the full potential of the Islamic financial system, genuine endeavors to strengthen further 
the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure,  to  develop  the  Islamic  financial  markets  and  to  innovate  Islamic 
financial  instruments  and  activities  that  are  able  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  the  new 
economy  and  the  contemporary  global  marketplace  need  to  be  continuously  pursued.  With  the 
acceleration of the global integration of Islamic finance, it will provide the synergies and opportunities 
for the Islamic financial industry to evolve into an important component of the international financial 
system that can contribute to enhance the prospects for a more balanced global growth and global 
financial stability. 
On that note, I wish you a successful Conference. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2004
