Y V Reddy: India and the global economy 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National 
Academy of Administration, Mussoorie, Uttaranchal, 17 July 2004.  
 Friends,  
I am delighted to be here in the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie. 
You  are  among  the  few  that  have  succeeded  in  perhaps  one  of  the  most  competitive  and  fairest 
examinations in the world. You have the additional advantage of having spent some time in the rural 
and  semi  urban  areas  of  our  country  while  in  the  districts.  I  chose  the  subject  `India  and  global 
economy’ precisely because during the next three to four decades that you will be serving our nation, 
the biggest challenges and opportunities for our country would be in the rural and semi-urban areas. 
An important driver of change in rural India would be the impact of integration of the Indian economy 
with global economy. It is a happy coincidence that the respected Chief Minister of Uttranchal, Shri 
N.D.  Tiwari,  who  spoke  to  you  in  the  preceding  session  today,  urged  you  to  closely  follow  the 
developments in the global economy even while you work in sub-divisions, districts and States. Mr. 
Mukesh Puri, your Course Director asked me whether the topic of my talk today was, indeed, 'India 
and the global economy' and not 'India in the global economy’. I clarified that it was ‘and’ and not “in” 
the  global  economy.  Simply  stated,  till  recently  the  issue  had  been  how  India  would  manage  its 
growing  integration  with  the  global  economy.  Of  late,  there  is  some  discussion  on  how  the  global 
economy would adjust to the successful global integration of India.  
In the first part of the presentation, as a background, there will be a brief account of global economic 
integration and the role of public policy. This will be followed by a review of India’s policies in regard to 
the  external sector.  The  third section will  mention what  appear to  be  the current challenges  for  the 
global  economy  as  India  integrates  with  it.  The  fourth  section  would  be  in  the  nature  of  random 
thoughts on the public policy challenges in our country to manage the integration smoothly. The fifth 
section  will  elaborate  on  several  issues  in  regard  to  financial  integration.  The  issues  include  the 
special characteristics of financial integration and our policy in this regard including that for the banks. 
Global economic integration 
The concept of globalisation, in the sense in which it is used now, can be traced to the phenomenon of 
nation  states.  In  the  distant  past,  there  were  just  human  communities.  For  much  of  human  history, 
most  people  remained  confined  to  their  communities,  villages  or  local  areas.  With  developments  in 
communication and economic activity, it has progressively become easier to move from the local to 
the  regional  and  then  from  the  regional  to  the  national  level,  and  finally  across  nations.  Perhaps 
globalisation is  a  process that  has  been,  in  some  sense,  constrained  by  the  authority  of  the  nation 
states, particularly in the twentieth century. It may be useful to touch upon the role of the public policy 
of  nation  states,  in  the  context  of  the  concept  of  globalisation.  After  the  emergence  of  the  nation 
states,  each  nation  state  perceived  that  it  was  in  its  collective  self-interest  to  promote  or  restrict 
involvement  with  citizens  of  other  nation  states.  While  developments  in  technology  enabled  and 
accelerated  the  movements  of  goods,  people  and  services,  the  policies  of  many  nations  tended  to 
impose restrictions. A nation state is presumed to put restrictions on its citizens in their involvement 
with  other  nation  states  only  in  the  collective  self-interest  of  its  citizens.  It  is,  however,  not  easy  to 
define what is in the collective self-interest of all its citizens or of only a few at the expense of others. 
In  the  context  of  the  public  policy  relating  to  globalization,  a  critical  issue  is  the  trade-off  between 
individual  freedom  and  the  collective  self-interest  and  also  whether  the  onus  of  proof  lies  with  the 
individual or the national authorities. It is difficult to resolve these issues but they must be appreciated 
in the context of public policy. 
At  a  conceptual  level,  a  distinction  can  be  made  between  technology-enabled  (or  induced) 
globalization and public policy-induced restrictions or easing of restrictions. Globalization has several 
dimensions arising out of what may be called enhanced connectivity among people across national 
borders.  Such  enhanced  connectivity  is  determined  by  three  fundamental  factors  viz.,  technology, 
individual taste and public policy. Cross-border integration can have several aspects: cultural, social, 
political  and  economic.  For  the  purpose  of  this  presentation,  however,  only  economic  integration  is 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
considered. Broadly speaking, economic integration occurs through three channels, viz., movement of 
people, of goods and, of finance or capital. 
Firstly, on the aspect of movement of people, the most notable achievement of recent globalization is 
the  freedom  granted  to  many,  if  not  all,  from  the  tyranny  of  being  restricted  to  a  place  and  being 
denied the opportunity to move and connect freely. Secondly, in regard to trade in or movement of 
goods  across  the  national  boundaries,  two  types  of  barriers  generally  are  described  viz.,  natural 
barriers  and  artificial  barriers.  Of  late,  while  the  multilateral  trade  agreements  are  encouraging 
reduction  in  such  artificial  barriers,  the  developments  in  technology  are  also  making  it  difficult  for 
national  authorities  to  enforce  artificial  barriers.  The  pace  and  nature  of  globalization  will  naturally 
depend  on  the  combined  effect  of  technology  and  the  public  policy,  both  at  the  national  and  the 
international  level.  The  third  dimension  relates  to  capital  movements  for  which  also,  the  interplay 
between technology and the public policy becomes relevant. There have been, however, some special 
characteristics  of  capital  flows  in  recent  years  mainly  led  by  revolutionary  changes  in  telecom  and 
computing capabilities. These have highlighted the phenomenon of what is described as “contagion”, 
which  implies  the  risk  of  a  country  being  affected  by  the  developments  totally  outside  of  its  policy 
ambit,  though  domestic  policy  may,  to  some  extent,  influence  the  degree  of  its  vulnerability  to  the 
contagion.  In  any  case,  cross-border  flows  of  capital  have  wider  macroeconomic  implications, 
particularly in terms of the exchange rate that directly affects the costs of movement of people as well 
as goods and services and, also in terms of the conduct of monetary policy and the efficiency as well 
as stability of the financial system. Capital flows, by definition, generate further liabilities or assets and 
could  involve  inter-generational  equity  issues.  In  this  regard,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish  the  extent  of 
globalisation  in  respect  of  three  different  types  of  economic  entities  viz.,  individuals  or  households, 
corporate entities and financial intermediaries. It has been noticed that financial intermediaries impinge 
on the contagion effects impacting financial stability in the developing countries. Experience in Asia 
and  Latin  America  has  shown  that  the  external  liabilities  of  the  private  sector  tend  to  devolve  on 
national governments in the event of crises and hence, there is a role for the public policy in trying to 
prevent crises and creating capacities to meet crises, if and when they arise. 
In managing the process of economic integration that is driven by several forces, developing countries 
face challenges from a world order that is particularly burdensome on them. Yet, it is necessary for the 
public  policy  to  manage  the  process  with  a  view  to  maximizing  the  benefits  to  its  citizens  while 
minimizing the risks; but the path of optimal integration is highly country-specific and contextual. On 
balance,  there  appears  to  be  a  greater  advantage  in  achieving  a  well-managed  and  appropriate 
integration into the global process, which would imply more effective - but not necessarily intrusive or 
extensive - interventions by governments. In fact, while there are some infirmities in interventions by 
government, markets do experience market-failures and cannot exist without some externally imposed 
rules  and  prescriptions  of  the  public  policy.  As  the  poor,  the  vulnerable  and  the  underprivileged 
continue  to  be  the  responsibility  of  the  national  governments,  there  is  relevance  of  national  public 
policy - particularly as it relates to global economic integration.      
External sector policies: a review  
It is useful to outline the major developments in external sector policies since our independence as a 
background  to  enable  an  appreciation  of  the  current  and  future  challenges.  During  the  first  three 
decades of planned development, successive plans emphasized the need for financing development 
largely  from  resources  mobilized  domestically.  Firstly,  Indian  planners shared  the  export  pessimism 
then  pervading  the  developing  world.  Secondly,  the  existence  of  a  large  domestic  market  provided 
scope for internalising forward and backward linkages. Thirdly, development strategy hinged upon a 
programme  of  industrialization  to  break  through  the  vicious  circle  of  backwardness.  Fourthly,  the 
availability  of  foreign  exchange  was  a  major  constraint,  especially  after  the  running  down  of  the 
Sterling  balances  during  the  1950s  and  1960s.  Export  pessimism  permeated  the  policy  stance 
throughout  the  early  decades  of  our  planning.  Accordingly,  exports  were  regarded  as  a  residual,  a 
vent-for-surplus on those occasions when such surpluses were available. Import substitution was the 
principal instrument of trade policy and was regarded in the early years as not only the correct strategy 
but also inevitable in a continental economy like India. 
It may be of interest to note that the objective of self-reliance did not find an explicit commitment in the 
second and third five-year plans which were mainly concerned with generating the foreign exchange 
resources  required  for  the  plans.  The  third  plan  reflected  the  first  signs  of  rethinking  in  the  policy 
strategy  by  dedicating  itself  to  ‘self-sustaining  growth’  which  required  ‘domestic  savings  to 
progressively  meet  the  demand  of  investment  and  for  the  balance  of  payments  gap  to  be  bridged 
over’.  The  fourth  plan  contained  an articulated  approach  to  achieving  self-reliance.  While an  export 
growth  of  seven  per  cent  per  annum  was  considered  an  essential  element  of  the  strategy,  it  was 
envisaged that the dependence on foreign aid would be halved during the course of the fourth plan 
(1969-74). It was in the fifth plan (1974-79) that self-reliance was recognised as an explicit objective. 
The  sixth  plan  (1980-85)  emphasized  the  strengthening  of  the  impulses  of  modernization  for  the 
achievement of both economic and technological self-reliance. The seventh plan (1985-90) noted the 
conditions under which the concept of self-reliance was defined earlier, particularly in the preceding 
plan.  It  conceptualized  self-reliance  not  merely  in  terms  of  reduced  dependence  on  aid  but  also  in 
terms of building up domestic capabilities and reducing import dependence in strategic materials. The 
concept also encompassed the achievement of technological competence through liberal imports of 
technology. The gulf crisis and its impact on India provided several lessons for us, and one of them 
was  that  a  relatively  closed  economy  does  not  provide  immunity  from  a  foreign  exchange  crisis. 
Incidentally, India excelled in managing the crisis and emerged as one of the very few countries in the 
world,  amongst  both  the  developed  and  the  developing,  to  have  never  defaulted  on  its  external 
obligations. 
In the aftermath of the Gulf crisis, policy actions were initiated as part of the overall macroeconomic 
management well coordinated to simultaneously achieve stabilization and structural change. External 
sector policies designed to progressively open up the Indian economy formed an integral part of the 
strategy for structural reforms. In this context, the Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of 
Payments  (Dr.  Rangarajan  Committee,  1993)  recommended 
in  exports,  both 
merchandise  and  invisibles;  modulation  of  import  demand  on  the  basis  of  the  availability  of  current 
receipts to ensure a level of current account deficit consistent with normal capital flows; enhancement 
of non-debt creating flows to limit the debt service burden; adoption of market-determined exchange 
rate;  building  up  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  avoid  liquidity  crises  and  elimination  of  the 
dependence on short-term debt. It is evident that the external sector policies of the 1990s, based on 
the Report, paid rich dividends in terms of growth and resilience to a series of external and domestic 
shocks.  
In the new millennium, however, there has been a dramatic shift in our approach to external sector 
management in tune with the changing circumstances. First, with the emergence of marginal current 
account  surplus,  it  appears  that  the  sustainability  of  current  account  deficit  may  not  be  a  problem 
though the deficit on trade account persists and has been increasing. Second, the main contributors to 
the positive outcome in current account are workers' remittances and export of software, both being a 
result  of  process  of  global  integration.  Third,  the  exchange  rate  regime  as  well  as  external  debt 
management  served  us  well,  especially  the  avoidance  of  sovereign  debt  through  commercial 
borrowings.  The  policy  regime  helped  us  withstand  several  global  crises  while  maintaining  a 
respectable growth. Fourth, the management of capital account has acquired the primary focus rather 
than the current account. Fifth, a judicious integration with the global trade regime has imparted some 
competitive  efficiency  and  confidence  to  the  domestic  industry  and  perhaps,  even  to  commercial 
agriculture  though  to  a  limited  extent.  Finally,  it  has  become  evident  that  the  management  of  the 
external sector is closely linked to the domestic sector and the major thrust of public policy now has to 
be  managing  the  integration  and not  'grumbling'  as  the Nobel  Laureate  Amartya  Sen  is reported  to 
have  said  a  couple  of  days  ago.  Integration  of  the  Indian  economy  with  the  global  economy  and 
policies  aimed  thereat  have  to  address  domestic  and  external  sectors  in  a  holistic  and  harmonious 
way. In brief, we have moved from managing external sector to implementing an optimal integration of 
domestic and external sectors, and the global economy. 
improvement 
Adjustments by the global economy 
The  debate  in  India  has  customarily  been  on  the  contours  of  the  public  policy  in  the  context  of 
increasing global economic integration. More recently, however, a debate in the rest of the world has 
been  in  evidence  on  the  challenges  likely  to  be  faced  by  the  global  economy  on  account  of 
progressively  increasing  global  integration  of  the  Indian  economy.  The  emphasis  is  of  course  on 
successful integration which will no doubt depend on the appropriateness of our public policies and 
the  private  sector  responses.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  to  have  an  ongoing  appreciation  of  how  the 
global economy is responding to the challenges of our integration while we move forward with our own 
agenda of securing an optimal integration.  
Currently,  the  major  issue  in  the  global  economy  appears  to  be  the  significant  build  up  of  current 
account imbalances. The current account deficit of U.S.A. has been rising and is around 5% of GDP, 
while current account surpluses are noticed in Asia and to some extent in Latin America and Russia. 
The  external  financing  of  the  US  deficit  moved  away  from  equity  in  the  late  nineties  to  debt  in  the 
recent  years,  possibly  reflecting  a  perception  of  productivity  growth  in  the  former  period  and  fiscal 
stress  in  the  latter.  The  official  reserves  played  a  greater  role  than  in  the  past  in  financing  the  US 
current  account  deficit  in  recent  years.  There  is  a  perception  that  the  US  dollar  is  still  relatively 
overvalued warranting a correction. Simultaneously, the unique combination of easy monetary policy 
and lax fiscal policy in major industrialised countries is set to end and the financial markets are already 
in  a  state  of  uncertainty.  Even  assuming  that  the  transition  of  monetary  policies  to  a  more  neutral 
stance  is  managed  well  and  that  trade  gets  to  be  more  evenly  balanced,  associated  with  some 
corrections in the USA, the simultaneous emergence of China and India with significant competitive 
strengths in trade in goods as well as services will have to be accommodated by the global economy. 
Thus,  the  issue  for  the  immediate  future  is  that  both,  correcting  current  global  imbalances  and 
integrating the two Asian giants, may have to take place simultaneously in the global economy.  
It is evident that China and India will have to give a high priority to generating employment and are 
poised  for  substantial  increases  in  productivity.  Consequently,  the  global  economy  will  have  to 
consider the implications of these developments on prices, exchange rates, wages and structures of 
employment in industrialised countries. Over the medium term, it is felt that outsourcing will grow in 
geometric progression, particularly to India, and may also cover high-end research and development. 
In  manufacturing,  China  has  emerged  as  a  leader  and  India  is  poised  to  join  the  race.  Though 
agriculture is heavily subsidised in major industrialised countries, such subsidisation could be difficult 
to sustain from a fiscal point of view, since many of the countries concerned are poised to meet the 
mounting pension liabilities not to speak of burgeoning health care costs of maintaining the changing 
demographics. One sector where the industrialised economies continue to show considerable strength 
and dominance is the financial sector, partly attributable to the confidence factor in financial markets 
that favours the industrialised economies and traditional international financial centres. It is essential 
for us to carefully monitor the developments in both real and financial sectors, and to modulate our 
policies in tandem with the global developments so that global integration continues to be a positive 
sum game for all the countries.  
Random thoughts on our policies 
As  mentioned,  global  economic  integration  is  technology  induced  and,  simultaneously,  policy 
constrained or policy restrained - in other words, policy-managed. While the economic integration of 
India with the global economy will continue to take place, a successful integration, with due regard to 
the  interests  of  a  vast  majority  particularly,  the  poor  in  our  country  would  be  possible  only  through 
sound  public  policies  -  evolved  and  redesigned  from  time  to  time.  The  key  phrases  here  are 
“successful economic integration”, and “sound public policies” - both involving processes spread over 
time  and  also  interaction  with  global  economies.  If  one  were  to  make  an  informed  guess  on  the 
prospects of such a successful integration of India, it may be said that upside and downside risks are 
evenly balanced with a short term bias towards upside risks - which would give us some time to work 
on mitigating the downside risks in the medium term. Indeed, the well publicised BRIC report1 reflects 
considerable confidence in the future of the Indian economy, though it is necessary to see the fine 
print  to  realise  that  while  India  would  be  a  super  power  in  2050,  “if  development  proceeds 
successfully”, the per capita income would still not be at a high end. What is important to recognise is 
that the report leans on the demographic strength that India derives from its huge workforce. In order 
to harness the demographic advantages, the quality of labour force, (in terms of relevant skills which 
need to be sustained, reoriented and upgraded in a globally competitive era) and the physical health 
of the workforce become crucial. Education and health, therefore, provide the link between supply and 
demand  for  labour  through  increases  in  productivity.  In  this  background,  here  are  some  random 
thoughts  on  the  priorities  for  public  policy  to  ensure  successful  economic  integration  of  India  with 
global economy. 
                                                      
1   Wilson, D., Rupa Purushottaman, October 2003, 'Dreaming with BRICS: The Path to 2050', Global Economics Paper No.99, 
Goldman Sachs, New York. 
First, pragmatic policies in the external sector, particularly in the management of capital account and 
exchange  rate,  have  served  us  well  by  contributing  to  growth,  resilience  to  shocks  and  an  overall 
stability.  There  is  merit  in  continuing  the  pragmatic,  cautious  and,  gradual  approach  in  this  regard, 
subject  to  improvements  in  fiscal  arena  and  the  progress  in  strengthening  the  domestic  financial 
sector. 
Second, the management of financial sector has been oriented towards gradual rebalancing between 
efficiency  and  stability  and  the  changing  shares  of  public  and  private  ownership.  Enhanced 
competition among diverse players, including from branches of foreign banks, has been encouraged. 
Considerable improvements have taken place in prudential governance as also in moving away from 
administrative  measures  to  market-orientation.  Improvements  in efficiency  and  stability  are  palpable 
and there is merit in continuing with such rebalancing while refocusing on consolidation, governance 
and moving towards Basel II - albeit gradually, as in the past.  
Third, on the fiscal front, the ratio of public-debt to GDP is high in our country, but the structure of 
public-debt displays characteristics that make us less vulnerable than other countries with similar debt 
magnitudes.  There  is  advantage  in  continuing  the  progress  in  public  debt  management  keeping 
structural aspects in view. As we proceed with fiscal consolidation, clearly focussed in the latest Union 
Budget 2004-05, there will be greater flexibility in conduct of monetary policy and greater confidence 
for proceeding with financial sector reforms. Furthermore, an effective and qualitative fiscal adjustment 
would enhance the scope for a more successful integration with the global economy. 
Fourth, in matters relating to trade, significant liberalisation of external trade has taken place smoothly, 
which has imparted competitive efficiency to the domestic sector. The apprehensions that existed till a 
few  years  ago  of  the  adverse  impact  of  such  trade  liberalisation,  have  abated  and  the  business 
confidence  in  the  country  has  improved.  While  the  gradual  approach  with  a  commitment  to  a 
liberalised trade regime has enabled productivity increases - almost up to the global best standards in 
many of the sectors - there are signs of pick up in investment activity which could catalyse the needed 
demand for credit and create employment. There is one significant incongruity, however, which should 
be corrected sooner than later, viz., the continuing trade restrictions within the country even as there 
has  been  progress  in  liberalising  external  trade.  There  is  incontrovertible,  though  generalised, 
evidence to show that persisting trade restrictions in a country are not in the public interest and hence, 
as  many  distinguished  economists  plead,  most  of  the  exceptions  to  Article  301  of  the  Constitution 
permitted  on  'public  interest'  grounds  perhaps  need  to  be  done  away  with.  (Article  301  reads  as 
`subject to other provisions of this part, trade, commerce, and intercourse throughout the territory of 
India shall be free’). This may warrant repeal of several legislations that restrict trade domestically in 
the “public interest”. To alleviate any adverse impact on vulnerable sections, a straight forward subsidy 
could  be  considered  in  favour  of  the  poor.  There  is  another  well  recognised  distortion,  vestiges  of 
which still continue, in the form of reservation for small scale industries. With liberalisation of external 
trade, it is anomalous to persist with such distortions, even if on a reduced scale. Thus, there is still an 
unfinished agenda on trade reforms especially in regard to domestic trade and a policy commitment to 
remove such distortions in a defined short time frame would be ideal. 
Fifth,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  two  sectors  where  India  is  globally  most  competitive,  namely, 
software and pharmaceuticals, are not power intensive and do not require bulky transportation. The 
competitiveness  of  the  manufacturing  industry  is  admittedly  a  function  of  the  availability  of  reliable 
power supply at reasonable cost. The budget of 2004-05 has rightly emphasised the importance of 
power,  airports  and  seaports  (apart  from  tourism,  which  has  significant  employment  potential)  but 
there  is  need  for  implementation  at  a  pace  significantly  faster  than  we  have  ever  witnessed  in  any 
sector so far. 
Sixth,  there  is  universal  recognition  of  the  need  to  improve  both  productivity  and  output  in  the 
agriculture and related activities to meet the objectives of growth and employment. Yet, despite the 
best of efforts and excellent results achieved in that direction, there will have to be a massive shift of 
the  workforce  from  agriculture  to  non-agricultural  avocations.  While  it  is  difficult  to  estimate  at  this 
stage, we should be prepared for a large-scale migration of the workforce to the tune of 10 million per 
year,  from  rural  to  semi-urban  and  urban  areas.  The  quality  of  urban  infrastructure  even  in  the 
metropolitan  cities  is  not  conducive  to  globally  competitive  economic  activity.  The  inevitable  large 
scale redeployment of the migrating workforce would, therefore, need institutional arrangements, be 
they in public or private sector, for skill-imparting and skill up gradation. In these two matters relating to 
the workforce, some supply-led approaches appear to be in order, rather than waiting for the demand 
to be generated.  
Seventh, improvements in institutional infrastructure in matters relating to administrative, judicial and 
other  systems  of  governance  are  admittedly  important.  Needless  to  say,  if  we  fail  to  record  rapid 
progress in these critical areas, we will fail in everything, especially in economic arena. 
Eighth,  the  quantity  and  quality  of  water,  education  and  health  care  infrastructure  are  far  from 
adequate, and are not even at the minimum level consistent with a modern society. These fall under 
the ambit of delivery of public services and the Prime Minister has already accorded a high priority to 
this  issue.  Any  tangible  reform  in  this  area  would  require  action  on  several  fronts,  i.e.,  legislative, 
executive and judicial and at several levels, Centre, State and local. 
Ninth, there are regional inequalities in growth and several analysts have tried to find the causes and 
suggest  remedies.  Recognising  that  the  next  phase  of  reforms  in  most  of  the  physical,  social  and 
institutional infrastructure, especially in the area of delivery of services, would fall within the realm of 
the States, one should hope that the demonstration effect of a few high-performing States will spur the 
other States, in the medium term, to compete for better governance and economic performance.  
Finally, enhanced investment activity, particularly in the infrastructure area, would necessitate higher 
domestic  savings,  especially  in  the  public  sector  coupled  with  efficient  financial  intermediation.  In 
addition, foreign savings need to be attracted and absorbed with a strong preference to Foreign Direct 
Investment  in  all  sectors  though  in  some  sectors  like  banking,  a  calibrated  approach  may  be 
warranted. At the same time, our enterprises should be enabled to attain a strong global presence in 
all sectors. In brief, our global integration has to be a two way process, encompassing movement of 
people  with  some  caveats,  trade  in  a  free  and  equitable  manner  and  financial  integration  on  a 
specially sequenced basis. Hence, it is necessary to elaborate on the financial integration.  
Financial integration 
From  a  policy  perspective,  there  are  three  fundamental  issues  in  regard  to  financial  integration 
namely, “how does financial globalization help growth ?”; “how does it impact macro-volatility ?”; and 
“how can developing countries harness the benefits of globalization ?”. These three issues have been 
addressed  comprehensively,  in  an  IMF  Occasional  Paper2  and  the  following  extracts  from  the 
summary of the Paper do provide some answers:  
“There  is  some  evidence  of  a  'threshold  effect'  in  the  relationship  between  financial 
globalization  and  economic  growth.  The  beneficial  effects  of  financial  globalization  are 
more  likely  to  be  detected  when  the  developing  countries  have  a  certain  amount  of 
absorptive  capacity”………  "International  financial  integration  should,  in  principle,  also 
help countries to reduce macroeconomic volatility. The available evidence suggests that 
developing  countries  have  not  fully  attained  this  potential  benefit”.………  “A  type  of 
threshold  effect  appears  here  as  well  -  reductions  in  volatility  are  observed  only  after 
countries have attained a particular level of financial integration”……….. “The evidence 
presented  in  this  paper  suggests  that  financial  integration  should  be  approached 
cautiously,  with  good  institutions and  macroeconomic  frameworks  viewed  as  important. 
The review of the available evidence does not, however, provide a clear road map for the 
optimal pace and sequencing of integration. Such questions can best be addressed only 
in the context of country-specific circumstances and institutional feature”.  
The guidance for policy makers from the above is perhaps clear. Unlike in the case of trade integration 
where  benefits  to  all  countries  are  demonstrable,  in  case  of  financial  integration,  a  “threshold”  is 
important for a country to get full benefits. A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and when a 
country has reached the “threshold” and the financial integration should be approached cautiously with 
a plausible road map by answering questions in a country-specific context and institutional features. 
Fortunately, we, in India, have been adhering to a cautious and calibrated approach in our reforms so 
far and there is merit in adopting a 'road map approach' building on the strengths that we have already 
developed. 
One of the major concerns for developing countries in proceeding with financial integration appears to 
be the financial stability. Hence, the role of cross-border linkages in this regard should not be ignored. 
                                                      
2   Prasad E., Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003, 'Effects of Financial Globalisation on Developing 
Countries: Some Empirical Evidence', IMF Occasional Paper, No.220, Washington DC. 
It  would  be  useful  to  draw  upon  the  Introduction  in  an  IMF  Working  Paper3  on  the  subject  which 
identifies four major trends in the financial economy of the past decades and mentions the following:  
“Although  these  trends  reflect  important  advances  in  finance  that  have  contributed  substantively  to 
economic efficiency, they evidently have implications for the nature of financial risks and vulnerabilities 
and  the  way  these  affect  the  real  economy,  as  well  as  for  the  role  of  policymakers  in  promoting 
financial  stability.  For  instance,  risk  management  and  diversification  techniques  have,  in  principle, 
bolstered  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  but  the  expansion  of  cross-sector  and  cross-border 
linkages implies more scope for contagion”.   
It  is  also  necessary  to  recognise  that  financial  integration  complicates  the  conduct  of  monetary 
management. The growing cross-border integration of financial markets enables massive movements 
of  capital,  which  quickly  arbitrage  interest  rate  differentials  across  national  boundaries.  This  is 
reinforced  by  the  ever-widening  impact  of  the  information  technology  revolution.  Real  long-term 
interest  rates  in  industrialised  countries  have  been  converging  since  the  late  1980s.  Financial 
integration  has  also  brought  with  it  shocks  common  to  several  countries  since  the  “confidence 
channel”  transmits  financial  crises  across  countries  swiftly.  In  a  world  of  generalised  uncertainty, 
monetary  policy  in  several  countries  is  faced  with  a  progressive  loss  of  discretion.  For  developing 
countries,  in  particular,  considerations  relating  to  maximising  output  and  employment  weigh  equally 
upon  monetary  authorities  as  maintaining  the  price  stability.  In  considering  the  pace  of  financial 
integration,  the  implications  of  a  concurrent  loss  of  a  degree  of  autonomy  in  conduct  of  monetary 
policy of a country and the country context should not be lost sight of. The analytics presented in the 
Report  of  the  Committee  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility  (Tarapore  Committee,  1997)  are  very 
relevant in this regard. In particular, they relate to what has been described as 'preconditions' such as 
fiscal consolidation and strength of the financial sector, and meeting such preconditions facilitates the 
conduct of monetary policy in a more open capital account regime. 
It is also useful to recognise a close link between the extent of capital account liberalisation and the 
presence of foreign financial enterprises in a country. The nature of the link is best articulated in the 
following extracts from a recent book by Martin Wolf4:  
“It is impossible for such tiny markets to support competition among self-standing national 
players  with  realistic  aspirations  to  world-class  performance”.  (p.285)………….  “For  all 
these reasons, a symbiosis exists between both current and capital account liberalization 
and  the  contribution  made  by  the  presence  of  foreign  financial  enterprises  in  the 
economy.  This  is  a  second  reason  for  aspiring  to  capital  account  liberalization”. 
(p.286)…………… “For all these reasons, therefore, the elimination of controls on capital 
movement is a desirable objective. But it is one that also carries substantial risks. The 
right  answer  is  not  to  avoid  liberalizing  for  ever,  but  to  carry  it  through  in  a  carefully 
thought  out  and  disciplined  manner.  In  that  way,  it  may  be  possible  to  achieve  the 
objectives of integration without the crises that have, so often punctuated movement in 
that direction”.(p.288).  
Thus, one of the important considerations for encouraging the presence of foreign financial enterprises 
is to ensure adequate and healthy competition. The compulsion to expand foreign enterprises would 
thus depend on quality of competition that is already existing in a country. In any case, the consensus 
appears  to  be  that  process  of  liberalization  in  financial  sector  has  to  be  carefully  calibrated  and 
sequenced.  
Banks and financial integration  
The major risks in financial integration that emerging economies face relate to financial stability and in 
this regard the criticality of banks is generally acknowledged, but is worth reiterating in the words of 
Martin Wolf5:  
                                                      
3   Houben A., Jan Kakes, and Garry Schinasi, June 2004, 'Towards a Framework for Safeguarding Financial Stability', IMF 
Working Paper, No.WP/04/101, Washington DC.  
4   Wolf M., 2004, Why Globalization Works, Yale University Press, New Haven and London. 
5  
Ibid. 
“Banks are the epicentres of financial fragility. The central role of banks in generating the 
financial feast and famine of the past three decades, particularly in relation to emerging 
market finance, is entirely predictable. If we are to manage a financially integrated world 
better than we have done so far, banks must be more effectively caged in the countries at 
the  core  of  the  financial  system  and  those  at  the  periphery”.  (p.298)……………….“The 
fads  and  fancies  of  foolish  bankers  in  the  core  countries  have  lain  behind  most  of  the 
financial crises of the past three decades. When elephants stampede, they trample down 
everything in the way. That is what happened to Latin America in the 1970s and 1980s 
and  then  East  Asia  in  the  1990s.  For  this  reason,  Dobson  and  Hubauer  have  rightly 
argued that making the world safer requires changes at both the core and the periphery. 
They  argue  that  not  only  the  behaviour  of  the  banks  but  even  that  of  hedge  funds  is 
directly related to the frailty of banking”. (p.299)  
It would not be appropriate to conclude from the above that capital market integration should not take 
place. From a policy perspective, the concluding remarks of Mr. Martin Wolf are very pertinent, and the 
extract reads as follows:  
“But,  for  a  host  of  reasons,  emerging-market  economies  should  ultimately  plan  to 
integrate  into  the  global  capital  markets,  with  emphasis  on  the  words  `ultimately’  and 
`plan’”. (p.304).  
Foreign banks and financial integration 
It will be useful to narrate the pros and cons of licensing foreign banks in the emerging economies by 
drawing  liberally  from  two  recent  publications6,  7.  The  pros  relate  to  (a)  increasing  and  diversifying 
available  funds;  (b)  enhancing  banking  competition  and  efficiency;  (c)  developing  financial  markets 
and market infrastructure; (d) helping with recapitalisation and wider diversification of banks; and (e) 
reducing sensitivity of the host country banking system to local business cycles and changing financial 
market  conditions.  The  arguments  against  foreign  banks'  entry  encompass  (i)  weakening  infant 
domestic banks; (ii) servicing only the ‘best’ customers and neglect of Small and Medium Enterprises; 
(iii) likelihood of bringing instability; (iv) concerns that majority of banking assets will become foreign 
owned; and above all (v) challenges to financial supervisors in the emerging markets.  
The challenges to emerging market banking supervisors have come to the fore of research agenda 
now.  The  policy  concerns  in  the  recent  years,  with  increasingly  large  proportion  of  banking  assets 
accounted for by foreign banks, are well documented in the Report of the BIS and the Working Paper 
referred to above. The issues relate to (a) licensing policy for foreign banks; (b) monitoring the local 
establishments of large international banks; (c) sheer variety and complexity of new financial products 
including derivatives; (d) familiarisation and understanding of when and to what extent the overseas 
parent banking organisations will support their cross-border operations in times of difficulties or crises; 
(e) managing systemic risks associated with cross-border banking; (f) the complications arising from 
the organisational positioning of the foreign banks that are not necessarily stand-alone institutions but 
are  rather  part  of  a  holding  company  group,  and  the  complexity  of  financial  institutions  active  in  a 
number of jurisdictions; and (g) possibility of increased operational risks due to integrated operations 
of  consolidated  financial  institutions.  While  narrating  the  complexities,  the  IMF  paper  makes  a 
reference to the broadening of supervisory concerns. “This is a particular concern in the cases where 
foreign commercial banks expand their operations rapidly in the area of non-bank financial services, 
such  as  insurance,  portfolio  management,  and  investment  banking”.(p.20).  Hence,  in  the  regulation 
and supervision of foreign banks, which have cross-border operations, the regulators will have to take 
into account all these fundamental realities. 
On the basis of anecdotal evidence, and perceptions of supervisors in the emerging countries, some 
of the practical concerns need to be considered. First, there are occasions when the policy imperatives 
of the regulators and supervisors do not fully align with the strategic business goals of the banking 
                                                      
6   Committee  on  Global  Financial  System,  2004,  'Foreign  Direct  Investment  in  the  Financial  Sector  of  Emerging  Market 
Economies', Report of a Working Group established by the Committee on Global Financial System, Bank for International 
Settlements, Basel. 
7   Song,  Inwon,  2004,  'Foreign  Bank  Supervision  and  Challenges  to  Emerging  Market  Supervisors',  IMF  Working  Paper, 
No.WP/04/82, Washington DC. 
sector players. In such instances of conflict, it is likely that the interest of domestic banks would be 
more closely aligned with the policy objectives than the interest of the foreign banks. Second, there 
may  be  instances  when  the  relationship  between  a  supervisor  and  the  supervised  foreign  bank 
become the subject matter of inter-governmental concerns which often puts emerging economies in a 
disadvantageous  position.  Third,  the  intimate  knowledge  that  a  national  supervisor  possesses  in 
respect of domestic ownership of a domestic bank is normally not available in respect of all foreign 
investors in any bank - domestic bank or foreign bank with presence in the host country. Fourth, there 
are concerns about the affiliations between banks and commercial firms in terms of conflicts of interest 
and misallocation of credit. Similar concerns arise regarding affiliations between non-banking financial 
companies and banks as also between non financial companies and banks. (For example, see Terry 
J. Jorde “The future of banking - The Structure and Role of Commercial Affiliations” in the Symposium 
hosted by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, U.S.A., July, 16, 2003). Fifth, there are several 
policy  issues  with  regard  to  liquidity  management  that  may  arise  in  the  course  of  wider  foreign 
participation in the financial market in Asia, which have been well articulated by Eiji Hirano,8 Assistant 
Governor of Bank of Japan. Two extracts from his Paper would be appropriate to the current context:  
“The question occurred to me as to whether or not there is an optimal way of accepting 
foreign participation which prevents adverse element of foreign participation. My tentative 
answer is probably not. Foreign participation inevitably has double-edged-sword nature, 
namely  a  source  of  stability  as  well  as  instability.  If  you  expect  greater  benefits  from 
foreign  participation,  you  have  to  accept  greater  potential  cost.  That  is  probably  the 
reality”………………. “The corollary of this proposition is that premature exposure of weak 
domestic  banks  to  international  competitors  in  domestic  markets  may  run  the  risk  of 
weakening overall systemic stability, which could have global implications”.  
There is a recent development which impacts the level playing field between foreign banks present in 
emerging  market  economies  and  the  domestic  banks.  During  the  annual  meetings  of  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  on  26th  June  2004,  a  formal  announcement  was  made  regarding  the 
publication of the revised framework for capital adequacy, known as Basle II, as approved by Group of 
Ten (G-10) countries. The studies on quantitative impact of Basel II seem to indicate that the foreign 
banks  operating  in  emerging  economies  would  require  less  regulatory  capital  and  by  virtue  of  their 
lower capital servicing costs, could finely price their products and services to the detriment of domestic 
banks. However, it is too early to assess the advantage, if any. 
The policy-makers in emerging countries are fully aware of both the benefits and risks arising out of 
the  presence  of  foreign  banks  and  indeed  foreign  capital  in  banks,  which  leads  them  to  impose  a 
variety  of  forms  of  restrictions  depending  on  the  circumstances  of  each  country.  There  are  several 
ways in which restrictions are imposed on foreign ownership in the banking sector, whether through 
limiting the foreign investment in the domestic banks or the presence of foreign banks. Presence of a 
foreign  bank  is  usually  in  one  of  the  three  recognized  forms  (viz.,  a  branch,  subsidiary  or  a  wholly 
owned subsidiary) and only a particular form of organisation may be permitted usually with no choice 
to  the  foreign  bank.  There  are  some  restraints  on  the  type  of  business  permitted  to  a  foreign  bank 
(such as being restricted to foreign currency operations or non-acceptance of retail deposits or other 
specified operations) as also stipulations in regard to the minimum capital requirement for a branch or 
a  subsidiary  of  a  foreign  bank.  There  can  also  be  practices  amongst  countries  in  regard  to  the 
aggregate  foreign  investment  permitted  in  a  local  bank  as  also  on  the  maximum  holdings  by  an 
individual or a corporate entity or an entity controlled by foreign financial institutions in a local bank. 
Similarly,  the  regulations  in  some  countries,  consistent  with  the  overall  plan  of  financial  integration, 
place an absolute limitation on the size of the total assets or capital of a foreign bank (which would 
indirectly restrict its total assets). It needs being borne in mind that certain policies in regard to the 
entry  of  foreign  investors  or  a  foreign  bank  in  a  country  may  be  triggered  due  to  extraordinary 
circumstances such as a financial crisis or as a part of a structured crisis management package. There 
are instances where as a part of response to banking crises, a higher level of initial foreign ownership 
have  been  permitted  but  with  stipulations  for  dilution  subsequently.  Furthermore,  certain  countries 
which, ab initio, did not have any private sector banking might welcome the presence of foreign banks. 
Similarly, expectations of joining a regional bloc, say European Union, might result in welcoming of a 
larger presence of foreign banks.  
                                                      
8   Hirano  Eiji,  2004,  'Policy  issues  concerning  financial  sector  FDI  in  Asia:  A  global  financial  system  perspective',  CGFS 
Workshop, (mimeo), Seoul. 
The extent of foreign investment, the nature of such investment, the appropriate form of presence and 
the profile of actual players in the banking sector are usually prescribed by the supervisors taking into 
account  the  multiple  challenges  faced  in  a  given  country  context  including  the  extent  of  financial 
integration  sought  to  be  achieved.  In  brief,  each  country  picks  up  an  appropriate  package  that  is 
necessitated by the circumstances, which ensures the presence of foreign investors that fully satisfy 
the `fit and proper’ criteria, and that the presence of foreign banks is in the best national interest. It is 
noteworthy that our policy in regard to foreign banks is a part of the planned strategy for rebalancing 
efficiency and stability in the financial system.  
In  this  background,  what  should  be  the  policy  considerations  governing  the  presence  of  foreign 
banks? First, the issue is not one of being for or against the foreign banks since financial integration 
necessitates  their  presence  -  be  it  in  the  industrialised  or  in  the  developing  countries.  There  are, 
however, special  problems  in  the case of  emerging market  economies  which have  not reached  the 
“threshold” to be able to minimise the downside risks of the foreign banks' presence. These are key 
supervisory  and  regulatory  issues  which  arise  as  a  result  of  greater  foreign  participation  in  the 
domestic financial system. Hence, policy-makers, including the financial sector supervisors, have to 
carefully  craft  a  road  map  to  ultimately  integrate  the  domestic  financial  sector  globally  while  also 
moving  towards  the  “threshold”  based  on  perceptions  of  the  international  financial  system  and  on 
domestic  economic  conditions.  Second,  quite  often  it  is  not  a  question  of  whether  to  have  the 
presence of foreign banks, but, to what extent, under what conditions, over what time horizon and in 
what form - usually a particular form of presence being preferred. A more difficult question, especially 
in regard to foreign investors in local banks, is the identity and the nature of investors - recognising 
that  an  absolute  majority  of  portfolio  flows  originate  in  tax  havens.  The  problem  is,  however,  less 
complex in regard to highly rated banks. Finally, there are pros and cons in any package of policy in 
regard to foreign banks. The weight to be attached to each of the pro and the con is country-specific, 
judgmental and evolving. Hence, a degree of transparency, a road map and considerable flexibility to 
the  supervisors  to  exercise  judgment  on  several  aspects  of  entry  and  presence  of  foreign  banks 
appear to be the desirable components of an appropriate policy framework in this regard.  
Our approach  
India’s approach to financial sector reforms, in general, and to the management of the external sector, 
in  particular,  has  served  the  country  well,  in  terms  of  aiding  growth,  avoiding  crises,  enhancing 
efficiency and imparting resilience to the system. The development of financial markets has been, by 
and large, healthy. The basic features of the Indian approach are gradualism; co-ordination with other 
economic policies; pragmatism rather than ideology; relevance to the context; consultative processes; 
dynamism and good sequencing so as to be able to meet the emerging domestic and international 
trends. In order to facilitate an understanding of the approach, a few illustrations would be in order. 
Convertibility  on  current  account  was  announced  in  1994  by  the  Government  and  the  exchange 
control  restrictions  were  removed  over  a  period  of  time,  emphasising  the  need  for  underlying  real 
transactions and reasonableness of amounts. However, the repatriation and surrender requirements 
still dominate the system, though some people aver that it is inconsistent with the concept of current 
account convertibility. The intention to move over to capital account convertibility was announced in 
1997  and  its  achievement  is  still  an  ongoing  process  -  which  differentiates  the  roles  of  individuals, 
corporates and financial intermediaries. Likewise, in regard to Primary Dealers (PDs), initially in 1996 
only the PDs promoted by local banks or financial institutions were licensed. Foreign bank-sponsored 
PDs  were  licensed  after  about  three  years.  In  the  banking  system,  diversified  ownership  of  public 
sector banks has been promoted over the years and the performance of their listed stocks in the face 
of intense competition indicates improvements in the system. They do co-exist with several old and 
new  private  sector  banks,  and  some  of  the  new  private  sector  banks  have  proved  to  be  of  global 
standards.  Recently,  some  of  private  sector  banks  promoted  by  domestic  financial  institutions  have 
been permitted to conduct Central and State Government business supplementing the public sector 
banks.  In  February  2004,  transparent  guidelines  were  issued  by  RBI  in  regard  to  the  prior 
acknowledgement  from  RBI  for  any  acquisition  /  transfer  of  shares  of  a  private  sector  bank  which 
would take the aggregate shareholding of an individual or a group to equivalent of five percent or more 
of the paid up capital of the bank. While this requirement already existed, transparency was imparted 
by the guidelines. On July 2, 2004, a comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance 
in private sector banks has been placed in the public domain, by the RBI in the form draft guidelines, 
for wider public debate. Based on the feedback received, a second draft of the guidelines would be 
prepared and put in public domain for further discussions.  
Foreign banks have been operating in India for decades with a few of them having operations in India 
for over a century. Quite a few foreign banks from diverse countries set up operations in India during 
the  mid-1990s  following  the  liberalisation  of  the  Indian  economy.  The  number  of  foreign  bank 
branches in India has increased significantly in recent years since a number of licences were issued 
by RBI - well beyond the commitments made to the World Trade Organisation. Although foreign banks 
can  operate  in  India  only  by  way  of  branch  presence,  some  of  the  foreign  banks  have  established 
several subsidiaries in the form of either Non Banking Finance Companies or limited companies in the 
non financial sector in India that undertake diverse businesses such as dealing in securities, leasing 
and finance, information technology, etc.   
The presence of foreign banks in India has benefited the financial system by enhancing competition, 
resulting in higher efficiency. There has also been transfer of technology and specialised skills which 
has had some “demonstration effect” as Indian banks too have upgraded their skills, improved their 
scale  of  operations  and  diversified  into  other  activities.  At  a  time  when  access  to  foreign  currency 
funds was a constraint for the Indian companies, the presence of foreign banks in India enabled large 
Indian companies to access foreign currency resources from the overseas branches of these banks. 
Creating  inter-bank  markets  in  money  and  foreign  exchange  is  a  challenge  in  several  developing 
countries. In India, however, the presence of foreign banks, as borrowers in the money market and 
their operations in the foreign exchange market, resulted in the creation and deepening, in terms of 
both volumes and products, of the inter-bank money market and forex market though by virtue of their 
skills and resources, the foreign banks tend to dominate in some financial markets. In the days ahead, 
the  challenge  for  the  supervisors  would  be  to  maximise  the  advantages  and  minimise  the 
disadvantages of the foreign banks' local presence by synchronising the emerging dominance of their 
local  operations  with  the  progress  in  the  domestic  financial  markets  as  well  as  in  liberalisation  of 
capital account.  
In terms of the Press Note No.2 (2004 Series) issued by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry on 
March  5,  2004,  the  FDI  limit  in  private  sector  banks  was  raised  to  74%  under  the  automatic  route, 
including the investment made by FIIs. Foreign banks, according to the Press Note, will be permitted 
to have either branches or subsidiaries, not both. They may operate in India through only one of the 
three channels viz., (i) branch/es; (ii) a wholly owned subsidiary; or (iii) a subsidiary; with aggregate 
foreign investment up to a maximum of 74% in a  private bank. The Press Note mentioned that the 
guidelines  in  this  regard  will  be  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  Reserve  Bank  is  currently 
examining various options for strengthening the financial sector, in general, and the banking sector, in 
particular,  concurrent  with  the  well-calibrated  de-regulation  process  already  set  in  motion.  The 
liberalisation measures would need to take into account several imperatives, such as, consolidation of 
domestic banking sector; restructuring of Development Finance Institutions; and appropriate timing for 
the  significant  entry  of  foreign  banks  so  as  to  be  co-terminus  with  the  transition  to  greater  capital 
account  convertibility  while  being  consistent  with  our  continuing  obligation  under  the  WTO 
commitments. It is also necessary to examine several issues relating to implementation of the Press 
Note No.2 not in isolation but as part of overall reform paradigm of the banking sector. In respect of 
foreign banks, issues include: choice of the mode of presence, acceptable transition path, according 
national  treatment,  addressing  supervisory  concerns,  linkages  between  foreign  banks  and  their 
presence in other (non-banking) financial services and the timing of various measures as per a road 
map to be drawn up. Reserve Bank intends to formulate the guidelines, through an ongoing process of 
consultation, as in the past. The proposed guidelines in this regard are expected to carry forward the 
process of financial integration of India in a carefully calibrated and transparent manner. 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Let me wish you all the best in your careers; and, that would ensure 
that my grand children will also be the beneficiaries of a happier India. 
