Vahur Kraft: A successful Estonia - in a successful Europe 
Speech by Mr Vahur Kraft, Governor of Eesti Pank (Bank of Estonia), at the Euro Conference of Eesti 
Pank, Tallinn, 3 May 2004. 
 This year spring is going to be different, 
chirp-chirp! Different, this year different… 
These are the words by Henrik Visnapuu, an Estonian poet, in his third letter to his beloved Ing in May 
1919. 
May has been a month of important events in the history of Eesti Pank. 85 years ago, on 3 May 1919, 
the first entry regarding the fixed capital of Eesti Pank was made into the general ledger, and the first 
payment was accepted into the current account. Thus, 3 May 1919 was the actual day the doors of the 
Bank  opened.  (By  the  way,  the  historical  entry  into  the  general  ledger  can  now  be  viewed  at  the 
Museum of Eesti Pank.) 
Today, on 3 May 2004, Eesti Pank made its first share capital transfer to the European Central Bank. 
Eesti Pank has become a member of the European System of Central Banks, one of the owners of the 
European Central Bank. Today, 3 May 2004 is already the third day of being a fully-fledged member 
state  of  the  European  Union.  Two  out  of  three  Estonian  citizens  voted  for  accession  to  the 
European Union in the referendum held last September. 
What is going to happen now? This is largely up to us. Becoming a member of the European Union 
does not mean that Estonia has become ‘ready’. Every other Estonian resident believes that by 
becoming a fully-fledged member of the European Union, Estonia will be able to influence the 
decisions  of  the  European  Union  in  the  future.  Having  faith  in  the  possibility  to  influence 
decision-making largerly shapes the attitutes of Estonians regarding the European Union as a whole. 
The  Estonian  country  and  society  have  changed  profoundly  during  the  past  10-15  years  - 
maybe even faster than we would have believed, and others would have expected us to change. Does 
anyone still remember that in 1992 the inflation rate in Estonia stood at 1,077 per cent? In 2003 prices 
rose by just 1.3 per cent. In place of long waiting lists for having a telephone installed, Estonia has 
evolved into a country enjoying one of the best communication networks in Europe with diverse mobile 
telephony and Internet solutions, with active use of such facilities surpassing that of many European 
Union member states. The daredevil slogan of 1988, 'An Independent Estonia to the 1992 Olympic 
Games', has been replaced by actual membership not only in the Olympic family or the UN, but also 
by full membership in the European Union and NATO... 
• 
On the 80th anniversary of Eesti Pank five years ago I spoke about the broader economic 
policy role of our central bank. The right and obligation of the central bank to contribute to 
shaping Estonia’s economic policy has been set down in the Bank of Estonia Act. But this 
task  can  only  be  performed  in  cooperation  with  the  Government  and  other  constitutional 
institutions. Today we can acknowledge that regardless of the fact that both the central bank 
and  other  state  institutions  employ  Estonians  who  are  known  as  great  individualists,  our 
cooperation in the field of economic policy has been smooth and yielded results. 
Five years ago I also spoke about the essential developments and necessary reforms facing 
Estonia. Today, many structural reforms under discussion at the time have been successfully 
launched,  including  the  pension  system  reform,  which  has  given  a  completely  new 
dimension to the saving patterns of the Estonians. As regards the changes that the financial 
system  was  facing,  my  anniversary  speech  mentioned  the  plans  to  set  up  a  universal 
financial  supervisory  body,  which  has  also  successfully  materialised.  Today  we  have  a 
banking sector that is very up-to-date and successful on the international banking scene as 
well. 
According to the World Economic Forum, Estonia is the most competitive country today 
among  the  new  European  Union  member  states  with  its  competitiveness  index  of 
4.64 points. With this score Estonia is also ahead of four ‘old’ member states (Spain - 4.47, 
Italy - 4.38, Portugal - 4.25, and Greece - 4.00), while narrowly falling behind Ireland (4.69). 
Our open market economy, development of the information society and the financial sector 
  BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
as well as the quality of our business environment have been considered Estonia's strongest 
areas. 
In conclusion we can say that Estonia has been quite successful so far. 
• 
For a successful future, we should first realise how far Estonia has progressed. Then we can decide 
where Estonia wants to be headed. When we know what we want to achieve in the future, we have to 
answer another, often an unpleasant question: how, through which measures, and at what price can 
we achieve the desired result? And then there is nothing more to it but to embark on taking purposeful 
action... It is as easy as that. Or is it? 
• 
It is a fact that as Estonia is evolving into a ‘boring and stable European country’, our society 
is supporting change for the sake of itself less and less. Stability, keeping one's word, and 
honouring contracts concluded either directy or indirectly is becoming an increasingly highly 
regarded value in the Estonian society. 
As Governor of Eesti Pank I would hereby like to recall that if anyone in Estonia has the 
right  -  and  obligation  -  to  stress  the  importance  of  stability,  it  is  the  central  bank. 
Some very successful examples illustrating the fact that stability is held in high regard are 
the Estonian kroon that has held out splendidly for twelve years and the Estonian monetary 
system that has not been ‘copied from Europe’ but has been structured bearing in mind our 
specific situation. The fact that we have been wise enough to keep to our principles also in 
tougher times, and that we have not succumbed to the temptation ‘to try something better’ 
when times have been easier has in the end only benefited the Estonian economy. 
Today,  the central bank maintains  that considering the specific conditions and related 
changes  now  that  Estonia  has  become  an  EU  member  state,  our  agenda  for  the 
coming years should include an upgrading of our monetary system to be completed 
with the changeover to the euro.  Namely  upgrading,  not  a radical  monetary  reform:  the 
Estonian kroon will maintain its value, and the central bank will continue to exchange it at a 
fixed rate for euros without any time or quantity restrictions. This promise is as binding to the 
central  bank  as  the  word  given  in  June  1992  that  from  that  day  on  it  was  possible  to 
exchange eight Estonian kroons for one German mark every single day. 
By  June  at  the  latest,  the  central  bank  will  announce  a  competition  for  finding  the 
design for the national side of the euro coin. As we all know, there are altogether eight 
euro coins. The side with figures is identical everywhere while the other side is different in all 
member states. The look of Estonia's euro coins will become clear this year. To find the best 
solution, Eesti Pank wants the Estonians to have a say and a right to decide the matter. 
As of 1 May 2004, ALL new member states will have to treat their monetary and exchange 
rate policy as an area of common interest for all member states. Price stability is the main 
aim of Estonia’s monetary policy already now, and it MUST remain so also according to the 
principles  of  the  European  Union.  But  as  far  as  the  choice  of  strategies  for  managing  the 
monetary and exchange rate policy is concerned, this will still be decided by each member 
state individually. 
Therefore ALL the countries joining the European Union together with Estonia face another 
important merger in the near future - accession to the Economic and Monetary Union (prior 
to  that  the  countries  are  EMU  members  with  limited  rights).  Only  after  completing  this 
change  can  we  be  sure  that  our  state  is  capable  of  fully  utilising  the  possibilities  that  the 
merger  with  a  powerful  economic  area  offers.  Estonia  hopes  to  be  among  the  very  first 
member states to do that. 
At some forums outside Estonia we have been asked why we are rushing to the euro zone. 
Actually, the question should be formulated the other way round - why are some countries 
incapable  of  taking  this  next  step  in  the  near  future?  Estonia  has  pursued  conservative 
economic policy and achieved success. Thus it is inappropriate to imply that we should wait 
for others for whom our pace of movement is too fast. The changeover to the euro does 
not call for extensive reforms in Estonia, rather, it is a more exhaustive utilisation of 
the opportunities Europe has to offer. 
The changeover to the euro cannot and must not be a seasonal election issue but an area 
where  we  proceed  from  Estonia's  interests  -  hence,  common  sense,  analysis  of  the 
economic situation, and knowledge of the theoretical foundations of the EMU. 
BIS Review 26/2004
       2 
  The European Central Bank has indicated that due to the differences in the economies of the 
new member states, a single approach suitable for everyone for joining the exchange-rate 
mechanism,  ERM  II,  and  adopting  the  euro  cannot  be  suggested.  Besides,  a  common 
approach was not possible for the present member states either. An approach that takes 
into account Estonia's particulars means that accession is going to be based on the 
present  currency  board  arrangement  and  that  our  application  to  join  ERM  II  will  be 
submitted as soon as possible. Prior to adopting the euro a country has to be a successful 
member  of  ERM  II  for  at  least  two  years.  Also  Estonia's  technical  readiness  for  changing 
over to the euro should be achieved by mid-2006. If such a scenario materialises, we will be 
among the first new EU members to adopt the euro. I would like to stress that being among 
the first is not an aim in itself but arises from the acknowledgement that Estonian economic 
fundamentals have stood firm and that our economy will be ready for joining the mechanism 
in a few years. 
• 
Joining the Economic and Monetary Union is a crucial step for the Estonian economy, 
which will secure the sustainability of a favourable investment climate and strengthen 
the prerequisites for a continued long-term and balanced economic growth;  
The estimates by foreign investors and rating agencies on the reliability of Estonian 
economy  have  already  taken  into  account  the  imminent  membership  of  the  EMU, 
which is evidenced by the interest margins and credit ratings that are already on the 
levels comparable to the old member states;  
A prerequisite for sustaining the outstanding reliability achieved to date is as fast as 
possible  changeover  to  the  euro,  i.e.  becoming  a  full  member  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union.  
  An important argument in favour of a comparatively swift changeover to the euro is Estonia’s 
current economic situation. What are the grounds for such a claim? In order to evaluate the broader 
economic  impact  of  joining  the  euro  system  and  choose  the  right  accession  moment,  the  UK  has 
adopted five 'euro tests'. These are the following:  
1. 
Have  the  economic  structures  and  cycles  of  the  accession  country  and  the  euro  zone 
converged sufficiently for a successful application of the common monetary policy? 
Is  the  economy  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  country-specific  economic  problems  and 
unexpected shocks that do not affect the whole euro zone? 
Will joining the euro zone create better long-term investment conditions for companies? 
How would joining the euro zone affect the financial sector?  
Will  joining  the  euro  zone  promote  economic  growth,  economic  stability,  and  long-term 
employment? 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Estonia scores five out of five on these tests. 
The  European  Union  gauges  an  applicant  country's  readiness  for  successful  participation  in  EMU 
according to the Maastricht criteria (inflation, interest rates, exchange rate, budget balance, and public 
debt criteria).  
• 
The Estonian economic situation today is in many ways unique compared to the other 
accession countries: the inflation rate is low - 1.3% in 2003; Estonia is one of the few new 
members states where the state budget balance is under control; public debt is one of the 
smallest in the EU; and the exchange rate of the Estonian kroon has been fixed against the 
euro for some time already. 
Still, meeting all the Maastricht criteria requires major efforts also from Estonia. Difficulties 
might arise both from the ideosyncrasies of the Estonian economy as well as from the results 
of economic policy decisions. 
From  the  standpoint  of  the  Maastricht  criteria,  the  greatest  peculiarity  of  the  Estonian 
economy is the comparatively low level of income, but on the other hand, the country´s 
economic growth is faster compared to the current EMU member states. 
• 
Estonia's  GDP  per  capita  currently  amounts  to  about  42%  of  the  respective  EU 
figure; Estonia´s price level is about 56% of the EU level.  
  BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
        Meanwhile, according to different studies, Estonia´s potential GDP growth is 5-6% 
per year - in a situation where the pace in the EU would be 2-2.5% per year. 
If the current growth rate differences are maintained, the level of income in Estonia should 
reach the current EU average in some 20 years. Hence - the average price level will be 
reached in the course of the following decades, not in months. 
However,  as  many  as  every  fourth  Estonian  believes  that  on  account  of  the 
changeover to the euro the prices will rise fast, which will have a significant impact on 
their welfare. These people are worried about their primary subsistence - above all, growth 
in food and housing costs is feared. I can assure you - based on the experience of other 
countries - that the adoption of the euro in itself will not bring about any price rises. It is a 
different  matter  that  people  sometimes  perceive  rises  in  prices  to  be  steeper  than  they 
actually are, e.g. if a cup of coffee at one's favourite corner cafe becomes more expensive. 
Namely  such  rises  contributed  to  the  price  growth  after  the  changeover  to  the  euro. 
According to studies, adopting the euro cash boosted the inflation rate ACTUALLY only by 
0.1-0.2  percentage  points.  Even  if  we  compare  the  price  increase  in  the  year  of  the  final 
changeover to the euro, i.e. in 2002, to the inflation rate in earlier years, we can see that the 
price rise in the euro zone did not accelerate. The rate of inflation in neighbouring Finland 
was  even  lower  than  in  2000  or  2001.  Meanwhile  in  Denmark,  which  had  postponed  the 
changeover to the euro, growth in prices accelerated and was even faster than in Finland, 
which had adopted the euro. 
Unsubstantiated price rises under false pretences in the conditions of market economy are 
above  all  prevented  by  competition  between  companies,  both  in  Estonia  and  in  the  ‘old’ 
Europe. In the ‘old’ Europe, also consumer protection agencies have been of help, which will 
hopefully be the case also in Estonia. 
Administrative  rises  in  excise  duties  related  to  the  accession  to  the  European  Union  and 
increase  in  the  prices  of  a  few  other  individual  goods  (such  as  sugar)  cannot  and 
must not be associated with the adoption of the euro as a single currency. These two 
factors are not related, except for the fact that in order to adopt the euro a country has to be 
a member of the European Union first. 
The following six months will indeed bring about several one-off price rises related to the 
accession  to  the  European  Union  -  all  in  all,  according  to  our  current  analysis,  these 
should escalate Estonian consumer prices 1-1.4%. 
But  none  of  these  price  rises  is  even  slight  related  to  the  fact  whether  and  when 
Estonia adopts the euro in the future. 
In the conditions of market economy, price stability does not mean that prices do not change 
at all, but that they fluctuate moderately and that price movements can be anticipated. The 
price of sugar may slightly rise or fall both in Estonia as well as elsewhere in the European 
Union in the future. 
It is most likely that a piece of meat on the dinner table here in Estonia will at the time of 
adopting the euro cost more than today. It is integral to market economy that inflation goes in 
line  with  the  increase  in  income.  But  the  price  will  not  rise  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
denomination of payment is the euro and not the kroon. It will be so because the incomes of 
people  will  have  gone  up  and  they  can  afford  more  and  better  goods.  One  thing  is  sure  
- there is going to be a rise in the standard of living. It is the pace of growth that is the issue 
here. And the European Union will significantly contribute to the increase in our income.  
Next I will provide a more general background to the coming developments in Estonia. 
Why is the European Union useful to us? In the past few years it has been customary that every 
regular  quarterly  economic  survey  of  Eesti  Pank  includes  a  reference  to  the  economic  standstill  in 
Europe. But today I would like to stress that even as such, at a standstill, Europe's economic power 
and  extensive  market  suffices  for  it  to  remain  one  of  the  most  important  engines  of  the  global 
economy. 
It is difficult to overestimate the role of the European Union in the world trade. One can, of course, be 
ironic  about  some  fruit  standards  but,  meanwhile,  the  same  EU  standards  and  product  safety 
requirements  affect  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  is  worth  mentioning  once  again  that  80%  of  Estonia's 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
exports go to the EU member states while 85% of the direct investments made into Estonia are related 
to the European Union. I think that this calls for no further commentary. 
Europe's  core  economic  policy  goals  are  embodied  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Such 
goals  are  stable  economic  growth  and  price  stability.  And  this  is  what  we  all  want.  The  EMU 
signifies the common monetary policy and coordinated economic policy.  
• 
Why  a  common  monetary  policy  and  a  single  currency?  The  aim  of  the  common 
monetary policy is to guarantee a low level of inflation (below but close to 2% a year) through 
a common currency, a common central bank system, and common interest rates. Several 
studies and decades of experience in the industrial countries have shown that a stable, low, 
and  easily  predictable  inflation  rate  leads  to  the  most  favourable  conditions  for  long-term 
economic growth. 
The notion of a monetary union is based on the optimum currency area theory formulated by 
Robert  Mundell  in  the  early  1960s.  Multilateral  fixing  of  currency  rates  and  joining  of 
monetary policies offers several benefits: 
• 
excessive fluctuations in exchange rates, i.e. in the price of money will disappear; it 
will  be  easier  to  predict  the  price  of money  in  the  future  and  therefore,  easier  to 
plan the future;  
improved  certainty  will  reduce  the  cost  of  hedging  currency  risks  and  will  avoid 
such  undesirable  developments  like  the  ones  in  Estonia  that  accompanied  the 
Russian crisis in mid-1990s; the costs related to currency exchange can, of course, 
only be eliminated by a common currency;  
most  importantly,  pegging  the  currencies  should  lead  to  faster  economic  and 
financial  integration,  boost  the  flow  of  goods  between  countries,  and  enable 
convergence of market interest rates and improved price comparison.  
  An additional advantage of a large currency area is greater seigniorage income earned on 
issuing bank notes, since the money can be used outside its own economic zone. The role 
of the euro as an international financing, settlement, and reserve currency has been 
consistently growing. For example, of all the bonds issued in foreign currencies by world 
governments and the private sector, bonds denominated in euros accounted for more than 
30% in 2003 (prior to launching the euro the overall amount of the bonds denominated in the 
national  currencies  of  the  current  euro  zone  totalled  20%).  The  share  of  the  euro  in  the 
currency reserves of the world amounted to some 19% in 2003. 
The larger the common currency zone is, the smaller the transaction costs, and the more it 
will support economic development, increase stability and future security. 
Whether joining the monetary union is useful depends on the ratio of the costs of the lost 
monetary policy independence to the gains arising from the accession. Since the exchange 
rate is not an adaptation tool in the monetary union, prices and salaries must be flexible and 
factors  of  production  (capital  and  labour)  have  to  move  freely.  In  general  terms,  open 
economies (and Estonia is a very open economy) and countries with similar economic cycles 
gain more from the monetary union. 
Why  coordinated  economic  policy?  Coordinated  economic  policy  must  contribute  to 
creating a favourable environment for stable and sustainable economic growth.  
The most closely coordinated area between the EMU member states and institutions is the 
budgetary  policy.  This  is  based  on  the  framework  established  by  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact: the budgets of the member states must be balanced or show a surplus during at least 
several consecutive years and in no year must the deficit rise above 3% of the GDP. Besides 
budgetary  policy,  most other  economic policy sectors  (e.g.  labour  market policy,  structural 
policies, etc.) are coordinated between the members states and institutions. 
The  economies  of  the  European  Union  member  states  are  closely  intertwined.  Of  the 
external trade of the EU, some 65% is with other member states, and only a third with the 
rest of the world. The more the economies of the member states depend on each other, the 
greater the gain arising from the single currency. Then it will also be unlikely that economic 
       BIS Review 26/2004 
 5
growth in some member states might be significantly slower, which could potentially threaten 
the stability of EMU. 
What does such a framework mean for the future of the European Union? Above all, economic 
success of the European Union - hence also of Estonia - depends on whether the economy in Europe 
manages to be sufficiently flexible and competitive so as to utilise the opportunities offered by the 
single currency and attract more investments than before.  
• 
Economic  flexibility  is  the  trump  card  Estonia  as  a  small  country  holds  in  the 
European  Union.  It  is  very  important  for  our  small  and  open  economy  that  the 
powerful common market we are joining would operate as efficiently as possible and 
that a climate favouring innovative ideas would be predominant in Europe. According to the 
economic  theory,  the  aim  of  the  economic  policy  of  a  small  country  is  to  react  fast  in  the 
changing  circumstances  and  respond  to  the  changes  in  the  global  economy  in  time.  Our 
Estonian  experience  confirms  this  economic  principle.  The  first  prerequisite  for  a  flexible 
economy  is  the  faith  in  the  durability  of  the  core  values  of  economic  policy.  This  means 
abiding by the law and the fact that contracts are honoured and ownership relations stable. It 
certainly involves faith in the stability of the currency. The latter in turn is inseparably linked 
to the reliability of the financial system. 
Another prerequisite for flexible economy is education and openness to new ideas. 
Flexible  economy  also  requires  a  favourable  public  attitude  towards  entrepreneurship. 
Entrepreneurs  must  have  the  opportunity  to  implement  their  ideas  and  engage  capital, 
labour, and information at a fair market price and with as little trouble as possible. 
To sum up what has been said above, we could say that creating a flexible and competitive 
economic framework is the main economic policy task for Estonia. With this task we would 
also adopt the principal viewpoints of the Lisbon strategy comprising the economic policy 
priorities and directions for development in the European Union today. The economy policy 
priorities  specified  for  the  years  2003-2006  in  Europe  are  the  following:  (i)  promoting 
economic growth, (ii) creating jobs, and (iii) sustainability of public finances. 
Economic growth in Europe has fallen behind its potential in the past three years. This again 
seems to point to the need for structural reforms. It is in the interest of Estonia that structural 
reforms targeted at improved efficiency in the use of resources would continue both in the 
recently joined countries as well as in the old EU member states. 
Regardless of the fears prevalent in the ‘old’ Europe, extensive labour influx from the new 
member  states  in  the  near  future  is  unlikely.  Therefore,  the  insufficient  flexibility  of  the  
pan-European labour market has to be counterbalanced by as efficient as possible internal 
market, high mobility of capital, and as flexible as possible internal labour market. 
Estonia is building up a modern pension and health insurance system. This is an area where 
also  the  current  ‘old’  member  states  will  probably  have  to  focus  more  on  individualised 
contributions and securing more extensive employment. 
Yet the greatest problem the European Union faces is the budget issue due to the need to 
reform the pension system and in particular the healthcare system in the light of long-term 
sustainability  and  on  account  of  the  budgetary  positions  of  the  member  states  that 
deteriorated in 2003. The excessive budget deficit procedure was initiated against Germany 
and France which exceeded the maximum budget deficit allowed according to the Growth 
and Stability Pact, 3% of the GDP - and the number of such member states will probably 
grow. At the same time, the situation initiated a discussion regarding sufficient flexibility of 
the  Growth  and  Stability  Pact,  first  and  foremost  in  the  context  of  a  weaker  economic 
situation. 
Estonia's  budgetary  policy  is  and  has  been  strict  and  balance-oriented.  This  gives  us  a 
competitive advantage over others and does not place us in an inferior position, contrary to 
what has been erroneously claimed. The current debt burden of the Estonian government 
sector is about 5% of the GDP (the lowest in the EU accession countries); the budget deficit 
of  the  government  sector  rose  above  the  maximum  level  allowed  under  the  Maastricht 
criteria only in 1999. 
       6 
 BIS Review 26/2004
 While assessing the relevance of the budgetary balance requirement from the viewpoint of 
Estonia's future competitive ability, one certainly has to bear in mind that merely meeting the 
budget  criterion  might  not  be  a  sufficient  success  guarantee.  In  the  conditions  of  the 
common monetary policy, the budgetary policy will become the principal economic policy tool 
through  which  the  government  can  independently  influence  economic  development  (e.g. 
stimulate  its  economy  in  the  period  of  slow  growth).  But  in  order  to  actually  use  such 
budgetary policy tools flexibly, the budget has to be balanced not in the course of just one 
year but across the whole economic cycle - posting a surplus in the periods of fast economic 
growth while showing not a very large deficit, a maximum of 3% of the GDP, in the period of 
downturn. 
There has been a notion spreading among Estonians that we are extremely good... Hence the 
biggest threat facing us is complacency. 
• 
Besides  its  significant  role  in  the  world  trade,  the  European  Union  has  long  been  a  net 
investor in the rest of the world. But the level of investments within the European Union, at 
least in the old member states, remains lower than it could and should be. A well-considered 
investment  policy  is  one  of  the  key  issues  from  the  point  of  view  of  European  economic 
development  prospects.  Creating  an  attractive  investment  environment  and  utilising  the 
know-how accompanying the investments is an area where Estonia has (at least in the case 
of the financial sector) successful experience to offer to Europe. At the same time, Estonia 
as an EU member state should learn from the experiences of other states. 
In  2004-2006  an  average  of  2.7  billion  kroons  per  year  is  flowing  into  Estonia  from  the 
European Union. According to the present financial estimates, the inflowing amount will be 
around  40  billion  kroons  in  2007-2013,  an  average  of  5.6  billion  kroons  a  year.  At  the 
moment  we  have  managed  to  make  use  only  over  half  of  these  funds.  It  is  quite  another 
matter HOW to use the inflowing money IN A SENSIBLE WAY. 
Estonia  hopes  to  be  successful  in  Europe  like  many  other  small  countries,  
e.g.  Finland  and  Ireland.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  copying  the  solutions  and 
development  approaches  of  these  countries  would  necessarily  guarantee  success.  For 
example,  it  would  undoubtedly  be  of  great  use  to  learn  about  the  experience  of  Finland's 
SITRA,  Ireland's  Forfas  and  ICSTI,  and  other  similar  state-owned  structures  designed  to 
promote modern knowledge, product development, and manufacturing. But Estonia has to 
face the fact that the majority of the projects successfully launched with SITRA's co-financing 
are related to innovations that have received an additional quality guarantee - a patent or a 
useful model certificate - considered essential by venture capital investors. According to the 
Estonian Patent Office, considering the number of globally innovative products per 100,000 
inhabitants and the products' patents, Estonia is lagging behind the EU member states up to 
50 times - in Finland an average of 40-50 patent applications per 100,000 inhabitants are 
submitted per annum; in Ireland the respective figure is 30, and in Estonia less than one. 
Naturally, this is just a single indicator among many others and other factors should be taken 
into account, but still... 
Maybe this is where we should start? It is quite obvious that Estonians have no other way of 
achieving success than using their knowledge and skills. As we all know very well, Estonia 
does  not  have  oil  fields  at  the  expense  of  which  we  could  become  rich.  Innovation  and 
willingness to develop should become a pervasive way of thinking for us, there should be a 
change in our values. 
The  world  economy  is  currently  going  through  changes  in  its  fundamental  paradigm  and 
turning into a knowledge- and innovation-based economy, founded on creating, introducing, 
and  applying  knowledge.  And  the  focus  is  on  the  latter,  application  of  knowledge,  
i.e. innovation.  
Innovation  can  be  defined  as  a  novel  and  successful  application  of  knowledge  and 
technology in order to achieve a competitive advantage. The competitiveness of companies 
in knowledge-based free market economy essentially narrows down to their innovation, i.e. 
their  ability  to  find  and  sustain  their  originality  and  thus  a  market  position  enabling  high 
returns.  It  is  international  competition  between  companies  that  ultimately  creates  an 
opportunity for economic growth and thus for the increase in the society's welfare. 
     BIS Review 26/2004 
 7
          8 
 Innovation requires at least three factors: firstly, educated and competent people; secondly, 
a  well-functioning  financial  system  covering  the  whole  chain  of  innovation;  and  thirdly,  a 
culture favouring innovation and entrepreneurship. 
Is Estonian labour really competitive? Do we want to be price or quality leaders? If the 
goal is to be price leaders, our salaries should be as low as possible. If we want to be quality 
leaders, the situation is vice versa. In order to generate innovation, innovative people have to 
be raised in Estonia, brought to Estonia - and kept in Estonia, hence the aim should be to 
create more high-productivity jobs. 
I  maintain  that  being  a  part  of  Europe,  we  should  become  quality  leaders  since  we  have 
already lost the price leader position to Asia. This is undoubtedly easier to say than to do. 
Here  we  face  the  threat  of  outpacing  the  so-called  natural  development,  which  calls  for 
step-by-step  industrial development  towards  manufacturing  products with  increased  added 
value - such a development is in fact currently under way in Estonia. On the other hand, the 
payback  period  of  such  investments  is  very  long  and  the  experience  of  several  countries 
(including  Finland  and  Ireland)  has  shown  that  success  often  arrives  only  decades  later. 
Consequently  -  if  it  is our  goal  to become  a  quality  leader,  development  activities  in 
this direction should be launched as soon as possible. 
Here we come to the question, WHERE to start? The answer requires a good prediction or 
even a vision: which areas have enough potential in Estonia that are worth to be given 
systematic  development  priority.  It  is  possible  that  due  to  its  small  size  Estonia  lacks  any 
potential for developing high-technology industry since this would require the emergence of 
clusters.  Even  if  we  manage  to  develop  our  own  high-technology  industry,  sufficiently 
high-level know-how will most likely emerge only in few fields. However, this does not mean 
that we should develop just a few areas. According to the principle of risk-spreading, it would 
still be better to support research and development activities on quite a broad basis. 
The economic analyses by the central bank consistently emphasise that in order to obtain 
financial  capital  required  for  development,  Estonia  must  remain  attractive  in  the  eyes  of 
foreign investors also in the future. However, in order to boost the country's competitiveness 
it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  adopt  a  more  carefully  planned  system  of  investments  into 
human capital and set up a framework for financing innovation. 
There are many possibilities to do that. Firstly, large companies could train their own staff. 
This  would  require  strong  public  secondary  education,  diploma  studies,  and  postgraduate 
studies,  and  not  necessarily  public  vocational  education.  (There  are  examples  of  such  an 
approach primarily in the IT and telecommunications areas.) 
The  second  possibility  is  state-commissioned  education.  Since  investments  into  human 
capital promote innovation and bring about other positive effects, state investments into the 
area are justified as the private sector invests less than is socially optimal. Estonia is quite 
progressive in that field - we spend 6-7% of the GDP on education, which is more than in 
other transition countries and similar to the respective levels in Finland and Sweden. 
Even  though  state-controlled  development  of  human  capital  requires  increased  spendings 
from the national budget, it is relevant that some of the expenditure will be later recovered 
through additional receipts since rising productivity and employment boost tax revenues. 
The third option is to secure as efficient as possible operation of the education market in the 
private sector where people themselves pay for their education. One possibility to contribute 
to this is, for example, through carefully planned implementation of the system of education 
capital  units  that  has  already  been  under  discussion,  in  the  similar  way  to  the  pension 
insurance  system  that  has  been  successfully  launced.  When  we  know  which  areas  will 
boost Estonia's competitiveness, we should make sure that those who pay for their 
education themselves would choose the right specialities (they should be motivated by 
the fact that their anticipated pay is going to be higher - hence they would be willing to bear 
higher  costs).  Currently  the  problem  in  Estonia  is  that  people  choose  law  and  business 
specialities  where  the  external  impact  is  small,  and  fewer  engineering  professions, 
mathematics, etc. where the external impact is presumably high. 
Probably  the  main  problem  here  is  lack  of  information.  In  order  to  secure  improved 
circulation  of  information,  future  students  should  be  systematically  informed  of  the 
BIS Review 26/2004
differences in pay and the opportunities of finding employment in different areas - however, 
pay differences today do not always reflect what is to become in the future. For example, the 
excessive supply in business specialities compared to other areas should lower entry-level 
salaries. Another area about which students should be systematically informed is the level of 
schools.  If  the  aim  of  the  upper  secondary  school  is  to  send  students  on  to  higher 
educational  establishments,  the  percentages  of  those  admitted  to  universities  should  be 
publicised on a permanent basis. This requires the state to take action. 
Developing  an  INTEGRAL  framework  for  supporting  innovative  activities  -  including 
measures related to labour quality and promoting innovation as well as venture capital funds 
helping  to  implement  good  ideas  in  manufacturing  -  similarly  requires  contemplation  and 
support  by  the  state.  I  say  again  that  our  approach  should  be  integral  and  not  dispersed 
between  different  competing  projects  and  agencies.  Now,  on  the  threshold  of  the 
European Union, it is the most appropriate and necessary time for that. Several plans 
and projects in that direction that can serve as a foundation are about to be completed. Also 
Finland's  SITRA  has  offered  us  help.  Ideally,  I  would  like  to  see  regional  cooperation 
between  the  Baltic  Rim  countries  in  that  area  similarly  to  the  work  that  has  been 
successfully launched in the financial sector. And perhaps we might find an opportunity to 
rely also on pan-European structures. 
 Let me remind you that Knowledge-based Estonia, the research and development strategy 
for  2001-2006,  was approved  by Riigikogu as  early as  in  2001. How  much  of  it  has been 
implemented by today? One thing is sure: more could have been done - and perhaps in a 
more coordinated manner. Time does not wait. 
  Concluding  remarks:  The  expansion  of  the  European  Union  will  have  several  direct  and  indirect 
effects on both the current and the new member states. 
The European Union is currently facing several complicated economic policy problems. Many of these 
have  originated  from  the  developments  in  Europe's  near  past.  New  member  states  will  bring  new 
problems  and  new  weaknesses  to  the  Union,  but  certainly  they  will  also  intensify  some  positive 
developments within the European Union. Joint efforts should help to move future developments within 
the European Union towards the direction favourable to everybody. 
What will be the role of the central bank of Estonia, a new European Union member state, in all this? 
To put it briefly - the same as today, only on an unparalleled scope and in enormous volumes since 
the  central  bank  will  be  analysing  the  whole  European  Union  instead  of  the  small  Estonia,  and  the 
bank has to participate in making decisions affecting the whole European Union.  
The  principal  tasks  of  the  present  and  also  the  future  central  bank  are  and  will  be  the  same  as 
described by the then Governor of Eesti Pank, Jüri Jaakson, about 80 years ago. The cornerstone of 
each and every economy is a firm monetary unit, which is a gauge of economic values. This monetary 
unit  must  not  fluctuate,  it  must  not  be dependant on  random  external  factors,  or  else  it  will  lose  its 
value as a stable gauge. Each industrialist, every merchant, any entrepreneur that creates economic 
values or obtains them for reselling must have the opportunity to make a definite pre-calculation as to 
the cost of these assets to him and the price at which he will have to pass them on in order to make 
both ends meet. /... / Therefore, maintaining the firm value of a monetary unit is an enormous, difficult, 
and very responsible task in every country. 
To  sum  it  up,  I would  like to express  my  many  thanks to all  the  Estonians:  to  every  corporate 
manager,  state  official,  banker,  and  politician  who  has  supported  the  central  bank  in  performing  its 
difficult task by having faith in it. Without your trust in the past 12 years we would not have reached the 
point where we are standing now. Once again - thank you very much!  
BIS Review 26/2004 
 9
