Susan Schmidt Bies: US - EU regulatory dialogue  
Testimony of Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, DC, 
13 May 2004. 
 Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  today  on  matters  relating  to  the  informal 
U.S.-EU Financial Markets Regulatory Dialogue. I would like to focus my remarks on the Dialogue’s 
role  in  helping  us  to  monitor  European-wide  regulatory  developments  in  financial  services  and 
understand the effects on U.S. banking organizations operating in the European Union. 
Background to the dialogue 
As  has  been  noted,  the  Dialogue  was  initiated  by  the  Treasury  Department  in  2002,  at  a  time  of 
significant regulatory developments in both the European Union and in the United States. At that time, 
the European Union was continuing its efforts, begun in 1999, to establish a single market in financial 
services  by  implementing  the  “Financial  Services  Action  Plan”  (FSAP).  The  FSAP  consists  of  a 
number  of  regulatory  and  legislative  measures  designed  to  achieve,  among  other  things,  a  single 
wholesale European market; open and secure retail markets; and state-of-the-art prudential rules and 
supervision. On our side of the Atlantic, U.S. regulators were continuing to implement provisions of the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  and  Congress  was  considering  reforms  that  led  to  the  adoption  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act. These developments, which affected European financial services firms with U.S. 
operations, naturally were of interest to staff of the European Commission. 
From the outset, the Dialogue’s purpose has been to foster a better mutual understanding of U.S. and 
EU  regulatory  approaches  and  to  identify  potential  substantive  conflicts  in  approach  as  early  in  the 
regulatory  process  as  possible.  The  Dialogue  consists  of  an  informal  discussion  or  explanation  of 
regulatory approaches, developments, and timetables, conducted at an experts level. This format has 
served us well during the past two years. Although the Federal Reserve has regular contact with staff 
of  the  European Commission  in other groups  on  a range  of  issues,  the  Dialogue  is  the  only  venue 
dedicated specifically to U.S.-EU regulatory issues.  
Federal Reserve’s interest in monitoring foreign regulatory developments 
As  the  umbrella  supervisor  of  U.S.  bank  holding  companies  and  financial  holding  companies,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  a  strong  interest  in  the  regulatory  environments  in  which  these  firms  operate 
outside the United States. We have an established program of working with foreign supervisors at both 
bilateral and multilateral levels. Through regular contact, we track changes to foreign bank regulatory 
and supervisory systems and seek to understand how these systems affect the banking institutions we 
supervise.  
This is especially important in the European Union, where U.S. banking organizations have substantial 
operations.  As  of  September  30,  2003,  thirty-four  U.S.  banking  organizations  operated  in  the 
European  Union  with  aggregate  EU  assets  of  more  than  $747  billion.  As  of  December  31,  2003, 
sixty-eight EU banking organizations maintained active banking operations in the United States, with 
total  third-party  banking  assets  in  their  U.S.  offices  of  $937  billion.  As  these  figures  suggest, 
institutions from the United States and the EU are major participants in each other’s markets.  
The dialogue as an additional forum for monitoring EU regulatory developments 
As  the  EU  seeks  increasingly  to  harmonize  financial  services  rules  across  its  internal  market,  the 
regulatory  role  of  the  European  Commission  has  grown  correspondingly.  In  this  environment,  the 
Dialogue complements the Federal Reserve’s ongoing relationships and discussions with EU national 
regulators.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
The Dialogue, moreover, fills a role not presently served by any one of those ongoing relationships 
and discussions. As the market for financial services becomes increasingly integrated, the interests of 
banking,  securities,  and  insurance  regulators  correspondingly  are  becoming  more  common  and 
intertwined.  The  Dialogue  provides  a  forum  for  discussion  of  issues  in  each  of  these  areas.  The 
regulatory discussions benefit from this sharing of different substantive perspectives. For this reason, 
too, the Dialogue is an efficient forum for information exchange, which has great utility for supervisors 
of large complex financial services organizations. 
Global companies operate across many countries and must adapt their business and strategy to local 
regulatory and supervisory requirements. It is now generally accepted in the U.S. and internationally 
that a foreign firm that conducts business in a local market should receive national treatment, that is, 
the  foreign  firm  should  be  treated  no  less  favorably  than  a  domestic  firm  operating  in  like 
circumstances.  The  United  States  adopted  a  specific  policy  of  national  treatment  for  foreign  banks 
operating in this country with the enactment of the International Banking Act of 1978.  
As  we  have  previously  testified,  implementing  a  policy  of  national  treatment  can  be  challenging. 
Although large financial services companies operate in a globalized world, each is based in a specific 
country whose economic regulation or supervisory approach will differ from those in other countries. 
The challenge of providing national treatment arises as we seek to adapt our own regulatory system to 
a  foreign  banking  organization  that  operates  under  a  different  legal  and  regulatory  structure.  We 
believe  the  Federal  Reserve  has  successfully  met  the  challenge  in  its  treatment  of  foreign  banking 
organizations operating in this country. Part of that success can be attributed to our work with foreign 
regulators and supervisors in seeking to understand the operating environment of the foreign banks 
we regulate. The Dialogue contributes to that knowledge. 
We are equally concerned that U.S. banking organizations receive national treatment in their foreign 
operations.  The  Dialogue  provides  us  the  best  opportunity  to  understand  EU  directives  that  affect 
those  operations  and  provides  us  with  the  ability  to  raise  concerns  directly  with  the  staff  that  has 
responsibility for the preparation and presentation of such directives. 
The  Dialogue  provides  a  useful  forum  for  information  exchange  between  U.S.  regulators  and  the 
European Union over Europe-wide matters that have the potential to affect the application of national 
treatment  in  particular  situations.  In  implementing  the  FSAP  in  the  European  Union,  the  European 
Union has an obligation to ensure that the rules adopted are consistent with the principle of national 
treatment. It is our expectation that the European Commission and the member states will continue to 
seek to do so.  
Select issues discussed during the dialogue 
The Dialogue has touched on a variety of issues in the past two years. Of particular interest to the 
Federal Reserve and to U.S. banking organizations operating in the EU is the issue of the application 
of the EU’s Financial Conglomerates Directive to U.S. financial firms. This Directive, and others that 
have been amended in connection with its adoption, establishes various supervisory requirements for 
EU firms. Among other matters, it requires that the consolidated group be subject to supervision and 
minimum capital standards by a member state authority. For firms that are headquartered outside the 
EU, such as U.S. banking organizations, the directives require that the foreign financial firm operating 
in  EU  markets  must  be  subject  to  supervision  at  the  holding  company  level  by  a  competent  home 
country authority, which supervision is equivalent to that provided for by the provisions of the Directive.  
The EU’s national supervisors will be responsible for making equivalency determinations on a group-
by-group basis, in accordance with guidance issued by the European Commission. In the absence of 
an  equivalence  determination,  U.S.  financial  firms  with  EU  operations  could  be  subject  to  higher 
capital and risk control requirements or be required to create an EU sub-holding company.  
The European Commission is preparing guidance on what might constitute equivalent supervision by 
third countries. In preparing this guidance, committees working under the auspices of the Commission 
convened a technical group comprised of member state supervisors to provide input on issues to be 
taken  into  account  in  verifying  equivalence.  The  group  sent  questionnaires  to  home  country 
supervisors of financial organizations having operations in the EU, inquiring about the measures those 
supervisors take to ensure that the entities they supervise are subject to consolidated supervision at 
the top-tier level. The Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency prepared a 
joint response on supervision of U.S. banking organizations with EU operations. We understand that 
the EC’s guidance is expected to be issued in the summer. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
Member  state  lead  regulators  are  expected  to  rely  on  the  European  Commission’s  guidance  in 
verifying equivalent supervision with respect to individual institutions. We anticipate that the European 
Commission will keep us informed of member states’ progress in this regard during the Dialogue and 
also will alert us to the existence of and procedures for addressing any disparities in member states’ 
approaches.  We  fully  expect  that  U.S.  banking  organizations  will  be  found  to  meet  the  supervision 
standard of the directive.  
Another topic of discussion relating to banks has been the status of work on revisions to the Basel 
Capital Accord (Basel II). The discussions within the Dialogue have not focused on technical issues 
that  have  been  under  consideration  within  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel 
Committee),  but  rather  have  addressed  the  scope  of  application  and  implementation  and  timing 
concerns. Specifically, the Dialogue has served as a useful venue for both the EU representatives and 
the Federal Reserve participants to gain a better understanding of the implementation procedures that 
are anticipated to be applicable in each jurisdiction. Staff has been able to ask questions about the EU 
legislative process, and to explain in detail how the U.S. regulatory process functions. Understanding 
the requirements and limitations of each others’ legislative and regulatory processes has helped both 
sides  achieve,  in  my  view,  a  better  sense  of  the  implementation  challenges  we  all  face  and  of  the 
commitment to see the process through. 
With  regard  to  the  scope  of  application  of  the  proposed  new  Accord,  the  Federal  Reserve 
representatives were able to provide information for the EU participants about the reasons the U.S. 
banking agencies proposed to require only a core set of banks to apply the advanced approaches for 
both credit risk and operational risk. As you know, one of the primary drivers behind this decision was 
the U.S. banking agencies’ collective view that complex, sophisticated organizations should be using 
the most advanced risk measurement and management practices available and those techniques and 
practices  are  recognized  in  the  Basel  II  advanced  approaches.  The  U.S.  agencies  also  proposed 
permitting  other  institutions  to  move  voluntarily  to  the  advanced  approaches  subject  to  the  same 
rigorous risk measurement and management requirements as core banks. Through the Dialogue, the 
participants were able to discuss the U.S. approach and to compare it with the EU proposal to apply 
Basel II to all of its banks and investment companies. These different implementation strategies will 
raise  some  issues,  and  that  is  why  the  Basel  Committee  has  created  the  Accord  Implementation 
Group to coordinate implementation across jurisdictions and work through home-host issues. 
As noted, issues are not resolved during Dialogue discussions; that is not the purpose of the Dialogue. 
But  open  communication  that  fosters  understanding  can  feed  back  into  the  decision-making 
discussions when they are held in other appropriate forums. With respect to Basel II implementation 
and  the  Dialogue,  in  my  view,  the  current  structure  will  continue  to  serve  a  useful  purpose  -  as 
implementation issues are identified, the Dialogue can be a venue for candid, informal communication. 
Participants can take back to their constituents the results of those discussions and the subject matter 
experts can determine how best to address issues that are raised or respond to particular questions or 
concerns. 
The Dialogue has been useful in diffusing tensions over matters that have a direct impact on global 
firms. This has been especially true with respect to issues under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, a discussion 
of which I shall leave to my SEC colleague. The Dialogue has also been helpful on less high profile 
matters.  Through  discussions  at  Dialogue  meetings,  we  were  able  to  keep  EC  staff  apprised  of 
developments  relating  to  asset  pledge  requirements  applicable  to  foreign  banking  organizations 
having U.S. offices. 
For more than forty years, federal and state bank licensing authorities have imposed an asset pledge 
or  capital  equivalency  deposit  requirement  on  U.S.  branches  and  agencies  of  international  banks, 
primarily  for  safety  and  soundness  reasons.  This  requirement  obligated  such  institutions  to  hold 
certain negotiable securities at American custodian banks. In recent years, foreign banks were of the 
view that such requirements were more onerous than necessary and sought a reduction in the level of 
assets  to  be  pledged.  The  matter  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  European  Commission  staff  who 
raised it at the Dialogue. We were able to inform Commission staff of progress being made on this 
front by state authorities in New York and elsewhere over a two-year period. New York changed its 
asset pledge requirement in 2003, generally satisfying the concerns of foreign banks. The Dialogue 
was a useful forum to keep Commission staff apprised of developments during this period. 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
International accounting 
The FSAP also contemplates mandating adherence to international accounting standards. Currently, 
banking  organizations  in  the  European  Union  may  prepare  their  annual  financial  statements  in 
accordance  with  the  accounting  standards  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB), 
U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (U.S.  GAAP),  and/or  national  standards.  The  use  of 
U.S. GAAP is usually limited to those banking organizations or other companies whose securities are 
publicly  traded  on  U.S.  stock  exchanges  and  are  registered  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission. In many cases, these companies will also provide separate financial statements based 
on their national accounting standards and disclosure rules. The European Union will require all EU 
companies  listed  on  EU  exchanges  that  are  currently  following  national  standards  to  follow  IASB 
standards by 2005 and will require those EU companies that currently follow U.S. GAAP to adopt IASB 
standards by 2007. The EU is also working to adopt international auditing standards for external audits 
of EU companies, including banks.  
The IASB is now independent of the international accounting profession and independently funded. It 
has adopted many of the structural elements of the FASB in the United States, which are intended to 
promote an independent, objective standards-setting environment. Many senior American accounting 
experts serve on the IASB and its staff. IASB GAAP has many similarities with U.S. GAAP and the 
IASB  issued  extensive  enhancements  to  its  standards  last  year  and  this  year,  with  additional 
improvements  also  issued  as  a  proposal  this  year. For example,  in recent  months  the  IASB  issued 
major revisions to its standards for financial instruments, which are similar to U.S. GAAP and cover 
many areas of banking activities. One aspect of these revisions by the IASB significantly improved the 
guidance on loan loss allowances in ways that could lead to better bank reserving practices around 
the world. 
The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure 
by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering 
stable  financial  markets.  The  concept  of  market  discipline  is  assuming  greater  importance  among 
international banking supervisors as well. Basel II seeks to strengthen the market’s ability to aid bank 
supervisors in evaluating banking organizations’ risks and assessing capital adequacy. It consists of 
three pillars, or tools: a minimum risk-based capital requirement (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar 
II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III). This approach 
to  capital  regulation,  with  its  market-discipline  component,  signals  that  sound  accounting  and 
disclosure will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach. 
The Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies are also actively involved in the efforts of 
the Basel Committee to promote sound international accounting, auditing, and disclosure standards 
and practices for global banking organizations and other companies. For example, an official of the 
Federal Reserve Board is a member of the Standards Advisory Council that advises the IASB and its 
trustees on IASB projects, proposals and standards. The U.S. banking agencies have been active in 
supporting the Basel Committee in its work with the IASB’s technical advisory groups to enhance the 
IASB’s standards for financial instruments and bank disclosures. The Federal Reserve Board has also 
been  active  in  supporting  the  Basel  Committee’s  projects  with  the  International  Federation  of 
Accountants  (IFAC)  and  other 
International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  to  promote  substantial  enhancements  to  global 
standards and practices for audits of banks and other companies. 
Although the Federal Reserve Board has been actively involved in addressing international accounting 
and auditing issues primarily through our involvement in the Basel Committee’s projects, the Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission  has  had  the  primary  role  in  discussing  these  matters  with  the  EU 
representatives as part of the Dialogue.  
international  regulatory  organizations,  such  as 
Cooperation on anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing issues 
While not historically part of the U.S.-EU Dialogue, recent anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist 
financing regulatory initiatives on both sides of the Atlantic have had a significant impact on banking 
organizations, many of which operate globally. Because of the potential consequences of differences 
in  regulatory  approaches  in  this  area,  governments  have  been  in  frequent  contact.  In  the  end,  the 
anti-money laundering provisions set forth in the USA PATRIOT Act and those contained in the EU 
Anti-Money Laundering Directive are generally in harmony. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
Part of this can be attributed to the Federal Reserve’s and other U.S. and EU regulatory authorities’ 
mutual  involvement  in  multilateral  policy  efforts  to  improve  regulatory  systems  so  to  prevent  these 
crimes,  such  as  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  and  the  Basel  Committee’s  cross-border  banking 
group.  On  a  practical  level,  supervisory  dialogue  and  cooperation  on  anti-money  laundering  and 
counter-terrorist  financing  also  has  been  necessary  due  to  the  role  the  Federal  Reserve  frequently 
shares with its EU counterparts as “home/host” supervisors of global banking organizations. However, 
this cooperation is typically focused on providing assistance in order to fulfill supervisory mandates, 
not to conduct money laundering or terrorist financing investigations, the authority for which typically 
falls with law enforcement authorities. 
While  Bank  Secrecy  Act  requirements,  including  the  provisions  added  by  the  USA PATRIOT  Act, 
generally do not extend to foreign operations of U.S. banking organizations, the Federal Reserve is 
interested in understanding the global operations of the banking organizations under Federal Reserve 
supervision  as  a  matter  of  safety  and  soundness.  In  this  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  relies  upon 
communication  with  supervisors  from  foreign  jurisdictions,  including  EU  member  states,  in  which 
banking organizations subject to Federal Reserve supervision have material operations. 
Critical  information  obtained  in  the  course  of  an  examination,  which  may  impact  a  banking 
organization’s operations in the foreign jurisdiction, is typically exchanged among relevant supervisors. 
For  example,  when  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  conducts  an  on-site  examination  of  a  foreign  banking 
organization in the United States, and significant problems are identified with regard to its anti-money 
laundering program, the Federal Reserve contacts the home country supervisor to discuss the findings 
and to develop corrective action plans.  
Moreover, the Federal Reserve may provide information to European Union member bank supervisors 
when administrative penalties have been imposed or any other formal enforcement action has been 
taken  against  a  U.S.  banking  organization  (whether  or  not  it  is  related  to  anti-money  laundering 
requirements) if the Federal Reserve believes such information will be important to the host country 
supervisor. The Federal Reserve expects the same from its counterparts.  
the  coming  years,  particularly  with  expansion  of 
Future of the dialogue 
As is evident from the tenor of my remarks, the Federal Reserve has found the Dialogue to be a useful 
vehicle  for  monitoring  the  rapid  regulatory  developments  in  the  European  Union  and  exchanging 
information. We are committed to continuing discussions with the Commission on matters of mutual 
interest, both bilaterally and as part of the financial markets regulatory discussions led by the Treasury 
Department. The regulatory landscape in the European Union is certain to continue to develop rapidly 
in 
the  European  Union,  member  states’ 
implementation  of  the  numerous  FSAP  measures  needed  to  create  a  single  market  for  financial 
services, and the growing integration of our capital markets.  
We at the Federal Reserve have an obligation to keep apprised of these developments on a timely 
basis  in  order  to  fulfill  our  supervisory  function  and  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  for  U.S.  banking 
organizations operating in the European Union. We are confident that continuing the Dialogue in its 
present form would facilitate these objectives.  
We  are  equally  confident  that  other  existing  multilateral  and  bilateral  exchange  mechanisms  are 
appropriate venues for discussing policies and attempting to resolve disputes. In our view, formalizing 
the Dialogue - for example, by elevating it to the principals level or expanding its mandate to include 
policy-setting or dispute resolution functions - would be unnecessary and may impair the Dialogue’s 
utility.  
The Federal Reserve believes that U.S. banks are second to none in their ability to compete when 
they  are  given  the  opportunity  of  operating  on  a  level  playing  field.  Providing  strong  supervision  at 
home and participating in international regulatory and supervisory groups such as the Dialogue helps 
assure that our banking organizations will continue to have such opportunities.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 5
