Leonard Wilson Kamit: The 2003 dividend to the government 
Speech  by  Mr  Leonard  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of 
Papua  New Guinea,  on  the  occasion of  the  payment  of  the  2003  dividend  to  the  government,  Port 
Moresby, 14 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
The  Minister  for  Finance  and  Treasury,  Honourable  Bart  Philemon  M.P,  members  of  the  Board, 
executives of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, ladies and gentlemen. 
The Central Banking Act (CBA) 2000 specifies the objectives and functions of the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea.  Besides  our  core  functions  of  managing  monetary  policy,  supervising  the  financial  system, 
ensuring  an  efficient  payments  system,  promoting  macroeconomic  stability  and  economic  growth  in 
Papua  New  Guinea,  the  Central  Bank  also  has  a  special  relationship  with  its  shareholder,  the 
Government. The Bank is mandated to provide to the Government advice on financial and banking 
matters, and liaise closely with the Treasury Department on macroeconomic matters. Our relationship 
with  the  Government  involves  acting  as  its  banker  and  financial  agent,  as  the  official  depository, 
perform general agency functions, liaise with international financial institutions and provide short-term 
advances  to  meet  cash-flow  mismatches.  The  Bank  of  PNG  has  a  Board  that  ensures  that  the 
Governor  and  management  perform  in  fulfilling  the  duties  so  prescribed  as  well  as  strive  to  make 
profits and declare dividends to its shareholder. 
I am pleased to announce that the Central Bank has a very dynamic and vigilant Board, which ensures 
that  the  Bank’s  policies  and  operations  are  prudent  and  sound.  The  membership  of  the  Board  as 
prescribed under the Central Banking Act has representation from the civil and business community 
with explicit governance responsibilities. The Board members are: 
Mr L Wilson Kamit CBE 
Mr Benny Popoitai MBE 
Rev Samson Lowa 
Mr John Mahuk 
Mr Michael Mayberry 
Mr Patrick Kolta 
Mr Kostas Constantinou OBE 
Mr Robert Igara CMG 
The late Koiari Tarata ISO, CBE 
To ensure that accountability, structural and governance matters were strengthened in the Bank, the 
Board established an Audit Committee. The approved a charter for the Audit Committee covers the 
responsibilities,  role,  purpose  and  authority  of  the  Audit  Committee.  An  internal  Tender  Committee 
was  also  established  to  ensure  that  due  process  is  followed  in  the  assessment  and  allocation  of 
contracts  for  good  and  services  to  be  provided  by  external  parties.  The  Board  also  established  an 
Investment  Committee 
for 
management of foreign exchange reserves held by the Bank of PNG. 
The  Central  Bank  performance  has  been  strengthened  due  to  its  adherence  to  good  governance, 
ensuring  that  procedures  and  policies  are  followed.  The  Board  insists  on  adherence  to  good 
governance  and  management  and  staff  strive  to  maintain  a  high  degree  of  professionalism  and 
integrity in their work. This has been supported by the implementation of new systems in the Bank, 
and on-going capacity building and training of staff. 
Today marks another occasion when the Central Bank pays due to its shareholder, the Government, 
on behalf of the people of Papua New Guinea. This time, paying our dividend to the Government from 
the Bank’s 2003 operating profit. 
 – Governor & Chairman 
 – Deputy Governor, Management & Operations 
 – President, PNG Council of Churches 
 – President, PNG Trade Union Congress 
 – President, PNG Chamber of Commerce 
 – President, PNG Institute of Accountants 
 – Managing Director, Lamana Hotel Ltd 
 – Chief Executive, PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd 
 – Secretary, Department of Treasury (now vacant) 
implementation  of  procedures 
the  development  and 
to  oversee 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
The 2003 dividend 
At the Board meeting on 30 June 2004, the Board endorsed the Bank’s final and audited accounts for 
2003, which was audited by the Auditor General’s office. The audit confirmed that the operating profit 
for 2003 was K68 million, which is the highest level recorded in the Bank’s history. 
The Board also approved that the net profit available for payment as dividend to the Government is 
K50 million after a transfer of K18 million to the reserve funds of the Bank of PNG. This appropriation 
is consistent with the Bank’s policy adopted by the Board in September 2002, to build its reserve funds 
to 10 percent of assets at risk in order to meet any future contingencies that may arise in the Bank’s 
operations.  At  end  December  2003,  the  amount  of  assets  at  risks  was  K2,600  million,  while  the 
balance in the reserve funds was K125 million. The Minister has agreed to these profit appropriations. 
The  2003  operating  profit  resulted  from  the  following  major  sources  of  revenue  and  expenditures 
areas: 
 
  Interest revenue 
Overseas investments 
Domestic gov’t securities 
Others: fees/commission from 
Fx transactions/rent 
Total 
 
   
 2003  
(K mn) 
31.93 
116,15 
11.27 
159.35 
Expenses 
 Interest - gov’t securities 
General administration 
Total 
 
The figures for 2003 in comparison to those of 2002 show that: 
(1) 
55.07 
36.28 
91.35  
2002 
(K mn) 
61.10 
76.94 
16.52 
154.56 
 73.80 
26.70 
100.50 
(2) 
(3) 
Significant  revenue  was  earned  from  domestic  market  operations  due  to  higher  level  of 
Government securities held by the Bank and high interest rates on Treasury bills; 
Interest expenditures were lower compared to 2002, due to limited involvement by the Bank 
in the secondary market for Treasury bills; and 
Generally expenditures were well controlled although significant costs were incurred in the 
areas of: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
IT Management of Systems; 
Building Maintenance; 
Currency Replenishment; and  
Staffing Costs - Salaries and Wages, and Training. 
The way ahead 
Honourable  Minister,  the  Bank’s  2004  financial  results  would  likely  be  affected  by  the  current  low 
interest rate environment and high liquidity situation that we confront since the beginning of the year. 
Whilst we have rebuild our foreign exchange reserves, our interest earnings on them would be also 
affected by the low interest rates overseas and the appreciation of the kina exchange rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
 It is therefore important that this dividend payment should not allow us to rest on our laurels and pat 
ourselves on the back. Whilst we should take time to celebrate achieving such a result, we must also 
be mindful of our on-going duty to the Government and the nation. 
There are still on-going work within the Central Bank to improve the design of our policies and their 
implementation.  We  are  constantly  striving  to  improve  our  operations  to  enhance  efficiency  in 
achieving  our  core  objectives  and  functions  by  using  the  latest  technology,  follow  international  best 
practices, and continue to build our internal capacity. And indeed the brief but very significant visit by 
the Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, Mr. Agustins Carstens, not only provided a strong sign of 
confidence on the Government’s economic management, but also gave us the opportunity to discuss 
further technical assistance in various areas of the Bank’s operations. 
Let me mention some of the major tasks currently undertaken by the Bank: 
• 
Building  up  our  capacity  to  supervise  the  financial  system  including  life  insurance  and 
superannuation fund industries with external assistance; 
Undertaking research work on the Central Bank’s operations and policies; 
Implement  an  electronic  registry  system  to  help  with  our  domestic  trading  of  Government 
securities; 
Review of the Exchange Control Regulations; 
Drafting of the Anti-Money Laundering legislations with Government agencies; and 
Involvement in the implementation of the PNG-ADB Microfinance Project. 
• 
• 
• 
These changes and the on-going work will ensure the Central Bank not only fulfills its mandate to the 
Government  and  people  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  but  also  allows  us  to  be  responsive  to  the 
everchanging vagaries of the world we live in today. I am confident that the Board, management and 
staff of the Central Bank are up to the challenge. 
I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  Board  to  which  I  am  most  privileged  to  be  the 
Chairman;  the  management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  for  the  support  and  commitment  they 
continue to display in their various roles. I also wish to thank the Auditor General and his staff for their 
assistance over the years. 
Honourable Minister with these few remarks, I now present to you the Bank of PNG’s dividend 
for the 2003 financial year of K50 million. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
