Mohamed S Fofana: Managing Sierra Leone’s post-conflict economy 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Mohamed  S  Fofana,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  at  the 
opening  ceremony  of  the  Regional  Forum  on  Economic  and  Financial  Management  for  Legislators, 
Freetown, Sierra Leone, 12 July 2004. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Hon. Minister of Justice, 
Your Excellency, the High Commissioner of The Gambia, 
Hon. Members of National Parliaments of WAIFEM Countries, 
Director General of WAIFEM, 
Directors of the Bank of Sierra Leone, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Facilitators and Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
It is my honour and privilege to extend a hearty welcome to all of you on behalf of the Government and 
people  of  Sierra  Leone,  Governor  JD  Rogers  who  is  unavoidably  absent  today,  the  Board, 
Management  and  staff  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  and  on  my  own  behalf,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
opening  of  the  Regional  Forum  on  Economic  and  Financial  Management  for  Legislators 
organized by WAIFEM. As host, I would like to urge you to take time out of your crowded programme 
to visit Freetown and behold the many attractions of this rejuvenated city. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, permit me to briefly dwell on the state of the West African Economy. 
The  sub-region  came  into  the  new  millennium  with  a  combined  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  of 
US$ 80 billion,  representing  about  10  percent  of  the  GDP  of  Spain  and  against  a  backdrop  of  high 
unemployment, it is not surprising that income per capita averages 386 US dollars for our sub-region - 
one  of  the  lowest  in  the  world.  In  addition,  virtually  all  the  countries  are  burdened  by  a  huge  debt 
overhang.  Indeed,  only  two  of  the  15  countries  of  ECOWAS  are  not  classified  among  the  highly 
indebted poor countries (HIPC). 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  do  not  intend  to  spoil  your  day  with  depressing  statistics  about  the  economic  performance  of  the 
sub-region as this would be tantamount to showing you only one side of the coin. The more pleasant 
face  of  this  coin  shows  a  sub-region  parading  some  of  the  world’s  leading  exporters  of  crude  oil, 
diamonds and gold, as well as abundant maritime resources. Many of our countries also perform well 
in the global market for other commodities, including cocoa, cotton and groundnuts. However, when 
the  abundant  resource-endowment  of  the  sub-region  is  set  against  its  pandemic  poverty,  we  see  a 
development paradox that challenges scholars and policy makers alike. 
Several  reasons  have  been  advanced  for  this  state  of  affairs.  They  include  inappropriate 
macroeconomic  policies,  weak  institutions,  weak  executive  capacity,  weak  legal  institutions,  and 
severe  exogenous  and  endogenous  factors.  Time  will  not  permit  me  to  dwell  on  the  relative 
contribution of each of these factors to the overall poor economic performance. Suffice it to say that 
efforts  to  address  the  resultant  problems  underpin  the  current  far-reaching  reforms  undertaken  by 
governments in the sub-region. These include financial sector reforms, public sector reforms and the 
privatization of public enterprises. 
Following  several  years  of  persistent  reforms,  some  modest  improvement  has  been  registered  in 
recent  times.  Real  GDP  growth  rates  of  most  countries  in  the  sub-region  averaged  4.3  percent  in 
2003, compared with 3.7 and 1.9 percent in 2001 and 2002 respectively. The average fiscal deficit to 
GDP ratio improved significantly, from 4.2 percent in 2002 to 0.7 percent in 2003, although most of the 
economies  remained  fiscally  fragile.  Inflation  rate  accelerated  marginally  to  6.0  percent  from 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
5.5 percent in 2002. Overall, the external sector of the sub-region improved somewhat as the current 
account position recovered from a deficit to GDP ratio of 4.3 percent in 2002 to 1.7 percent in 2003, 
driven by the significant turnaround in the export growth of 4.5 percent in contrast to the decline of 
3.0 percent in the preceding year. 
Managing a post-conflict economy 
Here in Sierra Leone, the government has stayed the course in its reform programme with an accent 
on reconstruction and rehabilitation. Helped by the quick repossession of the agricultural and mining 
belts by government, real GDP grew steadily from 5.4 to 6.6 and to 7.0 percent in 2001, 2002 and 
2003 respectively. The marked recovery in the export of cocoa and diamonds contributed significantly 
to GDP growth. For instance, the volume of cocoa exports more than doubled from 1,178 metric tons 
in 2002 to 2,752 metric tons in 2003, while diamond exports as valued by the Government Gold and 
Diamond Office (GGDO) increased by 155 thousand carats or by over 44 per cent in 2003. 
Not surprisingly, the problems associated with fiscal management in a post-conflict environment have 
exerted  enormous  pressures  on  government  finances.  In  an  effort  to  strengthen  its  revenue  base, 
government  has  established  the  National  Revenue  Authority  to  unify  the  Income  Tax  and  Customs 
and  Excise  departments  into  a  single  unit.  As  a  result,  there  was  a  significant  increase  of 
20.52 percent in domestic revenue collection in 2003. 
Nevertheless, the fiscal out-turn, excluding grants, resulted in an overall deficit of 16.7 percent of GDP. 
This represents a 3 percentage point reduction over the level recorded in the preceding year. As a 
result  of  the  high  credit  expansion  to  both  Government  and  the  Private  Sector,  there  was  a  large 
injection of liquidity into the economy as broad money growth accelerated to 21.9 percent against the 
planned target of 14 percent. Consequently, inflation reared its ugly face in 2003, crossing the double-
digit threshold for the first time in five years. 
The case for a legislature/executive partnership 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am informed that this is the third in the series of special Forums for Legislators and senior officials of 
the executive arm of government organized by WAIFEM. I want to commend WAIFEM for this initiative 
which has become an important platform for policy dialogue between the two arms of government and 
more  importantly,  strengthening  the  capacity  of  the  parliaments  in  the  vital  areas  of  economic  and 
financial  management.  It  is  in  the  realization  of  the  useful  role  of  such  platforms  in  forging  greater 
understanding  among  key  stakeholders  in  the  policy  process  that  the  Committee  of  Governors  of 
Central Banks of ECOWAS member countries called for the reactivation of the periodic Consultative 
Forum of Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors of ECOWAS countries at its meeting in 
Dakar, Senegal on June 16, 2004. 
Looking at the pertinent issues to be dealt with in the course of your deliberations and the calibre of 
resource persons to facilitate the process, I have no reason to doubt that you are in for a round of 
stimulating  and  fruitful  deliberations.  Permit  me  therefore,  to  anticipate  that  you  will  come  up  with 
concrete  and  implementable  proposals  to  facilitate  a  harmonious  working  relationship  between  the 
legislature and the executive in pursuance of their shared economic management objective. 
Towards regional monetary integration 
This has become particularly urgent in the light of the need to ensure that West African countries stay 
the course in their commitment to achieve economic convergence. But as you are aware, virtually all 
the countries have found it difficult to achieve and sustain, over time, the required level of economic 
performance under the convergence criteria. The persistent slippages do not augur well for the July 
2005  deadline  for  the  launch  of  the  Second  Monetary  Zone.  In  this  regard,  it  is  imperative  that  all 
hands be put on deck in pursuing the monetary integration project. As legislators, your involvement in 
enacting the enabling legislation that would form the legal underpinning for the policies, programmes 
and  institutional  framework  for  the  monetary  union  will  be  critical.  In  this  connection,  the  national 
parliaments should set up as a matter of urgency, research units comprising economists and financial 
experts to provide the requisite professional back-stopping for them. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Once more, I welcome you all to Freetown and wish you a pleasant stay. It is my singular honour and 
privilege to declare open the third Regional Forum on Economic and Financial Management for 
Legislators. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
