Adrian Orr: Excerpt on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s exchange rate 
intervention proposal 
Address  by  Mr  Adrian  Orr,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  as  part  of  a 
presentation to the Meat New Zealand Annual Conference in Whangarei, 25 March 2004. 
 I wish to make a few comments about the Reserve Bank’s proposal to have the capacity to intervene 
in the foreign exchange market. These comments relate to what the proposal is, what it is not, and 
what it implies for business people. 
There are two legs to the Bank’s foreign exchange intervention objectives which are likely to be used 
in very different circumstances.  
First, the Bank has a long standing objective to restore order to any actual or potential dysfunction in 
the  foreign  exchange  market.  If,  for  some  exceptional  and  disturbing  event,  liquidity  in  the  New 
Zealand  dollar  exchange  rate  dried  up,  the  Bank  would  be  prepared  to  support  liquidity  until  some 
sense  of  normality  returned.  This  objective  is  not  about  bailing-out  speculators,  or  facilitating  ‘hot 
money’ flows. It is about ensuring that the foreign exchange market continues to function in an orderly 
manner  and  essential  transactions  can  occur.  To  meet  this  objective,  the  Bank  currently  holds  and 
manages a portfolio of liquid, high quality, foreign currency assets that would be used in exceptional 
times.  
The Bank, last month as part of its ongoing legal commitment to advise the Minister of Finance on 
foreign  exchange  matters,  recommended  that  the  Bank  hold  more  foreign  currency  reserves  as 
‘insurance’.  More  reserves  appear  necessary  because  the  foreign  exchange  market  globally  has 
grown  significantly  since  1984  -  when  the  Bank’s  reserves  level  was  largely  set  -  as  has  the  New 
Zealand economy. While it is an unlikely event for a well managed economy with a floating exchange 
rate, the New Zealand economy can not afford to face a situation of a non-convertible currency. Our 
foreign currency reserves need to be sufficient to ensure such a situation has a very low probability. 
The Minister of Finance has agreed with our advice and will be moving to increase significantly the 
level of foreign currency reserves the Bank will manage for such ‘insurance’ purposes. 
In  addition,  and  again  as  part  of  the  Bank’s  ongoing  legal  commitment  to  advise  the  Minister  of 
Finance  on  foreign  exchange  matters,  we  recommended  having  the  capacity  to  intervene  in  the 
foreign exchange market to affect the level of the exchange rate in certain circumstances. That is, we 
would contemplate intervening if the exchange rate is exceptionally and unjustifiably high or low, and 
we think an opportunity exists that would ensure such intervention was effective.  
By exceptionally high or low, we mean when the exchange rate is nearing its cyclical extremes, as has 
been seen  in  New  Zealand  over recent  decades  on a  3  to  5  year  cycle.  By  unjustifiable, we  mean 
when the exchange rate has moved well in excess of any relevant economic fundamentals, such as 
relative productivity, commodity prices, growth, or inflation.  
It  should  be  noted  that  most  of  the  time  a  floating  exchange  rate,  like  New  Zealand’s,  performs 
important  economic  functions  such  as  acting  as  a  buffer  against  shocks  to  the  terms  of  trade  or 
relative business cycle pressure. We believe our floating exchange rate serves New Zealand well. 
However,  at  times,  the  exchange  rate  has  varied  by  far  more  than  can  be  justified  by  relevant 
economic fundamentals. It is at these exceptional and unjustifiable levels of the exchange rate that the 
Bank would consider buying or selling foreign currencies for NZ dollars in an effort to influence the 
level of the exchange rate. There is no mechanical rule underlying this new objective - such decisions 
are made in context. 
An  important  part  of  the  Bank’s  consideration  to  intervene  would  be  the  dynamics  of  the  foreign 
exchange  market  at  the  time  and  whether  we  feel  our  actions  will  be  effective.  In  other  words,  the 
Bank  would  intervene  at  opportune  times,  not  when  the  currency’s  direction  is  being  dominated  by 
strong international trends or consensus opinions.  
We do not intend wasting our reserves by defending a particular exchange rate level, nor do we intend 
standing in the way of strong market trends or beliefs. We also do not expect to attract speculators 
who think they can ‘take the Bank on’. If we are not defending a particular level of the exchange rate, 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
we  have  no  mechanical  rule,  and  we  intervene  consistent  with  our  monetary  policy  objectives  at 
opportune times, then it is unclear what nature of speculator would be attracted by our actions. 
By  way  of  example,  we  are  not  recommending  a  Bank  of  Japan  style  intervention,  where  they  use 
significant funds with the aim of influencing the long-term trend of the exchange rate, or by standing in 
the path of strong trends in the exchange rate. And we are certainly not recommending defending a 
particular  level  of  an  exchange  rate  that  is  clearly  over  or  under-valued.  This  was  the  case,  for 
example, in many East Asian economies during the late-1990s Asian financial crisis.  
Instead, the Bank believes strongly in the virtues of a floating exchange rate within a well managed 
economy. What we are recommending is intervening when the moment is justified and opportune, with 
the outcome of, at best, trimming the extreme tops and bottoms of the NZ dollar exchange rate cycle.  
Such an intervention strategy would be consistent with the Bank’s primary objective of achieving and 
maintaining price stability. Hence, foreign exchange intervention can be viewed as another instrument 
for  the  Bank,  consistent  with  achieving  our  monetary  policy  objectives,  albeit  a  very  secondary 
instrument  to  our  most powerful  one of  the Official Cash Rate.  Intervention  would be considered in 
reasonably  infrequent  circumstances,  that  is,  when  the  exchange  rate  level  is  exceptional  and 
unjustified by economic fundamentals, and when we believe an opportunity to be effective exists.  
We do not anticipate having a substantial or large impact on the level of the exchange rate. However, 
we believe there will be positive benefits that exceed any of the relatively small and manageable risks 
of  such  a  policy.  Given  the  prominence  of  the  level  and  cyclical  variability  of  the  exchange  rate  in 
investment, output, employment, and inflation decisions, even a small impact from intervention on the 
exchange rate can have widely dispersed economic benefits.  
The Bank’s advantage in this intervention strategy is not its ‘weight of money’. Instead it is the Bank’s 
investment  horizon,  information,  and  alignment  of  policy  objectives  that  brings  advantages  and 
opportunities. To be successful, we need to be in the business for the long-term. This is why we have 
appealed for multi-party political support of the policy. 
That  said,  the  Bank  already  has  the  ability  -  legal  and  operational  -  to  intervene  in  the  foreign 
exchange market, consistent with achieving and maintaining its primary goal of price stability. What we 
have  requested  from  the  Minister  is  additional  foreign  reserves  for  intervention  purposes,  over  and 
above the minimum we recommended for avoiding dysfunction. In addition, we have requested that 
the  Government  inject  additional  capital  into  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  so  that  we  can  absorb  any 
potential  temporary,  unrealised,  marked-to-market  losses  in  our  foreign  exchange  positions.  This  is 
prudent management. 
Such an intervention strategy, over the relevant medium-term horizon, should even prove profitable or, 
at the least, reduce the cost of holding foreign currency reserves for avoiding market dysfunction.  
The  Bank’s  intention  to  buy  foreign  currencies  (sell  NZ  dollars)  when  the  exchange  rate  is 
exceptionally and unjustifiably high, and to sell foreign currencies (buy NZ dollars) when the exchange 
rate is significantly and unjustifiably low, makes good portfolio management sense - as long as we are 
in the business for the long-term. On average, over the medium term we would anticipate having no 
exposure to foreign exchange swings.  
The Reserve Bank’s management of foreign reserves is a long-term business. It is very common for 
central banks internationally to manage their foreign currency reserves in such a manner - just as any 
fund manager or business in the game for the long-term would do. 
Our assessment as to the benefits of foreign exchange intervention of the nature outlined is the result 
of considerable analysis over several years. This includes analysing experiences internationally, and 
academic and empirical literature. It is not a knee-jerk reaction to the recent level of the exchange rate, 
nor  a  response  to  political  pressure.  We  take  our  operational  independence  seriously,  and  for  this 
reason we have recommended that this new intervention policy operates under the Bank’s own legal 
purposes, so that any intervention decisions are made within the Bank, and are consistent with our 
primary  objective  of  achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability.  We  have  not  recommended  such  an 
intervention capacity lightly. 
As part of our operational independence, we stand prepared to be held accountable for the outcomes, 
as we do with monetary policy in general. 
But,  exporters,  importers  and  anybody  else  dealing  with  foreign  exchange,  need  to  be  clear  that 
ongoing and considerable cyclical variability in the exchange rate will continue even if our interventions 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
are  successful.  Our  intervention  policy  is  talking  about,  at  best,  knocking  the  extreme  tops  and 
bottoms off the NZ dollar exchange rate cycle. By far the bulk of foreign exchange risk management 
responsibility remains in the hands of the businesses and individuals within NZ. We are not offering a 
panacea to these cycle, we are simply saying we think we can make a small positive difference that 
makes sense. 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
