Nout Wellink: Business cycles and foreign direct investment 
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements,  at  the  Chamber  Luncheon  of  the  American  Chamber  of  Commerce  in 
the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 23 September 2004. 
 I  feel  honoured  to  speak  to  this  distinguished  group  of  people  today.  To  the  general  public  in  the 
Netherlands, the ‘AmCham’ may not be a well-known organization. However, the list of its members 
proves that its goals and purposes have wide support in the Dutch business community. As we have 
known  since  centuries,  foreign  investment  and  trade  between  countries  enhance  welfare  in  both 
countries, and it is vital to sustain and promote this in a globalizing world economy. Your active role in 
this process is highly appreciated. 
Traditionally, Dutch-American trading and investment relations have been extensive. In particular, on 
average  around  a  quarter  of  outward  Dutch  direct  investment  flows  is  directed  towards  the  United 
States.  Over  the  last  ten  years  mutual  direct  investment  flows  have  increased.  This  increase  was 
similar to the global increase in foreign direct investment that started in the 1980s. In 2000, the Dutch 
foreign  direct  investment  position  in  the  US  had  a  value  of  around  20%  of  Dutch  GDP,  which  is  a 
quarter of the total Dutch foreign investment position. Fifteen years earlier, in 1985, this value was just 
12%. 
In my talk this afternoon, I will further explore the effects of increased direct investment exposures. In 
particular, their effects on the behaviour of international business cycles. I will start by elaborating on 
two  observations  concerning  business  cycles.  First,  in  contrast  to  the  past,  when  business  cycles 
generally became more moderate over the longer term, the Dutch business cycle has become more 
volatile recently. Moreover, Dutch and US business cycles have become more synchronized. 
Let me elaborate on the increased volatility of the Dutch business cycle first. According to our current 
knowledge, the Dutch economy has passed the trough of the cycle around the end of last year. Last 
year,  GDP  growth  reached  its  lowest  rate  in  the  past  twenty  years,  at  a  negative  rate  of  0.9%. 
Compared  to  other  European  countries,  our  growth  rate  was  exceptionally  low;  more  than  one 
percentage point below the average. This low performance was in strong contrast with performance in 
the second half of the nineties. In those years Dutch GDP growth was consistently higher than the 
euro  area  average.  This  illustrates  that  the  Dutch  economy  has  acquired  a  kind  of  boom-bust 
character, which indicates a more volatile cyclical growth pattern. Another indication is given by the 
rise in the standard deviation of growth rates. This measure of volatility has almost doubled over the 
last four years, compared to the four years before. For a significant part, the comparative strength of 
the upturn and the severity of the downturn in the Netherlands can be attributed to the open character 
of the Dutch economy. The spectacular growth of world trade since 1995 and the declining exchange 
rate  of  the  euro  have  boosted  exports.  The  downturn  that  followed  had  an  opposite  and  -  again  - 
comparatively strong effect on the Dutch economy. However, more can be said about the latest Dutch 
business cycle - I will return to that later. First, we should take a view from a longer term, more global 
perspective. 
Although  the  volatility  of  economic  growth  during  the  latest  Dutch  business  cycle  was  higher  than 
before, the long term, global pattern is very different. Since a long time, at least since 1960, but even 
more pronounced since 1980, the volatility of GDP growth [measured by the standard deviation] has 
shown  a  downward  trend.  In  other  words,  from  a  longer  term  perspective,  the  business  cycle  has 
become more stable. All G7 economies, as well as the Dutch economy, have become more stable. 
This  increasing  stabilization  has  been  labelled  by  economists  as  ‘the  Great  Moderation’,  especially 
with respect to the US economy. To give a quantitative illustration, the standard deviation of quarterly 
growth rates in the Netherlands was 2.4% in the 1980s; over the period since 1990 it has fallen to 
1.4%. Similar figures have been found for the US. 
Extensive research has been devoted to an explanation for this moderation of the business cycle over 
the past twenty years. There are two explanations which I would like to focus on in this speech. 
The first  explanation  that  has  been  proposed  is  structural  change.  This  explanation  suggests  that 
there have  been  improvements  in  the ability  of  modern  economies  to absorb  shocks. For example, 
due  to  improved  methods  of  inventory  management,  there  are  less  severe  fluctuations  in  inventory 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 1
stocks.  Other  examples  are  deregulation  of  financial  markets,  and  the  improved  resilience  and 
strength  of  the  financial  sector.  Financial  institutions  are  more  able  to  diversify  their  risks,  both 
internationally  and  among  types  of  financial  products.  Therefore,  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  private 
sector has become more sophisticated, enhancing the ability of firms to smooth their activity during the 
business cycle. Second, economic research convincingly shows that the number and size of shocks 
hitting economies has diminished over the past twenty years. In this sense, the observed moderation 
of  business  cycles  since  the  1980s  can  be  seen  as  the  result  of  good  luck.  However,  as  a 
consequence, it is possible that we may experience an increase in volatility again, if we run out of luck. 
Besides volatility, there is a second characteristic of recent business cycles that deserves attention: 
international co-movement - or synchronization - of cycles. Business cycles in modern economies tend 
to move together. For example, the rate of correlation between the US and Dutch growth rates varies 
between 0.4 and 0.5, since 1960. An extensively studied question has been whether there has been 
an increase in the amount of synchronization of business cycles. In general, the available evidence 
indicates that there is no overall tendency towards closer synchronization or co-movement, over the 
past quarter century. However, at a more detailed level, the picture is different. There are cases of 
increased synchronization within groups or pairs of countries. For example, within the group of euro 
area countries, synchronization has become closer since the nineteen-eighties. Moreover, in the latest 
cycle, correlation between US and Dutch growth rates has increased significantly, to a value of 0.65. 
From this, we may conclude that Dutch and US growth rates have become more synchronized in the 
most recent cycle. 
In general, there are two sources for co-movement of economies. First, it is clear that general shocks 
to the economy, which affect many countries, lead to correlated national economic developments. This 
reflects  a  common  reaction  of  more  or  less  comparable  countries  to  the  same  exogenous  factor. 
Examples  are  energy  price  shocks,  or  major  developments  in  technology.  Second,  in  addition  to 
common  shocks,  country-specific  shocks  are  important,  to  the  extent  that  they  spill  over  to  other 
countries. Spill overs of shocks require economic linkages between countries, like trade and financial 
flows.  Hence,  stronger  linkages  raise  the  probability  of  co-movement.  For  example,  an  increase  in 
economic  activity  in  one  country  boosts  activity  in  its  trading  partners  because  of  higher  foreign 
demand. 
More recently, another transmission channel between countries has increased in importance: foreign 
direct investment, or FDI. Several factors have contributed to the strong increase of FDI flows since 
the mid-nineties, like the liberalization of capital flows, reduced trade barriers and the widespread use 
of ICT-technologies. 
Interestingly,  results  from  empirical  analysis  at  DNB  have  shown  that  countries  with  comparatively 
large bilateral FDI positions tend to have a higher correlation of output growth rates. In other words, 
FDI may intensify co-movement of business cycles. In particular, this appears to be the case in the 
period 1995-2001. 
There are two ways in which FDI acts as a transmission channel for economic shocks, depending on 
where  the  shock  occurs:  in  the  home  country  or  the  host  -  the  foreign  -  country.  First,  shocks  in  a 
foreign investor’s home country may affect its financial position at home, and force it to cutback its 
activity  in  host  countries  as  well.  Second,  due  to  shocks  in  a  host  country,  the  value  of  a  firm’s 
investments abroad may be affected. Consequently, that firm’s net worth at home is affected as well. 
Net worth, in turn, is related to financing costs, so it is obvious that a reduction of the value of foreign 
investments may reduce investments in the home country, because of higher costs. 
Let me try to integrate what I have said so far. On the one hand, international economic linkages, like 
trade and FDI flows, have become stronger and more sophisticated. In itself this would lead to more 
co-movement (or synchronization) of business cycles, because common and country-specific shocks 
are transferred more ‘effectively’ and rapidly between countries. For example, accounting problems in 
the  US  not  only  had  national  effects,  but  were  also  transferred  to  European  countries  through 
channels within multinational firms (like Ahold and Anderson). 
On the other hand, there are signs that the amount and strength of common shocks has decreased. I 
mentioned this earlier as an explanation for the global moderation of business cycles. As a result, the 
enhanced transmission channel for country-specific shocks has been compensated for by smaller and 
less  frequent  common  international  shocks.  This  explains  why,  on  a  global  scale,  co-movement  of 
cycles has remained fairly stable. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2004
Having discussed the global picture, I will return to the Netherlands now. As I said, the Dutch business 
cycle has become more volatile recently, as well as more synchronized with the US. Both observations 
are  in  contrast  to  the  global  picture  of  more  moderate  cycles  with  stable  synchronization.  In  my 
opinion, these atypical features of the Dutch business cycle can be explained in the terms that I used 
to describe the global picture. First, the Dutch economy has been subject to some especially powerful 
country-specific shocks. An example is the exceptionally favourable housing market development in 
the nineteen-nineties, which had a positive effect on private consumption. Later on, consumption has 
been negatively affected by political developments, which reduced consumer confidence significantly. 
Besides,  the  size  of  the  external  sector  and  the  large  FDI  positions  make  the  Dutch  economy 
particularly sensitive to international developments, especially from the US. This is also reflected in the 
stock market - our own research indicates that the Dutch stock market is traditionally highly correlated 
with the US stock market, in comparison to other European countries. In terms of FDI, the US is by far 
the most important partner of the Netherlands. As a percentage of GDP, Dutch investments in the US 
are larger than those of any other European country. Hence it is no surprise that some international 
and  US  shocks  have  had  a  sizeable  effect  on  the  Dutch  economy,  like  the  sharp  correction  in 
international  stock  markets  in  2000,  as  well  as  the  geopolitical  tensions  of  the  recent  years.  As  a 
consequence, the Dutch business cycle was more volatile and moved more closely together with the 
US economy than did business cycles in other countries. 
It is challenging now to take a look ahead. What do these observations, that I have sketched here, 
imply  for  global  business  cycles  in  the  near  future?  Will  business  cycles  remain  moderate  and  will 
co-movement remain stable? Let me try to discuss some implications from my remarks so far. 
One  implication  to  take  note  of,  is  related  to  the  vulnerability  of  economies  to  international  shocks. 
Several studies have concluded that business cycles have moderated, because the amount and size 
of  shocks  have  diminished.  However,  this  might  not  continue  indefinitely  -  we  may  run  out  of  luck. 
Major  international  shocks  could  occur  again,  significantly  enhancing  international  business  cycle 
volatility  and  co-movement.  In  fact,  we  have  recently  experienced  that  terrorism  and  geopolitical 
tensions may act as a shock to the economy, for example through global shocks in confidence levels 
or through disruptions of energy supply. An obvious result could be a disruptive shock to oil prices. In 
this  respect,  the  results  of  a  recent  study  on  oil  price  shocks  are  striking.  It  found  that  an  oil  price 
shock that is related to political factors and supply side conditions has more severe implications than 
other types of oil price shocks, such as shocks related to demand conditions. Since 1984, an oil price 
shock of this type has not occurred, except in the past half year. 
Were  such  a  large  international  shock  to  materialize,  one  should  be  aware  that  the  partial 
consequences  for  the  exposed  countries  can  be  larger  than  in  the  past.  This  is  because  the 
transmission  channels  of  shocks,  such  as  FDI  and  trade  flows,  have  increased  over  time  and  will 
probably  continue  to  do  so.  However,  this  is  not  to  say  that  we  should  aim  at  reducing  these 
international linkages. Let me elaborate on this. 
First,  one  should  not  forget  that  international  trade  and  other  linkages  may  transmit  economic 
disturbances,  but  have  beneficial  effects  as  well.  FDI  has  become  an  important  mechanism  for  the 
transfer  of  technology,  including  management  techniques.  In  this  way,  FDI  supports  a  smooth 
adoption of technologies that can make an economy less vulnerable to cyclical factors. For example, 
scale economies may drive multinational firms to apply state-of-the-art ICT-technology or management 
models in different countries. I will not conceal that there also have been mistakes in this respect - 
there have been clear cases of overinvestment during the global boom in mergers and acquisitions. 
However, there is reliable empirical evidence that technology transfers through FDI have stimulated 
the rate of technological progress. 
Second, the negative effect of international shocks may be kept in check by ongoing improvements in 
the resilience of the financial sector. This month, the IMF reported (in its WEO) that the global financial 
system is in its strongest shape over the past three years. 
Finally, there are structural changes in the economy that indicate that firms are becoming more flexible 
and  are  less  affected  by  cyclical  developments.  Let  me  illustrate  this  by  focussing  on  the  Dutch 
economy; however, similar developments have been found for the US economy. 
A  remarkable  development  can  be  observed  in  the  sectoral  pattern  of  employment  changes.  More 
than  before,  sectors  or  industries  may  be  denoted  as  either  structurally  shrinking  or  structurally 
growing; independent of the state of the business cycle. Less than before, industries that shrink in a 
downturn  can  expect  to  grow  again  in  the  next  upturn  of  the  cycle.  Consequently,  employees  are 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 3
made redundant in sectors which are subject to structural shrinking, and must find new jobs in growth 
sectors. During the 1995-2002 cycle, these sectors accounted for 96% of employment, as compared 
to  71%  during  the  1987-1994  cycle.  This  changing  pattern  of  sectoral  employment  indicates  that 
labour  and  product  markets  have  become  more  dynamic  and  flexible.  A  flexible  labour  market  is 
conducive  to  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  long  term.  Moreover,  the  ongoing  changes  in  the 
sectoral  composition  of  employment  indicate  that  companies  are  forced  to  carry  out  ongoing 
restructuring, for example, as a result of increasing competition and innovation. 
Let me conclude here. Every business cycle is unique. However, we may try to find patterns and take 
lessons from the past and from other countries. In summary, over the long run, business cycles tend to 
be more moderate and co-movement appears to be less strong than we would expect. Most of this 
can be explained by the absence of international shocks to the economy. However, since economies 
have increasingly become integrated, the risks of disturbances spilling over to other countries seem to 
be greater than ever. On the other hand, as I have indicated, modern economies are becoming more 
resilient at the same time. This may be viewed as a positive effect of increased economic linkages. It 
is my opinion that this effect should be encouraged; and I am convinced that the task of improving 
economic  linkages  is  well  dedicated  to  the  AmCham.  Looking  at  the  current  business  cycle,  I  am 
convinced that the worst part is behind us now. Most indicators point to a sustained recovery of the US 
and the world economy. As we emerge from this downturn it will become clear that the Dutch economy 
has experienced a volatile business cycle and that strong linkages to the US economy can be a great 
advantage.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2004
