Ben S Bernanke: The great moderation 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington DC, 20 February 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 One  of  the  most  striking  features  of  the  economic  landscape  over  the  past  twenty  years  or  so  has 
been a substantial decline in macroeconomic volatility. In a recent article, Olivier Blanchard and John 
Simon (2001) documented that the variability of quarterly growth in real output (as measured by its 
standard deviation) has declined by half since the mid-1980s, while the variability of quarterly inflation 
has declined by about two thirds.1 Several writers on the topic have dubbed this remarkable decline in 
the variability of both output and inflation “the Great Moderation”. Similar declines in the volatility of 
output and inflation occurred at about the same time in other major industrial countries, with the recent 
exception  of  Japan,  a  country  that  has  faced  a  distinctive  set  of  economic  problems  in  the  past 
decade. 
Reduced macroeconomic volatility has numerous benefits. Lower volatility of inflation improves market 
functioning, makes economic planning easier, and reduces the resources devoted to hedging inflation 
risks. Lower volatility of output tends to imply more stable employment and a reduction in the extent of 
economic uncertainty confronting households and firms. The reduction in the volatility of output is also 
closely associated with the fact that recessions have become less frequent and less severe.2 
Why has macroeconomic volatility declined? Three types of explanations have been suggested for this 
dramatic  change;  for  brevity,  I  will  refer  to  these  classes  of  explanations  as  structural  change, 
improved macroeconomic policies, and good luck. Explanations focusing on structural change suggest 
that changes in economic institutions, technology, business practices, or other structural features of 
the  economy  have  improved  the  ability  of  the  economy  to  absorb  shocks.  Some  economists  have 
argued, for example, that improved management of business inventories, made possible by advances 
in  computation  and  communication,  has  reduced  the  amplitude  of  fluctuations  in  inventory  stocks, 
which in earlier decades played an important role in cyclical fluctuations.3 The increased depth and 
sophistication of financial markets, deregulation in many industries, the shift away from manufacturing 
toward services, and increased openness to trade and international capital flows are other examples 
of structural changes that may have increased macroeconomic flexibility and stability. 
The second class of explanations focuses on the arguably improved performance of macroeconomic 
policies,  particularly  monetary  policy.  The  historical  pattern  of  changes  in  the  volatilities  of  output 
growth and inflation gives some credence to the idea that better monetary policy may have been a 
major  contributor  to  increased  economic  stability.  As  Blanchard  and  Simon  (2001)  show,  output 
volatility and inflation volatility have had a strong tendency to move together, both in the United States 
and other industrial countries. In particular, output volatility in the United States, at a high level in the 
immediate  postwar  era,  declined  significantly  between  1955  and  1970,  a  period  in  which  inflation 
volatility was low. Both output volatility and inflation volatility rose significantly in the 1970s and early 
1980s and, as I have noted, both fell sharply after about 1984. Economists generally agree that the 
1970s, the period of highest volatility in both output and inflation, was also a period in which monetary 
                                                      
1   Kim and Nelson (1999) and McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) were among the first to note the reduction in the volatility of 
output. Kim, Nelson, and Piger (2003) show that the reduction in the volatility of output is quite broad based, affecting many 
sectors and aspects of the economy. Warnock and Warnock (2000) find a parallel decline in the volatility of employment, 
especially in goods-producing sectors.   
2   The United States has experienced only two relatively mild recessions since 1984, compared with four recessions - two of 
them  quite  deep  -  in  the  fifteen  years  before  1984.  Indeed,  according  to  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research’s 
monthly business cycle chronology, which covers the period since the Civil War, the 120-month expansion of the 1990s was 
the longest recession-free period the United States has enjoyed, and the 92-month expansion of the 1980s was the third 
longest such period. 
3   McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) and Kahn, McConnell, and Perez-Quiros (2002) make this argument. McCarthy and 
Zakrajsek (2003) provide an overview and evaluation of this literature; they conclude that better inventory management has 
reinforced the trend toward lower volatility but is not the ultimate cause. Willis (2003) discusses structural changes that may 
have contributed to reduced variability of inflation. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 1
policy  performed  quite  poorly,  relative  to  both  earlier  and  later  periods  (Romer  and  Romer,  2002).4 
Few disagree that monetary policy has played a large part in stabilizing inflation, and so the fact that 
output volatility has declined in parallel with inflation volatility, both in the United States and abroad, 
suggests that monetary policy may have helped moderate the variability of output as well. 
The  third  class  of  explanations  suggests  that  the  Great  Moderation  did  not  result  primarily  from 
changes in the structure of the economy or improvements in policymaking but occurred because the 
shocks  hitting  the  economy  became  smaller  and  more  infrequent.  In  other  words,  the  reduction  in 
macroeconomic volatility we have lately enjoyed is largely the result of good luck, not an intrinsically 
more stable economy or better policies. Several prominent studies using distinct empirical approaches 
have  provided  support  for  the  good-luck  hypothesis  (Ahmed,  Levin,  and  Wilson,  2002;  Stock  and 
Watson, 2003). 
Explanations of complicated phenomena are rarely clear cut and simple, and each of the three classes 
of  explanations  I  have  described  probably  contains  elements  of  truth.  Nevertheless,  sorting  out  the 
relative importance of these explanations is of more than purely historical interest. Notably, if the Great 
Moderation was largely the result of good luck rather than a more stable economy or better policies, 
then we have no particular reason to expect the relatively benign economic environment of the past 
twenty  years  to  continue.  Indeed,  if  the  good-luck  hypothesis  is  true,  it  is  entirely  possible  that  the 
variability of output growth and inflation in the United States may, at some point, return to the levels of 
the  1970s.  If  instead  the  Great  Moderation  was  the  result  of  structural  change  or  improved 
policymaking, then the increase in stability should be more likely to persist, assuming of course that 
policymakers do not forget the lessons of history. 
My view is that improvements in monetary policy, though certainly not the only factor, have probably 
been an important source of the Great Moderation. In particular, I am not convinced that the decline in 
macroeconomic volatility of the past two decades was primarily the result of good luck, as some have 
argued, though I am sure good luck had its part to play as well. In the remainder of my remarks, I will 
provide some support for the “improved-monetary-policy” explanation for the Great Moderation. I will 
not spend much time on the other two classes of explanations, not because they are uninteresting or 
unimportant, but because my time is limited and the structural change and good-luck hypotheses have 
been  extensively  discussed  elsewhere.5  Before  proceeding,  I  should  note  that  my  views  are  not 
necessarily  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board  of  Governors  or  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee. 
The Taylor curve and the variability tradeoff 
Let us begin by asking what economic theory has to say about the relationship of output volatility and 
inflation volatility. To keep matters simple, I will make the strong (but only temporary!) assumption that 
monetary policymakers have an accurate understanding of the economy and that they choose policies 
to promote the best economic performance possible, given their economic objectives. I also assume 
for the moment that the structure of the economy and the distribution of economic shocks are stable 
and unchanging. Under these baseline assumptions, macroeconomists have obtained an interesting 
and  important  result.  Specifically,  standard  economic  models  imply  that,  in  the  long  run,  monetary 
policymakers can reduce the volatility of inflation only by allowing greater volatility in output growth, 
and vice versa. In other words, if monetary policies are chosen optimally and the economic structure is 
held constant, there exists a long-run tradeoff between volatility in output and volatility in inflation. 
The ultimate source of this long-run tradeoff is the existence of shocks to aggregate supply. Consider 
the canonical example of an aggregate supply shock, a sharp rise in oil prices caused by disruptions 
to foreign sources of supply. According to conventional analysis, an increase in the price of oil raises 
the  overall  price  level  (a  temporary  burst  in  inflation)  while  depressing  output  and  employment. 
Monetary policymakers are therefore faced with a difficult choice. If they choose to tighten policy (raise 
the short-term interest rate) in order to offset the effects of the oil price shock on the general price 
level,  they  may  well  succeed  -  but  only  at  the  cost  of  making  the  decline  in  output  more  severe. 
Likewise, if monetary policymakers choose to ease in order to mitigate the effects of the oil price shock 
                                                      
4   Using more formal econometric methods, Kim, Nelson, and Piger (2003) also found that structural breaks in the volatility 
and persistence of inflation occurred about the same times as the changes in output volatility.   
5   Stock and Watson (2003) provide a recent overview of the debate. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2004
on output, their action will exacerbate the inflationary impact. Hence, in the standard framework, the 
periodic occurrence of shocks to aggregate supply (such as oil price shocks) forces policymakers to 
choose between stabilizing output and stabilizing inflation.6 Note that shocks to aggregate demand do 
not  create  the  same  tradeoff,  as  offsetting  an  aggregate  demand  shock  stabilizes  both  output  and 
inflation. 
This apparent tradeoff between output variability and inflation variability faced by policymakers gives 
rise to what has been dubbed the Taylor curve, reflecting early work by the Stanford economist and 
current Undersecretary of the Treasury John B. Taylor.7 (Taylor also originated the eponymous Taylor 
rule,  to  which  I  will  refer  later.)  Graphically,  the  Taylor  curve  depicts  the  menu  of  possible 
combinations of output volatility and inflation volatility from which monetary policymakers can choose 
in the long run. Figure 1 shows two examples of Taylor curves, marked TC1 and TC2. In Figure 1, 
volatility  in  output  is  measured  on  the  vertical  axis  and  volatility  in  inflation  is  measured  on  the 
horizontal  axis.  As  shown  in  the  figure,  Taylor  curves  slope  downward,  reflecting  the  theoretical 
conclusion that an optimizing policymaker can choose less of one type of volatility in the long run only 
by accepting more of the other.8 A direct implication of the Taylor curve framework is that a change in 
the  preferences  or  objectives  of  the  central  bank  alone  -  a  decision  to  be  tougher  on  inflation,  for 
example  -  cannot  explain  the  Great  Moderation.  Indeed,  in  this  framework,  a  conscious  attempt  by 
policymakers to try to moderate the variability of inflation should lead to higher, not lower, variability of 
output. 
How, then, can the Great Moderation be explained? Figure 1 suggests two possibilities. First, suppose 
it  were  the  case,  contrary  to  what  we  assumed  in  deriving  the  Taylor  curve,  that  monetary  policies 
during the period of high macroeconomic volatility were not optimal, perhaps because policymakers 
did not have an accurate understanding of the structure of the economy or of the impact of their policy 
actions. If monetary policies during the late 1960s and the 1970s were sufficiently far from optimal, the 
result  could  be  a  combination  of  output  volatility  and  inflation  volatility  lying  well  above  the  efficient 
frontier defined by the Taylor curve. Graphically, suppose that the true Taylor curve is the solid curve 
shown in Figure 1, labeled TC2. Then, in principle, sufficiently well executed policies could achieve a 
combination of output volatility and inflation volatility such as that represented by point B, which lies on 
that  curve.  However,  less  effective  policies  could  lead  to  the  economic  outcome  represented  by 
point A in Figure 1, at which both output volatility and inflation volatility are higher than at point B. We 
can see now how improvements in monetary policy might account for the Great Moderation, even in 
the absence of any change in the structure of the economy or in the underlying shocks. Improvements 
in  the  policy  framework,  in  policy  implementation,  or  in  the  policymakers’  understanding  of  the 
economy could allow the economy to move from the inefficient point A to the efficient point B, where 
the volatility of both inflation and output are more moderate. 
Figure 1 can also be used to depict a second possible explanation for the Great Moderation, which is 
that,  rather  than  monetary  policy  having  improved,  the  underlying  economic  environment  may  have 
become more stable. Changes in the structure of the economy that increased its resilience to shocks 
or reductions in the variance of the shocks themselves would improve the volatility tradeoff faced by 
policymakers. In Figure 1, we can imagine now that the true Taylor curve in the 1970s is given by the 
dashed curve, TC1, and the actual economic outcome chosen by policymakers is point A, which lies 
on TC1. Improved economic stability in the 1980s and 1990s, whether arising from structural change 
or  good  luck,  can  be  represented  by  a  shift  of  the  Taylor  curve  from  TC1  to  TC2,  and  the  new 
economic  outcome  as  determined  by  policy  is  point  B.  Relative  to  TC1,  the  Taylor  curve  TC2 
represents  economic  outcomes  with  lower  volatility  in  output  for any  given  volatility  of  inflation,  and 
vice versa. According to the “shifting Taylor curve” explanation, the Great Moderation resulted not from 
improved  practice  of  monetary  policy  (which  has  always  been  as  effective  as  possible,  given  the 
                                                      
6   Strictly speaking, according to standard models, policymakers face a tradeoff between volatility of inflation and volatility of 
the output gap, the difference between potential output and actual output. If the economy’s potential output grows relatively 
smoothly, variability in the output gap will be closely related to variability in actual output.   
7   Chatterjee (2002) provides an overview of the Taylor curve and its implications. For an exposition by Taylor himself, see 
Taylor (1998).   
8   The policy tradeoff between the variability of inflation and the variability of output implied by the Taylor curve is reminiscent 
of an older proposition, that policymakers could achieve a permanently higher level of output (and thus a permanently lower 
level  of  unemployment)  by  accepting  a  permanently  higher  level  of  inflation.  However,  for  both  theoretical  and  empirical 
reasons, this older idea of a long-run tradeoff between the levels of inflation and output has been largely discredited, and the 
Taylor curve tradeoff is in some sense its natural successor.   
BIS Review 12/2004 
 3
environment) but rather by favorable structural change or reduced variability of economic shocks. Of 
course,  more  complicated  scenarios  in  which  policy  becomes  more  effective  and  the  underlying 
economic environment becomes more stable are possible and indeed likely. 
With  this  bit  of  theory  as  background,  I  will  focus  on  two  key  points.  First,  without  claiming  that 
monetary policy during the 1950s or in the period since 1984 has been ideal by any means, I will try to 
support my view that the policies of the late 1960s and 1970s were particularly inefficient, for reasons 
that I think we now understand. Thus, as in the first scenario just discussed (represented in Figure 1 
as  a  movement  from  point  A  to  point  B),  improvements  in  the  execution  of  monetary  policy  can 
plausibly account for a significant part of the Great Moderation. Second, more subtly, I will argue that 
some  of  the  benefits  of  improved  monetary  policy  may  easily  be  confused  with  changes  in  the 
underlying environment (that is, improvements in policy may be incorrectly identified as shifts in the 
Taylor  curve),  increasing  the  risk  that  standard  statistical  methods  of  analyzing  this  question  could 
understate the contribution of monetary policy to the Great Moderation. 
Reaching the Taylor curve: improvements in the effectiveness of monetary policy 
Monetary  policymakers  face  difficult  challenges  in  their  efforts  to  stabilize  the  economy.  We  are 
uncertain about many aspects of the workings of the economy, including the channels by which the 
effects of monetary policy are transmitted. We are even uncertain about the current economic situation 
as economic data are received with a lag, are typically subject to multiple revisions, and in any case 
can  only  roughly  and  partially  depict  the  underlying  economic  reality.  Thus,  in  practice,  monetary 
policy will never achieve as much reduction in macroeconomic volatility as would be possible if our 
understanding were more complete. 
Nevertheless, a number of economists have argued that monetary policy during the late 1960s and 
the 1970s was unusually prone to creating volatility, relative to both earlier and later periods (DeLong, 
1997; Mayer, 1998; Romer and Romer, 2002). Economic historians have suggested that the relative 
inefficiency  of  policy  during  this  period  arose  because  monetary  policymakers  labored  under  some 
important  misconceptions  about  policy  and  the  economy.  First,  during  this  period,  central  bankers 
seemed  to  have  been  excessively  optimistic  about  the  ability  of  activist  monetary  policies  to  offset 
shocks  to  output  and  to  deliver  permanently  low  levels  of  unemployment.  Second,  monetary 
policymakers  appeared  to  underestimate  their  own  contributions  to  the  inflationary  problems  of  the 
time, believing instead that inflation was in large part the result of nonmonetary forces. One might say 
that,  in  terms  of  their  ability  to  deliver  good  macroeconomic  outcomes,  policymakers  suffered  from 
excessive “output optimism” and “inflation pessimism.” 
The output optimism of the late 1960s and the 1970s had several aspects. First, at least during the 
early part of that period, many economists and policymakers held the view that policy could exploit a 
permanent  tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment,  as  described  by  a  simple  Phillips  curve 
relationship. The idea of a permanent tradeoff opened up the beguiling possibility that, in return for 
accepting  just  a  bit  more  inflation,  policymakers  could  deliver  a  permanently  low  rate  of 
unemployment. This view is now discredited, of course, on both theoretical and empirical grounds.9 
Second, estimates of the rate of unemployment that could be sustained without igniting inflation were 
typically  unrealistically  low,  with  a  long-term  unemployment  rate  of  4  percent  or  less  often  being 
characterized as a modest and easily attainable objective.10 Third, economists of the time may have 
been  unduly optimistic about  the  ability  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policymakers  to  eliminate short-term 
fluctuations in output and employment, that is, to “fine-tune” the economy. 
What I have called inflation pessimism was the increasing conviction of policymakers in the 1960s and 
1970s, as inflation rose and remained stubbornly high, that monetary policy was an ineffective tool for 
controlling inflation. As emphasized in recent work on the United States and the United Kingdom by 
                                                      
9   Friedman (1968) provided a major theoretical critique of the idea of a permanent tradeoff. Scholars disagree about when 
and to what degree U.S. monetary policymakers absorbed the lessons of Friedman’s article. 
10   Orphanides (2003) has emphasized the importance of poor estimates of potential output and the closely associated concept 
of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  for  explaining  the  inflationary  policies  of  the  1970s.  He  notes  the  difficulty  that 
policymakers of the time faced in distinguishing the productivity slowdown of the period from a cyclical decline in output. 
Analytical  support  for  the  view  that  confusion  between  the  cyclical  and  secular  aspects  of  the  1970s’  slowdown  had 
inflationary consequences is provided by Lansing (2002) and Bullard and Eusepi (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2004
Edward  Nelson  (2004),  during  this  period  policymakers  became  more  and  more  inclined  to  blame 
inflation  on  so-called  cost-push  shocks  rather  than  on  monetary  forces.  Cost-push  shocks,  in  the 
paradigm  of  the  time,  included  diverse  factors  such  as  union  wage  pressures,  price  increases  by 
oligopolistic firms, and increases in the prices of commodities such as oil and beef brought about by 
adverse changes in supply conditions. For the purpose of understanding the upward trend in inflation, 
however, the most salient attribute of cost-push shocks was that they were putatively out of the control 
of the monetary policymakers. 
The combination of output optimism and inflation pessimism during the latter part of the 1960s and the 
1970s was a recipe for high volatility in output and inflation - that is, a set of outcomes well away from 
the  efficient  frontier  represented  by  the  economy’s  Taylor  curve.  Notably,  the  belief  in  a  long-run 
tradeoff  between  output  and  inflation,  together  with  an  unrealistically  low  assessment  of  the 
sustainable rate of unemployment, resulted in high inflation but did not deliver the expected payoff in 
terms  of  higher  output  and  employment.  Moreover,  the  Fed’s  periodic  attempts  to  rein  in  surging 
inflation  led  to  a  pattern  of  “go-stop”  policies,  in  which  swings  in  policy  from  ease  to  tightness 
contributed  to  a  highly  volatile  real  economy  as  well  as  a  highly  variable  inflation  rate.  Wage-price 
controls,  invoked  in  the  belief  that  monetary  policy  was  ineffective  against  cost-push  forces,  also 
ultimately proved destabilizing. 
Monetary policymakers bemoaned the high rate of inflation in the 1970s but did not fully appreciate 
their  own  role  in  its  creation.  Ironically,  their  errors  in  estimating  the  natural  rate  and  in  ascribing 
inflation to nonmonetary forces were mutually reinforcing. On the one hand, because unemployment 
remained  well  above  their  over-optimistic  estimates  of  the  sustainable  rate,  they  were  inclined  to 
attribute  inflation  to  outside  forces  (such  as  the  actions  of  firms  and  unions)  rather  than  to  an 
overheated  economy  (Romer  and  Romer,  2002;  Nelson,  2004).  On  the  other  hand,  the  view  of 
policymakers that exogenous forces largely drove inflation made it more difficult for them to recognize 
that their estimate of the sustainable rate of unemployment was too low. Several years passed before 
policymakers were finally persuaded by the evidence that sustained anti-inflationary monetary policies 
would  actually  work  (Primiceri,  2003).  As  you  know,  these  policies  were  implemented  successfully 
after 1979, beginning under Fed Chairman Volcker. 
Better known than even the Taylor curve is John Taylor’s famous Taylor rule, a simple equation that 
has proved remarkably useful as a rule-of-thumb description of monetary policy (Taylor, 1993). In its 
basic form, the Taylor rule relates the Federal Reserve’s policy instrument, the overnight federal funds 
interest rate, to the deviations of inflation and output from the central bank’s desired levels for those 
variables. Estimates of the Taylor rule for the late 1960s and the 1970s reflect the output optimism and 
inflation pessimism of the period, in that researchers tend to find a weaker response of the policy rate 
to inflation and (in some studies) a relatively stronger response to the output gap than in more recent 
periods.11 As I will shortly discuss further, an insufficiently strong response to inflation let inflation and 
inflation expectations get out of control and thus added volatility to the economy. At the same time, 
strong responses to what we understand in retrospect to have been over-optimistic estimates of the 
output gap created additional instability. As output optimism and inflation pessimism both waned under 
the force of the data, policy responses became more appropriate and the economy more stable. In this 
sense, improvements in policymakers’ understanding of the economy and the role of monetary policy 
allowed the economy to move closer to the Taylor curve (or, in terms of Figure 1, to move from point A 
to point B). 
Improved monetary policy or a shifting Taylor curve? 
Improvements in monetary policy that moved the economy closer to the efficient frontier described by 
the  Taylor  curve  can  account  for  part  of  the  Great  Moderation.  However,  several  empirical  studies 
have questioned the quantitative importance of this effect and emphasized instead shifts in the Taylor 
curve,  brought  about  by  structural  change  or  good  luck.  For  example,  in  a  paper  presented  at  the 
                                                      
11   See, for example, Judd and Rudebusch (1998), Taylor (1999), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), Cogley and Sargent (2002), 
and Mehra (2002). Orphanides (2003) argues that, if one takes account of policymakers’ mis-estimates of the output gap in 
the 1970s, the same Taylor rule that describes policy after 1979 applies to the 1970s as well. The debate is an important 
one, but it may bear more on what policymakers actually thought they were doing - and thus on the history of ideas - then on 
the question of whether monetary policy was in fact inefficient or even destabilizing during the period. There seems to be 
little doubt that it was.   
BIS Review 12/2004 
 5
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  annual  Jackson  Hole  conference,  James  Stock  and  Mark 
Watson (2003) use several alternative macroeconomic models to simulate how the economy would 
have  performed  after  1984  if  monetary  policy  had  followed  its  pre-1979  pattern.  Although  inflation 
performance after 1984 would clearly have been worse if pre-1979 monetary policies had been used, 
Stock  and  Watson  find  that  output  volatility  would  have  been  little  different.  They  conclude  that 
improved  monetary  policy  does  not  account  for  much  of  the  reduction  in  output  volatility  since  the 
mid-1980s. Instead, noting that the variance of the economic shocks implied by their models for the 
1970s  was  much  higher  than  the  variance  of  shocks  in  the  more  recent  period,  they  embrace  the 
good-luck explanation of the Great Moderation. Interesting research by Timothy Cogley and Thomas 
Sargent (2002) and by Shaghil Ahmed, Andrew Levin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2002) likewise find a 
substantial  reduction  in  the  size  and  frequency of shocks  in  the more  recent period, supporting  the 
good-luck hypothesis. 
Both the structural change and good-luck explanations of the Great Moderation are intriguing and (to 
reiterate) both are no doubt part of the story. However, an unsatisfying aspect of both explanations is 
the difficulty of identifying changes in the economic environment large enough and persistent enough 
to explain the Great Moderation, both in the United States and abroad. In particular, it is not obvious 
that economic shocks have become significantly smaller or more infrequent, as required by the good-
luck hypothesis. Tensions in the Middle East, often blamed for the oil price shocks of the 1970s, have 
hardly  declined  in  recent  years,  and  important  developments  in  technology  and  productivity  have 
continued to buffet the economy (albeit in a more positive direction than in the 1970s). Nor has the 
international  economic  environment  become  obviously  more  placid,  as  a  series  of  financial  crises 
struck  various  regions  of  the  world  during  the  1990s  and  the  powerful  forces  of  globalization  have 
proceeded apace. In contrast, following the adverse experience of the 1970s, changes in the practice 
of  monetary  policy  occurred  around  the  world  in  similar  ways  and  during  approximately  the  same 
period. 
Certainly,  stability-enhancing  changes  in  the  economic  environment  have  occurred  in  the  past  two 
decades.  However,  an  intriguing  possibility  is  that  some  of  these  changes,  rather  than  being  truly 
exogenous, may have been induced by improved monetary policies. That is, better monetary policies 
may  have  resulted  in  what  appear  to  be  (but  only  appear  to  be)  favorable  shifts  in  the  economy’s 
Taylor curve. Here are some examples of what I have in mind. 
First, monetary policies that brought down and stabilized inflation may have led to stabilizing changes 
in the structure of the economy as well, in line with the prediction of the famous Lucas (1976) critique 
that  economic  structure  depends  on  the  policy  regime.  High  and  unstable  inflation  increases  the 
variability  of  relative  prices  and  real  interest  rates,  for  example,  distorting  decisions  regarding 
consumption,  capital  investment,  and  inventory  investment,  among  others.  Likewise,  the  high  level, 
variability,  and  unpredictability  of 
financial 
investments and money holdings. Theories of “rational inattention” (Sims, 2003), according to which 
people vary the frequency with which they re-examine economic decisions according to the underlying 
economic environment, imply that the dynamic behavior of the economy would change - probably in 
the  direction  of  greater  stability  and  persistence  -  in  a  more  stable  pricing  environment,  in  which 
people reconsider their economic decisions less frequently. 
Second, changes in monetary policy could conceivably affect the size and frequency of shocks hitting 
the economy, at least as an econometrician would measure those shocks. This assertion seems odd 
at first, as we are used to thinking of shocks as exogenous events, arising from “outside the model,” so 
to speak. However, econometricians typically do not measure shocks directly but instead infer them 
from movements in macroeconomic variables that they cannot otherwise explain. Shocks in this sense 
may certainly reflect the monetary regime. For example, consider the cost-push shocks that played 
such  an  important  role  in  1970s’  thinking  about  inflation.  Seemingly  unexplained  or  autonomous 
movements in wages and prices during this period, which analysts would have interpreted as shocks 
to wage and price equations, may in fact have been the result of earlier monetary policy actions, or 
(more  subtly)  of  monetary  policy  actions  expected  by  wage-  and  price-setters  to  take  place  in  the 
future. In an influential paper, Robert Barsky and Lutz Kilian (2001) analyze the oil price shocks of the 
1970s in this spirit. Barsky and Kilian provide evidence that the extraordinary increases in nominal oil 
prices during the 1970s were made feasible primarily by earlier expansionary monetary policies rather 
than by truly exogenous political or economic events. 
Third, monetary policy can also affect the distribution of measured shocks by changing the sensitivity 
of  pricing  and  other  economic  decisions  to  exogenous  outside  events.  For  example,  significant 
movements  in  the  price  of  oil  and  other  commodities  continued  to  occur  after  1984.  However,  in  a 
inflation  profoundly  affected  decisions  regarding 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2004
low-inflation environment, with stable inflation expectations and a general perception that firms do not 
have pricing power, commodity price shocks are not passed into final goods prices to nearly the same 
degree as in a looser monetary environment. As a result, a change in commodity prices of a given size 
shows up as a smaller shock to output and consumer prices today than it would have in the earlier 
period.  Likewise,  there  is  evidence  that  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  have  smaller  effects  on 
domestic  prices  and  economic  activity  when  inflation  is  less  volatile  and  inflation  expectations  are 
stabilized (Gagnon and Ihrig, 2002; Devereux, Engel, and Storgaard, 2003). 
Fourth,  changes  in  inflation  expectations,  which  are  ultimately  the  product  of  the  monetary  policy 
regime,  can  also  be  confused  with  truly  exogenous  shocks  in  conventional  econometric  analyses. 
Marvin  Goodfriend  (1993)  has  suggested,  for  example,  that  insufficiently  anchored  inflation 
expectations  have  led  to  periodic  “inflation  scares”,  in  which  inflation  expectations  have  risen  in  an 
apparently  autonomous  manner.  Increases  in  inflation  expectations  have  the  flavor  of  adverse 
aggregate supply shocks in that they tend to increase the volatility of both inflation and output, in a 
combination that depends on how strongly the monetary policymakers act to offset these changes in 
expectations. 
Theoretical and empirical support for the idea that inflation expectations may become an independent 
source of instability has grown in recent years.12 As I mentioned earlier, a number of researchers have 
found that the reaction of monetary policymakers to inflation has strengthened, in that the estimated 
coefficient on inflation in the Taylor rule has risen from something less than 1 before 1979 to a value 
significantly greater than 1 in the more recent period. If the policy interest rate responds to increases in 
inflation  by  less  than  one-for-one  (so  that  the  real  policy  rate  does  not  rise  in  the  face  of  higher 
inflation), economic theory tells us that inflation expectations and the economy in general can become 
unstable. The problem arises from the fact that, if policymakers do not react sufficiently aggressively to 
increases in inflation, spontaneously arising expectations of increased inflation can ultimately be self-
confirming and even self-reinforcing. Incidentally, the stability requirement that the policy rate respond 
to  inflation  by  more  than  one-for-one  is  called  the  Taylor  principle  (Taylor,  1993,  1999)  -  the  third 
concept  named  after  John  Taylor  that  has  played  a  role  in  this  talk.  The  finding  that  monetary 
policymakers violated the Taylor principle during the 1970s but satisfied the principle in the past two 
decades would be consistent with a reduced incidence of destabilizing expectational shocks.13 
Support for the view that inflation expectations can be an independent source of economic volatility 
has also emerged from the extensive recent literature on learning and macroeconomics (Evans and 
Honkopohja, 2001). For example, Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams (2003a, 2003b) have 
studied  models  in  which  the  public  must  learn  the  central  bank’s  underlying  preferences  regarding 
inflation  by  observing  the  actual  inflation  process.14  With  learning,  inflation  expectations  take  on  a 
more adaptive character; in particular, high and unstable inflation will beget similar characteristics in 
the pattern of inflation expectations. As Orphanides and Williams show, when inflation expectations 
are poorly anchored, so that the public is highly uncertain about the long-run rate of inflation that the 
central bank hopes to achieve, they can become an additional source of volatility in the economy. An 
analysis that did not properly control for the expectational effects of changes in monetary policy might 
incorrectly conclude that the Taylor curve had shifted in an adverse direction. 
Conclusion 
The Great Moderation, the substantial decline in macroeconomic volatility over the past twenty years, 
is a striking economic development. Whether the dominant cause of the Great Moderation is structural 
change,  improved  monetary  policy,  or  simply  good  luck  is  an  important  question  about  which  no 
consensus  has  yet  formed.  I  have  argued  today  that  improved  monetary  policy  has  likely  made  an 
important  contribution  not  only  to  the  reduced  volatility  of  inflation  (which  is  not  particularly 
controversial)  but  to  the  reduced  volatility  of  output  as  well.  Moreover,  because  a  change  in  the 
monetary policy regime has pervasive effects, I have suggested that some of the effects of improved 
                                                      
12   See Bernanke (2003, 2004) for more extensive discussions.   
13   In a similar spirit, Stefania Albanesi, V.V. Chari, and Lawrence Christiano (2003) have shown that when the central bank’s 
commitment  to  fighting  inflation  is  perceived  to  be  weak,  as  may  have  been  the  case  during  the  1970s,  self-confirming 
increases in expected inflation are possible and will tend to destabilize the economy.   
14   See Bernanke (2004) for additional discussion.   
BIS Review 12/2004 
 7
monetary policies may have been misidentified as exogenous changes in economic structure or in the 
distribution  of  economic  shocks.  This  conclusion  on  my  part  makes  me  optimistic  for  the  future, 
because I am confident that monetary policymakers will not forget the lessons of the 1970s. 
I have put my case for better monetary policy rather forcefully today, because I think it likely that the 
policy explanation for the Great Moderation deserves more credit than it has received in the literature. 
However,  let  me  close  by  emphasizing  that  the  debate  remains  very  much  open.  Although  I  have 
focused  on  its  strengths,  the  monetary  policy  hypothesis  has  potential  deficiencies  as  well.  For 
example,  although  I  pointed  out  the  difficulty  that  the  structural  change  and  good-luck  explanations 
have in accounting for the rather sharp decline in volatility after 1984, one might also question whether 
the change in monetary policy regime was sufficiently sharp to have had the effects I have attributed to 
it.15 The consistency of the monetary policy explanation with the experience of the 1950s, a period of 
stable inflation during which output volatility declined but was high in absolute terms, deserves further 
investigation. Moreover, several of the channels by which monetary policy may have affected volatility 
that I have mentioned today remain largely theoretical possibilities and have not received much in the 
way  of  rigorous  empirical  testing.  One  of  my  goals  today  was  to  stimulate  further  research  on  this 
question. Clearly, the sources of the Great Moderation will continue to be an area for fruitful analysis 
and debate. 
Monetary policy and the variability of output and inflation 
Figure 1 
                                                       
15   Stock  and  Watson  (2003)  make  this  point.  Supporting  their  argument,  in  Bernanke  (2004)  I  present  evidence  that  even 
today inflation expectations may not be anchored as well as we would like.   
8 
 BIS Review 12/2004
