Ishrat Husain: Economic development in South Asia and the impact of 
globalisation 
Keynote address by Dr Ishrat Husain, delivered on the occasion of the Middle East and South Asia 
Conference of KPMG, Bahrain, 11 July 2004. 
 I would like to address three questions pertaining to the topic assigned to me this morning. The first 
question  is:  How  have  the  South  Asian  economies  fared  in  the  last  decade  and  what  are  their 
prospects  for  the  future.  The  second  question  is:  How  well  they  have  done  compared  to  other 
competitor  developing  regions  particularly  East  Asia?  Finally,  how  have  these  countries  positioned 
themselves to meet the challenges of globalization and what should they be doing to maximize the 
benefits of globalization? 
Economic situation and prospects 
South Asia has grown at 5.6 percent in the decade of 1990s - faster than for low-income countries but 
slower than the East Asian countries. The wide ranging reforms that have been implemented in this 
region during the last ten years or so have brought about some fundamental changes in the economic 
landscape and removed some of the major constraints that were retarding the progress of this region. 
Let me recapitulate them briefly. 
First, there is now a broad political consensus about the thrust and direction of economic policies in 
almost all the countries. The defeat of BJP Government in the recent Indian elections should not be 
construed as an indictment of reforms but a manifestation of the growing impatience of the electorate 
that these reforms have not been deep, pride and fast enough to touch the lives of the majority of the 
population.  This  political  consensus  has  survived  many  changes  of  the  governments  in  India  since 
1991 and the alternating shift of power in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. 
Second,  reliance  on  private  sector  as  the  main  investor,  producer  and  distributor  of  goods  and 
services has replaced the old notion of the commanding heights model of the economy in which State 
and State-owned enterprises were the main tools of industrial development. The demise of Licence 
Raj  has  given  rise  to  a  healthy  competitive  environment  in  which  market  mechanism  is  used  for 
allocation  of  resources.  This  shift  has  improved  the  overall  efficiency  of  resource  allocation  and 
utilization in South Asia. 
Third,  unilateral  trade  liberalization  has been  quite  rapid  in  the  1990s  in  the  whole  region. Average 
tariff rates have declined from 90-100 percent in 1980s to 13-32 percent today. Sri Lanka leads the 
way  followed  by  Pakistan.  India  and  Bangladesh  are  considered  laggards  in  trade  liberalization 
according to a World Bank study, but are in much better shape than what they were in the 1970s and 
1980s.  Export  promotion  has  finally  been  accepted  as  the  new  gospel  in  contrast  to  the  past  five 
decades of obsession with inward looking import substitution and protection of domestic industry. 
Fourth,  domestic  financial  and  capital  market  reforms  have  made  the  financial  sector  sound  and 
healthy. In Sri Lanka and Pakistan the strides made are quite advanced. India is slowly and gradually 
opening up to foreign competition and introducing new legislation to improve the performance of the 
banks  and  upgrade  the  quality  of  assets.  Bangladesh  has  begun  the  process  more  recently  but  is 
committed to move forward in the same direction. 
Fifth,  macroeconomic  stability  i.e.,  low  inflation,  low  domestic  interest  rates,  and  stable  but  realistic 
exchange  rates,  has  become  the  hall-mark  of  these  economies.  Exchange  rate  regimes  in  all  the 
countries have switched from fixed to managed float. Bi-directional movement i.e. both, depreciation or 
appreciation  of  domestic  currency  takes  place  according  to  market  supply  and  demand  conditions. 
There  is  no  longer  a  hang  up  to  defend  a  particular  level  of  exchange  rate  and  preserving 
competitiveness of exports and smoothing volatility are the main policy considerations. Large foreign 
exchange  reserves  are  piling  up  in  all  the  countries  with  India’s  coverage  more  than  15  months 
imports followed by Pakistan about 12 months and Bangladesh 4 months. 
Sixth,  fiscal  consolidation  and  discipline  are  the  furthest  in  Pakistan  with  fiscal  deficit  down  to 
4 percent of GDP compared to average 7 percent and domestic resource mobilization stepped up in 
the  last  five  years  by  almost  70  percent.  India’s  recent  budget  announced  on  Thursday  aims  at 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
4.4 percent of GDP for the Central Government but the consolidated deficit is still uncomfortably high. 
Tax-GDP  ratios  are  low  by  comparison  to  other  countries  at  the  similar  income  levels.  Therefore 
domestic savings and investment ratios have not matched those of China and other fast growing East 
Asian countries. 
Seventh,  India  has  clearly  taken  advantage  of  the  low  wage,  English  speaking,  highly  educated 
technical manpower to become a leader among the recipients of outsourcing of IT related services. 
The  same  trend  is  beginning  to  emerge  in  other  services  such  as  drug  clinical  trials,  health  Care, 
biotechnology, research and development. Although the immediate employment impact of the exports 
of  these  service  is  likely  to  be  limited,  in  the  medium  and  long  term  the  expansion  of  burgeoning 
middle class and the demonstration effect on the younger generation to acquire higher scientific and 
technical education will help India in the transformation of its economy. Other countries in South Asia 
are latecomers to the scene and have a lot of catching up to do. 
These improvements in macroeconomic fundamentals have led to up gradation of credit worthiness of 
India and more recently Pakistan. Both the countries have established access to international bond 
market at fine pricing. 
Despite these positive achievements and strides made in these countries there are some very difficult 
challenges to surmount. 
First,  political  and  geopolitical  risks  in  the  region  are  still  quite  elevated.  The  long  standing  hostility 
between India and Pakistan, the acquisition of nuclear and missile capability by the two countries and 
the  consequential  sanctions  imposed  upon  them,  the  active  frontline  status  of  Pakistan  in  the  war 
against terrorism, the prolonged civil war between Tamil Tigers and the government in Sri Lanka, and 
the frequent strikes called by the opposition parties against the government in power in Bangladesh 
have added risks to doing business and locating investment in these countries. 
Second, bureaucratic hassles, long drawn procedures, un-even application of rules and regulations, 
excessive  discretionary  powers  in  the  hands  of  lower  level  bureaucracy,  shortages  of  essential 
infrastructure  facilities  and  low  productivity  of  labor  force  have  also  made  the  region  not  such  an 
attractive place for foreign investors. 
Consequently,  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  has  not  yet  made  any  significant  impact  on  the 
economies of the region. FDI accounts for 0.5% of GDP with India receiving $3-4 billion annually and 
Pakistan about $1 billion. Portfolio investment to India had taken an upward trend but suffered a set 
back in the aftermath of the recent elections. 
Third,  there  is  a  very  little  intra-regional  trade  taking  place  in  South  Asia.  Intraregional  trade  has 
remained stagnant  at  less  than  2%  of  the  total  trade  in  the  last twenty  five  years.  Regional  trading 
arrangements have made a huge difference in North America, Europe and East Asia, but they have 
been unsuccessful in South Asia. The recent attempt to revitalize SAARC is in the right direction and 
will stimulate trade and growth but only to the extent that it unleashes competition that lowers domestic 
prices, enables achieving economies of scale and acquiring new technology. 
A  World  Bank  study  has  estimated  that  if  normal  relations  had  prevailed  in  2001  and  trade  was  at 
global averages, the Indo-Pak trade would have been $1.85 billion rather than the actual trade of only 
$254 million. Other estimates show that the volume of bilateral trade can surpass $4 billion. 
On the basis of the above developments, policy and structural changes that have taken place during 
the  last  ten  years  or  more  it  would  be  safe  to  surmise  that  the  probability  of  South  Asia  to  attain 
average annual growth rate of 6 to 7 percent is within the realm of possibility. But as I point out in the 
later  part  of  my  remarks  there  are  a  number  of  additional  measures  that  need  to  be  taken  as  this 
growth rate can neither be automatically attained nor it can be taken for granted. 
South Asia - East Asia comparison 
It must be recognized at the outset that India accounts for 80 percent of the aggregate regional GDP 
of South Asia with only 7 countries while China’s weight in East Asian GDP is only 60 percent among 
a group of 20 countries. Thus whatever happens to Indian economy has a much greater bearing on 
South Asia than is the case with China. 
The above structural feature is amply reflected in highly differentiated trade expansion trends of the 
two  regions.  In  1978,  the  merchandize  exports  of  both  India  and  China  were  close  or  almost  at 
identical level. But by 2004, China’s exports have jumped to $400 billion plus while India’s exports had 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
reached  $60  billion.  This  trend  is  mirrored  in  the  lackluster  performance  of  South  Asia’s  exports. 
During  1980-2002,  South  Asia’s  exports  have  barely  grown  from  under  $50  billion  to  roughly 
$100 billion.  East  Asia,  a  region  of  comparable  size  in  population  and  GDP  in  1981,  has  seen  its 
exports  grow  from  $100  billion  to  nearly  $1  trillion  in  the  same  twenty-year  period.  In  fact,  all 
developing  countries  expanded  their  exports  about  three  times  from  $1.2  trillion  to  $3.5  trillion  and 
South Asia could not even attain the average growth rate of all developing countries. 
As pointed out earlier, intra-regional trade as a share of total trade within South Asia was less than 
2 percent and  remained  unchanged  two  decades  later.  But  in  1981  East  Asia  saw  its  intra-regional 
trade grow from 10 percent to more than 18 percent between 1980 and 2002 This was all the more 
remarkable because trade was growing much faster as a share of GDP. In East Asia, trade grew at 
2 to 3 times the pace of overall GDP growth. Today, South Asia is the least integrated of all six regions 
when measured as a share of GDP. While South Asia’s share was 0.8 percent of GDP and East Asia’s 
26.5 percent, sub-Saharan African had intra-regional trade at 5 percent of regional GDP. 
Why this dismal performance of South Asia when it is quite well established that openness leads to 
higher growth that, in turn, reduces poverty? As the region containing the highest number of the poor 
countries,  South  Asia  has  not  been  able  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  opportunities  offered  by 
integration in the world markets through trade. It is only quite recently - the decade of 1990s to be 
more  precise  -  that  South  Asian  countries  have  resorted  to  liberalization  but  the  pace  needs  to  be 
accelerated to catch up with other regions. 
South  Asia  today  still  has  higher  trade  barriers  than  do  other  regions.  India  and  Bangladesh  have 
overall trade restrictiveness index of 36 percent and 24 percent respectively falling in the last decile of 
the  most  restricted  trading  regimes.  This  level  of  protection  puts  South  Asian  exporters  at  a 
disadvantage in third country markets. Not only the South Asia’s predominant labor intensive exports 
face high tariff wall in the developed countries (Average tariff on Bangladesh’s exports to the U.S. is 
14.6  percent  compared  to  1.5  percent  for  the  European  Union  exports)  high  import  tariffs  escalate 
domestic  costs  of  imported  inputs  into  export  production  putting  them  at  a  cost  disadvantage 
compared to their competitors. 
FDI flows into South Asian countries - other than for natural resource exploitation - have been mainly 
targeted at domestic markets. Unlike China where one half of all manufactured exports emanate form 
foreign owned ventures India offers its vast market of 1 billion population and 400 million consumers 
as  a  point  of  attraction  for  foreign  firms  engaged  in  non-IT  related  industries  and  services.  Exports 
from foreign firms in South Asia are almost negligible as the high tariff protection to domestic industry 
makes the latter more profitable compared to manufacturing for exports. No wonder, FDI flows into 
East  Asia  have  surpassed  $50  billion  while  South  Asia  has  hardly  reached  one-tenth  of  that  level. 
Proscriptions and restrictions on foreign investment in several sectors have also kept these inflows at 
a  trickle.  South  Asia  that  accounts  for  11  percent  of  GDP  of  developing  countries  receives  only 
3 percent of FDI flows. 
Meeting challenges of globalization 
Empirical evidence clearly indicates that globalization, technological progress and competition are the 
main drivers of growth and prosperity in the 21st century world. How well South Asian countries have 
positioned themselves in meeting this challenge is the question I wish to turn to now. 
Economic fundamentals have improved to a very large extent in all the South Asian countries in the 
last decade or so. Broad political consensus on the content and direction of economic policies does 
provide some reassurance that the countries will be able to traverse this path with care and agility. 
I would therefore focus my attention on the things that need to be done to maximize the benefits from 
globalization. 
First and foremost is investment in education and human development. The most recent census data 
for 2001 shows that India’s literacy rate has gone up to 64 percent but it also demonstrates that at 
least one third of its population and labor force is not fully equipped to take up the ever changing and 
more  complex  tasks  of  the  economy  trying  to  outclass  other  competing  countries.  Pakistan  and 
Bangladesh  have  almost  half  of  their  population  illiterate  and  Sri  Lanka  is  the  only  country  in  the 
region with almost one hundred percent literacy. 
But his full literacy level raises another stark fact in our face i.e., the growing imbalance between the 
demand  for  skills  imposed  by  market  economic  forces  and  the  supply  of  skills  produced  by  our 
educational institutions. There is a surfeit of highly educated graduates who are not employable and 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
there is a shortage of workers who can carry out routine technical jobs in production and service. India 
produces good quality Science and Engineering graduates every year who can cater to the high end 
of  the  job  market  but  lack  of  attention  to  non-University  technical  education  and  its  quality  have 
created wide gaps at the middle end of the job market. This situation is much aggravated in Pakistan 
and Bangladesh where the issues of quality, relevance and numbers are all intertwined. Sri Lanka has 
no problem with the numbers but high level of unemployment among University graduates testifies to 
this mismatch in the skills. The widespread frustration among the parents and graduates on one hand 
and a high level of dissatisfaction among the employers in finding the right persons for the right jobs 
are further evidence of the imbalance in labor market. 
This imbalance and lack of employability has serious repercussions for the composition and growth of 
the basket of goods that can be exported. The most dynamic and rapid growing sectors of exports in 
the  world  market  today  and  in  the  medium  term  are  those  associated  with  high  technology  and  to 
some extent medium technology. While India is making some headway in increasing its penetration of 
high technology exports the record of other countries in the region is not very promising. They are still 
stuck in the low technology exports particularly textiles and clothing which have a declining shares in 
the world trade. Thus the need to overcome the skill obsolescence and turn towards medium and high 
technology exports was never as apparent as it is today. 
One particular means through which this change in the composition of exports can be accelerated is 
by removing the barriers and constraints in the way of foreign investors and Multinational Corporations 
(MNCs).  FDI  is  an  important  force  for  integration  for  this  as  MNCs  have  set  up  supply  chains  and 
integrated  production  networks  that  tend  to  locate  each  stage  of  production  in  the  country  with  the 
lowest  cost. Affiliates  of  a  MNC  in  one  country  often  export  to another  for  eventual sales  in  a  third 
country  market.  These  affiliates  act  as  the  on-the-job  training  grounds  for  the  acquisition  and 
dissemination  of  the  skills  needed  for  production  and  minimizing  costs.  These  skills  are  then 
disseminated multiplied throughout other firms in the country. 
South Asian countries have so far missed the boat by not becoming a part of global value chain and 
participating  in  international  supplier  chain  arrangements.  There  is  no  single  business  model  for 
participating in this chain and there can be many phases of transition and many modes of involvement. 
For example, joint ventures, franchising, purchasing by international firms, licensing, sub-contracting, 
fully  owned  firm,  original  equipment,  manufacturing,  original  design  and  manufacturing,  strategic 
partnerships for technology, overseas acquisition of equity are the diverse means whereby developing 
country enterprises can gain wide access to international markets at their own level of capability, climb 
the  technology  ladder  and  benefit  from  globalization.  East  Asia  is  a  major  participant  in  this  global 
supply chain and produces parts and components for a variety of manufactures. It is time that South 
Asian countries do make an attempt to get engaged in this value chain. 
SAFTA arrangements to be successful in the coming year require a number of important preparatory 
measures. These are described below: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
4 
 Trade facilitation through expeditious border crossings, quick custom clearance, efficient port 
facilities, improved transport links should precede or take and take place simultaneously with 
the expansion of volume of cross border trade. 
Domestic tax, tariff and subsidy policies that affect production and trade incentives should be 
harmonized to avoid recurrence of trade disputes and frequent use of anti dumping laws. As 
India  provides  a  lot  of  subsidies  to  its  producers  in  various  forms  and  shapes  the  smaller 
countries are hesitant to allow MFN status to India. The recourse to a long negative list that 
restricts the volume of trade should be avoided at all costs. 
Macroeconomic  policies  such  as  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  should  be  harmonized  to 
achieve a stable, non-discriminating macroeconomic environment for all the countries in the 
region. 
Supporting institutions to manage and facilitate integration, for example, setting standards, 
establishing regional development funds and for dispute resolution should be created. 
Communication  and  transport  infrastructure  between  the  bordering  countries  should  be 
improved and upgraded to facilitate increased trade and factor mobility. 
BIS Review 45/2004
f) 
g) 
Legal  regulations  for  investor  protection,  intellectual  property  rights  enforcement,  anti-trust 
law, commercial law, labor relations, financial institutions should be harmonized. 
Financial markets should be widened and regulatory changes introduced to promote cross-
border investment, listings, syndication, bond issues, etc. 
Finally,  I  turn  to  the  impact  of  WTO.  I  wish  to  clear  the  confusion  that  as  if  something  drastic  or 
unexpected or unknown is going to hit us in the near future due to WTO. All the countries in the region 
are  already  members  of  this  organization  since  1995  and  have  made  binding  commitments  to 
maximum tariffs. In some cases the applied tariffs are lower than the bound tariffs. In actual practice, 
the South Asian countries have liberalized their imports and have been flooded with cheaper imports 
from China in the recent years. There could be no greater threat to the survival of domestic industry 
than  competition  from  Chinese  goods.  Some  industrial  firms  could  not  face  the  onslaught  of  this 
invasion and have died. Others have taken up by the challenge by cutting the fat, taking up the slack, 
becoming cost efficient, improving quality are competing with the new entrants. Thus the process of 
restructuring and transition is ongoing and should not pose any systematic threat to the industries of 
the region. 
What  we  all  seem  to  be  focusing  upon  is  the  abolition  of  the  textile  quotas  under  the  Multi-fibre 
agreement and the adoption of new agreement on Clothing and Textiles in January 2005. The impact 
of  this  new  pattern  of  textile  trade  on  the  economies  of  South  Asia  region  is  highly  varied  and 
differentiated. Most simulation studies and modeling exercises carried by the World Bank, USITC and 
independent consulting firms give credence to the view that China followed by India and Pakistan will 
be  the  main  beneficiaries  of  the  abolition  of  quotas.  These  countries  are  all  vertically  integrated 
i.e., from producing cotton all the way to finishing, dyeing, stitching, etc. and enjoy low wage costs and 
low raw material costs. Pakistan, for example, has invested $3 to 4 billion during the past five years to 
modernize  and  acquire  state-ofthe-  art  machinery  that  can  produce  quality  goods  according  to  the 
varying  specifications  and  changing  demand  patterns  of  the  buyers.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not 
obvious  if  all  the  ready  made  garment  exporting  firms  in  Bangladesh  and  Sri  Lanka  will  be  able  to 
survive in the post 2005 markets. Both countries are seized of this problem and are taking measures 
to assist their firms and their workers. 
Doha Development Round should be resumed as early as possible because whatever the benefits of 
regional  trading  blocks  they  are  no  substitute  for  participation  in  multilateral  trade  arrangements. 
These arrangements provide a much larger market to exploit which is several times the size of any 
regional  block  Multilateral  arrangements  enlarge  the  market  access  substantially  and  permit  wider 
competition, larger scale of operation and greater specialization all of which increase productivity and 
growth. 
Conclusion 
South Asia has made substantial progress in the last decade to integrate in the World economy but 
given  its  slow  start  and  initial  handicaps  there  is  a  need  for  much  rapid  pace  for  liberalizing  trade, 
attracting Foreign direct investment, assimilating new technology, upgrading human skills and actively 
participating in regional and multilateral arrangements. 
Economic development and poverty reduction require ever expanding economic resources, which can 
only  be  generated  through  high  economic  growth.  Openness  is  found  to  positively  impact  upon 
economic growth by making investment more productive and efficient and by nurturing incentives for 
new  investment.  South  Asian countries  faced with a  high  degree  of  poverty  will  benefit  enormously 
from openness, integration in the World economy and maximizing benefits of globalization. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 5
