Zhou Xiaochuan: The current financial situation and development of the 
financial market in China 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the National Conference 
for the Work of Foreign-funded Banks, Beijing, 12 April 2004. 
 I. 
The  current  macro  financial  performance  is  broadly  stable,  but  some  problems 
remain. 
This year, China’s national economy continued to grow rapidly. Consumer demand rose stably, urban 
and rural incomes increased steadily, foreign trade soared, and treasury revenue surged. The current 
financial performance is broadly stable. It is noteworthy, however, that there still exist in the economic 
performance  such  problems  as  faster  than  desired  investment  expansion  and  money  and  credit 
growth as well as heightened pressure of inflation. 
According  to  preliminary  statistics,  at  the  end  of  March  2004,  broad  money  M2  increased  to 
RMB23.18 trillion yuan by 19.2 percent over the same period of 2003. Loans in renminbi and foreign 
currencies by all financial institutions increased to RMB17.90 trillion yuan by 20.66 percent over the 
same period of 2003. New loans registered RMB912.2 billion yuan in the first quarter. In particular, 
loans in renminbi increased by RMB834.2 billion yuan, representing an acceleration of RMB23.8 billion 
yuan over the same period of 2003. To prevent inflation and assets price bubbles and the emergence 
of bad loans in banks resulted from faster than desired growth of money and credit, and to forestall 
financial  risk  as  well,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  took  and  will  take  some  policy  measures, 
including the hike of another 0.5 percentage point in the required reserve ratio from April 25 on, the 
arrangement of differentiated required reserve ratios and floating central bank lending rates. Besides, 
the PBC raised the central bank lending rates and rediscount rates. 
From  the  macroeconomic perspective,  the  major  issues  in  the current  macroeconomic  situation  are 
reflected in the following four aspects. First, money supply grew faster than desired with actual M1 and 
M2 higher than predicted and so did credit with its growth rate 10 percentage points higher than that 
forecasted in the beginning of 2004. Hike of required reserve ratio will help control money injection and 
loan  growth,  ensuring  the  stable  performance  of  the  financial  market.  Second,  the  direct  financing 
accounts for too low a ratio to the total financing in China and the indirect financing too high a ratio. 
Although it is quite common that in developing economies the securities market is not developed yet 
and direct financing is difficult for enterprises to access, such a high ratio of indirect financing in China 
exerts  some  difficulties  for  the  asset-liability  management  and  risk  control  for  the  whole  economy. 
Third, the ratio of M2 to GDP is too high. In 2003, that ratio in China was close to 200 percent. So high 
a  ratio  does  not  exist  across  the  globe  except  for  extremely  exceptional  cases.  While  the  Chinese 
economy has its particularity, excessively high ratio of M2 indicates that financing relies too heavily on 
the  banking  system  in  the  course  of  the  economic  development  and  thus  the  risk  concentration  is 
higher  than  desired.  Fourth,  the  total  savings  rate  is  still  on  the  high  side.  In  2003,  the  rate  edged 
higher to 47 percent. Economic growth is mainly driven by investment, with contribution of consumer 
demand yet to increase. All the above issues are yet to be studied and discussed. Their resolution will 
all hinge on the development of the financial markets. 
II. 
Significant headways have been achieved in the development of the Chinese financial 
market since China adopted the reform and opening-up policy. 
First,  the  financial  market  system  has  taken  its  initial  shape.  At  present,  China  has  basically 
established  the  securities  futures  market,  the  money  market  and  the  inter-bank  foreign  exchange 
market.  Second,  the  financial  market  has  cultivated  diversified  participants.  It  not  only  has 
accommodated  commercial  banks,  the  social  security  fund,  trust  companies,  insurance  companies 
and securities companies but also has introduced, since 2003, qualified foreign institutional investors 
(QFII), which has played an important role in the development of the Chinese financial market. Third, 
products  in  the  market  have  gradually  been  diversified.  While  there  are  financial  debts,  treasury 
bonds, central bank bills, corporate equity and other products with features of debts, new securities 
and banking products have been continuously innovated. Such innovative banking products as ABS, 
MBS and CDO and securities products as open-ended funds have attracted strong demands in the 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 1
markets. Fourth, innovations keep crossing boundaries of the markets themselves, e.g. money market 
funds and securitization of credit assets by banks. 
Compared with developed economies, however, the Chinese financial market is still lacking in product 
varieties and is not sophisticated enough. Financial deepening is still inadequate and there still exists 
the depression of innovation in quite a few aspects. 
III. 
With the steady development of the economy and the deepening of the opening up, 
the Chinese financial market calls for further development and relevant departments 
shall thus adapt to the situation and transform their conception. Meanwhile, financial 
products will inevitably change accordingly. 
First,  with  the  transitional  period  coming  to  an  end  for  China’s  accession  to  the  WTO,  the  national 
treatment in place and the gradual easing of market entry, financial institutions shall face even bigger 
international competition. The commitments China made when joining the WTO and the requirements 
of the Chinese economy itself call for the accelerated development of the financial market. Secondly, 
with the gradual opening of the market and the progress of the economic globalization, the ratio of 
foreign trade to GDP in China has reached 60% in 2003. More and more enterprises are involved in 
international  businesses.  Objectively,  the  Chinese  financial  institutions  are  required  to  provide 
corporate  customers  with  a  series  of  financial  services  such  as  arbitrage,  risk  control  and  FX  cash 
management. The expansion of market demand opens windows of opportunity for the development of 
the  financial market  and  financial  products.  Third,  with  the  deepening  of  the  opening  up,  China  will 
improve  the  formation  mechanism  of  renminbi  exchange  rate, phase  out  inappropriate  measures of 
foreign exchange control and realize in the end the Renminbi convertibility under the capital account. 
All the above calls for further development of the financial market and further diversification of financial 
products.  The  development  and  the  diversification  have  been  defined  as  developing  the  financial 
market system in an all-direction and multi-level manner. 
IV. 
As a developing country and a transitional economy, China shall, despite setbacks in 
the  past,  attach  great  importance  to  innovation  of  financial  products  without 
refraining from it simply for fear of running risks. In the process, efforts shall be made 
to  deal  well  with  the 
interaction  between  accumulation  of  experience  and 
improvement  of  regulations  and  to  standardize  innovation  of  financial  products  by 
means of the positive and negative lists. 
In the preliminary period of the opening of the Chinese economy in the 1980s and mid-1990s, there 
were  turns  and  twists  for  the  innovation  of  financial  products  and  in  turn  the  annulment  of  some 
products and closure of problematic financial institutions due to lack of talents, outmoded technology, 
deficient management and supervisory inadequacies. The innovation of financial products like those in 
other  sectors,  have  to  undergo  the  process  of  learning,  personnel  training,  growth  of  institutions, 
maturing of the market and progress of supervision. Risks would rise if some conditions are not ripe. 
Besides, the closure of the problem financial institutions has also exposed some weaknesses in the 
Chinese legal system, for example, there are still considerable problems in terms of closure as a result 
of bankruptcy. 
Of course, different decision-making departments and different experts and scholars will have different 
opinions in terms of development and supervision of innovation of financial products. In particular, one 
idea is that as there were turns and twists historically, there shall be, first and foremost, the regulations 
to draw international experience for the purpose of developing new financial products. The case holds 
to some extent. In practice, however, it invites some problems. First, the experience and lessons in the 
international  context  differ  from  country  to  country,  and  different  countries  differ  considerably  from 
each  other  as  well.  For  instance,  the  British  and  US  models  differ  immensely  from  the  Continental 
model in Europe and from the Korean and Japanese models, which needs further analysis, judgment 
and selection. 
Furthermore,  development  of  rules without  practical  experience  usually  costs quite  a  long  period  of 
time and even could never be finished. As such, the rules lack practicability and comprehensiveness. 
In terms of methodology, the belief that everything will not be practiced until the rules are established, 
is against the objective law that human being enhances perceptual knowledge through practice. The 
practical way at present, might as well be, to draw experience from the current implementation of the 
sectoral policies and to deal with the issue by setting positive and negative lists. Where products are 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2004
relatively  mature  in  the  international  context  and  where  financial  institutions,  with  strong  risk 
management, carry out product innovation, the negative list will be adopted, i.e. “all those business 
items that laws do not clearly prohibit are allowed to develop.” Where the financial products are not 
very mature and are prone to produce systemic risks, a positive list will be adopted to regulate the 
operation. 
In  the  course  of  innovation  of  financial  products,  efforts  shall  be  made  to  properly  define  the 
positioning  of  financial  products.  Attention  shall  be  paid  to  differentiate  products  designed  for 
institutional investors from those for individuals. As institutional investors usually have advantages of 
its own and thus have relatively strong capability of analysis, judgment and resilience against risks, 
requirements  for  permits  of  products  designed  for  institutional  investors  shall  not  be  so  tight  and 
prudential as those designed for individuals. So is with the information disclosure and supervision. In 
particular,  financial  innovations  for  select  customers  shall  be  differentiated  from  those  for  common 
customers.  Besides,  the  financial  innovations  like  derivatives,  which  are  sophisticated  in  terms  of 
pricing  and  risk  control  and  designed  for  complex  financial  institutions,  shall  be  differentiated  from 
others as well from the perspective of supervision. 
Development of innovative financial products will enable the transformation of the structure of assets 
and  liabilities  in  financial  institutions.  Take  banking  innovations  for  example.  At  present,  from  the 
perspective  of  assets,  there  have  been  such  new  financial  products  as  consumer  credit,  assets 
securitization, securitization for non-performing loan (NPL) package and turnovers of credit risks. From 
the  perspective  of  liabilities,  there  have  emerged  substitutions  for  savings  products,  e.g.  funds 
products, securities investment and insurance products etc. Besides, fee-based business is now in the 
ascendant. In the international context, banks are no longer simply regarded as institutions that deal in 
savings and loans, rather as commercial and service entities with enormous branch network and as 
sales and service network capable of coping with various products. Meanwhile, financial services are 
regarded as information processing by connecting electronic networks. 
V. 
The continuous change of market demand and appearance of trans-sectoral products 
increasingly call for functional supervision, in order to adapt to the changing situation 
and to strengthen coordination. 
After  the  establishment  of  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  (CSRC),  China  Banking 
Regulatory Commission (CBRC) and China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC), the framework 
of functional supervision has basically taken shape, playing important role for the stable development 
of the financial industry and effective prevention of financial risks. Meanwhile, it is observed that the 
continuous  change  of  market  demand  objectively  calls  for  the  rational  and  effective  allocation  of 
financial resources among different markets. Therefore, demand unfolds gradually for trans-sectoral 
products.  For  example,  corporate  customers  have  cultivated  demands  for  investment  and  cash 
management,  arbitrage  and  insurance  besides  loans  while  individuals  have  further  developed 
demands  for  consumer  credit,  housing  loans  and  even  investment  and  cash  management  and 
annuities  besides  deposits.  The  appearance  and  development  of  trans-sectoral  business  items 
produce new opportunities of changing irrational proportions of direct and indirect financing. 
Trans-sectoral products objectively call for more comprehensive functionalities of financial institutions. 
From the perspective of the current practical situation in China, supervisory organizations take on de 
facto  acquiescence  toward  the  advent  and  development  of  financial  holding  companies.  It  is 
recognized that the extensive branch network and long-term special information of customers in the 
financial institutions provide opportunities for development of trans-sectoral business. It is observed, 
therefore, that the development of market demand and requirement of resource sharing have exerted 
impact  on  the  old,  divided  supervisory  conception  that  financial  institutions  be  supervised  by  the 
issuers  of  “Certificates  of  Birth”  (permits  for  operation).  In  fact,  it  is  not  necessary  at  all  to  set  up 
hurdles  between  functional  supervision,  market  entry  and  development  of  financial  products.  With 
economic  development,  whichever  department  is  responsible  for  approval  of  establishment  of 
institutions, business innovation shall not be impeded. There shall, not necessarily, be contradictions 
between functional supervision and business development. Supervisory departments are adapting to 
the changing situation, transforming conception and strengthening coordination. Besides, to maintain 
the stable and balanced development of the macro economy, the Reports of the Third Plenary Session 
of the 16th Congress of the CPC have stated clearly that the PBC, the Ministry of Finance and the 
three supervisory commissions shall further strengthen coordination. The tendency has been reflected 
in relevant legislations. 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 3
VI. 
The  inherent  advantages  of  foreign-funded  banks  have  provided  great  potential  for 
their  development  in  China,  and  their  development  shall  correspond  with  the 
demands of the macro financial situation. 
Since reform and opening, more and more foreign-funded banks have entered the Chinese market, 
playing  significant  roles  in  improvement  of  the  Chinese  financial  system  and  development  of  the 
financial  market.  In  the  course  of  economic  transition,  foreign-funded  financial  institutions  have 
exhibited  some  advantages  in  corporate  governance,  risk  control,  risk  management,  credit  culture, 
decision-making procedure, incentive structure and assets management, producing great potential for 
their  development,  and  particularly  for  promoting  development  of  the  financial  market  and  financial 
product innovation. 
Development of foreign-funded banks shall take into consideration the needs of the Chinese macro 
financial  situation  as  well.  In  the  course  of  economic  transition,  different  industries  and  regions  will 
have different stages and potential of development. Foreign-funded banks might as well attach greater 
attention to development of some relatively weak financial markets, weak financial products or weak 
links  and  to  the  transformation  of  the  economic  structure,  by  supporting  the  development  of 
Northeastern Old Industrial Bases and Western Region of China. They shall compete with the Chinese 
counterparts on one hand and complement them on the other. It is hoped that foreign-funded financial 
institutions  in  China  will  do  more  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  Chinese  macro  financial  situation.  They 
shall not only share the profits out of the rapid and stable growth of the Chinese economy during the 
booming period but also weather possible busts and even crises for long-term operation and benefits. 
The  above  is  also  a  topic  for  discussion  and  deliberation  during  the  meetings  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements in February, 2004. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2004
