Shkëlqim Cani: Review of the Albanian economy   
Statement by Dr Shkëlqim Cani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, for Euromoney Yearbooks, Global 
banking and financial policy review, Tirana, 9 August 2004. 
 The  Albanian  economy  experienced  a  recovered  pulse  of  economic  growth  over  the  year  2003. 
Positive developments are marked in respect of consolidating the country’s macroeconomic stability, 
economic growth and a sound development of the financial system. A recovery in economic activity 
and 6% growth of Gross Domestic Product in real terms was proved by all sectors of the economy, but 
was  particularly  evident  in  the  construction,  transport  and  services  sectors,  which  are  the  most 
dynamic sectors of Albanian economy. 
The  year  2003  was  characterised  by  a  low  inflation  rate,  within  2%-4%  of  the  targeted  range.  The 
inflation rate as of December was 3.3%, meeting the Bank of Albania (BoA) target. Despite the various 
factors this low rate emerged from a diligent management of the domestic demand as an outcome of 
appropriate fiscal and monetary policies. 
BoA’s monetary policy has been a moderate one throughout 2003. Such a trend will continue during 
2004 and was recently reflected by the reduction of the core interest rate in the economy. Since April 
2003 the REPO rate has been lowered by 2.5%. The 6% REPO rate, decided on May 12, 2004, is the 
lowest ever in the Albanian economy. The policy aims to reduce borrowing costs in the economy and 
maintain price and financial stability. 
At the end of 2003 the foreign reserves of BoA reached US$1.03bn covering 4.7 months of imports. 
BoA continues to maintain its view of a free exchange rate regime. This was reflected in the fewer 
episodes of BoA’s intervention in the foreign exchange market during the first half of 2003, when the 
purchase of foreign currency was almost four times that of the second half of the year.  
Nonetheless, this did not hold back the domestic currency from appreciating against the euro and the 
US dollar, with a stronger appreciating trend in place in the second half of the year. The appreciation 
of the domestic currency was one of the factors behind BoA’s 2.0% interest rate cut during year 2003. 
Monetary  indicators  have  generally  been  performed  in  compliance  with  the  forecasts  set  out  in  the 
Bank’s monetary programme. The annual growth rate of lek deposits was 19.1% by the end of the 
year, which is significantly higher than the annual rates of the pervious years. 
The credit balance rose by L11.9bn or 30.9%. The new credit increased by 50% meanwhile 76% is in 
foreign currency. The loans/GDP ratio is still low, at about 7%. 
The banking system experienced important developments during 2003 and in the beginning of 2004. 
The entry of two new banks of Albanian capital was soon followed by the successful privatisation of 
the Savings Bank from the Raiffeisen Zentralbank (RZB) Austria. Now, all in all there are 16 banks in 
the Albanian Banking system. 
The BoA has progressed in reforming the banking system towards international standards, with the 
aim  of  the  developing  and  refining  the  country’s  banking  infrastructure.  AIPS,  inaugurated  in  early 
March 2004, can be considered as the backbone of the whole banking system infrastructure. 
The  BoA  wishes  to  bring  its  central  bank  closer  to  that  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  Therefore, 
changes and amendments of the Bank’s regulations are aimed towards achieving this goal. 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
