Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms and growth, as highlighted by the Irish 
case 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, delivered at the 
Whitaker lecture organised by the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, Dublin, 
31 May 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a real pleasure for me to speak at this inaugural lecture in honour of Dr. T.K. Whitaker, for several 
reasons.  
Firstly, in doing so I have the satisfaction of honouring a great man, a great European and a great 
Central Banker. Dr. Whitaker is a man whose inspiration and efforts were used at a critical time in Irish 
history  to  bring  Ireland  on  a  journey  of  transformation  from  economic  stagnation  to  a  position  of 
stunning and exemplary economic success. 
Secondly,  you,  Dr.  Whitaker,  deserve  to  take  the  satisfaction  and  pride  of  knowing  that  your 
contribution to the success of the Irish economy has not been bounded by Ireland’s shores. Rather the 
process of transformation that you began over four decades ago has become a model for the millions 
of  new  citizens  of  the  European  Union.  The  new  Member  States  of  the  EU  have  had  to  confront 
economic  challenges  whose  magnitude  and  long-term  importance  are  similar  to  those  that  faced 
Ireland when you began your work. Thanks to Ireland’s economic success, to which you devoted your 
life, we can be confident that economic reform works.  
Today I have the opportunity to highlight the importance of structural and fiscal reforms in an enlarged 
Europe.  Ireland’s  contribution  in  this  area  is  not  confined  to  inspiration  from  its  exemplary  policy 
record.  The  Irish  Presidency  of  the  European  Union  is  working  to  stimulate  progress  in  structural 
reform  through  its  prioritisation  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda.  Together  with  the  great  events  of  European 
Union enlargement and the progress being made in other areas, this should be a source of pride for 
Ireland.  
Speaking  about  Ireland’s  EU  Presidency,  and  noting  that  the  outgoing  President  of  the  European 
Parliament, Pat Cox, is also Irish, I cannot resist mentioning with pride my own Celtic roots as a native 
“Breton”! 
Before experiencing economic spring, Ireland has had to go through a long winter of economic inertia. 
For  decades  after  the  establishment  of  Ireland’s  independence  a  climate  of  economic  and  social 
pessimism  became  prevalent  in  a  country  which  appeared  to  have  little  to  offer  its  citizens  but  the 
prospect of emigration and low revenues. Between 1951 and 1958, as Europe’s economy rebounded, 
Ireland’s relative GDP per capita actually fell from 75 to 60 per cent of the EU average.  
It was the year 1958 in which an important turning point was made in Irish modern economic history: 
The Programme for Economic Expansion was published under your leadership and inspiration as the 
then Secretary of the Department of Finance.  
This  publication  pointed  a  way  out  from  what  appeared  to  be  an  intractable  downward  spiral  of 
weakening economic activity, high inflation, low living standards, chronic unemployment and a level of 
emigration  that  was  comparable  to  the  birth  rate.  With  its  emphasis  on  free  trade,  increased 
competition and the need to end protectionism, this document pointed the way to an Ireland that was 
to become economically more open, industrially more diverse and increasingly confident of its future.  
Your inspiration was followed by your action as Ireland’s top public servant. In the same year of 1958, 
the Industrial Development Authority was created, bringing the stimulus of foreign investment into the 
Irish  economy.  Subsequently,  you  guided  Ireland’s  programme  of  trade  liberalisation  and  structural 
reform in the 1960s. Economic growth accelerated as a result. In 1973 Ireland acceded to the EU in a 
process to which you played a significant role as Governor of the Irish Central Bank.  
So far I have looked backward but in true Central Banking style I have done so only so that I may look 
forward, in particular to the challenges facing Europe now. In an enlarged Europe, the vision you have 
displayed in inspiring, designing and implementing economic reform in the 1950s is very relevant to us 
today.  
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
Allow me now to focus on this theme and in particular on the important topics of structural reform and 
fiscal consolidation, explaining for each of them their merits, including in light of the Irish experience 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  has  been  highly  successful  in  fostering  macroeconomic  stability  in 
Europe. The ECB has provided its own contribution to this success through the safeguarding of price 
stability in the euro area. However, important efforts are still needed to fully realise the advantages of 
a stable single currency. Structural reforms that are designed to increase the flexibility of markets offer 
the  key  to  achieving  higher  sustainable  growth,  increasing  employment,  promoting  innovation  and 
securing  the  sustainability  of  social  security  systems  in  the  EU.  They  furthermore  enhance  the 
capacity of the participating countries to cushion macroeconomic shocks. By contrast, the more rigid 
labour,  product  and  financial  markets  are,  the  higher  will  be  the  employment  and  income  losses 
experienced in response to changing domestic and global economic conditions.  
It is widely recognised that structural reforms are needed to improve the prospects of the euro area. 
Given that demographics in the EU are less dynamic than in other economies, including the US, the 
case for a decisive implementation of structural reforms is even more pressing. 
This is not to say that there has been no progress in structural reform across Europe in past years. 
Indeed,  a  number  of  governments  have  made  important  and  significant  steps  to  address  structural 
rigidities in their countries. Progress has been uneven however and we still have a distance to cover 
before reaching the goals that have been set.  
The impetus from determined structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets would set in 
motion  a  virtuous  circle  of  increasing  confidence:  the  more  credible  the  reforms  are,  the  more 
confidence  they  will  create,  and  the  more  confidence  is  created,  the  sooner  positive  results  will  be 
visible. So, I would like to give you some examples of where I think further progress with structural 
reform is needed in Europe, to enhance job creation, growth and economic resilience. 
One of the most difficult and persistent challenges facing Europe is to reduce structural unemployment 
and  elevate  the  level  of  activity  rate.  In  2003,  9%  of  the  labour  force  in  the  European  Union  was 
unemployed,  a  level  of  three  percentage  points  higher  than  in  the  US.  The  rate  of  youth 
unemployment was more than double that of adult unemployment. The overall rate of activity is around 
62 % in the euro area where it is as around 75 % in the United States. Some countries have started to 
reform their social security systems and unemployment schemes and early retirement incentives have 
been  reduced.  But  more  progress  of  this  type  is  necessary  to  attract  more  people  into  the  labour 
market, particularly as Europe’s populations become older, and to reach the goal which has been set 
up in the LISBON agenda, namely a rate of activity of 70 % by 2010. In a number of cases, together 
with high marginal tax rates, the legal and regulatory environment in Europe continues to provide a 
disincentive  to  take  up  work  and  to  continue  working  later  on  in  life.  And,  there  are  still,  in  certain 
sectors  of  activity,  a  large  mismatch  between  skills  and  vacancies,  implying  the  need  for  improved 
education and training. Finally, wages should more strongly reflect regional and sectoral productivity 
differences.  
EU countries also made progress in product market reforms during the 1990s, having positive effects 
on the integration and level of competition in goods markets, but barriers to competition and innovation 
in Europe remain. Attention should be paid in particular to the share of EU Internal Market legislation 
not yet transposed into national laws, the incomplete integration of the service sector, where most new 
jobs are created, and remaining regulations that hamper the internal market. Progress on this front is 
extremely  important  as  many  forms  of  national  regulations  hamper  integration  and  competition  and 
keep prices above levels observed in more integrated markets. Furthermore, state subsidies and in 
particular  sectoral  aid  continue  to  distort  European  product  market.  The  Lisbon  target  that  R&D 
investment should reach 3% of GDP, with two-thirds financed privately, is not yet achieved.  
Finally much progress has been achieved in capital market reforms, not least due to the introduction of 
the  euro.  But  the  further  integration  of  national  capital  markets  towards  a  truly  European  financial 
market  could  make  an  even  more  important  contribution  to  safeguarding  against  country-specific 
shocks. It would also result in greater availability of risk capital - particularly for innovative enterprises - 
and, more generally, in a reduction in financing costs for productive investments. Structural reforms in 
capital markets should aim to allow a more effective allocation of savings toward the most rewarding 
investment  opportunities.  Further  efforts  should  also  be  made  to  promote  foreign  investment  in  the 
euro area in order to attract additional capital and promote a greater transfer of technology. 
In this context, one has to consider the astonishing experience of Ireland, which recovered from poor 
economic and fiscal conditions in the mid-1980s to an impressive pace of economic activity and sound 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
fiscal position in no more than a decade. In addition to a favourable macroeconomic environment and 
the benefits derived from participation in the European Union, the economic recovery was grounded 
on far-reaching home made structural reforms in the labour, capital and product markets.  
The strengthening of the labour market was strongly underpinned by a supportive policy framework. A 
strong  pickup  in  labour  supply  and  impressive  productivity  gains  were  associated  with  favourable 
demographics and, more recently, an increase in skilled immigration. Furthermore, unemployment was 
dramatically  reduced  through  a  more  efficient  matching  of  individuals  and  job  vacancies.  Labour 
market participation, including that of women, was increased through structural reforms to reduce tax 
wedges and the human capital of the labour force was upgraded through a significant investment in 
education.  Ireland’s  economic  success  can  therefore  be  linked  to  the  transformation  of  its  labour 
market into a plentiful supply of competitively priced and quality labour resources. 
Important  successes  were  also  made  through  structural  reform  within  product  and  capital  markets. 
The  liberalisation  of  trade  and  investment  through  the  Single  European  Market  programme  had 
positive  effects  on  output  and  productivity  and  put  downward  pressure  on  costs  and  prices.  Goods 
markets  became  more  integrated.  Research  and  development  supported  the  dynamic  gains  from 
faster growth. Foreign direct investment also made a very significant contribution to Ireland’s growing 
economy. This streamed into Ireland, placing the country as one of the premier host countries for US 
foreign direct investment in the world during the 1990s. The EU’s Structural and Cohesion Funds were 
well used to improve Ireland’s infrastructure and educational system. Moreover, Ireland developed a 
transparent regulatory framework.  
To conclude on structural reforms, I think the key issue now is to bridge the gap between strategy and 
implementation in Europe - to identify the best policy practices and make structural reform happen. 
The European Union has a number of useful institutional instruments and processes in place, such as 
the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, the Employment guidelines and the Spring European Council, 
to foster implementation. In this respect, the ECB has always backed the diagnosis, the agenda and 
the goals that were adopted by the Lisbon European Council in 2000. The Presidency Conclusions of 
the  Spring  2004  European  Council  delivered  a  message  of  determination  and  confidence  which 
reinforced the validity and relevance of the Lisbon process. We have a consensus on the “road map”. 
The issue today is to improve “navigation”, to improve the decision making process and the effective 
delivery of the reforms. Convincing the people of Europe that all European citizens will be better off 
thanks to these reforms is absolutely key. The success of Ireland was largely due to the fact that the 
Irish citizens were rightly convinced that this road map would improve their own situation. 
Moving to the second topic of my speech, i.e. fiscal policies, let me stress that we Europeans have 
been  very  bold  in  creating  a  single  currency  in  the  absence  of  a  political  federation,  a  federal 
government and a federal budget at the euro area level. Some observers were indeed arguing that 
without a federal budget of some significance the policy mix would be very erratic, depending on the 
random  behaviour  of  the  different  national  fiscal  policies  of  the  member  countries.  They  were  also 
arguing  that  without  a  federal  budget  it  would  be  impossible  to  weather,  with  the  help  of  the  fiscal 
channel,  asymmetric  shocks  hitting  one  particular  member  economy.  In  this  respect,  the  very 
existence  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  actually  allows  to  refute  these  two  arguments:  first,  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Pact  provide  a  mutual  surveillance  by  the  “peers”-  i.e  the  Ministers  of 
Finance - of national fiscal policies; second, by calling upon Member States to maintain their budget 
close to balance or in surplus over the medium term, the Pact allows the automatic stabilisers to play 
in  full  in  countries  facing  an  economic  downturn,  without  breaching  the  3%  ceiling  for  the  deficit. 
Beyond these economic underpinnings, other considerations are worth mentioning: a fiscal policy set 
according  to  rules  adds  to  macroeconomic  stability  by  providing  agents  with  expectations  of  a 
predictable  economic  environment;  this  reduces  uncertainty  and  promotes  longer  term  decision 
making,  notably  investment  decisions,  and  economic  growth;  in  addition,  sound  fiscal  policies 
contribute to lower risk premia on long term interest rates and thus support more favourable financing 
conditions; finally, fiscal discipline prevents spill-over effects from one country to another in the form of 
higher interest rates. 
Some people argue that fiscal consolidation is detrimental to demand and economic activity. I would 
maintain that wealth and expectational effects of well-designed consolidation programmes might very 
much reduce and possibly even outweigh the traditional Keynesian multiplier effects of fiscal policy on 
demand and activity. If fiscal consolidation is perceived by the private sector as a credible sign that 
public  spending  will  be  permanently  lower  in  future  years,  households  will  revise  upwards  their 
expected  permanent  income  in  anticipation  of  lower  future  taxes.  Therefore,  current  and  planned 
consumption will also increase.  
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
In addition, fiscal consolidation might improve long-term financing conditions by way of less demand 
on  the  savings  pool  (reducing  crowding  out)  and  lower  risk  premia  on  government  paper.  Hence, 
wealth effects prompted by lower nominal and real interest rates would support larger consumption. 
Furthermore,  following  more  favourable  financing  conditions,  private  investment  is  also  likely  to 
increase.  
The  case  for  expansionary  effects  on  the  supply  side,  via  an  improved  competitiveness  of  the 
economy,  is  also  important.  If  fiscal  consolidation  can  induce  moderating  effects  on  wage  demand, 
relative  unit  labour  costs  might  decrease,  with  positive  medium-term  effects  on  real  GDP  growth 
through a greater competitiveness of the productive sector. Such effects are buoyed if lower expected 
tax  rates  and  more  efficient  public  expenditure  enhance  the  working  incentives  and  the  investment 
environment. 
It  is  also  important  to  recognise  that  fiscal  policies  can  promote  growth  and  employment  via 
appropriate reallocations of the level and composition of government taxes and expenditures without 
hampering  in  any  respect  the  fiscal  rules.  Reducing  inefficient  public  spending  can  reduce 
disincentives to work and help to finance tax cuts. Furthermore, public expenditures can be redirected 
towards productivity-enhancing physical and human capital accumulation rather than, for example, the 
provision of subsidies for declining industries.  
In this respect, the dramatic acceleration of output in Ireland in the post 1987 period can be associated 
with a vigorous and successful project of fiscal consolidation starting in 1987. This programme was 
based on tight expenditure control via subsidy cuts, social security reform and a streamlining of the 
public sector and control of public expenditure.  
Ireland’s experience, similar to the Danish experience in 1983-89, clearly shows how policies geared 
to fiscal consolidation do not necessarily entail contractionary effects on real aggregate demand and 
economic  activity.  On  the  contrary,  in  these  two  countries,  in  spite  of  the  tightening  policies 
undertaken, the rate of growth showed a significant increase in relation to previous years. In particular, 
in these countries, significant budget consolidation based on spending reduction enhanced the long 
term fiscal sustainability and increased the policy credibility of a more favourable tax regime. 
Regarding Ireland, the budget deficit was reduced from 10.1% of GDP in 1986 to 1.7% in 1989, while 
the  debt  ratio  declined  from  113%  of  GDP  to  100.4%  of  GDP;  over  the  same  period  GDP  growth 
accelerated  from  0.3%  to 6.2%;  the  overall consolidation  effort,  as  measured  through  the structural 
fiscal  balance,  amounted  to  5.1%  of  GDP  over  these  three  years.  In  the  years  afterwards,  Ireland 
continued to enjoy high rates of GDP growth and kept large structural fiscal surpluses (almost always 
above  5%  of  GDP),  thus  allowing  for  a  steady  and  rapid  decline  of  the  debt  ratio  (which  reached 
32.4% of GDP in 2003). 
The Irish and Danish experience brings evidence that expansionary expectation effects may dominate 
on the contractionary effects of a fiscal consolidation. In both cases there is a considerable evidence 
that the consumer boom was prompted by the wealth effects of cuts in public spending, as a signal of 
lower  future  taxes,  concomitantly  to  the  wealth  effects  implied  by  the  fall  in  interest  rates.  On  the 
supply side, a low tax environment has underpinned the pick up in economic activity in Ireland.  
Coming  back  to  Europe  as  a  whole,  confidence  among  European  citizens  is  vital  for  a  stronger 
economic  recovery  and  sustained  growth.  The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  recognises  that  the  still 
moderate level of consumer confidence is related in part to the debate about the appropriate path for 
fiscal policy and structural reform in many countries in the euro area. Also for this reason, progress 
with the implementation of the necessary structural reforms and more determined efforts to establish 
sound fiscal positions over the medium term are key to stronger confidence. 
The  successful  implementation  of  structural  economic  and  fiscal  reforms  requires  significant  and 
tireless efforts of explanation, pedagogy and adequate public communication. Over time, everybody 
will  benefit  from  more  growth,  employment  and  opportunities.  These  gains  from  reform  are  often 
overlooked in the public debate. In fact, there is a formidable challenge to gain the support of public 
opinion for implementing structural reforms.  
What are the implications in the current economic environment? Fiscal imbalances are quite significant 
in a number of EU countries with deficits and public debt ratios being too high. For these countries, 
there are solid economic reasons to argue that credible fiscal consolidation would boost growth in net 
terms,  the  so-called  “Ricardian”  effect  being  more  important  than  the  “Keynisian”  effect.  Reducing 
such imbalances is likely to have positive expectational effects of a more favourable tax regime and 
better financing conditions in the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
Moreover, we would probably all agree that tax and spending ratios in some countries are too high 
and unfavourable for investment and economic dynamism. Expenditure-based fiscal consolidation and 
reform  that  would  credibly  reduce  disincentives  to  work,  invest  and  innovate  could  have  significant 
confidence effects even in the short run.  
To conclude, I would like to return to the Lisbon reform agenda set in 2000, which was ambitious, but 
at  the  same  time,  absolutely  necessary.  It  was  clear  that  implementing  effectively  the  necessary 
reforms would be a real challenge and this challenge requires that we win the heart and the trust of 
the people. Indeed, many European countries are currently at a crossroad. First, and as regards public 
finances,  countries  are  faced  with  the  option  of  either  profoundly  reforming  their  public  expenditure 
and social security systems or putting their long run sustainability at risk. Second, I am convinced that 
economic activity, employment and innovation in the EU can only be lifted to a new, structurally higher, 
level  by  far-reaching  and  progressive  structural  reforms.  These  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  fiscal 
consolidation. The long-term advantages of following such a strategy far outweigh the short-term costs 
of  its  implementation.  I  therefore  strongly  encourage  and  support  those  governments  that  have  the 
courage  and  leadership  to  follow  this  path  and  hope  that  other  countries  will  follow  their  positive 
example. 
Dr.  Whitaker,  let  me  express  my  profound  admiration  for  the  example  you  have  shown  to  Central 
Bankers everywhere in your endurance and constant commitment to the public good. The fruits of your 
life’s work are all around us today and will play a role in inspiring policy reform in Europe. I for one, 
Dr Whitaker, salute you for your work, and thank you for the inspiration you have given all of us. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 5
