Jean-Pierre Roth: The creation of the euro and the new international monetary 
order - a view from Switzerland 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
2nd  Conference  of  the  “Geld  und  Währung”  Foundation  on  Financial  Stability  and  Globalisation, 
Frankfurt, 3-4 June, 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
It is widely acknowledged that the birth of the euro on January 1, 1999 was a milestone in the process 
of European integration. Giving up national sovereignty in monetary matters was a very bold move of 
truly  historical  proportions.  It  will  have  long-lasting  economic  and  political  consequences.  It  should 
promote  efficiency,  transparency,  and  growth.  The  creation  of  a  single  currency  should  also  act  as 
catalyst towards further European integration. Moreover, and this is really what I would like to focus on 
today, the creation of the euro has changed the world’s monetary landscape. I believe that one can 
say without fear of exaggeration that it has led to a new international monetary order. And for most of 
it, this is very good news indeed. 
Our pre-euro fears 
2. 
To be honest, I must admit that prior to the introduction of the euro we were somewhat worried at the 
Swiss National Bank. Although we fully appreciated the benefits that Switzerland would draw from the 
creation  of  the  euro  in  terms  of  increased  transparency  and  lower  transaction  costs,  we  were  also 
quite concerned about possible risks. We had three main fears. 
First,  we  were  concerned  that  the  Swiss  franc  might  be  in  for  a  roller-coaster  ride.  In  the  past, 
whenever  the  dollar  was  under  attack,  international  investors  turned  their  attention  to  the  German 
mark and the Swiss franc. Their status as safe-haven currencies meant that at times of turbulences on 
foreign exchange markets they would move well beyond what economic fundamentals could justify. In 
fact, the Swiss franc often exhibited a tendency to appreciate even more than the German mark, a 
phenomenon that was often attributed to the relative narrowness of the Swiss financial markets. Now 
with the German mark gone, wouldn’t all attention focus on the Swiss franc? Would it not mean that in 
any dollar crisis the franc would have to bear even more of the adjustment than in the past? Even 
worse, what would happen if the euro itself were under attack? The last thing we needed was for the 
franc  to  become  the  first  currency  in  the  line  of  fire,  or  something  like  the  lightening  rod  of  the 
international monetary system. 
A  second  fear  that  we  had  was  that  it  would  become  very  difficult  in  the  future  to  conduct  an 
independent  monetary  policy.  Switzerland,  together  with  Liechtenstein,  would  now  be  totally 
surrounded  by  a  single  monetary  zone.  As  you  know,  Switzerland  is  a  small  open  economy,  and  I 
emphasize both the words small and open. Indeed, we are widely open. Nearly half of our national 
income is generated abroad, and the European Union is by far our largest foreign partner. About two 
thirds of our exports head in that direction, and we are one of the best customers of the EU. We are 
also very small, meaning that although we have no significant impact on the rest of Europe, we are 
very  exposed  to  foreign  shocks,  whether  they  are  real  or  monetary  in  nature.  Our  activity  is  highly 
correlated with that of the eurozone. Under these conditions, would the SNB still be in a position to 
conduct an independent monetary policy? Would it be realistic to expect the SNB to follow a course 
that deviated from the one set by the European Central Bank, or would the SNB be obliged to shadow 
the actions of the ECB? 
The question of an independent monetary policy is not just a matter of safeguarding the interest and 
the prestige of our job as Swiss central bankers. The stakes are much higher. For one thing, even if 
Swiss  activity  and  economic  conditions  more  generally  are  highly  correlated  with  Europe,  the 
correlation is not perfect. Our economy, although offering many similarities to the German and French 
economies, also has its specificities. Thus, Switzerland is very well supplied with physical and human 
capital.  As  a  consequence,  the  return  on  capital  is  relatively  low  and  wages  are  relatively  high, 
particularly  so 
in  capital-intensive  and 
high-value-added activities. External shocks tend to impact on us in a way that is not exactly the same 
for  unskilled  workers.  We 
to  specialize 
tend 
thus 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
as for the rest of Europe. Moreover, we have to cope with home-brewed shocks as well. It is for these 
reasons that we are eager to keep an independent monetary policy. 
Furthermore,  if  markets  became  convinced  that  in  the  future  the  SNB’s  actions  would  merely  be  a 
Xerox  copy  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  they  would  rapidly  force  a  convergence  of  our  nominal 
interest rates with those of the eurozone. Our real interest rates might remain lower for a while, given 
our  relatively  large  endowment  of  physical  capital,  but  a  tendency  towards  equalization  would 
nonetheless set in. What this might mean for us is a higher inflation rate for some time, together with a 
collapse in asset prices and in domestic gross capital formation. A cocktail of higher interest rates and 
our high wage structure would be highly detrimental to our competitiveness in export markets. 
The third fear that was sometimes expressed, although here I must say I was rather sceptical myself, 
was  that  the  euro  could  eventually  make  the  Swiss  franc  obsolete.  With  many  of  our  trading  firms 
billing and paying their suppliers in euros, there might be a tendency for them to adopt the euro more 
generally for their accounting as well as for their domestic transactions. Some people even went as far 
as  predicting  that  before  long  wages  would  be  paid  in  euros.  Shops,  hotels  and  restaurants  would 
rapidly be forced to accept euros, so that visitors from abroad would no longer see the need to convert 
their euros into francs. Eventually Swiss consumers themselves would follow suit, so that Switzerland 
would be de facto integrated into the eurozone. 
More than national pride would be hurt by such an “euroization” of the Swiss economy. For one thing, 
such  a  development  would  entail  the  loss  of  seigniorage  income.  With  a  monetary  base  of  about 
40 billion francs (25 billion euros), that is about 5,700 francs (3,500 euros) per person, seigniorage in 
our  case  is  far  from  trivial.  But  much  more  seriously,  the  loss  of  monetary  autonomy  caused  by  a 
displacement of the Swiss franc by the euro would prevent the central bank from creating liquidity in 
case of need. 
To  a  large  extent,  the  fears  that  we  had  reflect  the  more  fundamental  debate  about  fixed  versus 
flexible  exchange  rates.  Which  foreign  exchange  regime  is  appropriate  for  a  given  country  at  a 
particular  time?  Although  this  view  is  not  universally  shared,  many  economists  argue  for  a  polar 
solution: either purely flexible exchange rates, or rigidly fixed ones. Intellectually, I tend to share this 
view,  except  that  I  would  like  to  take  it  one  step  further:  either  purely  flexible  exchange  rates,  or 
monetary union. Rigidly fixed exchange rates do not constitute a polar case. In fact, they accumulate 
many  shortcomings.  Thus,  fixed  exchange  rates  have  never  been  known  to  be  fixed  for  very  long. 
Fixed exchange rates are fixed until the day they change, and when they do change, they often do so 
brutally  in  an  atmosphere  of  crisis,  of  pain,  and  of  tears.  No,  I  believe  that  if  one  really  aims  at 
exchange rates that are irrevocably fixed, then one should move all the way, that is go for monetary 
union. As long as two currencies are distinguishable, their relative price might change. So the choice is 
between  flexible  exchange  rates  and  monetary  union.  Needless  to  say,  since  Switzerland  is  not  a 
member of the European Union, joining the eurozone is not an option worth discussing at this stage. 
Fixing the franc against the euro would not even be a second best. It would rather be the worst of all 
worlds  by  suppressing  our  monetary  independence,  and,  at  the  same  time,  exposing  us  to  all  the 
dangers of speculative attacks by setting us up, the back against the wall, alone against the market. 
Our post-euro experience 
3. 
What has happened since January 1, 1999, all in all, has proven very reassuring. Our worst fears have 
not materialized, and indeed, in some ways, the outcome has been even much more favourable than 
we could have hoped for. 
First, let me briefly sum up our experience with regard to the fears of “euroization” and of the loss of 
our  monetary  degree  of  freedom.  As  expected,  the  Swiss  franc  was  not  crowded  out  by  the  euro. 
Sure, the euro circulates in Switzerland, just like the Swiss franc circulates in neighbouring France and 
Germany,  but  the  phenomenon  remains  marginal,  and  it  does  not  exceed  the  use  of  the  French 
francs, German marks and Italian liras in the pre-euro world. This is not surprising, for even though the 
euros  (and  dollars  for  that  matter)  are  happily  accepted  in  Swiss  shops,  cafés,  and  hotels,  the 
exchange  rate  is  usually  unattractive  and  the  change  is  given  in  Swiss  francs.  Shopkeepers  and 
restaurant owners are not in the business of providing financial services, and foreign tourists are still 
better  off  changing  their  euros  at  banks  or  using  their  credit  cards.  True,  Swiss  firms  use  the  euro 
extensively, some do much of their billing in the European currency, and some have even switched 
their  accounting  to  euros.  Some  natural  hedging  takes  place  as  well,  although  it  is  not  clear  how 
efficient this is. It is noteworthy, however, that some of the largest firms do much of their billing and 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
their accounting in dollars, while others quite happily continue to use the Swiss franc. The fact that 
“euroization” has not taken place should not really surprise us. There have been other examples of 
small  independent  currencies  surviving  in  the  neighbourhood  of  much  larger  monetary  zones.  The 
example  of  the  Canadian  dollar  comes  to  mind.  The  loonie  has  been  floating  for  the  past  several 
decades, and it has served Canada rather well. More generally, there is nothing to be gained in having 
more than one currency for transaction purposes. Much of the double coincidence of wants gets lost if 
several  currencies  circulate  simultaneously.  “Dollarization”  only  occurs  in  those  countries  where 
hyperinflation threatens. This is not about to happen in Switzerland, which has the best record of price 
stability in Europe! 
The fear of losing our monetary independence was misplaced as well. Over the past five years the 
SNB has demonstrated that it can act decisively and independently, often well before the ECB. Given 
its openness, Switzerland was badly affected by the world slowdown. The situation was made worse 
by  the  fact  that  our  main  trading  partner,  Germany,  was  itself  severely  hit,  and  to  compound  our 
difficulties, the worldwide capital overhang had a very adverse effect on our exporters, many of whom 
are specialized in the production of capital goods. Special circumstances require special action. From 
March 2001 to April 2003, the SNB cut interest rates aggressively, lowering the target range for our 
reference rate, the three-month Libor, by 325 basis points, from 3.5% to just 0.25%. If anything, the 
differential between Swiss and euro interest rates has slightly widened, putting all fears of a rapid loss 
of our interest rate advantage to a rest. 
What about the stability of the external value of the Swiss franc? Here, I must say, our fears proved 
not just to be unfounded, but the reality turned out to be even more favourable than we could have 
hoped for. The exchange rate of the Swiss franc against the euro ended up being much steadier than 
expected, in fact even steadier than it used to be against the German mark, not to mention the French 
franc and the Italian lira. Over the past five years, the real exchange rate has moved within a relatively 
narrow band little more than five percentage points wide. Except for the post-September 11 period, 
when  the  Swiss  franc  appreciated  markedly,  the  external  value  of  the  franc  has  largely  reflected 
economic fundamentals. In fact, even the post-9/11 safe-haven effect was relatively mild compared to 
what we experienced in the past, during the seventies and the eighties, for instance. 
A new international monetary order 
4.  
I  believe  that  one  could  make  the  case  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  brought  about  a  new 
international monetary order, that it has produced an element of stability that benefits many countries, 
not just Europe’s immediate neighbours, but nations around the globe. As we have seen, movements 
in the dollar/mark exchange rate were magnified as far as the Swiss franc is concerned in the past, but 
are much dampened today. When the euro depreciated against the dollar, the Swiss franc did so too, 
but  by  a  much  lesser  degree.  And  later,  when  the  euro  appreciated  against  the  dollar,  the  franc 
appreciated as well, but again to a lesser extent. In other words, our effective exchange rate has been 
less affected, the movement of the dollar being offset, at least to some extent, by a movement of the 
euro  in  the  opposite  direction.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  phenomenon  has  benefited  not  just 
Switzerland, but also many other countries with their own independent currencies, such as the United 
Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, and Norway. 
This evolution might not last. Perhaps it is the outcome of chance, but it has been persistent enough 
over the past few years to be noticeable. Maybe one day some smart graduate student will write a 
thesis  on  this  topic,  and  confirm  or  falsify  my  hypothesis,  but  in  the  meantime  let  me  outline  why  I 
believe  that  there  are  some  good  reasons  for  the  assumption  that  the  stability  of  the  international 
monetary system has been enhanced by the creation of the euro. 
I do not think that anybody would argue that the world as a whole makes up an optimal currency area. 
Our  planet  is  not  yet  ready  for  a  single  currency.  We  are  therefore  bound  to  live  in  a  world  with 
n, n greater  than  one,  currencies.  For  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century,  we  lived  with  one 
dominating currency, the U.S. dollar, and many less important currencies, such as the British pound, 
the Japanese yen, the German mark, the Swiss franc, and so on. Moreover, the United States is a 
largely closed economy, so it could regard fluctuations in the external value of the dollar with benign 
neglect.  Of  course,  most  other  countries,  being  rather  small  and  quite  open,  were  fully  exposed  to 
turbulences in foreign exchange markets, but there was not much they could do about it. There were 
several  episodes  when  the  internal  stability  of  the  dollar  was  threatened  as  well,  with  U.S.  inflation 
rates in the double digits. The flight into more stable currencies put considerable pressure on these. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
Today, the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape in some important respects. First, as the 
new  kid  on  the  block,  the  euro  commands  attention  and  respect.  In  economic  size,  the  eurozone 
nearly rivals the United States. There is now an obvious alternative to the dollar as an instrument of 
portfolio diversification. If investors have doubts about the dollar, there is no longer any need to rush 
into the Swiss franc, the euro will do just fine. 
Second,  the  eurozone,  although  not  quite  to  the  extent  of  the  United  States,  is  a  largely  closed 
economy. Movements in the euro are far less devastating than movements of similar magnitude in the 
Swiss franc or in the German mark. The euro is much more capable than any other currency to take 
on the role of shock absorber against the U.S. dollar. The eurozone, in some ways, is the large closed 
economy that the world needed as the counterweight to the U.S. economy. All small open economies, 
like Switzerland, should benefit from this new international monetary order. 
There  is  a  third  reason  why  the  arrival  of  the  euro  has  changed  the  landscape  and  should 
fundamentally  prove  beneficial  to  the  stability  of  the  international  monetary  system,  and  that  is 
competition. Even though the U.S. monetary authorities do not have a mandate that is as specifically 
directed at price stability as the ECB does, investors now have a choice and can vote with their feet. 
Thus the pressure is on the United States to deliver price stability as well. I find it very unlikely that we 
should again experience any time soon double digit inflation rates in the U.S., and this is very good 
news indeed for the good health of the international monetary system. 
Conclusion 
5.  
All  in  all,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been  a  very  positive  development  for  the  international 
monetary system and for Switzerland as an economy strongly dependent on world trade.  
We benefit from the greater transparency offered by the euro and the lower transaction costs made 
possible by its creation. Perhaps for the first time in history, we are surrounded by an area that shares 
the same monetary policy objectives as we do, namely that of price stability. This explains to a large 
extent why the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate has been relatively stable over the past five years. But 
the presence of a single European currency has per se also shielded third currencies - like the Swiss 
franc - from too much volatility in the case of dollar turbulences.  
At  the  same  time,  we  keep  the  trump  card  of  an  independent  monetary  policy  that  enables  us  to 
respond very rapidly to the specific needs of the Swiss economy. Since 2001, we have thus lowered 
interest rates more quickly and more decisively than the ECB. With inflation less than 1 percent, we 
enjoy price stability and our interest rates lie clearly below corresponding rates in the eurozone.  
A more homogeneous monetary system in Europe and a more stable international monetary order will 
help Switzerland to fully benefit from the present recovery of the world economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2004
