Alan Greenspan: The economic outlook  
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Senate, Washington, 21 April 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on the 
outlook for the U.S. economy.  
The economy appears to have emerged around the middle of last year from an extended stretch of 
subpar growth and entered a period of more vigorous expansion. After having risen at an annual rate 
of  2-1/2  percent  in  the  first  half  of  last  year,  real  GDP  increased  at  an  annual  pace  of  more  than 
6 percent  in  the  second  half.  Aided  by  tax  cuts,  low  interest  rates,  and  rising  wealth,  household 
spending  continued  to  post  sizable  gains  last  year.  In  addition,  an  upturn  in  business  investment, 
which  followed  several  years  of  lackluster  performance,  and  a  sharp  rise  in  exports  contributed 
importantly to the acceleration in real GDP over 2003.  
Although real GDP is not likely to continue advancing at the same pace as in the second half of 2003, 
recent data indicate that growth of activity has remained robust thus far this year. Household spending 
has continued to move up, and residential home sales and construction remain at elevated levels. In 
addition, the improvement in business activity has become more widespread. In the industrial sector, 
nearly two-thirds of the industries that make up the index of industrial production have experienced an 
increase in output over the past three months. More broadly, indicators of business investment point to 
increases  in spending  for many  types of  capital equipment.  And  importantly,  the  latest  employment 
figures suggest that businesses are becoming more willing to add to their workforces, with the result 
that the labor market now appears to be gradually improving after a protracted period of weakness.  
Looking  forward,  the  prospects  for  sustaining  solid  economic  growth  in  the  period  ahead  are  good. 
Monetary policy remains quite accommodative, with short-term real interest rates still close to zero. In 
addition, fiscal policy will likely continue to provide considerable impetus to domestic spending through 
the end of this year.  
Importantly, the caution among business executives that had previously led them to limit their capital 
expenditures appears to be giving way to a growing confidence in the durability of the expansion. That 
confidence has, no doubt, been bolstered by favorable borrowing conditions, ongoing improvements in 
efficiency, and rising profitability, which have put many firms on a more solid financial footing.  
Nevertheless,  some  of  the  strains  that  accompanied  the  difficult  business  environment  of  the  past 
several years apparently still linger. Although businesses are replacing obsolescent equipment at an 
accelerated pace, many managers continue to exhibit an unusual reluctance to anticipate and prepare 
for future orders by adding to their capital stock. Despite a dramatic increase in cash flow, business 
fixed and inventory investment, taken together, have risen only moderately. Indeed, internal corporate 
funds exceeded investment over the course of last year for the first time since 1975.  
Similar cautious behavior has also been evident in the hiring decisions of U.S. firms, during the past 
several  years.  Rather  than  seeking  profit  opportunities  in  expanding  markets,  business  managers 
hunkered down and focused on repairing severely depleted profitability predominately by cutting costs 
and  restricting  their  hiring.  Firms  succeeded  in  that  endeavor  largely  by  taking  advantage  of  the 
untapped potential for increased efficiencies that had built up during the rapid capital accumulation of 
the latter part of the 1990s. That process has not yet played out completely. Many firms seem to be 
continuing  to  find  new  ways  to  exploit  the  technological  opportunities  embodied  in  the  substantial 
investments in high-tech equipment that they had made over the past decade.  
When  aggregate  demand  accelerated in  the  second  half  of  2003,  the  pace of  job  cuts  slowed.  But 
because of the newfound improvements in the efficiency of their operations, firms were able to meet 
increasing demand without adding many new workers.  
As  the  opportunities  to  enhance  efficiency  from  the  capital  investments  of  the  late  1990s  inevitably 
become  scarcer,  productivity  growth  will  doubtless  slow  from  its  recent  phenomenal  pace.  And,  if 
demand continues to firm, companies will ultimately find that they have no choice but to increase their 
workforces  if  they  are  to  address  growing  backlogs  of  orders.  In  such  an  environment,  the  pace  of 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
hiring  should  pick  up  on  a  more  sustained  basis,  bringing  with  it  larger  persistent  increases  in  net 
employment than those prevailing until recently.  
Still, the anxiety that many in our workforce feel will not subside quickly. In March of this year, about 
85,000 jobless  individuals  per  week  exhausted  their  unemployment  insurance  benefits  -  more  than 
double  the  35,000  per  week  in  September  2000.  Moreover,  the  average  duration  of  unemployment 
increased  from  twelve  weeks  in  September  2000  to  twenty  weeks  in  March  of  this  year.  These 
developments have led to a notable rise in insecurity among workers.  
Most of the recent increases in productivity have been reflected in a sharp rise in the pretax profits of 
nonfinancial corporations from a very low 7 percent share of that sector’s gross value added in the 
third quarter of 2001 to a high 12 percent share in the fourth quarter of last year. The increase in real 
hourly compensation was quite modest over that period. The consequence was a marked fall in the 
ratio  of  employee  compensation  to  gross  nonfinancial  corporate  income  to  a  very  low  level  by  the 
standards of the past three decades.  
If  history  is  any  guide,  competitive  pressures,  at  some  point,  will  shift  in  favor  of  real  hourly 
compensation at the expense of corporate profits. That shift, coupled with further gains in employment, 
should cause labor’s share of income to begin to rise toward historical norms.  
Such a process need not add to inflation pressures. Although labor costs, which compose nearly two 
thirds of consolidated costs, no longer seem to be falling at the pace that prevailed in the second half 
of last year, those costs have yet to post a decisive upturn. And even if they do, the current high level 
of  profit  margins  suggests  that  firms  may  come  under  competitive  pressure  to  absorb  some 
acceleration  of  labor  costs.  Should  such  an  acceleration  of  costs  persist,  however,  higher  price 
inflation would inevitably follow.  
The pace of economic expansion here and abroad is evidently contributing to some price pressures at 
earlier  stages  of  the  production  process  and  in  energy  markets,  and  the  decline  in  the  dollar’s 
exchange rate has fostered a modest firming of core import prices. More broadly, however, although 
the  recent  data  suggest  that  the  worrisome  trend  of  disinflation  presumably  has  come  to  an  end, 
still-significant  productivity  growth  and  a  sizable  margin  of  underutilized  resources,  to  date,  have 
checked any sustained acceleration of the general price level and should continue to do so for a time. 
Moreover, the initial effect of a slowing of productivity growth is more likely to be an easing of profit 
margins than an acceleration of prices.  
As I have noted previously, the federal funds rate must rise at some point to prevent pressures on 
price inflation from eventually emerging. As yet, the protracted period of monetary accommodation has 
not fostered an environment in which broad-based inflation pressures appear to be building. But the 
Federal Reserve recognizes that sustained prosperity requires the maintenance of price stability and 
will act, as necessary, to ensure that outcome.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
