M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Achieving financial system stability 
Welcoming  remark  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Conference  on  Banking  Sector 
Issues:  Weak  Banks  and  Systemic  Crises,  Bangkok, 
18-20 February 2004. 
 Distinguished panelists,  
Honorable guests and participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On behalf of the Bank of Thailand, I would like to warmly welcome you to the city of Bangkok and this 
BIS/FSI  Conference.  My  sincere  thanks  to  our  overseas  speakers  and  guests  who  have  followed 
through  with  your  commitment  to  share  your  expertise  at  this  international  conference  despite  the 
recent outbreak of the bird flu. It is my sincere hope that you will take the opportunity to see more of 
our country beyond the conference hall and enjoy your stay here in Thailand.  
At the outset, I would like to say I am honoured to have this opportunity to address a distinguished 
audience of bank supervising experts from all corners of the world. The conference has adopted the 
theme: Banking Sector Issues: Weak Banks and Systemic Crises, a timely subject - appropriate and 
critical to bank supervisory authorities, since risk management is inherent in all commercial activities. I 
would like to suggest that this is a commonly faced challenge to us all, regardless of borders or stages 
of socio-economic development. I hope that over the course of this two-and-a-half days' conference, 
the  deliberations,  emerging  from  the  experts  and  audience  on  a  wide  array  of  supervision-related 
issues, will shed more light on how best to deal with weak banks and systemic crisis.  
All  banking  supervisors  and  central  bankers  seek  the  “Holy  Grail”  aspiration  for  a  stable  financial 
system which is resilient and capable of returning to a balance after a shock. To fulfill this common 
goal, let me repeat a golden principle of sound banking supervision - prevention is fundamental to 
avoiding  a  banking  crisis.  We  all  know  that  handling  a  crisis  is  always  very  difficult  and  painful; 
therefore, supervisors and bankers have a shared responsibility and accountability to prevent banking 
problems.  Supervisors  must  create  a  sound  framework,  foster  a  robust  and  effective  system,  and 
establish clear procedures to identify and deal with weak banks. This means the supervisors must be 
equipped  with  the  legal  power  to  effectively  carry  out  their  duties  and  have  the  necessary  tools, 
resources  and  capacity  to  solve  the  problems.  These  are  the  necessary  infrastructure  or  building 
blocks  of  a  sound  and  stable  financial  system.  Equally  important,  the  Board  and  management  of 
individual  banks  must  shoulder  the  responsibility  of  monitoring  and  addressing  bank  weaknesses. 
They cannot fail in their oversight and risk managerial duties, just as supervisors cannot fail in their 
on-site and off-site supervision.  
In this respect, I am a strong believer that good governance is the corner stone of a stable financial 
sector. We must create a banking community that does not tolerate imprudent business practices and 
lax systems and control. These are the sins of the past. Thailand, for instance, is carefully fostering a 
new business culture with the right values. On our part, the Bank of Thailand has since March 2002 
announced  guidelines  supporting  the  practice  of  good  corporate  governance  of  banks'  Board  and 
management to ensure that they look after the interests of their stakeholders in an effective manner. 
These  rules  are  not  ground-breaking;  they  are  just  simple  common  sense.  But  we  need  to 
communicate clearly to the private sector what our expectations are and what the consequences are if 
the efforts fail.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The cost of financial restructuring in Thailand was, after all, too enormous in figures and too painful in 
real terms to allow us to continue with our old way. In addition to changing the corporate culture, we 
are also amending a few key laws to solidify the foundation of our financial infrastructure. The new 
Financial  Institutions  Businesses  Act  will  empower  banking  authorities  with  the  necessary  power  to 
supervise financial institutions on a consolidated basis and to take appropriate actions against weak 
banks,  with  the  provisions  of  prompt  corrective  actions.  The  Deposit  Insurance  Act  will  support  a 
deposit insurance system to limit the loss of public money and reduce the moral hazard inherent in the 
current guarantee system. We must ensure that when a bank failure does occur, despite all preventive 
measures  and  utmost  efforts  to  prevent  it,  depositors  are  taken  care  of  fairly,  and  the  bank's 
BIS Review 14/2004 
 1
shareholders  accept  their  due  share  of  burdens.  Moreover,  we  have  drafted  the  Financial  Sector 
Master Plan to foster an efficient, stable, and competitive financial sector, guiding the development of 
the financial sector over the medium term.  
All these initiatives were undertaken with the objective of providing the right framework for effective 
supervision  in  order  to  develop  a  sound  and  strong  banking  sector.  In  this  regard,  I  trust  that  the 
discussions in the next two and a half days will be very constructive, providing more insights on these 
issues, as well as other controversial debates - such as the role of governments and lender of last 
resort.  
Allow me to say a few words on the substantial progress made by various international bodies in crisis 
prevention. The IMF has taken a leading role, revamping its own approach and sharpening its focus 
on crisis prevention, management, and resolution. Standards and codes of best practices have been 
introduced - the work coordinated by the IMF, World Bank, BIS, OECD and other international experts, 
underpinned by the Financial Sector Assessment Program. The Basel Committee has introduced the 
New Basel Capital Accord, the evolutionary supervisory framework. Supervision is directed away from 
rule-based  guidelines  to  a  more  comprehensive  risk-based  calculation  of  capital  adequacy, 
methodologies on operational risk, supervisory review process, and market discipline. These are just a 
few examples of the important work accomplished by the international financial institutions and various 
experts. Your presence here at this Conference is the best testament to how the solutions and ways 
for crisis prevention are still evolving, situations being reassessed, and tools being refined.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
There  has  been  a  saying  that  “every  crisis  is  a  new  crisis”  - we  don't  have the  same kind  of  crisis 
twice - and this indeed is a scary thought. We can come up with a how - to book on solving banking 
problems and crisis resolution, but the challenges are still enormous. I would like to reiterate the point 
made earlier that prevention is key because once a weak bank explodes into a full-blown crisis, the 
depth  and  complexity  of  problems  could  be  of  the  magnitude  that  is  unimaginable.  It  is  with  these 
thoughts in mind that I would have to sum up with this simple message: a supervisor can never be 
complacent.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The Asian crisis started from Thailand slightly over six years ago, and it induced a train of international 
coordination programs and discussions to prevent a recurrence and means to manage it. I hope this 
conference  will  add  to  our  knowledge  of  supervisory  tools  that  can  aid  participating  supervisors  to 
better  meet  the  challenges  of  weak  bank  resolution  and  systemic  crisis  regardless  of  the stages  of 
economic development and forms of financial system. I am happy that Thailand is the venue of, and is 
host to, this conference - a commendable international effort to bring us all closer to our aspiration of a 
sound and stable financial system. May I take this opportunity to thank the FSI and BIS for allowing us 
to  take  part  in  this  event  and  for  the  excellent  cooperation  over  the  years.  Our  compliments  to 
Mr. Jason  George  and  his  team  for  their  very  efficient  organization  of  this  event.  I  wish  you  all  a 
successful conference.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 14/2004
