Kristina Persson: Globalisation, structural changes and monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at at seminar arranged by the 
Confederation of Swedish Enterprise, Stockholm, 14 April 2004. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  take  part  in  this  important  conversation  on  the  consequences  of 
globalisation for Swedish economic policy. I shall primarily highlight the significance for inflation and 
monetary  policy,  although  I  shall  also  briefly  discuss  the  increased  demands  for  structural  changes 
and political management entailed by globalisation. 
Globalisation - or “the increasing interdependence of countries around the world as a result of growing 
cross-border trade in goods and services, investment and financial flows” (the IMF’s definition) - is not 
a new phenomenon. It has been going on for some time and has given rise to rapid structural changes 
with  considerable  demands  for  adaptation  of  people  and  businesses.  It  has  led  to  a  change  in  the 
division of labour and to specialisation, as well as access to new markets, which in turn has formed a 
base  for  increased  real  wages  and  growing  welfare.  How  well  Sweden  can  manage  these 
requirements for change in the future will be decisive for our economic development. 
In  recent  years,  both  the  scope  and  rate  of  change  of  the  globalisation  process  appear  to  have 
increased. Over the past twenty years, world trade has increased twice as fast as GDP growth, direct 
investment  has  increased  three  times as  much  and  both  foreign  exchange  and  equity  trading  have 
increased approximately ten times faster than GDP. There are several explanations for this, including 
the deregulation of the financial markets during the 1980s. Another contributory factor is that China 
and  India  are  participating  to  an  increasing  degree  in  the  global  economy.  China  is  currently  the 
world’s fourth largest trading nation, and its share of global trading has increased from 1.5 to almost 
5 per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  At  the  same  time,  private  consumption  in  China  has 
increased from a few per cent of US consumption to the equivalent of more than one tenth. 
What can explain the inflation rate slowing down? 
Over the past year, lower import prices and higher productivity than expected have contributed to the 
Riksbank  revising  down  the  forecasts  for  future  inflation,  particularly  in  recent  months.  It  was 
concluded in the Inflation Report published a couple of weeks ago that the unexpectedly low rate of 
increase  in  imported  inflation  (adjusted  for  oil  prices)  was  partly  due  to  lower  international  price 
pressure. Strong productivity growth has also contributed. There appear to be a number of structural 
changes behind the increase in productivity, which are at least partly connected with globalisation.  
If one disregards the temporary increases in inflation caused by high prices for energy, for instance, 
one can observe a gradual decline in inflation over the past decade. In Sweden CPI inflation has fallen 
from  around  5  per  cent  in  1994  to  approximately  2  per  cent  in  2003.  Even  in  a  more  long-term 
perspective,  inflation  shows  a  downward  trend,  which  is  illustrated  in  a  figure  showing  inflation  in 
OECD  countries.  Other  parts  of  the  world  have  experienced  a  similar  development.  The  IMF’s 
previous  chief  economist  Ken  Rogoff  has  demonstrated  in  an  article  that  global  inflation  has  fallen 
from 30 per cent to 4 per cent between 1993 and 2002. 
Which factors could lie behind this remarkable slowdown in the rate of price increase? I believe that it 
is mainly a combination of three factors:  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
A change in monetary policy with independent central banks applying inflation-targeting,  
IT investments enabling large-scale cost savings and  
Globalisation  that  entails,  among  other  things,  increased  competition  from  new  low-wage 
countries and pressurises producer countries towards greater productivity. 
Independent central banks with inflation targets 
1. 
At the beginning of the 1990s, in the aftermath of the years of overheating and crisis, a process of 
reorientation  of  economic  policy  began  in  Sweden:  the  tax  system  was  reformed  and  combating 
inflation was given priority. The Riksbank decided at the beginning of 1993 to introduce an inflation 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
target, defined as 2 per cent with a tolerated deviation interval of plus/minus one percentage point, 
and fiscal policy was increasingly oriented towards budget consolidation. Similar developments took 
place  at  around  the  same  time  in  many  other  countries.  The  change  in  economic  policy  was 
particularly  revolutionary  in  the  former  communist  states  in  Europe,  in  China  and  in  developing 
countries that had previously been inspired by the planned economy, such as India, which contributed 
to these countries becoming increasingly integrated into the global economy. 
The  fact  that  price  stability  has  become  an  explicit  target  for  monetary  policy  has  thus  played  an 
important role in the slowdown in inflation over the past decade. It is only to be expected, given that 
inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon,  which  is  ultimately  determined  by  monetary  policy  and  the 
confidence it inspires. Independence for central banks, the convergence criteria for EMU membership 
and a ban on financing budget deficits by printing more money are some examples of measures that 
have  contributed  to  increasing  confidence  in  the  price  stability  target.  In  addition,  improved 
communication and increased transparency have led to monetary policy becoming more predictable 
and more credible. This has resulted in low, stable inflation expectations, which in Sweden have on 
average remained close to the inflation target in recent years. 
Increased investment in IT 
2. 
As I have already mentioned, productivity has developed more strongly than expected over the past 
year.  Unlike  the  situation  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  this  upturn  cannot  be  explained  by 
increased production of ICT goods in general and telecommunications products in particular, as these 
sectors have experienced a sharp fall since 2001. The higher productivity growth is instead due to an 
unusually  large  rise  in  total  factor  productivity,  which  is  usually  ascribed  to  technological  and 
organisational improvements.  
Historically, the broader impact of technological changes has lagged since it takes time to adapt an 
organisation  and  technology  to  each  other  in  order  to  fully  take  advantage  of  the  innovations.  It  is 
therefore possible that the large-scale investment in ICT at the end of the 1990s is only now beginning 
to make a clear impact in the form of organisational improvements, cost cutting and higher productivity 
growth. In addition, ICT developments have led, by enabling more efficient production in networks and 
at  a  distance,  to  new  sectors  in  the  service  industries  being  opened  to  trade  and  international 
competition.  Another  important  factor  in  this  process  is  the  increasingly  strong  interaction  between 
ICT, trade and product markets, which enables outsourcing of labour-intensive stages of goods and 
services production to low-wage countries. 
Globalisation and the structural changes in the world economy 
3. 
The  access  to  new  information  technology  is  thus  one  of  the  conditions  for  the  new  trade  and 
production  patterns  that  are  emerging.  However,  the  slackening  in  price  trends  is  a  result  of  many 
interacting factors that are partly connected with globalisation:  
– 
– 
– 
Increased world trade and more operators lead to greater competition 
Deregulation and privatisation will also mean that competition increases 
A greater degree of specialisation and utilisation of comparative advantages (what is known 
as global labour reallocation) lead to increased productivity and efficiency 
More production in typically low-wage countries leads to lower costs 
– 
All  of  this  indicates  that  international  price  pressure  should  be  lower  during  the  coming  years  at  a 
given point in the economic cycle.  
To gain a more comprehensive picture of the significance of the structural changes for prices, it may 
be  useful  to  illustrate  how  they  interact  with  other  factors  that  might  influence  international  price 
pressure,  such  as  global  demand  and  commodity  prices.  Over  the  past  few  years,  international 
economic activity has been weak, which has probably contributed to the low rate of price increase. 
Until a year or so ago, commodity prices were also developing weakly, but since then a relatively large 
upturn  has  occurred,  while  manufacturing  activity  has  improved  and  global  demand  has  increased. 
Despite this, prices of manufactured goods have remained subdued.  
This somewhat contradictory, in historical terms, price picture is probably partly due to developments 
in China, where on the one hand the vigorous industrial expansion has led to a marked increase in the 
demand for commodities, while on the other hand the plentiful supply of low-wage labour has meant 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
that production of cheap goods for the world market is accelerating rapidly. This clearly illustrates one 
of  the  conditions  of  globalisation,  namely  the  increasing  specialisation  and  increased  utilisation  of 
comparative advantages. These factors, among others, provide better resource allocation, increased 
productivity and greater efficiency, which in turn have a subduing effect on prices. 
The increasing strong international economic activity and the upturn in commodity prices indicate that 
international price  pressure  will  increase  gradually  in  the  future. However,  the  globalisation  process 
may mean that price increases remain moderate over the coming years, despite the economic upturn. 
China and India together have more than 2 billion inhabitants, which corresponds to one third of the 
total world population. So far, only around 10 per cent of the Chinese population is estimated to be 
affected by the modern economy. This means that there is a very large unutilised labour reserve that 
could  contribute  to  keeping  down  price  increases  for  a  long  period  of  time.  At  the  same  time,  it  is 
important to remember that the integration of China and India into the global economy will not only 
lead to a large increase in the supply of cheap goods and services; these countries will also contribute 
substantial  demand  for  goods  and  services  from  the  industrialised  world.  It  is  therefore  no  simple 
matter to assess the long-term significance of China and India for global price pressure. 
The  integration  of  low-wage  countries  into  the  global  economy  through  large-scale  investment  in 
export-driven  growth  is  not  a  new  phenomenon;  another  example  is  Japan,  which  developed  in  a 
similar  manner  after  the  Second  World  War.  However,  the  size  of  China  and  India  means  that  the 
adaptation process could be much more profound and prolonged this time. Moreover, this adaptation 
will  occur  in  a  global  environment  that  is  much  more  open  and  exposed  to  competition  than  has 
previously been the case.  
As yet, only a small percentage of the firms in the United States and the EU, including Sweden, have 
moved their production to countries like China, India and the new EU members in eastern and central 
Europe.  Large  differences  in  labour  costs  in  particular  mean  that  this  redistribution  of  production 
capacity can be expected to continue in the near future. This development is supported by modern IT 
and by falling prices for international telecommunications. In all of the new EU member states from 
eastern and central Europe (with the exception of Slovenia), labour costs are lower than 5 euro an 
hour, while in countries like Sweden and Germany the figure is around 29 euro. Labour costs are even 
lower in China, less than 1 euro an hour.  
The low labour costs are one of the factors behind the sharp rise in direct investment in eastern and 
central Europe in recent years. During the period 1993 to 2002, the inflow of direct investment in most 
countries was between 30 and 50 per cent of GDP a year. As the new member states continue to 
modernise and integrate with the rest of the EU, including full membership of EMU, their powers of 
attraction for investments will probably increase further. 
The  cost  savings  from  outsourcing  could  thus  be  substantial,  as  could  the  profits  for  the  global 
economy.  The  profits  arise  because  when  jobs  with  a  low  value  added  are  outsourced,  labour  and 
investment  in  the  industrialised  nations  can  be  redirected  to  more  highly  productive  sectors,  which 
lead to an increase in productivity and lower costs for consumers. In this way global resources can be 
used  in  an  optimum  manner,  production  becomes  more  efficient  and  GDP  growth  in  the  global 
economy increases.  
For instance, the globalisation of IT services is expected to have major effects on productivity in the 
near future. A study by Catherine Mann at the Institute for International Economics shows that trade 
and global production accounted for 10-30 per cent of the price fall on hardware products in the United 
States during the 1990s. This led to growth being approximately 0.3 percentage points higher each 
year between 1995 and 2002 than it would otherwise have been. Today, expenditure on software is 
increasing at twice the rate as on hardware, and this process has scarcely begun in large areas of the 
economy.  If  prices  for  software  also  begin  to  fall,  thanks  to  globalisation,  the  second  wave  of 
productivity gains can be even greater than the first, particularly within the services sector, which has 
the greatest potential. 
We have seen that globalisation of trade and production patterns has led to more operators, who also 
have  lower  costs,  participating  in  the  world  economy.  This  has  led  to  international  competition 
becoming stiffer and prices being pushed down. Similarly, the increasing trend towards deregulation 
and privatisation over the past two decades has contributed to making production more efficient and 
raising productivity, which in turn has had a subduing effect on price trends.  
The question  of  how  globalisation  and  structural  changes may  affect  the  future  path  of  inflation will 
probably attract increasing attention in central bank circles. If, on the one hand globalisation and new 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 3
technology have led to economies having a lower inflation propensity, it may be possible to achieve a 
higher  level  of  resource  utilisation  without  inflation  accelerating.  Potential  growth  will  then  be  at  a 
higher level. On the other hand, increased demand from countries such as China and India combined 
with  a  synchronised  economic  upturn  could  contribute  to  the  global  output  gap  being  closed  more 
rapidly than we at present assume. In this case, inflation could rise earlier than anticipated. 
The major question is, of course, whether the low international price pressure will endure, and, if so, 
how long. One factor indicating that the developments we see now are a more lasting phenomenon is 
the  combination  of  more  independent  central  banks  with  inflation-targeting  and  increased  global 
competition. In addition, rapidly-growing low-wage countries like India and China still have some way 
to go before they are completely integrated into the global economy. Events that could radically alter 
the picture are, for instance, increased protectionism and introversion, extensive armed conflicts and 
irresponsible  fiscal  policy.  Protectionism  may  lie  close  to  hand  as  a  response  to  increasingly 
troublesome competition and difficulties in adapting national labour markets and production patterns, 
which is indicated, for instance, by the present US debate prior to the presidential elections. However, 
there is little that now indicates that these factors could grow sufficiently to outweigh the trend towards 
increased integration and globalisation.  
The  conclusion  is  therefore  that  the  low-inflation  economy  appears  to  have  become  established, 
although we cannot take it for granted. What consequences will this have for monetary policy in the 
future? 
Monetary policy in a low-inflation economy 
The  target  for  monetary  policy  is  price  stability.  This  means  that  the  Riksbank  is  as  anxious  that 
inflation should not be too low as that it should not be too high. In Sweden, the annual CPI inflation 
rate  was  negative  in  February,  for  the  first  time  since  the  beginning  of  1999.  Is  there  a  risk  of  this 
development continuing, and what can the Riksbank do if it does?  
To  begin  with,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  whether  price  trends  are  governed  by 
developments  on  the  demand  side  or  on  the  supply  side.  A  period  of  falling  prices  is  often  due  to 
aggregate  demand  being  significantly  lower  than  the  total  supply  of  goods  and  services  in  the 
economy. This type of situation can arise for two reasons: One is that demand could fall heavily, for 
instance,  as  a  result  of  households  for  some  reason  reducing  their  consumption.  The  other  is  that 
supply  could  increase  significantly,  for  instance  as  a  result  of  technological  advances  leading  to 
increased productivity. While demand-driven deflation is connected with weak production growth, the 
opposite  applies  to  supply-driven  deflation.  These  are  usually  termed  “bad  deflation”  and  “good 
deflation” respectively. 
In practice it is not so easy to distinguish between one sort of deflation and the other. Problems arise 
when  demand  is  too  low  in  relation  to  supply.  In  my  opinion,  there  could  be  a  possibility  that  the 
increasingly skewed distribution of income that has arisen over the past 20 years, particularly in the 
United States, but also in Europe and in ‘emerging markets, has led to total demand being excessively 
weak from a global perspective. However, to the extent that the present low price pressure is due to 
good productivity growth and the increased supply of cheap goods and services from China and India, 
it can thus be termed “good deflation”. 
These positive supply shocks, combined with the declining rate of inflation, have led to an increasing 
number of analysts, including Fed Governor Ben Bernanke, recently drawing attention to the risk that 
the  negative output  gap could  be  larger  than  anticipated.  This would  mean  that  disinflation  is  more 
pronounced  than  we  are  currently  assuming.  The  structural  changes  may  have  made  it  even  more 
difficult  to  assess  the  economies’  long-term  growth  potential  and  consequently  to  estimate  total 
resource utilisation. 
It is, of course, a complicating circumstance that factors a central bank has difficulty in identifying and 
controlling  are  important  to  inflation  trends,  in  both  the  short  term  and  in  a  longer  perspective. 
However,  there  is  at  the  same  time  a  lot  a  central  bank  can  do  to  prevent  excessively  low  price 
increases and to parry the increased complexity following in the wake of globalisation. Here I would in 
particular like to emphasise the importance of having a symmetric inflation target that functions as a 
clear, credible target for participants in the economy. I would also like to emphasise the importance of 
central banks’ communication in a low-inflation economy, as it is then particularly important to create 
stable, positive inflation expectations. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2004
Risks of deflation 
An interesting, but possibly hypothetical, question is whether there is a risk when inflation is very low 
of  Sweden  and  the  global  economy  fastening  in  a  deflation  spiral.  Experiences  from  deflation  are 
fortunately  rather  limited,  but  several  countries  suffered  problems  with  deflation  in  the  1920s  and 
1930s. In recent times, it is primarily Japan that has experienced deflation, and there is currently a 
discussion  underway of  the causes,  consequences  and what  would  have  been  a better policy.  The 
Swedish  experiences  from  the  1930s  indicate  that  a  price  stability  target  can  contribute  to  slowing 
down a threatening deflation process.  
With  an  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent,  it  could  become  more  common  in  future  for  inflation  to  be 
negative during individual months. It is difficult to say whether or not this is a problem, as we do not 
have very long experience of low inflation. Of course, there is a possibility that a more lasting deflation 
could arise if consumers become pessimistic. In that case it would be important for the central banks 
of  the  world  to  take  vigorous  monetary  policy  measures  in  order  to  maintain  confidence  that  the 
inflation target will be attained. 
Academic  research  in  the  field  of  economics  usually  highlights  three  costs  of  deflation.  The  first 
concerns the difficulty in reducing nominal wages. The second cost is due to the fact that deflation, if it 
is unexpected, results in a redistribution of wealth from borrowers to lenders. The third cost stems from 
the real interest rate becoming too high in relation to demand. The IMF’s report on deflation last year 
pointed  out  these  costs  and  emphasised  that  monetary  policy  must  be  preventive,  vigorous  and 
forward-looking with the aim of avoiding deflation. 
If deflation should nevertheless arise, what tools do we have to deal with the situation? If the scope for 
interest rate cuts has been exhausted, central banks must resort to other measures. These include, for 
instance,  trying  to  influence  interest  rates  on  securities  with  a  long  time  to  maturity  and  creating 
confidence in a higher inflation rate in future. In addition, fiscal policy can be more expansionary.  
A boxed article in the October 2003 Inflation Report described the Riksbank’s views on the deflation 
problem.  The  risk  of  deflation  was  portrayed  as  slight,  given  the  targeted  monetary  policy  and 
improved  economic  activity.  However,  there  are  analysts,  such  as  the  American  economist  Paul 
Krugman, who see parallels between the situation in Japan ten years ago and the American situation 
now, for instance with regard to the low level of resource utilisation and the aftermath of large share 
price  bubbles.  His  reasoning  is  that  it  took  a  long  time  for  deflation  to  arise  in  Japan  and  that  it  is 
therefore important to be aware of the warning signals that arise, such as the fact that the economy 
grows more slowly than its long-term potential rate for several years in a row.  
To summarise, it can be observed that the possibility of lasting deflation cannot be ruled out, but that 
the central banks have good possibilities to prevent this situation arising. The most important thing in 
this context is that monetary policy is adapted sufficiently quickly to achieve the target level and for 
monetary policy communication to be reliable and clear.   
The challenges of globalisation for Sweden 
Experiences show that it is generally the countries that have accepted globalisation and been quick to 
adapt both production and policy that benefit most from this process. The major challenge therefore 
lies in creating dynamic conditions in Sweden to ensure that new jobs arise as old ones disappear. 
What are the prospects for this?   
Structural changes in the wake of globalisation mean that less efficient production will be replaced by 
more efficient production and that sectors that do not hold up in competition will be replaced by sectors 
where the country has comparative advantages. Structural changes thus consist of two parts: closing 
down  (or  outsourcing)  and  new  establishment  of  businesses.  The  Austrian  economist  Joseph 
Schumpeter  called  this  creative  destruction;  old  jobs  and  technologies  disappear  and  new,  more 
productive jobs arise as technology develops and production becomes more specialised.  
The problem for both the economy as a whole and for individual employees is that the period of time 
between  destruction  and  creation  can  be  fairly  long,  whereby  “friction  unemployment”  arises. 
Structural  changes  make  tremendous  demands  of  the  capacity  to  change,  and  of  flexibility  in  the 
labour  market  to  enable  employees  to  change  sectors  as  smoothly  as  possible.  To  facilitate  this 
process, it is also important to offer support in the form of education and retraining.  
BIS Review 21/2004 
 5
There is considerable potential for a larger number of jobs and more highly qualified jobs, as well as 
increased productivity and lower prices, if the as yet relatively protected services sector is exposed to 
greater  competition.  As  far  as  Sweden  is  concerned,  this  applies  to  areas  such  as  foodstuffs,  the 
rental market, the construction industry and in particular the large public sector. A comparison with the 
EU shows that while 32 per cent of total consumption in Sweden was entirely exposed to competition 
in 1999, the corresponding figure for the EU on average was 45 per cent. 
In  order  to  realise  the  EC  Treaty’s  linchpin  of  free  competition  and  free  movement  of  services,  the 
European Commission put forward a directive in January this year that aims to create a real single 
market  for  services  by  2010.  The  sectors  covered  by  this  comprise  around  50  per  cent  of  the 
economic activity within the EU, and not least small and medium-sized companies. In practice, it can 
be difficult to reconcile the numerous national laws regulating the services sector with the ambition of 
creating free competition. Nevertheless, whatever happens, many of the new jobs created in the future 
will be in the services sector, in both the private and public sectors. 
Final remarks - some political reflections 
Globalisation has not merely liberated production capacity; it also limits the national state’s influence 
over the terms for production and employment. There are two possibilities available to compensate 
this  loss:  One  is  to  increase  the  power  of  attraction  in  relation  to  capital  and  competence  on  the 
international markets, which can lead to new businesses being established in, or moved to, Sweden 
and thereby to new jobs and increased growth. Attractiveness can refer, for instance, to stable rules 
for  economic  policy  and  entrepreneurship,  well-educated  labour  and  spearhead  competence,  good 
quality  of  life,  access  to  risk  capital,  good  infrastructure,  internationally  pioneering  technology  and 
research environments as well as efficient incentive and taxation systems.  
The  other  possibility  is  an  international  political  cooperation  to  balance  market  forces.  This  entails, 
among  other  things,  creating  the  conditions  for  taking  responsibility  for  the  environment,  fairer 
distribution  of  income  policy  and  investments  in  infrastructure,  research  and  development.  For 
Sweden, the EU is the arena closest to hand for cooperation between countries in ensuring that the 
long-term  perspective,  social  conditions  and  the  best  interests  of  society  are  taken  into  account  in 
economic developments. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2004
