Jean-Claude Trichet: The current state of the EU banking sector 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual Congress 
of German Savings Banks, Frankfurt, 5 May 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  both  a  pleasure  and  an  honour  to  be  invited  to  speak  here  today  at  the  Annual  Congress  of 
German  Savings  Banks.  Being  in  front  of  such  a  distinguished  audience  of  representatives  of  the 
financial community, I would like to present some views on the current state of play in the European 
banking sector. I will in particular analyse the factors that have contributed to its resilience over recent 
years. 
Since  2000,  EU  banks  have  been  confronted  by  an  extraordinary  combination  of  adverse  financial 
market shocks against the backdrop of a slow-down in the economy. Some commentators have even 
been  surprised  by  the  few  banking  problems  in  the  euro  area  during  this  period,  given  that  earlier 
episodes of slow growth often went hand in hand with severe problems in the sector. For central banks 
and banking supervisors, the resilience of the EU banking sector is, of course, very good news. At the 
same  time,  it  raises  a  number  of  questions.  What  is  now  so  different  compared  with  the  stressful 
periods that banks experienced in the past and what factors have contributed to this resilience?  
A turbulent period for EU banks 
But before addressing these issues, let me start by briefly recalling how challenging the environment 
has actually been for EU banks over recent years. Without a doubt, the most momentous technical 
and strategic challenge was the introduction of the single currency, now more than five years ago. 
The  very  smooth  transition  that  followed  the  adoption  of  the  euro  almost  makes  us  forget  the 
uncertainties, and sometimes even concerns, expressed before 1999 about the structural implications 
the euro might have on the euro area banking sector.  
The second challenge faced by banks in recent years was that not long after the banking sector had 
begun to adjust to operating with a new currency - including all of the efforts that this entailed - an 
exceptional series  of  adverse  events  followed  in  quick  succession.  After  an  almost  uninterrupted 
stock market boom since 1995, a severe stock market correction set in in March 2000 and investors 
faced  three  consecutive  years  of  negative  returns.  Investor  confidence  was  also  badly  shaken  by 
unprecedented episodes of serious corporate malfeasance. Although most of the main abuses took 
place abroad, Europe also had its fair share.  
Over  time,  we  have  observed  that  banks  have  increasingly  diversified  into  securities  trading, 
investment  banking  and  asset  management.  Although  much  was  expected  from  this  diversification 
strategy, the market correction was a reminder that fee income generated by these businesses also 
carries risks. Looking back, I think we can also say that some banks entered the businesses too late 
and at too high a price. The corporate scandals that coincided with the market downturn raised further 
questions about certain bank practices and Chinese walls did not always prove to be as impermeable 
as might have been expected.  
In my list of stressful events, I should also mention the re-emergence of country risk problems and 
the fall-out from the terrorist attacks in the United States. Country risk re-emerged as Turkey and 
Argentina  were  caught  up  in  currency  and  banking  crises.  Although  the  crises  had  only  limited 
economic effects on the EU banking sector as a whole, some banks incurred substantial losses. As to 
the  tragic  events  in  the  United  States,  they  had  an  immediate  effect  on  the  working  of  financial 
infrastructures and markets, but this was tackled quickly and efficiently by the competent authorities, 
including  those  here  in  Europe.  In  the  medium  term,  however,  the  attacks  shook  investor  and 
consumer confidence further.  
The third challenge, to conclude my brief overview, is that this extraordinary set of events took place at 
the same time that the economy was starting to slow down from the second half of 2000 onwards. 
As  debt  ratios  in  the  corporate  sector  had  risen  significantly  through  the  years  of  the  stock  market 
boom, signs of financial distress quickly surfaced as firms found that profits were not matching earlier 
expectations.  
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
Overall resilience despite isolated weaknesses 
But  in  spite  of  the  circumstances  that  I  describe  here,  the  EU  banking  sector’s  financial  health 
remained  overall  robust.  The  return  on  equity  of  EU  banks  peaked  at  12%  in  2000.  The  sector's 
profitability  subsequently  declined  for  two  consecutive  years,  reaching  8.6%  in  2002.  Increased 
loan-loss  provisions  for  corporate  loans,  reduced  commissions  and  trading  income  from  capital 
market-related  business  were  mainly  behind  this  fall.  Although  the  decline  was  substantial,  overall 
profitability levels continued to be well above those recorded in the second half of the 1990s. In the 
course of 2003 profitability picked up again. 
Banks’  solvency  levels  remained  relatively  unaffected  by  the  adverse  events.  Thanks  to  these 
adequate financial buffers, banks were able to withstand the shocks in their operating environment. 
The  aggregated  total  regulatory  capital  ratio  continued  to  hover  around  12%  throughout  the  period 
after 2000, which is well above the required minimum ratio of 8% for individual institutions.  
Although  the  overall  picture  was  rather  comforting,  I  have  to  qualify  this  somewhat  by  saying  that 
some individual institutions indeed experienced serious difficulties. Often this was because of problem 
loans in certain sectors, such as real estate, or because of the disappointing results in market-based 
activities.  In  some  instances,  the  intervention  of  public  authorities  or  private  banks  was  required  to 
prevent banks from failing.  
Possible reasons for the EU banking sector’s resilience 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  now  come  to  the  essence  of  my  question,  namely  the  factors  that  have 
accounted for the EU banking sector’s resilience over recent years. I am of the opinion that the benign 
combination of cyclical and structural factors contributed to this resilience. 
Let  me start with  the  cyclical factors. Although  the  economy started  to  slow  down  in  2000,  it  was 
preceded by a period of booming financial markets and strong growth. This expansive period helped 
banks  to  build  up  financial  buffers  sufficient  to  withstand  the  subsequent  downturn.  Although  the 
economic conditions were weak for a long period of time, the slowdown itself was relatively mild.  
Macro-economic instability, which so often coincides with a banking crisis, was absent in the EU in the 
period from 2000 onwards. It is my conviction that the economic and monetary union contributed 
significantly to this benign environment. First, by abolishing exchange rates between the former euro 
area  currencies,  exchange  rate  turbulence  was  avoided.  Second,  the  adoption  of  a  common  policy 
framework  based  on  price  stability,  fiscal  discipline  and  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms 
contributed favourably. The low inflation and interest rate environment, as well as sustained real estate 
prices, supported some lines of banks’ business. The retail business fared well and mortgage lending 
was  dynamic  in  the  face  of  declining  financing  costs  and  increasing  house  values.  This  helped  to 
counteract weakened corporate lending and the market-related activities of banks.  
I now come to the structural factors that contribute to the EU banking sector’s resilience. There I see 
that efforts made both by authorities and by banks, as well as developments in financial markets, 
have paid off. As a central banker, I would like to start with the role played by the authorities. Over 
recent  years,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  banks  has  been  greatly  reinforced. 
Here  we  should  duly  recognise  the  progress  made  under  the  influence  of  the  extensive  guidance 
developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  At  the  EU  level  there  have  also  been 
great  achievements  and  crucial  building  blocks  of  a  common  sound  regulatory  regime  have  been 
agreed upon. Here I am referring to the rules on access to the banking business, capital requirements, 
large exposures and group-wide supervision. 
Another  positive  development  I  see  is  the  extensive  international  cooperation  and  information 
exchange between authorities, who, as a result, are able to address the challenges of a banking 
business that is increasingly performed across borders. In this context I have to stress the valuable 
work that is being undertaken by the ESCB’s Banking Supervision Committee. The committee, which 
consists of EU national central banks and banking supervisors, performs extensive work in the area of 
financial stability monitoring. It does this by looking both at cyclical and structural developments that 
might affect the EU banking sector’s resilience.  
I  equally  want  to  stress  the  efforts  made  by  banks.  Risk  management  has  been  growing  in 
importance and is becoming more integrated in banks’ overall decision-making. Thanks to innovation 
in financial markets and advances in the quantification of risk, risk management practices have been 
significantly  improved.  Although  concerns  have  been  voiced  about  the  spectacular  growth  in  credit 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
derivatives, they also allow banks to better shape their risk profile. Risk models which are increasingly 
being  used  to  gauge  credit  and  operational  risk  allow  for  an  empirical  underpinning  of  risk 
management.  Through  joint  projects  such  as  the  one  being  undertaken  by  federations  of  savings 
banks to develop risk know-how and management systems, advanced risk management tools have 
also become available to smaller institutions. Outsourcing and centralisation in the field of individual 
banks’  payment  and  settlement  systems  is  another  example  of  such  joint  projects  which  are  being 
undertaken in a number of EU countries at the same time.  
The profitability pressures I described earlier have not led banks into immobility; in fact they have been 
quite responsive in taking corrective measures. Lending terms have been tightened and more risk-
based  pricing  strategies  applied.  In  addition,  non-core  assets  have  been  shed  and  the  number  of 
branches  and  employees  reduced.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  the  national  banking  systems  that 
were in need of further substantial restructuring.  
I want to conclude my overview by pointing to the developments in financial markets in Europe. 
Again,  the  single  currency  has  been  a  beneficial  factor.  This  is  most  clearly  illustrated  by  the 
unsecured money market. A very well integrated money market supported by TARGET, the area-wide 
wholesale payment system, now allows liquidity to be quickly channelled from areas of the European 
banking  sector  that  show  surpluses  to  areas  that  suffer  shortages.  This  has  contributed  to  a  more 
robust  banking  system.  The  emergence  of  a  number  of  highly  liquid  euro-denominated  exchange 
contracts has also facilitated banks’ risk management. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  briefly  conclude.  I  have  discussed  how,  under  the  challenging 
conditions  of  the  past  few  years,  the  EU  banking  sector  has  remained  robust  thanks  to  a  benign 
combination of cyclical and structural factors. 
Nevertheless,  a  number  of  challenges  remain  both  for  banks  and  authorities,  in  particular,  in  the 
structural domain. Several EU countries are still faced with excess capacity in their banking systems 
that will have to be further reduced over time. Likewise, cross-border consolidation might accelerate as 
mergers  and  acquisitions  pick  up  again  following  improved  market  conditions.  Regarding  regulation 
and supervision there is the new committee structure that is currently being set up at the EU level to 
improve rule-making and implementation; its agenda is demanding and challenging. Other important 
challenges  that  lie  ahead  are  the  introduction  of  the  New  Capital  Accord  and  the  International 
Accounting Standards, whose potential structural effects on the EU banking sector are still uncertain. 
Finally, another significant change for the EU banking sector, as I mentioned, is the recent entry of the 
new Member States into the EU. However, as these countries’ banking systems are, to a large extent, 
already integrated in the EU banking system, this should be favourable for a smooth transition. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
