Glenn Stevens: Recent issues for the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business Economists and the Economic Society (NSW Branch), Sydney, 17 February 2004. 
 Thank  you  to  the  ABE  and  the  Economic  Society  for  putting  on  such  an  enjoyable  occasion  and 
inviting me to speak. 
I don’t intend to say much about current economic conditions or the short-term outlook. The Bank has 
just released its Statement on Monetary Policy, and there is no end of discussion at this time of year in 
various conferences about what may lie ahead. 
Instead,  I  want  to  make  some observations about  several  issues  which  have been  important  in  the 
conduct of policy over the past couple of years. These issues of principle are worth clarifying as they 
are likely to be of more enduring importance than comments about the current state of the economy. 
Background 
The  past  two  or  three  years  have  seen  some  highly  unusual  circumstances  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  Internationally,  we  saw  in  2001  and  2002  the  weakest  economic  conditions  in  the 
major  countries  as  a  group  for  about  twenty  years.  Several  of  them  encountered  recession  -  and 
recovery tended to be rather halting, which seems related to the unwinding of the share market bubble 
and associated excesses in the US and elsewhere. It has also been a period of very low and declining 
inflation, as conventionally measured by CPIs. The long disinflation which began in the early 1980s 
has resulted in price stability in most countries, and the possibility of inflation falling too far - becoming 
deflation - was openly talked about around the world last year in a way which had not happened in half 
a century. 
A  result  of  all  of  this has been  that  interest  rates  in  the  world’s key  financial centres  have  fallen  to 
exceptionally low levels. At present, the average short-term interest rate in the ‘big three’ economies is 
1 per cent, the lowest in a hundred years. There have also been major changes in exchange rates 
over the past year or two. The US dollar, formerly very strong, has weakened considerably against the 
euro  and  other  major  floating  currencies;  most  Asian  currencies  have  depreciated  against  other 
currencies roughly pari passu with the US dollar. 
Through  all  this,  the  Australian  economy  has  to  date  maintained  a  pace  of  growth  envied  by  most 
others, in the face of some pretty unfavourable shocks. It is the first time anyone can recall the US 
having a recession without that also being followed by a recession in Australia. The reasons for this 
have been discussed on other occasions, so they don’t need detailed repetition. One of them was, in 
our judgement, a fairly expansionary setting of monetary policy.1 At the same time, there has been a 
very substantial build up in debt in the Australian household sector. 
During the second half of 2003, it became increasingly clear that the US economy, after a period of 
rather mediocre growth and a moment of genuine concern about deflation, was starting to experience 
the stronger performance for which people in the US - and everywhere else! - had been waiting. Other 
regions seemed to be noticing an improvement too. People became more confident that prospects for 
2004  were  looking  up.  At  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  concluded  that  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  in 
Australia  should  adapt  to  changing  international  and  domestic  circumstances,  and  we  adjusted 
interest rates up by a total of 50 basis points in the closing months of the year. 
During recent discussion, several quite important issues have come more clearly into focus. I’d like to 
take up three of those today:  
• 
the role of inflation forecasts in making monetary policy under inflation targeting;  
                                                      
1   Australian households and businesses having had less of the over-confidence and associated excesses than in some other 
countries in the late 1990s is another part of the explanation. Allowing the exchange rate to move has been a third. And, of 
course,  a  background  of  sound  structural  and  budgetary  policies  over  a  number  of  years  has  made  the  economy  more 
robust to shocks. All of these have been important. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 1
 the concept of the natural or neutral interest rate - its uses and limitations; and  
the importance of asset prices and credit, and how policymakers take account of them.  
Inflation targeting and the use of forecasts 
Inflation targeting has been in operation for a decade or so in Australia, and a little longer in some 
other countries. The general idea, put at its most simple, is that policy seeks to keep inflation roughly 
in  line  with  an  announced  numerical  goal,  over  time.  There  is  no  pretence  to  fine  tuning  here.  The 
framework simply embodies the things we know about monetary policy from long experience: that its 
long-run goal should be (and can only be) prices; that its capacity for short-term control of inflation is 
limited, and its short-run effect on economic activity important, so the price goal should be pursued 
gradually; and that expectations matter, so it is helpful to tell people what the goal of policy is and how 
we are going about achieving it. 
Because monetary policy operates with quite a long lag, it is important to think not just about where 
inflation has been, but where it is likely to be in the future. Hence the practice of inflation targeting, and 
the  rhetoric  of  inflation  targeting,  have  emphasised  the  importance  of  being  forward-looking. 
Unavoidably, this means that forecasts have become more prominent. Indeed, many descriptions of 
inflation targeting have adopted the shorthand of saying that it involves adjusting the instrument so as 
to  keep  the  conditional  forecast  of  inflation  at  target,  over  some  given  horizon.  I  have  used  that 
shorthand myself as a way of getting across the essence of the approach. 
But  like  all  simplifications,  this  abstracts  from  some  important  practical  issues,  and  it  may  easily 
convey  an  impression  that  inflation  targeting  is  rather  mechanical,  focussing  exclusively  on  the 
inflation forecast at one horizon. That impression would be unfortunate, because inflation targeting is 
not, and never has been, a policy rule, and the inflation forecast per se does not determine in some 
mechanistic way the central bank’s policy reaction. Forecasts are very important in assessing the need 
for policy adjustments, but there is no unique mapping from one to the other, and other considerations 
than just the numerical forecast have, quite properly, a bearing on the decision. In elaborating on this, 
there are a couple of points to make.  
First, the notion that inflation might be targeted at one particular horizon - six or eight quarters ahead 
or whatever - may be useful as a pedagogical device, but in fact policymakers care more about the 
general path of the inflation rate than about how it looks at one particular point. Policy settings which 
could  be  expected  to  achieve  an  ‘on  target’  result  x  quarters  ahead,  but  at  the  risk  of  significant 
problems in quarters x+1, x+2 and so on, will see policymakers looking for an alternative course of 
action. While, again, no one is pretending that the path of prices can be fine-tuned, a concern for the 
general path of inflation, as opposed to one point on the path, offers the best chance of achieving the 
inflation target on average.2 This is relevant to the late 2003 decisions, which saw inflation at 2½ per 
cent during 2005 but most likely on the way higher than that subsequently. That general trajectory, as 
opposed to one point on it, was given some weight. 
More generally, economic forecasting is difficult and imprecise. In practice, it can sometimes be hard 
for  the  forecasters  to  make  a  confident  call  that  higher  or  lower  inflation  is  on  the  cards  until  it  is 
imminent or even under way. Similar problems characterise forecasts for other variables. This is just 
inherent in the forecasting process. 
One  reason  is  that  there  are  a  host  of  potential  factors  which  cannot  be  incorporated  easily  in  a 
numerical  forecast.  Unexpected  changes  in  exchange  rates,  bond  rates,  property  prices  and  share 
prices, the effects of financial structure changes, and so on can have important effects. Typically, they 
are  assumed  not  to  occur  for  the  purposes  of  making  formal  forecasts.  Even  when  changes  are 
observed, their effects can in some cases be particularly difficult to quantify. Hence, they are normally 
listed under ‘risks’. 
This doesn’t mean we should disregard forecasts or try to make policy without them. But it does mean 
that policymakers cannot assume that the forecasts will give a signal which is sufficiently reliable on its 
own to be the sole basis for policy. It also means that risks often feature more prominently in policy 
deliberations than do the forecasts themselves. 
                                                      
2  
In principle, the central bank is seeking to solve a dynamic optimisation problem in which the variability of the whole path of 
prices around the target (and the variability of output) is minimised, in expectation, by the path of interest rates we choose. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2004
This is an appropriate moment at which to deal with an argument which is sometimes heard, that our 
2-3 per cent average inflation target means that we should tighten policy if, but only if, our forecast for 
inflation exceeds 3 per cent. By the same logic, we should ease policy if, and only if, the forecast is 
less  than  2  per  cent.  This  interprets  the  2-3  per  cent  specification  not  so  much  as  a  target  to  be 
achieved  on  average,  as  a  zone  of  inaction  for  policy:  do  nothing  until  a  trigger  point  is  reached, 
regardless of the level of interest rates currently in place.  
I think this is not the right way to operate policy. To see why, remember that it is the level of interest 
rates which matters. To be sure, changes in interest rates make the news, and may well have some 
announcement effect in themselves - mainly if they shift expectations about the level of interest rates 
in the future. But monetary policy does not stop working when the changes in interest rates stop. A 
persistently higher or lower level of interest rates affects cash flow positions, relative rates of return on 
assets, discount rates and so on, and hence behaviour, over quite a long period. Very low, constant, 
interest  rates  do  not  produce  a  one-time  lift  in  inflation.  They  will  eventually  produce,  in  a  normal 
economy,  continually  rising  inflation.  High  rates will  produce,  if  held  long enough,  continually  falling 
inflation and eventually deflation. 
It  follows  that  the  setting  of  the  policy  instrument  which  starts  a  movement  in  inflation  back  to  the 
target following a deviation is not the setting which will keep inflation at the target once it gets there.3 
Equally, a setting which is designed to counter some shock which would otherwise push the economy 
off  course  will  no  longer  be  appropriate  once  that  shock  has  waned.  Once  the  circumstances  that 
required  an  unusually  high  or  low  setting  of  interest  rates  pass,  interest  rates  will  need  to  be  re-
adjusted. The only question is when that should occur. 
For  policymakers  to  wait  until  they  are  sure  there  will  be  a  significant  over-shoot  or  under-shoot  of 
inflation from the target means that they would hold unusually low or high rates far longer than really 
needed - and would then need to correct very sharply, with quite large policy adjustments to recover 
the situation. Compared with a strategy of earlier but more modest adjustments, this could still achieve 
the same average inflation rate, but with more instability in the economy. 
The RBA has not conducted policy in that fashion. In late 1999 and the first half of 2000, we had a 
forecast that inflation would rise from 1½-2 per cent to about 2½ per cent by end 2000, and to close to 
3  per  cent  by  mid  2001.  Consistent  with  the  judgement  that  the  interest  rate  which  helped  move 
inflation up to the target was not the interest rate which would keep it there, we moved rates up by 
150 basis points in five steps. We didn’t wait until we had a forecast that inflation would clearly exceed 
3  per  cent  before  moving.  In  the  event,  inflation  did  end  up  exceeding  3  per  cent  in  2001  -  which 
confirms that some tightening had definitely been required. 
In 2001, policy was being eased given the anticipated effects of the global recession and so on, even 
though inflation was turning out a bit higher than expected. The forecasts at the time said that inflation 
would, after a lag, come down to about 2½ per cent. We didn’t wait to get a forecast of below 2 per 
cent inflation before easing. We would have had to wait, most probably, until quite recently for that, 
which would have been too late. 
So policymakers have not followed the ‘zone of inaction’ approach in the past, nor are they doing so 
now.  More  generally,  to  return  to  the  main  topic  of  this  section,  they  do  not  rely  on  the  inflation 
forecasts alone to drive the policy decision. Policymakers have to consider the best numerical forecast 
available as a key input. But in making their decision, they must also develop their own sense of the 
balance of risks, and the consequences were some of those risks to crystallise. I think the historical 
record is clear that, in doing so, they have made better decisions than would have been the case had 
they been driven exclusively by forecasts, even forecasts which by most standards were pretty good. 
The ‘neutral’ rate of interest 
The idea that there is a neutral setting of monetary policy has been prominent in policy discussion in 
the  past  few  years.  In  Australia,  the  Bank  has  used  this  language  on  occasion  when  explaining 
adjustments to interest rates. 
                                                      
3   This, of course, is not a new point. See the Governor’s November 1999 remarks to the House of Representatives Standing 
Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration at http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/reps/commttee/r2791.pdf. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 3
A key reason that we think it is a useful concept stems from our conviction that, as noted earlier, it is 
the level of interest rates which does most of the work in monetary policy. Given that, we need some 
basis on which to assess whether the level of rates is high or low. This is where ‘neutral’ comes in. 
This notion is not something we just dreamed up. It has quite a long pedigree in economics, stretching 
back at least as far as the great Swedish economist, Knut Wicksell, writing over a century ago. For 
Wicksell, the ‘natural’ rate was the rate of return earned by fixed capital. He distinguished it from the 
‘money’ rate of interest, which was set in the money market by the combined actions of the central 
bank and the private banking system. When the money rate was below the natural rate, there would 
be an incentive to borrow to invest and credit would expand, pushing up prices. The reverse occurred 
in  the  case  where  the  money  rate  rose  above  the  neutral  rate.  This  was  known  as  Wicksell’s 
‘cumulative process’. The idea was taken up by Keynes in the Treatise on Money, and further refined 
in the General Theory.4  
The modern world is more complex than the world of Wicksell and Keynes. We do not expect to drive 
monthly policy decisions direct from the dusty pages of old books, however classic they may be. But 
the essential insight is still useful. Imagine aggregate demand in the economy growing along a path 
which uses the economy’s productive resources fully - no more and no less - so that the economy is 
operating at its potential level of output, inflation is at the target and is expected to remain there. The 
level of interest rates which would, absent other shocks, perpetuate this happy state of affairs is the 
‘neutral’  rate,  so  named  because  it  does  not  move  the  economy  off  the  hypothetical  path  in  either 
direction. When, due to some shock, the economy is operating below its potential for other than a brief 
period, we would expect that part of the stabilising mechanism would be that interest rates would be 
lower than neutral. And they would be higher than neutral when the economy was tending to overheat. 
This  neutral  rate  is  not,  however,  an  observable  magnitude:  there  is  no  statistical  release  you  can 
consult to find out its value. Nor, of course, are other magnitudes which are common in the lexicon of 
macroeconomic policy, like ‘full employment’, ‘price stability’, or ‘sustainable growth’. We can offer a 
conceptual definition of these terms, but empirical estimates of them always have a margin for error 
and can never be assumed to be immutable. That does not render the ideas useless; indeed, people 
expect us to pursue some of them as policy goals. But it does mean that there isn’t much room for 
dogmatism about particular estimates, as the Governor has stressed over the past several years. 
To the extent that we can say anything useful about where a neutral rate might be, it will probably be 
based on the experience of the past decade or so, during which inflation expectations have been fairly 
low and well-anchored, and we have been following a stable policy regime.5  
Over  that  period,  cash  rates  between  4  and  5  per  cent  have  been  associated  with  marked 
accelerations in domestic demand on three occasions. Cash rates of 6¼-7½ per cent helped to slow it 
a couple of times. Those crude facts suggest that ‘neutral’ is, or at least was, somewhere in between 
those  two  levels.  Through  all  that,  inflation  has  had  mild  cyclical  swings  but  no  trend,  which  might 
suggest  that  rates  have  been  close  to  neutral  on  average.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  the 
economy  has  grown  sufficiently  fast  to  gradually  reduce  the  degree  of  spare  capacity,  and  hence 
faster than its likely long run sustainable rate, might suggest a setting somewhat below neutral was, on 
average, in place over that period. 
It was this sort of rough figuring that was the basis of the range of figures the Governor gave when 
questioned about this issue a couple of years ago.6 I conjecture that empirical techniques which do the 
computation in a more sophisticated fashion would arrive at similar answers. 
                                                      
4   For those with an historical interest, Wicksell’s exposition is in Interest and Prices, published in 1898. In the Treatise on 
Money (1930), Keynes defines the natural rate as that rate at which savings and investment are equal, distinguishes this 
from the market rate of interest, and goes on to say that ‘every departure of the market rate from the natural rate tends ... to 
set up a disturbance of the price level’ by causing saving and investment to diverge. In the General Theory, Keynes regards 
this  natural  rate  as  not  being  unique  -  there  are  now,  in  his  view,  a  multiplicity  of  natural  rates,  and  various  levels  of 
equilibrium output and employment levels - and hence not very helpful. He proceeds to define instead a ‘neutral rate’ as: ‘… 
the rate … which is consistent with full employment’ (p. 243 of Macmillan 1973 edition). It is quite clear that these concepts, 
through their various manifestations, are looking towards a concept of neutrality which is associated with neither inflationary 
nor deflationary pressure. 
5   Some earlier periods of history may be relevant, but for much of the post-World War II period, regulations on interest rates 
and associated credit rationing meant that monetary policy did not affect the economy in the same way as it does now. In 
addition, it’s clear that the broad trend in inflation of this period was upward, certainly from the early 1960s until the mid to 
late 1970s. This suggests that, on average, monetary policy was expansionary for quite a lengthy period of time. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2004
That,  of  course,  means  that  there  is  no  precise  number  for  ‘neutral’.  To  the  extent  we  can  offer  a 
range, it is unlikely to be a narrow one.7 This imprecision might be frustrating, if people are looking for 
specific guidance about the near-term path of rates. But it isn’t surprising that attempts to estimate an 
empirical  counterpart  to  an  analytical  construct  come  up  with  only  pretty  loose  results  -  it  has  ever 
been thus. In fact, we should view with suspicion any claim that ‘neutral’ can be pinned down closely. 
For those looking for short term guidance, it may be equally frustrating that, while in some fabled world 
without disturbances policy would be set at ‘neutral’ much of the time, in the real world it often isn’t, 
because disturbances have a habit of occurring.8 Persistent global economic weakness, for example, 
seen as dampening Australian growth, was one such factor over recent years. Given that Australia is 
open  to  global  capital  markets,  the  level  of  international  interest  rates  can  also  impinge  on  interest 
rates here - causing us to be away from ‘neutral’ at times, possibly for substantial periods.9  
That may be as much as we can realistically say about ‘neutral’. The concept helps us to remember 
that the level of rates matters, and that unusually high or low rates will most likely have to give way to 
more ‘normal’ levels eventually. But while it can in some circumstances give an indication of what the 
direction of rate changes should be, it is unlikely to give precise guidance on the size or timing. 
Asset prices 
I now turn to the topical question of asset prices and monetary policy. It is obviously something on a lot 
of minds, given the events in the US over the past five years and the preceding ‘bubble economy’ in 
Japan - and of course the run up in housing prices and debt in Australia. 
Among the central banking community and other observers, it is generally agreed that: 
• 
• 
asset prices per se should not be a target for monetary policy; but  
they should be analysed for what they say about the likely evolution of the macroeconomy 
over the coming year or two and, to that extent, movements in asset prices warrant a policy 
response.  
The more difficult part of the discussion is when we confront the question of whether policy should do 
more than the above - that is, should it respond by more than is suggested by the estimated short-term 
effects of the asset price changes on the macroeconomy through the standard channels like wealth 
effects and so on? 
The case in favour rests on the idea that credit-financed asset price booms, when they reverse, are 
likely to be highly contractionary for the economy. This may well be over a horizon longer than the 
usual  one  to  two-year  forecasting  horizon,  so  that  conventional  forecasts  may  not  capture  these 
dynamics. But over that longer horizon, on this argument, the economy will probably be better off if the 
boom  is  smaller  or stops earlier,  rather  than  later.  Policy  which responds  to  the  boom  to an  extent 
greater than required just by the short-term outlook may assist this. 
The opposing case does not deny the possibility that the boom will end painfully, but essentially says 
that modest action will be ineffective in restraining the boom, and aggressive action risks bringing on 
                                                                                                                                                                      
6   See remarks to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, May 
7  
8  
9  
2002, at http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/reps/commttee/r5558.pdf. 
It  is  worth  noting  that,  in  principle,  the  neutral  rate  can  vary,  though  one  would  not  normally  expect  it  to  be  a  cyclical 
variable. For  example, it  will be affected by things which affect the real expected  return to capital. Things like persistent 
changes  in  productivity  growth,  for  example,  might  affect  the  neutral  rate.  It  would,  in  principle,  be  affected  by  secular 
changes in saving behaviour. That’s before we have considered the question of whether changes in interest margins (e.g. 
between cash and mortgage rates) or levels of indebtedness may have a bearing on it. But while it is likely that the ‘neutral’ 
rate is subject to low-frequency fluctuations, I think it is reasonable to assume that it is sufficiently slow moving that it is still 
a useful concept, provided we don’t adopt the strong assumption that it never moves. 
Indeed, Wicksell expected that  a stable equilibrium where the  market and natural rates  were  equal would rarely, if ever, 
occur for any length of time. 
In a world in which capital flowed quickly to arbitrage away any differences in rates of return on capital across countries, 
there would presumably not be noticeable differences between the ‘neutral’ rate between countries. There would just be one 
global neutral rate,  with country  risk premia. But  in the current  world,  while capital mobility has increased a lot in recent 
decades, the vast bulk of the capital of most nations’ citizens is still invested at home, and differences in rates of return 
seem to persist. Hence, it still makes sense to think there is a neutral rate for policy which is distinct from international rates, 
though the actual setting of policy cannot be completely invariant to what happens abroad. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 5
the very recession that policy meant to avoid. On this view, policy should continue as normal during 
the boom, but stand ready to clean up afterwards. 
This debate has been going on for a number of years now. Much has been learned (although I don’t 
think  one  could  say  that  people  have  found  substantial  agreement).  Some  of  the  work  at  our 
conference  last  year  demonstrated  that  the  dynamics  of  asset  booms  and  busts  are  sufficiently 
complex  and  non  linear  that  we  should  take  great  care  in  any  response  to  a  well-developed  boom 
(which, of course, is the only type of boom where the issue arises - no-one advocates dealing with 
incipient booms). This indicates that a cavalier attitude to ‘pricking bubbles’ is not in order. At the same 
time,  it  is  increasingly  clear  that  a  narrow  policy  focus  confined  to  the  product  of  conventional 
economic  analysis  over  a  one  to  two  year  horizon  can  miss  very  important  developments  in  the 
financial  sector  and  asset  markets,  which  often  play  out  over  longer  horizons  but  which  can  have 
major economic implications. Surely we ignore these at our peril. 
So where does this leave us? I believe it should leave us trying to think about outcomes and risks, and 
policy settings which seek to manage those risks, over a horizon a bit longer than is common in much 
discussion  of  economic  policy.  Is  this  a  departure  from  our  long-established  medium-term,  flexible 
approach to inflation targeting? Definitely not. In fact, it dovetails quite well with the long-held view that 
policy  should  not  respond  solely  to  the  inflation  forecast  at  some  fixed  horizon  and  ignore  other 
considerations.  All  that  is  new  is  that  there  is  an  additional  dimension  to  the  general  rationale  to 
maintain, and on occasion to use, the flexibility the system has always had. 
Recent Policy 
These considerations have been relevant in our conduct of policy. With the global economy improving 
during the second half of 2003, it was clear that the Australian economy would not need interest rates 
to be only just above generation lows for much longer. It is true that inflation as measured by the CPI 
is likely to look quite low for the coming year or more because the exchange rate has been rising. But 
that sort of outlook is disguising pressure in the non-traded sector. If non-traded inflation were to build 
up further steam, and then the currency were at some point to decline - which history suggests it will - 
people could get quite a nasty surprise at how quickly overall inflation could increase. Not only that, 
but the non-traded part of inflation also tends to be harder, once it does increase, to reduce again. If 
we care about the medium term path for the economy, these are all relevant considerations. 
At the same time, the demand for credit was exceptionally high, and indeed picked up from mid 2003 
to  about  October,  after  a  number  of  years  of  sustained  strength.  Few  people  are  now  completely 
sanguine about the potential problems this could bring if it continues. There remains, as I have said, a 
good deal of debate about whether, and how aggressively, monetary policy might apply high interest 
rates to handle an asset boom. But it is hard to see a case in such circumstances for holding rates 
unusually  low,  in  the  absence  of  other  powerful  contractionary  forces.  It  certainly  seemed  to  us 
imprudent, to say the least, to leave interest rates so low, given that the international factors which had 
held  them  there  were  fast  evaporating.  A  risk-management  approach  to  policy  pointed  to  the 
advisability of removing some of that stimulus.  
It is possible to argue that a central bank following a narrow inflation-targeting approach could have 
waited longer before raising interest rates. But that view supposes a rather mechanical and short-term 
approach. At the risk of labouring the point, our approach has never been like that, and isn’t now. It 
has always stressed the desirability of taking account of things other than just the narrow short-term 
inflation  outlook  where  it  was  sensible  to  do  so,  with  the  proviso  that  medium-term  inflation 
performance be in line with the announced objectives. Hence the words ‘on average, over the cycle’ or 
other similar language, have always been a feature of our inflation target. A decade ago, this language 
was  far  too  vague  for  the  tastes  of  many  critics,  who  doubted  we  would  have  the  resolve  to  keep 
inflation low. But the record shows that the system has worked well. Sensibly operated, it will continue 
to do so. 
Conclusion 
Good policy uses  the  best  available analysis,  systematising  what  we can know  about  the economy 
from past experience, without assuming that the future will be like the past in every respect. It must 
avoid  both  the  hubris  of  thinking  we  know  everything  and  the  despairing  assumption  that  we  know 
nothing. 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2004
The apparatus I have described above has, in my view, been useful in helping sensible thinking about 
policy.  But  we  shouldn’t  get  too  carried  away  by  any  sense  of  numerical  precision,  or  become  too 
wedded to the idea that forecasts, or estimates of the neutral interest rate - or various other concepts 
which could be cited - will give us an exact guide to policy decisions. That is asking too much of them. 
Monetary policy always has needed some element of judgement - informed judgement desirably, and 
of  course  subject  to  appropriate  accountability.  Policymakers  have  to  make  their  decisions  on  the 
basis  of  incomplete  information  and  uncertainty  about  the  future,  balancing  the  risks  of  various 
outcomes and the pay-offs and penalties attached to the various possibilities. 
Policy  frameworks  also  retain,  desirably,  sufficient  flexibility  to  help  them  adapt  to  different 
circumstances and challenges. Inflation targeting began in an era in which memories of two decades 
of  bad  performance  were  fresh,  and  understandably  emphasised  the  importance  of  controlling  CPI 
inflation. Inflation in Australia has been well controlled for a decade now. Yet the challenges for policy 
seem as great as ever, as we have observed that asset market and financial instability can occur, and 
can be costly, under conditions of price stability. It is surely sensible that policymakers should care 
about these problems and should do what they can to ameliorate them - even if that is not very much. 
At  the  very  least,  we  have  to  try  hard  to  avoid  exacerbating  them.  There  is  no  inherent  conflict 
between such an aspiration and the accepted long run goal of maintaining price stability - indeed, over 
any sensible horizon, the two go together. But we need to be prepared to think about the balance of 
risks over that horizon and to give those considerations due weight in policy decisions. Of course that 
may not be easy to do, and perhaps it is not straightforward to explain, but it seems nonetheless to be 
a worthwhile endeavour. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 7
