Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic reform in Europe 
Contribution  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Panel  on 
EU/US cooperation at the Advancing Enterprise Conference, London, 26 January 2004. 
 Mr Chancellor, Ministers members of the Ecofin, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The European Central Bank (ECB) very much welcomes and supports the economic reform process in 
Europe  and  it  is  a  great pleasure  and honour  for  me  to  participate  in  this  very  distinguished  panel. 
Well-designed structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets will increase the flexibility of 
the  euro  area  economy,  enhance  its  resilience  against  economic  shocks  and  ultimately  result  in  a 
higher long-term growth rate potential which should be our first priority in Europe. 
The ECB contribution to long term sustainable growth 
1. 
The  ECB  provides  important  contributions  to  the  economic  reform  process  by  helping  to  ensure  a 
stable macroeconomic environment in the euro area. In particular the ECB maintains price stability in 
the  euro  area  and  helps  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Maintaining  price  stability  contributes  to  an 
economic environment favouring growth and job creation. Four main reasons can be mentioned in this 
respect. First, it preserves and bolsters consumers’ purchasing power and enhances the efficiency of 
the market at allocating resources. Second, price stability paves the way for lower uncertainty and risk 
premia in financial markets: this ultimately implies lower medium and long-term interest rates. Third, 
price stability provides markets with an indispensable nominal anchor for adjusting changes in wages 
consistently with productivity growth, thereby contributing to preserve competitiveness. And fourth and 
not the least, price stability prevents the economically and politically undesirable arbitrary redistribution 
of wealth and income that arises in inflationary as well as deflationary environments. 
Ensuring  price  stability  and  ensuring  the  credibility  of  price  stability  over  the  long  term  is  the  most 
important contribution of the ECB and the Eurosystem to growth and job creation in Europe. The ECB 
makes also an important contribution to safeguarding financial stability in the euro area. This should 
not be underestimated, given that a well-developed and stable financial system improves the efficiency 
of financing decisions and ultimately fosters economic growth.  
Over the last five years, the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy has resulted in low and stable 
inflation and has ensured that medium and long-run inflation expectations have been well anchored. 
Furthermore,  the  euro  area  has  enjoyed  a  high  degree  of  financial  stability.  However,  a  monetary 
authority such as the ECB and the Eurosystem provides a necessary condition for growth but is not 
responsible for the other conditions that are equally necessary to ensure higher long-term growth and 
prosperity. This requires in particular sound fiscal policy and bold structural reforms. 
The need for sound public finances 
longer-term  decision-making,  notably 
2. 
Sound public finances support a stable macroeconomic framework. In particular, a fiscal policy that 
is set according to rules, and is lived up to, adds to macroeconomic stability by providing economic 
agents  with  expectations  of  a  predictable  economic  environment.  This  reduces  uncertainty  and 
promotes 
investment  decisions,  and  economic  growth. 
Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that fiscal policy can also promote growth and employment 
via  appropriate  adjustments  of  the  level  and  composition  of  government  taxes  and  expenditures. 
Reducing  inefficient  public  spending  can  for  example  help  to  finance  tax  cuts.  Furthermore,  public 
expenditures  can  be  redirected 
towards  productivity-enhancing  physical  and  human  capital 
accumulation rather than, for example, the provision of subsidies for declining industries. 
As  regards  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  most  recent  events,  I  would  only  say  that  the  Governing 
Council shared the concerns of the Commission on the ECOFIN Council conclusions of 25 November 
2003 and made it public. The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and the Governing Council of 
the ECB respects the recent Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity. 
The Governing Council does not see a need for changes in the Treaty, and the Stability and Growth 
Pact  in  its  current  form  is  appropriate  in  its  view.  The  Governing  Council  is  in  agreement  with  the 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
Commission  that  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  could  be  further  improved,  in 
particular  as regards  the analysis  of  structural  balances  and  strengthening  the  incentives  for  sound 
fiscal  policies  in  good  times.  Clarity  and  enforceability  of  the  fiscal  framework  should  also  be 
enhanced. 
The need for structural reforms 
3. 
Turning to the aim of a higher long-term sustainable growth rate in the euro area more generally 
which, as I said, should be our major strategic goal, what we need is both higher productivity growth 
and higher employment creation. What is needed for these objectives to be achieved are economic 
reforms  that  ensure  that  capital,  labour  and  product  market  rigidities  will  be  substantially  lowered. 
Structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets and in social security systems are needed to 
allow  an  allocation  of  capital  and  human  resources  which  would  be  much  closer  to  the  optimum, 
enhancing the euro area’s growth potential and facilitating the adjustment to economic shocks. 
The reform priorities in the euro area’s capital, labour and product markets are overarching and very 
broad.  In  many  cases  they  need  to  be  translated  into  concrete  policy  measures  at  the  European 
and/or the national level. 
Starting with capital markets, the pace of reform in this field has been impressive over the last years 
in anticipation and since the introduction of the euro. This includes policy-induced reform, such as the 
Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) or the development of national legal frameworks governing the 
issuance of mortgage bonds. Reform covers also market-led initiatives, such as the development of 
electronic trading platforms or consolidation in the clearing and settlement infrastructure. 
Despite the past achievements the need for continuation and completion of the reforms remains. This 
relates first to the completion and implementation of the FSAP and its follow up. The FSAP should 
give  rise  to  genuine  common  financial  legislation  and  regulation  for  market  players.  The  so-called 
Lamfalussy  framework,  which  allows  for  flexible  technical  rules  at  the  EU  level  complemented  by 
enhanced  co-operation  as  regards  national  implementation  and  enforcement,  has  for  good  reasons 
been extended from the securities field to banking, insurance and financial conglomerates. 
A  second  area  of  structural  reform  in  capital  markets  is  the  further  consolidation  and  integration  of 
market infrastructure and the further harmonisation of the standards and conventions routinely used by 
market participants. There is a large variety of remaining obstacles to a fully integrated and efficient 
euro  area  market  which  still  needs  to  be  addressed  by  the  relevant  actors.  A  simple  but  telling 
example of the benefits that collective action can bring in this regard is the development of the EONIA 
overnight interest rate index by market participants organised within a trade association. This index 
has become the generally accepted reference in the euro overnight interest rate swap market, leading 
in turn to the impressive development of this particular market segment. 
Turning to labour markets, a number of structural reforms have been undertaken in recent years and 
efforts are still on-going in several Member States. Although unevenly implemented across countries, 
the positive impact of past reforms in the labour market has become visible. Output growth became 
more  job  intensive  towards  the  end  of  the  1990s  and  the  estimates  of  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment (NAIRU) in the euro zone tend to show a decline in structural unemployment from the 
mid-1990s.  However,  the  high  level  of  average  unemployment  and  the  relatively  low  average 
employment rate in the euro area, which in 2002 was still around 62%, compared for example to the 
United States with almost 75%, indicate that much more needs to be done. More specifically, policies 
should aim at: 
• 
Increasing  incentives  towards  employment.  Policies  should  aim  towards  reducing  labour 
taxes  and  non-wage  labour  costs  and  increasing  the  incentive  compatibility  of  benefit 
systems.  
Allowing for a sufficient degree of wage differentiation to ensure that wages reflect divergent 
productivity growth and regional/sectoral developments.  
Increasing  the  efficiency  of  matching  potential  workers  with  job  vacancies.  This  requires 
continuous  investment  in  education,  training  and  life  long  learning  as  well  as  improved 
efficiency of public and private employment services.  
Increasing  other  aspects  of  labour  market  flexibility  such  as  labour  mobility  (across 
occupations, sectors and regions) and encouraging the increased use of more atypical forms 
BIS Review 6/2004
   2 
 of employment such as flexitime, part-time and self-employment in particular, which should 
play a much more important role in job creation in continental Europe.  
The need for further labour market reforms should also be seen against the background of population 
ageing.  Demographic  developments  will,  inter  alia,  make  it  particularly  challenging  to  achieve  and 
maintain sustainable fiscal balances in the period ahead. 
As regards product markets, a number of studies have shown that the potential gains from creating 
truly integrated and competitive European markets could be very large. On the one hand this would 
require  further  progress  with  regulatory  reforms  at  the  national  level  in  order  to  intensify  domestic 
competition. On the other hand it needs the full EU-wide integration of markets. Regarding the latter 
much progress has been achieved in integrating EU goods markets, largely driven by the completion 
of  the  Single  Market.  The  integration  of  services  markets  however  has  been  more  limited  due  to  a 
large number of obstacles, whether legal, cultural or inherent to the nature of some segments of the 
service sector. Specific areas for further reform efforts include: 
• 
The  full  implementation  and  enforcement  of  the  existing  Internal  Market  legislation.  The 
extension of the Single Market to areas, which were so far not or only partially covered, for 
example  many  service  sectors.  Furthermore,  the  integration  and  reform  of  a  number  of 
network industries (e.g. energy, transport and postal sectors) needs to be continued.  
Ensuring effective competition within and across Member States. This requires a continuous 
review  of  the  powers  of  regulatory  and  competition  authorities  at  both  Member  State  and 
Community level.  
The legislative and regulatory framework of the European economies should be reviewed at 
all levels of government in order to create a more business-friendly environment.  
  To conclude I would like to stress more particularly five points. 
First,  on  the  economic  underpinnings,  the  main  strategic  goal  of  the  Eurozone  as  well  as  of  the 
European Union as a whole should be to increase substantially our growth potential. This is crucial 
and calls upon increasing very significantly in particular our rate of employment, our labour productivity 
progress and our technological and scientific basis. 
Second, as regards methodology, it is clear that we have to work out an appropriate concept for the 
actual, precise, to the point implementation of the reforms. The Lisbon agenda is excellent in terms of 
diagnosis. It is not associated with a precise and efficient decision making process, with a powerful 
delivery  concept,  which  is  absolutely  indispensable.  I  was  very  encouraged  to  hear  clearly  Mr  Mc 
Creevy  stressing  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  that  the  Irish  Presidency  will  put  the  Lisbon 
agenda  implementation  on  top  of  its  priorities.  The  ECB  will  very  warmly  back  initiatives  of  the 
Presidency in that domain. It is urgent. 
Third, as regards prioritization of structural reforms, I would personally particularly mention four points 
which  seem  to  me  of  utmost  importance  in  the  Eurozone:  Youth  unemployment  which  is  attaining 
unacceptable levels in some economies; unsatisfactory functioning of the Single Market in the service 
sector; insufficient labour productivity progress in the economy as a whole; and, lastly, consequences 
to be drawn from ageing in the management of the social protection schemes. 
Fourth,  as  regards  public  opinion,  I  trust  that  we  have  all  to  exert  maximum  efforts  to  improve 
explanations,  pedagogy,  communication  with  the  public  at  large.  We  are  living  in  very  vivid  and 
exemplary national democracies and in a European Union where the ultimate judge is the people. We 
have to convince our public opinion at large that each individual would be better off - with more growth 
and more jobs - if we could deliver the reforms of the Lisbon agenda . The ECB will do all what it can 
to help improving pedagogy in this respect. 
And five, I confirm here that we, in the Governing Council of the ECB, know that structural reforms are 
not easy to work out, that it needs much courage and determination from Governments, Parliaments 
and  social  partners.  We  will  back  in  the  future  as  we  have  in  the  past  this  courage  and  this 
determination. 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 3
