David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, 22 January 2004.  
 Today, we released our Update to the October Monetary Policy Report. The Update reviews economic 
and financial trends in the context of Canada’s inflation-control strategy. 
Three developments have led us to modify our outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada, 
since  our  October  Monetary  Policy  Report.  These  include:  stronger-than-expected  world  economic 
activity, the continued sharp depreciation of the U.S. dollar against major world currencies (including 
the  Canadian  dollar),  and  a  somewhat  larger  output  gap  in  Canada  at  the  end  of  2003.  Weighing 
these developments and their likely persistence, we lowered our projection of output in Canada over 
the next year and a half. In this context, we cut policy interest rates to support aggregate demand and 
thus return inflation to 2 per cent over the medium term.  
In Canada, economic growth in the period ahead will need to come primarily from private domestic 
demand, supported by monetary stimulus and by strong business confidence. We now project growth 
to average about 2 3/4 per cent in 2004, and to pick up to about 3 3/4 per cent in 2005. This would 
imply  that  the  output  gap  would  not  change  materially  before  the  end  of  2004,  but  would  be 
substantially closed by the third quarter of 2005.  
We project that core inflation will fall below 1 1/2 per cent in early 2004, before gradually moving back 
to  the  2  per  cent  target  by  the  end  of  2005.  Total  CPI  inflation  should  remain  below  core  inflation 
through 2005 if oil prices ease gradually from their current levels. 
The  main  uncertainties  in  the  outlook  relate  to  the  adjustment  of  the  Canadian  economy  to  global 
changes.  Canadian  monetary  policy  facilitates  the  overall  adjustment  process  by  helping  to  sustain 
aggregate demand in Canada. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
