I J Macfarlane: Recent financial and economic developments in Australia  
Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  Sydney, 
4 June 2004.  
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  front  of  the  Committee  once  again.  As  usual,  I  will  start  by 
reviewing the forecasts I gave to the Committee six months ago in Brisbane, then provide you with an 
update of our current forecasts. I will then move on to discussing the risks to these forecasts, both in 
the upward and the downward direction. 
Last December we thought that GDP growth in calendar 2003 would be about 3½ per cent. We now 
know that it came in at 3.9 per cent, with the second half of the year being a lot stronger than the first 
half, but with growth slipping to 3.2 per cent in the four quarters to March 2004. Our forecast for growth 
through  calendar  2004  is  now  3¾  per  cent.  We  began  to  lower  our  forecast  because  of 
weaker-than-expected  exports  and  retail  trade  and  stronger  imports.  We  then  raised  the  forecast 
following the Budget, but have lowered it again to take on board the March quarter national accounts 
released two days ago. I must say, however, that I think the market has over-reacted to the March 
quarter GDP figure. It only lowered our forecast in the mechanical sense that one of the four quarters 
is now lower than in our previous forecast. It did not materially change our view about the trajectory 
over the rest of the year, if anything it raised it. 
On inflation, we had forecast 2¼ per cent for the CPI increase over calendar 2003 and it came in a bit 
higher at 2.4 per cent, but has since receded to 2 per cent in the four quarters to March 2004. For 
calendar 2004, headline inflation will be heavily influenced by movements in oil prices, so it is best to 
look at underlying inflation. We are still forecasting that underlying measures will be running at about 
2 per cent, as we did last time we met. By end 2005, both headline and underlying measures are likely 
to  have  moved  up  to  about  2½  per  cent.  So  we  still  have  a  shallow  saucer-shaped  profile  for 
underlying inflation over the next year. Given the recent rise in petrol prices, the headline increase is 
likely to be higher than the underlying in the short run. 
This is a pretty good outlook for growth and inflation, both in absolute terms and, more particularly, 
relative to how things might have turned out. I would like to illustrate this latter point by referring back 
to a framework I put before the Committee a year ago when we met in Melbourne. This contained four 
possible scenarios, which I will recap. The first was: 
“a  weakening  world  outlook  and  an  abating  of  domestic  credit  and  asset  market 
pressures. This would provide a reasonably clear prognosis for monetary policy. In 
other words, if it were weak internationally, and weak domestically, that would be 
easy. In the other direction, so too would a combination of a clear strengthening of 
the world economy and continued domestic buoyancy. That would be easy. A third 
possible  combination,  and  the  most  favourable  one  for  Australia,  would  be  a 
firming  world  economy  and  an  easing  in  domestic  pressures,  resulting  in  more 
balanced growth for the Australian economy. 
But  the  combination  that  would  be  most  damaging  to  the  Australian  economy 
would  be  if  the  household  sector  were  to  continue  putting  itself  into  a  more 
exposed position at the rate it has over the past few years while, at the same time, 
a  further  weakening  of  the  world  economy  was  starting  to  feed  through  to 
Australian activity and incomes.” 
The last-mentioned of these possible outcomes, and the most unfavourable, was a distinct possibility 
in the middle of last year, but fortunately it did not come to pass. What occurred instead in the second 
half  of  last  year  was  the  second-mentioned  possibility  -  a  strengthening  world  economy  and  a 
continuation  of  domestic  credit  and  asset  market  pressures  centred  on  housing.  This  was  the 
environment in which we decided twice to raise the cash rate. 
What  has  happened  so  far  this  year  -  although  it  took  some  time  to  clearly  identify  it  -  was  the 
third-mentioned  possibility  -  a  transition  to  a  set  of  conditions  in  line  with  a  firming  in  the  world 
economy and an easing in domestic pressures. This was the most favourable outcome and the one 
most likely to result in a more balanced growth for the Australian economy. I outlined this in a speech I 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
gave to Macquarie University in April and we spelled it out more fully in our quarterly Statement on 
Monetary Policy published last month. 
The fact that conditions began to develop along these lines is also the reason why, after two rate rises 
in late 2003, we have not seen the need for action on monetary policy in any of our Board Meetings 
this year. In short, we have been comfortable with developments - a lot more so than we were for most 
of last year. But, as always, there are risks to the outlook, so I will spend the rest of my presentation 
discussing them. 
On  the  external  side,  consensus  forecasts  for  the  growth  of  the  world  economy  in  2004  put  it  well 
above 4 per cent, with a similar figure for 2005. Certainly, the bulk of the economic data supports this 
relatively  optimistic  outlook.  We  are  in  the  third  year  of  an  international  expansion,  and  unless 
something  unforeseen  comes  along,  we  should  expect  the  expansion  to  last  for  a  good  few  years 
longer. 
This is not the impression you would get by following press reports of financial market developments, 
where downside risks to the outlook always seem to be easier to identify than upside ones. The risk of 
a  further  rise  in  the  oil  price  is  a  constant  concern,  and  there  is  some  substance  to  these 
apprehensions, but I will say no more on the subject at present as Mr Stevens has already delivered a 
piece covering it a couple of days ago. A number of others in the market worry that policy tightening in 
China  will  be  overdone,  leading  to  a  collapse  of  the  Chinese  economy.  I  have  more  confidence  in 
China than that, and welcome the news that the Chinese authorities have been taking steps to rein in 
excessive investment. More generally, financial markets have had difficulty coming to grips with the 
fact that the long period of very low world interest rates must come to an end, and that they will have 
to adjust to an international environment of rising world interest rates over the next few years. Overall, 
we think these concerns are overdone and we are comfortable working on the assumption that the 
consensus forecast for a good world recovery is a reasonable one. We should also note that higher oil 
prices and higher interest rates are a symptom of global strength, not global weakness. 
We should also not rule out the risks on the upside. It may turn out to be the case that very low world 
interest rates were kept in place for too long a period. In this case, we could see greater inflationary 
pressure than we currently expect. In this scenario, I believe the main result would be a faster rise in 
world interest rates, as markets reacted to the prospect, and the reality of central banks acting to keep 
inflation under control. 
Turning  now  to  the  Australian  economy,  I  want  to  start  by  re-emphasising  that  monetary  policy  is 
determined by developments in the economy as a whole, not by developments in any one component. 
For example, for much of 2002/03, domestic demand was increasing at an exceptionally strong pace, 
but the external sector was subtracting from growth. Inflation at this time was also above 3 per cent. 
Even so, we did not use monetary policy to rein in the rapid growth of domestic demand because, for 
the  economy  as  a  whole,  growth  was not  excessive  and was not  threatening  our  inflation  objective 
over the medium term, despite being above it in the short run. 
While monetary policy is directed at the economy as a whole, it does not mean that we have to direct 
an equal amount of attention to each of its components. Those parts that are obviously exhibiting a 
serious imbalance will attract more of our attention than those that are relatively well behaved. This 
explains  why  we  have  spent  so  much  time  talking  about,  and  researching,  the  excessively  rapid 
growth in housing credit and, until recently, house prices. While other economic variables were more 
important for the overall macro-economic outlook, for example consumption and wage growth, their 
behaviour was not as clearly aberrant and therefore not in need of such intensive study. 
The  forecast  for  GDP  growth  in  2004  that  I  presented  before  is  based  on  the  view  that  domestic 
demand will slow from its former rapid pace, but at the same time the subtraction from growth due to 
the  external  sector  will  gradually  diminish.  Consumption  has  recently  slowed  a  bit,  although  it 
continues to be supported by strong employment growth and will benefit from the tax cuts later in the 
year. Business fixed investment, particularly in building and structures, will add to growth but not to the 
same  extent  as  in  recent  years.  Residential  investment  is  expected  to  subtract  from  growth  and 
government spending will add to it. Overall, expected GDP growth of 3¾ per cent would be a good 
outcome.  At  this  stage,  we  are  not  assuming  a  significant  drought  effect  over  the  coming  twelve 
months,  but  this  remains  a  downward  risk,  given  the  dry  conditions  prevailing  in  some  parts  of  the 
country so far this year. 
On the inflation front, we do not see a problem over the next twelve months. Beyond that, the picture is 
of  necessity  more  difficult  to  quantify.  Last  time  we  met  we  were  slightly  troubled  by  the  fact  that 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
inflation  in  the  non-traded  sector  was  over  4  per  cent,  and  that  if  this  continued  it  might  imply  a 
medium-term outlook for inflation somewhat above 3 per cent. This is still a risk, but we have taken 
some comfort from the fact that some of the sectors that were pushing it up - such as house-building 
and  property  services  -  should  slow  as  the  pressure  comes  off  the  house-building  sector.  The 
continued modest growth in average wages to date also gives us some confidence. To the extent that 
there  is  an  upward  risk  on  inflation  in the  medium term,  it  is more  likely  to come from international 
developments as the world recovery gathers momentum. 
I  will  conclude  by  saying  a  few  words  about  housing  credit  and  house  prices.  As  we  said  in  our 
quarterly  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  “The  run-up  in  credit  growth  and  the  associated  boom  in 
house prices in recent years presented two implications for the economy: they tended to boost growth 
in the short term, but carried the risk of a damaging correction if they continued too long.” In fact, they 
represented  the  one  internal  imbalance  that  could  have  put  at  risk  the  continuation  of  the  long 
economic expansion that has been so beneficial to the Australian community. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that we experienced a feeling of relief when data started to emerge this 
year which suggested the worst of the excesses may be past. First, we saw three monthly reductions 
in  loan  approvals  starting  in  November  2003  which  amounted  to  a  cumulative  fall  of  20  per  cent. 
Approvals are now running at about $12 billion per month instead of $15 billion at their peak last year. 
It is still far too early to know whether lending is returning to a sustainable pace - certainly $12 billion 
per month is still far too high - but at least some progress has been made. Certainly, the prospect of a 
return to sustainable rates of growth of credit seems brighter than for several years, and with it the 
increased likelihood that the run of good economic outcomes of the last decade will continue. 
More recently, we received very strong evidence that housing prices have not only slowed their rate of 
increase, but have fallen in level terms so far this year. This has occurred in most state capital cities, 
including the two largest, for Australia on average, and for both houses and apartments. As the fall in 
prices becomes widely known, it should allow potential house purchasers to take their time and not be 
afraid, as so many were, that they had to rush in and buy for fear of missing their last opportunity. It 
should enable them to resist the blandishments of the banks, brokers and other commission agents 
plying them with offers of seemingly generous quantities of credit. It should also reinforce the recent 
tendency of investors to question their assumptions about easy capital gains. As such, we expect that 
the housing market will continue to go through a much-needed cooling phase for some time yet. 
That is all I wish to say about the economy at this stage, but I will be happy to answer any questions 
you wish to put to me. I am also conscious that I have been talking on the economy for quite a while 
and  have  not  left  any  time  to  cover  the  various  other  areas  of  the  Bank’s  responsibilities,  such  as 
contributing to the soundness of the financial system, ensuring the efficiency of the payments system 
and  issuing  Australia’s  currency.  But  I  am  sure  these  can  all  be  covered  during  the  question  and 
answer session. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
