Marion Williams: The tourism sector - growth prospects and challenges 
Address  by  Dr  Marion  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  to  the  Barbados  Hotel 
Association, Christchurch, 8 September 2004. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a great pleasure for me to deliver the feature address to the annual meeting of the Barbados Hotel 
and Tourism Association. This association along with the BTA and the Ministry of Tourism has worked 
extremely hard over the years and especially hard since 2001, to ensure the survival and the rapid 
growth of the sector. 
My address will describe the economic landscape and will address issues of repositioning and will also 
flag issues to be considered but will stop short of prescribing solutions. 
Repositioning 
In  recent  years,  Barbados’  dependence  on  the  performance  of  the  tourism  sector  has  never  been 
more obvious. International developments and external challenges have forced the country to focus on 
policies  and  programmes  to  ensure  that  Barbados  is  able  to  compete  successfully  within  an 
increasingly challenging environment. We have thus far weathered the storm (no pun intended) but 
important challenges lie ahead both at a broad macroeconomic level and at the sectoral level. At the 
broader  economic  level,  Barbados  will  need  to  focus  on  developing  our  physical  and  economic 
infrastructure.  There  comes  a  time  when  incremental  increases  will  not  do  unless  the  structure  is 
revamped and repositioned. Yet we need to be continuously mindful of what is fiscally prudent. We 
also  need  to  keep  our  energy  policy  under  review  in  the  light  of  rising  oil  prices,  and  we  need  to 
ensure that our manufacturing and agricultural sectors are so repositioned as to have viable futures 
given global trade developments. The issues of financial liberalisation and liberalisation pressures on 
services are also continuing challenges both within CSME and within other negotiating fora. We need 
also  to  get  the  maximum  advantage  out  of  the  tourism  sector  and  give  this  key  sector  our  fullest 
support. In the medium term it will continue to be our flagbearer. 
Credit rating 
In spite of the recent downgrade of Barbados’ sovereign credit rating, the medium term prospects for 
Barbados are promising. We still expect to grow by approximately 2.5%, led by tourism. The financial 
markets have in fact recognised that Barbados continues to be a good credit and the risk premium on 
Barbados’ sovereign debt has not been affected by the recent ratings action. 
Not only has tourism been the best performing sector, but its performance last year and this year so 
far has been at its highest in recent years. While we do need to have balanced growth, and I am a 
great advocate of that approach, we should not be apologetic about the fact that the tourism sector 
has outperformed all others. 
Foreign exchange earnings 
The foreign exchange earning capacity of the sector has helped to offset some of the downside risks 
of the country’s debt levels. Earning as it did about $1.3 billion in foreign exchange in 2003 (expected 
to rise to $1.4 billion in 2004) contributing to close to 16% of gross domestic product, and employing 
over 11% of the labour force; the sector has contributed handsomely to the economic performance of 
the  Barbadian  economy  even  when  international  developments  have  presented  tremendous 
challenges.  I  think  it  is  a  credit  to  the  hard  work  of  the  officials  in  the  sector  and  to  Government’s 
willingness to provide support, that this outcome has been possible. The sector was able in 2003 to 
register  output  growth  of  7.3%  (6.7%  in  long  stay  arrivals)  against  a  global  decline  of  1%.  This 
compared with an annual average of 3% between the period 1994-2003. However, in 2004 growth has 
been particularly robust, reaching as high as a real value added of 10% in January to June. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
Satellite accounting for tourism 
I read with interest the recent report of the Private Sector Trade Team’s sectoral profile on the tourism 
industry  -  an  excellent  document.  The  tourism  satellite  accounting  approach  which  measures  the 
indirect  contribution  of  the  sector  to  output  and  which  puts  this  at  52%,  is  and  interesting  statistic. 
Statisticians  have  always  known  that  tourism’s  overall  contribution  to  GDP  is  much  greater  than 
15-16% of GDP, when indirect effects are taken into account, but the double counting that results has 
hindered  that  approach.  How,  for  example  can  we  say  that  the  construction  of  -  say  Hilton  hotel  - 
should not be included in statistics for the construction sector, but rather be included in the output of 
the  tourism  sector.  These  are  the  statistical  challenges,  and  they  are  governed  by  international 
standards  which,  for  international  comparability,  require  standard  measurements.  However  the 
satellite approach is a very useful one for giving us a more precise and measurable appreciation of the 
indirect  impact  of  the  sector  on  the  Barbados  economy,  and  can  assist  in  strategising  on  the 
intersectoral  linkages  between  tourism  and  other  sectors,  thus  allowing  allied  sectors  to  spot 
opportunities. 
The growth rates predicted for tourism and its anticipated continuing expansion, and are dependent on 
specific  conditions,  such  as  a  growing  world  economy,  low  energy  prices  and  a  global  decline  in 
conflicts. 
Energy costs 
In  the  case  of  energy,  the  current  level  of  oil  prices  must  be  of  concern  as  the  cost  of  utilities, 
operating costs and investment have constantly been an issue with respect to their cost impact on the 
tourism product in Barbados. Therefore, continued buoyancy in the price of oil will impact on economic 
prospects. Government earlier this year passed on some of these price increases to the consumer. 
This  had  an  impact  on  all  sector  of  the  economy,  including  tourism.  This  was  however  prior  to  the 
since  galloping  increase  in  oil  prices.  Even  the  airlines  have  imposed  a  fuel  tax  but  it  is  unclear 
whether this will have far-reaching implications. In a simulation run by the economists at the Central 
Bank it was found that a 25% rise in domestic fuel prices reduces nominal GDP by approximately one 
percentage point, implying that higher oil prices do impact on overall output. An analysis by sector has 
not however been conducted so we are unable to say what proportion of this impact would borne by 
the tourism sector. 
Exchange rate changes 
Meanwhile  exchange  markets  have  been  dominated  by  declines  in  the  US  dollar.  Not  withstanding 
some rebound since last February, World Economic Outlook, an IMF Report, notes that the US dollar 
depreciated  by  3  1/4  percent  in  trade  weighted  terms  since  September  2003  and  by  16  ½  percent 
since its peak in February 2002. The dollar depreciated significantly against the Euro and against the 
Yen.  This  would  have  made  travel  from  these  source  markets  more  attractive,  and  because  the 
Barbados dollar is tied to the US, would not have affected travel from the US market. The Report also 
indicates  that  in  developed  economies  (our  main  source  markets)  business  confidence  is  rising, 
unemployment  is  improving,  consumer  confidence  is  up  and  global  investment  is  promising.  This 
augurs well for travel in late 2004 and 2005. 
The Latin American market 
While  Latin  America  is  not  a  major  source  market  for  the  Caribbean,  ECLAC  reports  that  rising 
commodity  prices  in  Latin  America  have  resulted  in  the  highest  surplus  in  goods  and  services  in 
13 years and the best current account surplus in half a century. This would have positively affected 
discretionary income available for travel. However, it is not clear that the improvements are sufficiently 
significant as to lead to greater travel to the Caribbean from those markets, but the information should 
be  noted  and  monitored  when  future  strategies  involving  that  market  are  being  developed.  Many 
Caribbean  markets  also  provide  a  continuing  growth  opportunity,  particularly  since  some  of  our 
neighbours to the South are experiencing prosperous times. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
Comparative advantage 
In preparing for increased competitiveness, any country is best able to reap benefits if it specialises in 
areas on the basis of its comparative advantage. Clearly tourism is an area in which Barbados has a 
comparative advantage. In the case of tourism, our comparative advantage is one with which we were 
endowed. But competitive advantage can be built and engineered. Also, the buoyant sectors can help 
to  support  other  sectors.  The  offshore  services  sector  is  able  to  support  the  tourism  sector. 
Developments in that sector therefore ought to be of great interest to tourism officials and changes in 
the face of this sector should be monitored closely. It is important that we identify these linkages and 
build on these synergies. The development of local craft is an example of synergies between tourism 
and local manufacturing. In fact, the craft industry is largely a foreign exchange earner like any other 
export industry though it is not always so perceived. 
Sectoral linkages 
Tourism-linked sectors grow strongly when tourism performs well. Consequently, distribution, utilities, 
and the transport and communication sectors have exhibited good growth rates over the same period. 
Much of the major increases in construction activity, in particular, over the past five years, has been 
tourism-related.  Capital  investment  in  the  sector  has  also  been  a  source  of  long  term  capital  flows 
which  benefit  the  balance  of  payments  and  help  to  boost  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This 
emphasises the catalytic role which the tourism sector plays. If we can ensure that our service industry 
is globally recognised for its quality, we can also use our visiting tourists as marketing agents (by word 
of  mouth)  for  our  service  products  on  a  broader  scale.  The  service  and  the  quality  of  our  products 
therefore  have  to  be  superior  if  we  are  going  to  use  our  tourism  linkages  to  effectively  sell  them 
abroad, and this includes the ambience and the environment in which these sales take place. 
The cruise industry 
Despite the rapid growth in long stay visitors, the fastest growth in numbers has been in the cruise 
business. I read recently that fifty percent of new cruises are destined for Caribbean waters. Yet the 
value-added from cruise visitors is very much lower than that for long stay visitors. This is something 
on which Barbados and the region must strategise together so as to reap greater benefits. After our 
failed attempt to raise a tax on cruise passengers regionally, it may be time for us to seriously consider 
an entrance into the cruise business, either on our own or in partnership with others. It is a market 
from which we need to reap greater benefits. This industry is expected to reach the 800,000 mark this 
year, and so far this year cruise arrivals have grown almost 30%. This is clearly a booming business. 
Currently however, it is the ship owners who are reaping the greatest benefits. They have the capital, 
we  have  the  waters.  Our  private  sectors  need  to  work  on  getting  into  joint  ventures  with  the  ship 
owners and we should consider using a common cruise policy to give ourselves leverage. We should 
not give up on this. 
Market forecasts 
Future forecasts of world economic growth can have important implications for tourism’s sources and 
markets.  Forecasts  differ  among  individual  regions  and  groups  of  countries.  Generally  however, 
whereas  growth  in  the  industrialised  nations  is  expected  to  converge  and  is  unlikely  to  change 
significantly,  some  individual  markets  will  do  better  than  others.  In  addition,  there  is  an  evident 
widening  of  the  gap  between,  not  only  rich  and  poor  countries,  but  between  the  rich  and  the  poor 
within  countries  in  our  tourist  markets.  This  suggests  that  upmarket  tourism  will  continue  to  be  an 
important target market. Indeed, in those countries whose economies are flagging, the high end of the 
travel  market  is  expected  to  be  less  affected.  This  suggests  that  we  should  continue  to  market 
ourselves, among other things, as a playground for the rich, as this may lead to reliance on a more 
inelastic type of demand which is not particularly affected by economic slumps. 
Source markets 
Economic performance of our source markets will influence the travel market. Global trends suggest 
that in the euro area the recovery remains subdued. While there are signs of a pickup in investment, 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
household consumption remains weak but a gradual strengthening in domestic demand is expected. 
In Japan, GDP growth continues to exceed expectations with strong external demand - notably from 
China  -  accompanied  by  rising  investment  and  latterly  a  pickup  in  consumption.  This  may  have 
implications  for  the  marketing  thrust  by  the  industry  in  these  countries.  Indications  are  that 
international tourism will continue to be concentrated from the main source regions of the world. The 
US economy is projected to grow by 4.6% in 2004 and 3.9% in 2005, the euro area by 1.7% in 2004 
and 2.3% in 2005, and Canada by 2.6% in 2004 and 3.1% in 2005. The heaviest international travel 
flows will therefore continue to be within Europe and the USA - at least over the medium-term - partly 
because of growth, but also because of higher per capita incomes and longer leisure time. The IMF 
Outlook refers to the global recovery as becoming “increasingly well established”. 
Dynamic growth markets 
Countries regarded as dynamic growth travel markets are: China and the Southeast Asia region, and 
in  some  cases  the  Mediterranean  and  eastern  European  countries.  Other  Europe’s  market  share 
decreased  slightly  from  1995,  but  with  a  57.8%  share  of  the  market  there  are  still  by  far  the  most 
dominant tourist destinations. Only a few developing and emerging market countries are expected to 
do especially well. However, within CARICOM itself, travel has grown even faster than international 
travel  to  the  region.  The  Caribbean  must  however  continue  to  work  on  increasing  its  share  of  the 
global market. 
National treatment 
It will be important during the next few years that tourism investors are not put off by what appears to 
be  the  impending  prospect  of  liberalisation  and  a  scenario  where  because  of  “national  treatment” 
considerations  they  may  feel  uneasy.  It  may  appear  that  countries  will  have  to  offer  similar 
concessions to non-residents which they now offer to Barbadian residents, but some of these positions 
can be negotiated and it will be influenced by what the country commits to. Also, changes in position in 
the negotiating arena appear possible and it would be unwise not to grasp the opportunities offered by 
the  various  concessions  and  special  legislation  such  as  the  Tourism  Development  Act  and  others 
while  they  are  still  available  based  on  the  fear  that  they  will  not  last.  I  urge  you  to  grasp  these 
opportunities now. 
Industry consolidation 
Given that tourism’s growth globally has been reinforced by consolidation among every component of 
the major tourism service suppliers and by technological advances, our tourism sector cannot afford 
not to take advantage of these incentives so as to counteract some of the diseconomies of scale which 
small  countries  like  ours  face.  All  stages  in  the  tourism  value-added  chain  -  travel  agents,  travel 
organisers,  the  transport  and  hotel  and  catering  industries  -  are  subject  to  growing  competition. 
Growth  in  size,  trends  towards  concentration,  and strategic  alliances  are  pervasive.  Expansion  and 
concentration strategies are increasingly pursued internationally through investment, mergers and joint 
ventures,  both  horizontally  and  vertically.  I  am  not  necessarily  recommending  mergers  but  I  am 
suggesting that this region needs to respond pro-actively by forming alliances and partnerships among 
themselves  and  with  the  big  players  so  as  to  increase  its  economic  and  operational  space  even  if 
ownership is not increased or even though mergers may not take place. 
Bargaining and negotiation 
The increasing trend towards concentration, makes it difficult for small and medium-sized companies 
in this segment to survive without a broad regional or even global presence. We must be agile and 
respond to these challenges to small developing states, as we seek to negotiate the most appropriate 
deals with tourism suppliers as there are likely to be fewer actors among which to bargain and possibly 
more uniformity in price. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2004
A consumer driven sector 
It is not far-fetched to say that tourism is moving from a supplier-dominated industry to a consumer 
driven business. Some destinations, in an effort to either remain demand-driven have embarked on 
providing man-made travel and adventure environments which will entice the customer to choose their 
destination  on  grounds  of  specific  performance  and  not  on  price  alone.  As  a  relatively  high  cost 
destination the Caribbean may need to adopt this approach. Scale diseconomies again may require 
the use of existing incentive support to assist in providing these ancilliary attractions. 
Accessibility and air travel 
Transport is increasingly being determined with the co-operation of strategic partners and alliances - 
and Barbados’ officials are becoming more adept at negotiating their way through this network. I am 
going to be very provocative here. As a tourism dependent economy, it might well be worthwhile for 
Barbados  to  consider  getting  back  into  long  haul  airline  ownership  jointly  with  one  of  our  regional 
partners. As a tourism destination, Barbados has a lot of leverage. We need to use it. I am speaking 
here to the private sector. 
Brand name hotels 
Fewer brand name hotels are getting involved in real estate ownership today than say 10 years ago 
but they are willing to supply services to the industry. Because of the advantage of marketing under a 
brand name, this has become more and more attractive for small destinations, but somehow Barbados 
has not been too successful in this regard - Hilton hotel being a more recent exception. We may wish 
to opt to place greater energies into this search to bring brand names to Barbados and utilise existing 
unused  prime  locations  more  effectively.  Again  this  is  a  challenge  to  the  private  sector  to  pool 
resources so as to take advantage of existing opportunities. 
Barbados as a retirement destination 
The recent thrust to market Barbados as a retirement destination is also an interesting one - tourism 
for senior citizens is a growing area. In the industrialised nations the most critical aspect of population 
growth is the reversal of the age distribution. This comparatively larger proportion of retired people in 
the total population will also influence the structure of tourist demand. 
In  addition,  the  growth  in  tourism  continues  to  be  closely  tied  to  the  relationship  between  working 
hours  and  leisure.  In  the  majority  of  the  advanced  western  industrialised  nations’  average  working 
hours  under  collective  bargaining  agreements  have  fallen  steadily  over  the  past  20  years,  while 
vacation length has increased. Florida is a perfect example of the employment of such a strategy for 
retirees. In the Florida case the added advantage is that there is no state tax, only federal taxes. We 
may  not  need  (or  be  able  to  afford)  to  offer  any  other  tax  advantage.  However,  as  Barbados  is 
presently embarked on reducing its personal income taxation, this together with the double taxation 
treaty benefits may be sufficient. 
New forms of marketing 
The use of the Internet as a platform specifically enables service providers, hotels tour companies and 
the  like,  to  reduce  costs  by  contacting  customers  directly.  With  the  cost  of  communication  being 
lowered in Barbados, there may be opportunities for greater use here. 
Although figures on the number of current bookings made through the Internet to local businesses are 
not  available,  it  can  nevertheless  be  assumed  that  the  number,  given  the  proper  attention,  will 
increase in future as usage costs decline. It would be useful for forward planning to get a better idea, 
on the basis of an industry survey, of how much this is used and how effective it has been. 
With direct marketing, there is the opportunity to compare prices directly, there are no opening hours 
to worry about, and additional information can be obtained through other media. However, the retiree 
market which we hope to target more, may be less inclined to use these facilities as they are likely to 
be less computer dependent. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 5
The increased concern for safety and security; 
Permanent investment on quality; 
Incorporation of new technologies; 
Stress on value for money; and 
Developing public-private sector partnerships. 
Restructuring the market 
In  sum,  global  competition  in  tourism  will  be  further  intensified.  However,  there  are  a  number  of 
requirements  for  continuing  success  which  will  continue  to  be  important  for  the  industry  over  the 
medium term of which you as industry specialists are already well aware. Among them: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In respect of quality output and value for money we need to encourage job flexibility. Performance-
based pay or some means of creating incentives to encourage production of higher quality output, is 
therefore desirable. 
Barbados  as  a  small  economy  has  managed  to  cater  to  varying  segments  of  the  market  and  to 
combine up-market with the middle-market tourism. The challenge of combining the retirement market 
and the up-market tourism should not be beyond us. The tourist industry may in future have to focus 
more on a “hybrid consumer” whose travel choices and vacation activities will be increasingly complex. 
This multiple-segment marketing may have implications for ancilliary services - but this is where the 
linkages  will  become  evident  and  where  the  satellite  measurement  of  tourism’s  impact  will  become 
important for estimating where the opportunities lie. 
Tourism and the environment - a dilemma 
For many countries, an undisturbed natural balance, unspoilt landscapes and varied fauna and flora 
are their tourist attractions. Damage to the environment arises firstly as a result of processes unrelated 
to tourism, and secondly as the result of inappropriate utilisation of resources by the tourism sector 
itself.  It  is  not  only  an  environmental  problem,  but  also  an  economic  one.  There  is  a  cost  to 
preservation of the environment and the industry may have increasingly to bear some of that cost so 
as to relieve Government of some of this burden. 
Hurricanes and tourism in the Caribbean 
Will any of the foregoing analysis change with the advent of hurricane IVAN? 
It is possible that over the short term there may be some reticence about travelling to the region during 
the hurricane season, particularly if the clean up and recovery is prolonged. 
In some part, Barbados may even benefit from diversion of visitors formerly heading for Grenada or 
even Cayman. It is unfortunate that we should benefit from the misfortunes of others but this is the 
reality. We have had hurricanes before and we have not seen a medium term impact on long haul 
flights to the region. Also, Florida has been badly hit as well, so we may also benefit from a diversion 
by visitors originally headed to Florida. With respect to cruises, in my view, Cruises are more likely to 
bypass  the  affected  islands  than  bypass  the  Caribbean.  You,  the  specialists  in  the  sector  are  in  a 
better position to make these predictions. This is just a layman’s view. 
Tourism as a model industry? 
I would like to conclude with the remark that planning tourism like monetary and economic strategies, 
is today an increasingly demanding challenge. Given the number of variables to be taken into account, 
the industry will be faced with the task of dealing with increasing complexity. 
However, Barbados is a highly regarded brand. Our product will speak for it self. What we need are 
resources to market ourselves effectively to the world. 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2004
