Jean-Claude Trichet: Concluding remarks for the Euro-Mediterranean Seminar 
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Euro-Mediterranean Seminar, Eurosystem and Mediterranean country national central banks, Naples, 
14-15 January 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
To conclude today’s seminar, may I say what a pleasure it has been for me to be here among such 
distinguished participants. This seminar has brought together governors and high-level officials from 
the  central  banks  of  Algeria,  Cyprus,  Egypt,  Israel,  Jordan,  Lebanon,  Libya,  Malta,  Morocco,  the 
Palestinian  National  Authority,  Tunisia,  Turkey  and  the  Eurosystem,  namely  the  European  Central 
Bank and the national central banks of the euro area. 
Let me tell you how impressed I have been to feel, together with all participants in this seminar, the 
presence of history. And not only recent history, but also ancient history. I was particularly impressed 
by the various geographic maps which were presented during the course of this seminar: maps going 
back to Roman times, illustrating the intensity of trade relations 2,000 years ago. I was also struck by 
how often historians were quoted during the course of this meeting, in particular Fernand Braudel, who 
had a very deep understanding of the historical development of the Mediterranean region in the period 
of  Philippe  II.  And  so  when  paving  the  way  for  enhancing  and  improving  the  future  relationship 
between the Eurosystem and Mediterranean central banks, it is vital to take full account of all the close 
links that have developed among all of us over time.  
It  was  noted  that  our  seminar  was  living  proof  that  the  so-called  “clash  of  civilisations”  theory  is  a 
totally wrong and inappropriate concept; an absurd theory whose roots were probably to be found in 
times  of  economic  hardship.  One  of  us  noted  that  another  colloquium  is  being  held  this  week  by 
UNESCO entitled “The clash of civilisations will not happen”. We all share that view and consider that 
we  have  all  worked  as  efficiently  as  possible  to  create  the  environment  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability  that  is  necessary  for  growth  and  job  creation,  which  in  turn  helps  to  combat  poverty  and 
unemployment on all the shores of the Mediterranean. 
Let me tell you that, for me personally, it was very moving to hear such remarkable speeches on the 
same  issues  from  the  central  banks  of  Morocco  and  Spain,  when  one  thinks  of  the  historical  links 
between the two countries; from Greece and Israel, which have both been at the roots of European 
culture;  to  hear  the  central  bank  of  Tunisia,  when  thinking  of  the  Carthaginian  Empire;  to  hear  the 
central banks of Turkey, Lebanon, the Palestinian Monetary Authority, Algeria, Cyprus, Malta, Jordan, 
Italy and France, to mention just some of the really remarkable contributions we had the privilege to 
listen to today. 
I cannot help thinking that there is something in the European Union experience which could be of 
great  interest  to  the  non-European  Union  part  of  the  Mediterranean  area.  Indeed,  that  experience 
could be of interest to others throughout the world, particularly where one has to cope with extremely 
difficult  issues  that  are  triggering  acute  conflicts  of  interest  and  that  are  impossible  to  solve  by 
traditional  methods.  Jean  Monnet  had  the  wonderful  idea  of  pooling  conflicting  interests  and 
encouraging all partners to make it their common interest to jointly manage this new body of pooled 
interests,  in  the  best  possible  way,  through  an  independent  multilateral  institution.  In  this  respect,  I 
have found very interesting suggestions in Jean Monnet’s memoirs as regards the eastern part of the 
Mediterranean. 
 As you know, the ECB and the Eurosystem are young entities, but there is a long history of relations 
with monetary authorities in this region. Bilateral relations between the central banks of the euro area 
– for example the Banca d’Italia, our host and co-organiser of this seminar, which I would like to thank 
most warmly for the remarkable organisation of the present meeting, as well as of the central banks of 
the  euro  area  Mediterranean  countries  –  and  national  central  banks  on  the  southern  and  eastern 
shores of the Mediterranean have always been close. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
What is new is that central banks of the region have now met in a multilateral framework, opening the 
way for a central banking dimension within the Euro-Mediterranean process, the so-called Barcelona 
process. 
Today we have witnessed an extremely fruitful exchange of views on three topical issues: trade and 
financial links between the euro area and other countries around the Mediterranean; exchange rate 
regimes in the region; and the state of the banking and financial sector. 
This candid, very professional, frank and exceptionally interesting exchange of views was particularly 
rich and useful from both a practical and operational standpoint. Among the provisional conclusions 
that I am tempted to draw after hearing the discussions, I would mention the following: 
• 
We have a very large consensus on the importance of strengthening all links between our 
economies, with particular emphasis on trade and foreign direct investment as well as the 
financial sectors relationship. The idea of having an appropriate set of indicators to measure 
the  progress  in  this  domain  was  approved  unanimously.  Equally,  we  have  a  very  large 
consensus  on  the  need  to  run  sound  and  wise  monetary  policies,  to  benefit  from  equally 
sound fiscal policies and to rely on good governance in all sectors of the economy.  
On  exchange  rate  regimes,  the  exchange  of  views  was  particularly  stimulating  due  to  the 
great variety of experiences and regimes represented here. There was a large consensus on 
the  fact  that,  whatever  regime  is  adopted,  success  relies  very  much  on  the  quality  of  the 
policies pursued, in particular monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural policies.  
On  the  banking  system,  we  again  had  an  extremely  fruitful  exchange  of  views.  Good 
governance  and  solidity  of  the  banking  sector  were  unanimously  considered  as  a 
fundamental  precondition  for  sound  and  sustainable  growth  in  all  economies  considered. 
Central banks have a fundamental role to play in ensuring as much monetary stability and 
financial stability as possible. The Basel II accord was also mentioned and it was stressed 
that this is designed for all economies in the world.  
   Not only does today’s seminar mark the end of a preparatory process that started a couple of years 
ago,  but  I  am  convinced  that  it  also  marks  the  start  of  a  new  multilateral  dialogue  between  central 
banks in the region. While the mechanisms that will shape this process in the coming years still need 
some  fine-tuning,  with  the  necessary  adaptations  they  may  well  mirror  the  ways  in  which  the 
Eurosystem’s relations have developed with other areas of the world, like central and eastern Europe, 
Latin America and East Asia. These relations are based on regular multilateral meetings at both the 
policy and expert levels. 
Pursuant to such a scheme, high-level seminars at the policy level, co-organised by the ECB and a 
Eurosystem  national  central  bank  and  held  in  different  locations  could  be  repeated  every  year. 
Meanwhile, expert-level workshops on different topics could also be held every year, as appropriate 
preparation for the high-level seminars, possibly beginning at the end of 2004. These events should 
be prepared by pooling knowledge on the economies of the region and encouraging contacts between 
the research departments of the Mediterranean region’s central banks. 
Let me also mention that in recent years there has been significant demand for technical assistance 
from  central  banks  in  Mediterranean  countries.  Several  Eurosystem  national  central  banks  have 
responded  with  substantial  programmes.  To  the  extent  that  a  coordinated  effort  by  all  Eurosystem 
national central banks may help to respond to further requests, the ECB will activate its task force of 
Eurosystem technical assistance experts to that end. 
* * * 
Let me conclude by thanking once again Governor Fazio and the staff of the Banca d’Italia for their 
generous  contribution  and  precious  cooperation  in  organising  this  seminar.  The  impressive 
surroundings of the Capodimonte Royal Palace have certainly provided a stunning backdrop to our 
meeting. Moreover, I would like to thank His Eminence, Cardinal Giordano of Naples, the Minister for 
European Affairs, Mr Buttiglione, Members of the Italian Parliament, the President of the Campania 
Region Mr Bassolino, Mayoress of Naples Ms. Russo Jervolino and all our distinguished guests for 
their participation at the opening session. 
Finally, I would like to thank all participants, and in particular my colleagues from our Mediterranean 
partner countries, for coming to Naples and discussing with us issues of common interest. We all know 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2004
that parts of this region are not free of tensions. Thus, your participation in today’s meeting is a sign of 
professionalism to which I would like to pay particular tribute. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2004 
 3
