Kishori J Udeshi: Development of forex markets in India - review and prospects 
Keynote address by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 15th Forex 
Assembly organised by Forex Association of India, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 20 August 2004. 
Grateful  acknowledgement  for  inputs  provided  by  Smt.  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Executive  Director  and  Shri.  G.  Mahalingam, 
General Manager, Department of External Investments and Operations. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  in  Colombo  today  to  address  the  15th  National  Forex  Assembly.  India  and  Sri 
Lanka  have  had  very  close  and  friendly  neighbourly  relations  especially  culturally,  for  centuries  - 
indeed  millennia.  On  behalf  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  I  bring  greetings  to  you  all  and  express 
appreciation of the warm hospitality of the host country. RBI has always actively participated in the 
meetings of national Forex Assembly at Governor or Deputy Governor level. I am delighted to carry 
forward the tradition. Being an exclusive gathering of Forex Market participants in the region, I thought 
I  would  use  this  forum  to  share  some  of  my  thoughts  on  fora  market  developments  in  India.  I  am 
aware  that  each  country  has  unique  situations  and  policies.  But  in  forex  such  as  these,  we  could 
exchange experiences for mutual benefit.  
My  brief  address  has  been  structured  as  follows:  First,  I  will  trace  the  important  landmarks  in  the 
evolution of forex market in India spanning over roughly three decades. Thereafter, I will proceed to 
dwell on measures for market liberalization and development including disclosure and transparency 
initiatives.  Thereafter  there  would  be  a  coverage  of  institutional  development.  I  will  conclude  this 
address  outlining  the  tasks  that  lie  ahead  of  us  and  scope  for  further  interaction  among  the 
participants.  
Evolution of foreign exchange market in India 
The Indian forex market owes its origin to the important step that RBI took in 1978 to allow banks to 
undertake  intra-day  trading  in  foreign  exchange.  As  a  consequence,  the  stipulation  of  maintaining 
“square” or “near square” position was to be complied with only at the close of business each day. 
During the period 1975-1992, the exchange rate of rupee was officially determined by the RBI in terms 
of  a  weighted  basket  of  currencies  of  India’s  major  trading  partners  and  there  were  significant 
restrictions on the current account transactions. 
The initiation of economic reforms in July 1991 saw significant two-step downward adjustment in the 
exchange rate of the rupee on July 1 and 3, 1991 with a view to placing it at an appropriate level in line 
with  the  inflation  differential  to  maintain the  competitiveness of  exports.  Subsequently,  following  the 
recommendations of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman:Dr C. Rangarajan) 
the  Liberalised  Exchange  Rate  Management  System(LERMS)  involving  dual  exchange  rate 
mechanism was instituted in March 1992 which was followed by the ultimate convergence of the dual 
rates effective from March 1, 1993(christened modified LERMS). The unification of the exchange rate 
of  the  rupee  marks  the  beginning  of  the  era  of  market  determined  exchange  rate  regime  of  rupee, 
based on demand and supply in the forex market. It is also an important step in the progress towards 
current account convertibility, which was finally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of 
the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund. 
The appointment of an Expert Group on Foreign Exchange (popularly known as Sodhani Committee) 
in November 1994 is a landmark in the design of foreign exchange market in India. The Group studied 
the market in great detail and came up with far reaching recommendations to develop, deepen and 
widen the forex market. In the process of development of forex markets, banks have been accorded 
significant initiative and freedom to operate in the market. To quote a few important measures relating 
to  market  development  and  liberalisation,  banks  were  allowed  freedom  to  fix  their  trading  limits, 
permitted to borrow and invest funds in the overseas markets up to specified limits, accorded freedom 
to determine interest rates on FCNR deposits within ceilings and allowed to use derivative products for 
asset-liability management purposes. Similarly, corporates were given flexibility to book forward cover 
based on past turnover and allowed to use a variety of instruments like interest rates and currency 
swaps,  caps/collars  and  forward  rate  agreements  in  the  international  forex  market.  Rupee-foreign 
currency swap market for hedging longer term exposure has developed substantially in the last few 
years.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
Market profile 
The Indian forex market is predominantly a transaction based market with the existence of underlying 
forex  exposure  generally  being  an  essential  requirement  for  market  users.  Similarly,  regulations  in 
most cases require end users to repatriate and surrender foreign exchange in the Indian forex market. 
All  forex  transactions  of  Government  of  India  are  routed  through  the  market  except  for  aid 
transactions.  
The forex market is made up of Authorised Dealers (generally banks), some intermediaries with limited 
authorisation  and  end  users  viz.,  individuals,  corporates,  institutional  investors  and  others.  Market 
making  banks  (generally  foreign  banks  and  new  private  sector  banks)  account  for  a  significant 
percentage of the overall turnover in the market.  
The  average  monthly  turnover  in  the  merchant  segment  of  the  forex  market  increased  to 
US$ 40.5 billion  in  2003-2004  from  US$  27.0  billion  in  2002-2003.  In  the  inter-bank  segment,  the 
turnover  has  moved  up  from  US$  103  billion  in  2002-2003  to  US$  134.2  billion  in  2003-2004. 
Consequently, the average monthly total turnover increased sharply to US$ 174.7 billion in 2003-2004 
from US$ 130 billion in the previous year. The inter-bank to merchant turnover ratio hovered in the 
range of 2.9 –3.9 during the year.  
Trade and financial liberalisation 
There is large empirical literature suggesting that trade integration benefits a larger number and helps 
promote  economic  growth.  In  contrast,  recent  empirical  research  is  unable  to  establish  a  clear  link 
between financial integration and growth. There is therefore now a consensus among academicians 
and  policy  makers  that  trade  liberalisation  should  take  precedence  over  financial  liberalisation.  The 
RBI approach makes a distinction among the different participants in order to assess, on an ongoing 
basis,  the  gains  as  well  as  the  vulnerabilities  of  foreign  currency  exposures  to  the  system.  In  the 
capital  account,  apart  from  the  Government’s,  there  are  three  balance  sheets  that  we  take  into 
account  whether  for  residents  or  for  non-residents  :  the  balance  sheet  of  the  households,  the 
corporates and the financial intermediaries. Although in theory, everything may be integrated, in our 
phase  of  development,  definitely  these  three  are  distinct  in  terms  of  their  immediate  reactions  to 
market forces. In particular, this approach recognises the need to put in place appropriate prudential 
regulation  in  regard  to  the  financial  intermediaries  in  so  far  as  foreign  currency  transactions  are 
concerned.  There  is  virtual  unanimity  that  the  currency  mismatches  of  financial  intermediaries  is  a 
major source of risks of financial integration which has to be mitigated by monitoring and regulations 
and furthermore, that currency mismatches in the corporate sector can also be a source of risk to the 
financial sector. Hence the advice to banks to monitor unhedged exposures of borrowers. I would rejig 
your memory a bit - at the Ninth Forex Assembly at Goa, the then Deputy Governor Dr.S.S. Tarapore 
had alluded to these risks saying “banks and FIs cannot distance themselves from the risks taken by 
corporates as these risks can involuntarily devolve on the banks as their lendings to corporates can 
easily turn into NPAs”. Prudential regulations in the financial sector should not therefore be construed 
as capital controls. 
This  approach  has  been  reflected  in  the  recent  liberalisation  of  the  policy  on  external  commercial 
borrowings. The whole process of permitting such external debt may be either through the automatic 
route or non-automatic route, but slowly the automatic route is being expanded and the non-automatic 
route  reduced.  The  recent  External  Commercial  Borrowing(ECB)  policy  makes  clear  distinction 
between  corporates  and  financial  intermediaries.  Therefore,  while  corporates  have  been  given 
freedom to borrow under automatic route up to $500 million per year subject to certain conditions, a 
different approach has been adopted for financial intermediaries in the interest of financial stability by 
regulating access to overseas borrowings and issue of guarantees.  
Another  example  is  in  regard  to  overseas  investments.  To  enable  corporates  to  become  global 
companies overseas investments up to their net worth is permitted under the automatic route. They 
can also access ECBs under automatic route to invest overseas. In regard to resident individuals, in 
order to provide a hassle-free facility to make remittances overseas to meet both current and capital 
account requirements, they have been allowed to remit on an annual basis US$ 25000/- on a mere 
declaration of the purpose.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
Disclosure and transparency initiatives 
RBI  has  been  transparent  in  making  available,  in  public  domain,  appropriate  data  relating  to  forex 
market and those resulting from RBI operations in the foreign exchange market. RBI disseminates the 
daily  reference  rate  which  is  an  indicative  rate  for  market  observers  through  its  website.  The 
movements in foreign exchange reserves of the RBI are published on a weekly basis in the Weekly 
Statistical Supplement(WSS). WSS also carries data on exchange rates of rupee against some major 
currencies. The monthly Bulletin of RBI gives data regarding purchases and sales of foreign currency 
undertaken by RBI against the rupee. The data regarding the Balance of Payments and the External 
Debt profile of the country is put out on a quarterly basis. RBI has already achieved full disclosure of 
information pertaining to international reserves and foreign currency liquidity position under the Special 
Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) of IMF.  
With  the  concurrence  of  Government  of  India,  RBI  decided  to  compile  and  make  public  half-yearly 
reports on management of foreign exchange reserves for bringing about more transparency and also 
for  enhancing  the  level  of  disclosure  in  this  regard.  The  first  such  report  with  reference  to 
September 30, 2003 was put in public domain through websites of both the Government of India and 
RBI in February 2004. The second report on foreign exchange reserves with reference to March 31, 
2004 is now available at RBI website. 
Institutional development 
It has been well documented that the vast size of daily foreign exchange trading, combined with the 
global  interdependencies  of  the  forex  market  and  payment  systems  involves  risks  stemming  from 
settlement of forex trades on gross basis. Settlement of forex transactions spans different time zones 
and  payment  systems.  As  a  result,  counterparties  assume  various  types  of  risks  in  the  course  of 
settlement. As suggested by the Sodhani Committee, RBI took the initiative to establish CCIL in 2001 
to  mitigate  risks  in  the  Indian  financial  markets.  As  India’s  first  centralised  clearing  and  settlement 
system for the financial sector, CCIL’s role in facilitating settlement of both debt and forex transactions 
is perhaps unique.  
CCIL undertakes settlement of forex trades on a multilateral net basis through a process of novation 
and  all  trades  accepted  are  guaranteed  for  settlement.  On  an  average,  CCIL  daily  settles  over 
3500 deals covering an average gross volume of around US$3.5 billion, representing over 80% of the 
market.  CCIL  has  been  able  to  offer  netting  advantage  consistently.  In  addition  to  benefits  of  risk 
mitigation,  CCIL’s  intermediation  also  provides  to  its  members  other  tangible  benefits  such  as 
improved efficiency, lower operational cost and easier reconciliation of accounts with correspondents. 
CCIL  has  improved  operational  efficiency  with  a  zero  failure  rate.  We  will  be  happy  to  share  our 
experience with our Asian friends.  
Since it started its operations, CCIL has consistently endeavoured to add value to the services, and 
has gradually brought the entire gamut of forex transactions under its purview. It has also, over time, 
added  more  and  more  functionalities  enhancing  the  value  of  its  product.  Similarly,  CCIL  has  also 
launched a Forex Trading Platform to facilitate US Dollar /Rupee deals by banks in India. This platform 
has  been  given  to  members  free  of  cost.  The  platform  offers  both  Order  Matching  and  Negotiation 
modes for dealing. The USP of the platform is its offer of Straight-Through Processing capabilities as it 
is linked to CCIL’s settlement platform. RBI encourages the authorised dealers to take full advantage 
of this and intends monitoring the use of this platform to make it more user friendly and widely used.  
In India, the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India as a self-regulatory organisation formed 
by  authorised  dealers  plays  a  constructive  role  in  market  development  by  initiating  debates  on 
important  issues,  organising  training  programmes  and  providing  technical  expertise  on  various 
matters. We expect the FEDAI to enhance its catalytic role in market development in the years ahead.  
To further the participatory process in a more holistic manner by taking into account all segments of 
the financial markets, the ambit of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on Money and Securities 
Markets  set  up  by  RBI  in  1999  has  been  expanded  in  2004  to  include  forex  markets  and  the 
Committee has been renamed as TAC on Money, Securities and Forex Markets. 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
Tasks ahead 
The Reserve Bank will continue to adopt an approach characterised by gradualism in respect of future 
liberalisation of forex markets. In terms of sequencing, forex markets have to be aligned to external 
sector  reforms  and  development  of  financial  markets  as  part  of  overall  reform.  There  are  several 
aspects of reform in external sector and forex markets is one of them. Therefore, further liberalisation 
in forex markets have to be harmonised with progress in other areas.  
As you are aware, all major reforms in the market have been brought about after soliciting the opinions 
of  market  participants  and  thus  the  system  of  participatory  process  in  market  development  is  very 
much in place and will continue. In order to further the participatory process, I am happy to inform you 
that yesterday I had discussions with my colleague Dr. Rakesh Mohan and Governor Dr. Reddy. It has 
been decided that RBI will immediately set up a Committee to undertake a comprehensive review of 
the liberalisation process set in motion in the last decade, study recent international experience and 
identify various options for future forex market development in India. The Committee will interact with 
market  participants  and  experts  for  this  purpose.  The  Committee  will  prepare  a  report  within  three 
months which will be placed before TAC. The report will then be placed in the public domain for nviting 
suggestions.  On  the  basis  of  the  suggestions  received,  a  road  map  will  be  drawn  up  for  further 
liberalisation  to  reach  global  standards.  No  doubt  we  will  be  associating,  as  usual,  the  Forex 
Association to assist us in this endeavour. 
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  the  Assembly  for  giving  this  opportunity.  Our  officers  are  also 
participating in the deliberations and we will get a feedback from them. Wish you all the best in your 
endeavours.  
4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
