Lee Hsien Loong: Financial sector - liberalisation and growth 
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore’s  31st  Annual  Dinner,  Singapore, 
17 June 2004. 
 In  1997,  MAS  launched  a  comprehensive  review  of  Singapore’s  financial  sector.  The  Asian  crisis 
unfolded soon after, but we decided to press on. Over the next few years, we fundamentally changed 
our  regulatory  approach,  from  one-size-fits-all  prescriptive  regulation  towards  a  more  risk-focussed 
supervisory  approach.  We  liberalised  the  industry,  allowing  freer  competition,  more  play  of  market 
forces,  and  greater  risk  taking  by  institutions.  We  actively  promoted  activities  in  which  we  had 
competitive advantages. 
Our efforts are bearing fruit. In the last seven years, the financial industry has changed dramatically. 
Tonight, let me review the state of the industry, and discuss some key challenges and opportunities 
going forward. 
Overview of changes in the financial sector 
Singapore’s financial sector held up well against the full impact of the Asian Financial Crisis, and more 
recently the SARS outbreak. Despite the turbulent environment, it has steadily grown and matured. 
Our financial system is robust, and our legal, supervisory and institutional framework is sound, as the 
IMF’s  recent  Financial  System  Stability  Assessment  of  Singapore  affirmed.  Today,  700  local  and 
foreign  financial  institutions  are  in  Singapore.  They  offer  a  comprehensive  range  of  world-class 
financial services and with 5% of our workforce, contribute 12% of Singapore’s GDP. 
In  banking,  seven  local  banking  groups  have  consolidated  into  three  stronger  groups.  Foreign 
shareholding limits on locally-incorporated banks have been removed, allowing them to tap the equity 
market more flexibly, and if they desire, to form strategic partnerships with foreign banks. Six banks 
with  regional  and  international  standing  and  the  potential  to  contribute  to  our  financial  sector  have 
been awarded Qualifying Full Bank (QFB) licences. This has intensified competition in retail banking 
and  widened  consumer  choices.  Foreign  banks  also  continue  to  be  active  players  in  the wholesale 
banking market and in wealth management. International banks are using Singapore as their base to 
service corporations and high net worth individuals (HNWIs) in the region. 
In  insurance,  a  formerly  closed  industry  has  been  substantially  deregulated.  We  have  enhanced 
disclosure  requirements  of  products, 
the  overall 
professionalism of insurance advisers. 
The  financial  advisory  industry  has  also  seen  substantial  growth.  A  diversity  of  firms  and  business 
models now cater to different market segments. Service and conduct standards of financial advisers 
have gone up. 
The  wealth  management  industry  has  grown  dramatically.  Annual  growth  rates  in  private  banking 
assets under management (AUM) average almost 20%. In 2003, institutional AUM grew by 35% year-
on-year  to  S$ 465 billion.  A  majority  of  these  assets  are  internationally  sourced.  Close  to 
1,000 investment  professionals,  comprising  portfolio  managers,  analysts,  asset  allocators  and 
economists  now  work  in  this  high  value-added  sector.  Fund  managers  have  been  extending  their 
value chain of activities here. Apart from portfolio management and marketing activities, companies 
now carry out middle-office functions such as regional trading and research. Others have centralised 
regional back office operations in Singapore, making full use of our efficient infrastructure, conducive 
business environment and stable political climate. 
MAS also made a major effort to develop Singapore’s capital markets. A cornerstone of this effort was 
the easing of restrictions on the lending of the Singapore dollar (S$) to non-residents. Originally, banks 
required MAS’ permission for any form of lending to non-residents above S$ 5 million. This blanket 
restriction  effectively  discouraged  S$  speculation,  but  it  also  stifled  the  growth  of  capital  markets. 
Starting  in  1998,  we  progressively  refined  the  restrictions  to  focus  more  sharply  on  lending  for  the 
purpose of S$ speculation. We lifted restrictions on the trading of S$ derivatives like futures, options 
and  cross-currency  swaps.  We  allowed  non-residents  to  raise  S$  funds  through  debt  and  equity 
tightened  up  sales  practices  and  raised 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 1
issuance. Eventually the policy changed so substantially that it was no longer apt to describe it as the 
non-internationalisation of the S$. So in May this year we renamed it the policy on the lending of S$ to 
non-resident financial institutions. 
Consequently,  our  capital  markets  have  broadened  and  deepened.  The  debt  market  has  matured 
significantly, and now provides a cost-effective alternative funding source to a diverse range of local 
and foreign borrowers. The SGS yield curve has been extended from 7 to 15 years. Some statutory 
boards have even issued bonds up to 20 years in tenor. The corporate debt market has quadrupled 
since  end-1996  with  S$ 103 billion  of  corporate  debt  securities  outstanding  as  at  end-2003.  Debt 
issuance has increased substantially from only S$ 5.4 billion at end-1996 to S$ 67 billion in 2003, a 
compounded annual growth of 43%. 
The profile of debt issuers has also changed. Statutory boards used to dominate, but now form only 
3%  of  total  issuance.  Instead,  the  debt  market  has  a  stable  base  of  large  corporates  and  financial 
institutions  issuing  bonds  well  over  S$ 1 billion  in  issue  size.  This  has  increased  liquidity  in  the 
secondary market. Large international issuers such as IFC, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and ADB, which 
can tap any market in the world, have chosen to raise funds in Singapore. 
Treasury  markets  have  also  stayed  buoyant,  as  Singapore  remains  one  of  the  established  leading 
global FX trading centres. The creation and hedging of structured products have boosted turnover in 
derivative markets. Singapore now ranks 6th globally, in OTC FX and interest rate derivatives. 
Reforms were also introduced to deregulate the stockbroking industry. The industry has consolidated, 
operating  more  leanly  on  much  lower  commissions.  The  bigger  local  players  have  expanded  their 
product range and also expanded overseas. More foreign players have entered the market. Overall, 
investors have benefited from lower trading costs. 
SGX became the first demutualised, integrated stock and derivatives exchange in the Asia-Pacific in 
December 1999. It is now well placed to grow its business, and respond to developments in regional 
capital markets. More foreign companies are choosing to list in Singapore. To date, there have been 
47 listings by Chinese companies, and a few Indian listings are in the pipeline. SGX has also actively 
pursued alliances with other exchanges. Its first securities co-trading linkage with the Australia Stock 
Exchange allowed investors in the two countries to trade in each other’s market directly. SGX is also 
exploring linkages with ASEAN securities markets. If this succeeds it will benefit the region as a whole. 
We have also grown as a processing centre. Large financial institutions have centralised their regional 
and  global  processing  operations  in  Singapore.  These  house  high  value-added,  mission-critical 
systems as well as back-office processing activities. 
In  brief,  our  financial  sector  has  become  more  dynamic  and  vibrant.  Many  persons  and  institutions 
have participated in this process. Their support, hard work and spirit of enterprise made this possible. I 
thank them all. 
Developments in the banking sector 
Let me now focus on the banking sector. 
The  Asian  Financial  Crisis  underscored  the  importance  of  sound,  resilient  financial  systems 
underpinned by strong domestic banks. The lessons of the Crisis played a major part in re-shaping the 
banking  industry.  Meanwhile,  global  trends  such  as  consolidation  among  the  major  international 
banks, technology advances and globalisation of financial markets continued apace. A new financial 
landscape was emerging. 
MAS-initiated reforms 
Banking was the most critical and complex part of the MAS reforms. We started from a strong position, 
with  sound  and  well  supervised  local  banks,  although  they  operated  in  a  tightly  regulated  and 
protected environment. Our challenge was to free up this industry so that it could continue to develop 
and grow, without compromising stability and soundness in a changing landscape. Strong and well-
managed  local  banks,  with  a  significant  share  of  the  home  market,  were  and  are  critical  to  the 
resilience and stability of our financial system. However, we could no longer maintain this by restricting 
access to the domestic market. We needed to permit more competition, but in phases, to allow the 
local banks to adjust and compete effectively. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2004
MAS therefore introduced a five-year programme to liberalise access to Singapore’s domestic banking 
market. We made the first moves in 1999. As we lightened our regulatory touch, we also worked with 
banks to set guidelines for best practices and give banks greater room for enterprise and innovation. 
Stronger banking industry 
Today,  Singapore’s  banking  sector  is  more  open  and  dynamic.  This  has  come  about  without 
sacrificing  strength  and  stability.  Individual  banks  and  the  industry  as  a  whole  have  risen  to  the 
challenge. Existing players have upgraded and strengthened themselves. Banks have maintained high 
prudential standards, become more efficient and improved their service quality and product ranges. 
The foreign banks have contributed to the vibrancy of the Singapore banking scene. Competition has 
led to the development of a rich array of innovative products and more discriminating pricing models. 
Customer service as a whole has improved. Foreign banks have continued to expand their operations 
here,  and  many  have  made  Singapore  a  regional  or  even  global  platform  for  important  banking 
services. 
The local banks have strengthened their capabilities and expanded their range of business activities. 
They  have  built  up  their  management  teams,  and  made  significant  infrastructural  investments  to 
enhance  their  operational  effectiveness.  Fees  and  commissions  have  risen  as  a  proportion  of 
operating  income.  Banks  are  offering  new  business  services,  while  continuing  to  provide  affordable 
banking  facilities  to  the  average  Singaporean.  They  have  held  their  own  despite  the  increased 
competition. For instance, their market share of resident non-bank deposits (both ACU and DBU) has 
declined only marginally from 62% to 59% over the last five years. 
The  local  banks  have  also  improved  their  business  and  risk  management  capabilities.  The  recent 
change in MAS’ capital adequacy requirements is in recognition of local banks’ efforts to upgrade their 
risk management capabilities, and should allow them to manage their capital more flexibly. 
With greater financial strength from the mergers and increased competition at home, local banks have 
begun to venture abroad and develop a regional footprint through overseas acquisitions. 
Banking liberalisation 
When MAS embarked on the liberalisation measures, we sought to anticipate changes and trends that 
we were convinced were already underway. Events since then showed that we moved none too soon. 
Technological  advances  have  continued  unabated.  The  Internet  for  instance  has  proven  to  be  an 
efficient and widely used alternative distribution and marketing channel, and has helped create new 
business  models.  Worldwide,  major  banks  continue  to  consolidate,  though  the  process  is  not  yet 
complete, especially in Europe. 
We also anticipated needing to open up our banking sector because we intended to negotiate FTAs 
with major trading partners. Since our goods sector was already almost completely open, our partners 
would surely make requests in services, and especially financial services. Therefore our local banks 
had  to  be  ready.  The  banks  would  have  preferred  that  we  slow  down  the  pace,  but  we  had  an 
overriding need to conclude a wide network of FTAs, including one with the US. The banking reforms 
enabled us to do this. Now that we have done so, we are reassured that our banks are holding their 
own, and can take the increased competition in their stride. 
Adjustments to liberalisation measures 
It  is  now  three  years  since  the  last  package  of  banking  liberalisation  measures  in  2001.  Having 
assessed  the  state  of  the  industry,  MAS  has  decided  to  take  a  few  further  steps  to  liberalise  the 
banking industry. These are incremental adjustments to the earlier major liberalisation packages: 
a. 
Firstly, from 1 January 2005, QFBs will be permitted to establish up to 25 service locations 
from  the  existing  15.  The  25  locations  can  either  be  brick-and-mortar  branches  or  offsite 
ATM locations. With 6 QFBs permitted to share ATMs amongst themselves, this could result 
in a QFB shared ATM network of about 150 locations across Singapore. This provides QFBs 
with significant scope for expanding their presence in the domestic market. 
Secondly, MAS is prepared to grant a limited number of new Wholesale Bank (WB) licences 
to applicants that meet our admission requirements. 
b. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 3
c. 
Finally, QFBs will with immediate effect be allowed to negotiate with the local banks on a 
commercial  basis  to  let  their  credit  card  holders  obtain  cash  advances  through  the  local 
banks’ ATM networks. 
Singapore now has one of the most liberal banking environments in Asia. However, over time, as the 
industry changes, we must be ready to liberalise further. MAS will reassess the environment before 
deciding on any further measures. 
While it is still too early to make a final judgment, banking liberalisation has so far achieved its aim of 
bringing about greater competition. It has fostered the consolidation of the local banks, which might 
otherwise  have  taken  much  longer.  The  overall  market  shares  of  local  and  foreign  banks  have  not 
changed drastically, but there has been an all-round qualitative improvement which has enhanced the 
vibrancy of Singapore’s financial sector. 
The liberalisation measures and reforms of the last few years have set the financial sector on a firm 
foundation. However, we cannot afford to rest on our laurels. Challenges as well as opportunities exist 
for both the banking industry and the financial sector as a whole. We must identify and respond to 
them, in order to keep the financial sector dynamic and competitive. 
Challenges for banks 
For  banks,  I  will  focus  on  two  main  challenges.  Firstly,  banks  need  to  continue  to  maintain  high 
prudential standards so as to remain sound institutions. Next, they have to develop new strategies to 
continue growing strong, viable businesses. 
Sound institutions 
MAS does not seek to prevent institutions from taking risks. It is the business of financial institutions to 
take  on  and  intermediate  risks.  But  if  risks  are  not  well  managed  or  events  turn  out  unfavourably, 
institutions  can  incur  substantial  losses.  No  amount  of  regulation  or  supervision  can  completely 
prevent losses. On the other hand, over-regulation would curb innovation and enterprise. This was a 
key  message  in  MAS’  Monograph  on  the  Objectives  and  Principles  of  Financial  Supervision  in 
Singapore. 
Financial institutions therefore need to build their capacity to identify, monitor, and control the risks that 
they take. Banks should benchmark their risk management against international best practices. Risk 
management should be an integral part of their operations, and should keep pace with their business 
profile and with industry developments. The banking sector as a whole has done well in this respect, 
and we expect to see this continue. 
One  major  change  in  the  way  banks  manage  risks  will  be  triggered  by  the  new  Basel  Accord. 
Implementing  Basle  II  will  be  a  complex  exercise  but  will  spur  banks  to  enhance  their  risk 
management  practices.  Banks  need  to  develop  robust  systems  and  processes  to  make  the  new 
capital adequacy rules work. While cost will inevitably be an important consideration, this should be 
weighed against the significant benefits and operational savings from the more accurate allocation of 
capital to risk. MAS will work closely with the local banks to implement the new Accord. 
Business and strategic considerations 
Next, banks have to decide how to grow and position their businesses over the longer term, especially 
the local banks. Maintaining margins and cutting costs is necessary in the short term, but beyond that, 
banks need longer term strategies for staying viable and competitive. 
After a period of domestic consolidation, the local banks have made several regional acquisitions, but 
they still remain small by international standards. Competition will intensify, within the domestic market 
because of liberalisation, and internationally because globalisation is continuing. The local banks may 
well find that in order to hold their own and be viable, they need to grow bigger. 
Possibilities for domestic growth are limited other than through further consolidation. But the region 
offers considerable opportunities. Asia is poised for sustained growth, having emerged from the Crisis 
as one of the most promising regions in the world. Countries have gone through a period of structural 
reforms  and  transformed  their  financial  sectors.  Now  they  are  progressively  opening  up  their 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2004
economies  to  greater  foreign  participation.  This  is  attracting  interest  from  major  regional  and  global 
players. 
Our  local  banks  cannot  ignore  this  game.  They  need  to  consider  their  options  carefully.  Is  the  way 
forward  to  remain  a  niche  player,  sizeable  in  the  domestic  market,  but  small  by  international 
standards? Or must they achieve greater scale by expanding into the region? If so, what strategy will 
minimise the risks and maximise the benefits of operating in different countries? How can they build 
strong  management  teams,  to  execute  a  sound  strategy  well?  Each  bank  must  answer  these 
questions for itself. Their long term profitability and viability depends on their finding the right answers. 
Challenges for the financial sector 
Let  me  move  on  to  some  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges  for  the  financial  sector.  I  will  discuss 
three  issues  -  developing  the  wealth  management  industry,  growing  our  capital  markets,  and 
increasing our human capital. 
Wealth management 
The Asia-Pacific is the fastest growing market for private banking in the world. Rapid development is 
producing large numbers of wealthy individuals, and huge amounts of private wealth to be managed. 
Asian savers and investors are increasingly sophisticated and are seeking best of breed products and 
managers. Non-Asian clients are increasingly demanding geographical diversification for their assets. 
Institutional assets in Asia will also grow progressively as countries reform pensions, and deregulation 
frees up assets from insurance companies and other corporates for professional management. 
These  factors  favour  Singapore  as  an  Asian  centre,  because  of  our  sound  economic  and  political 
environment, conducive legal and tax policies, reputation for integrity, and strict enforcement against 
crime  and  money  laundering.  Singapore  is  already  an  established  centre  for  managing  Asian 
investments of global clients, and global investments of Asian clients. The strong growth potential of 
wealth management makes it an industry where Singapore is well placed to become a global player. 
The large increase in the number of HNWIs globally has also boosted demand for estate and trust 
planning. We are reviewing and modernizing the Singapore Trustees Act. MAS is also reviewing the 
Trust Companies Act, and will take over the regulation of trust companies. These steps will enhance 
Singapore’s  position  as  an  international  trust  domicile  and  widen  the  suite  of  wealth  management 
services available here. We also need to build a larger pool of wealth management skills, and continue 
to increase the range of product offerings for wealth management clients. 
Capital markets 
Since the Crisis, countries in Asia have recognized the importance of developing their bond markets. 
While individual countries have made significant progress, their markets remain fragmented and small 
by international standards. We need closer co-operation among the capital markets in Asia, in order to 
integrate the markets and collectively increase their depth and liquidity. This will allow us to effectively 
recycle some of Asia’s huge reserves and attract more international investors to the region. 
Regional  governments  have  therefore  taken  several  initiatives  to  foster  a  regional  capital  market, 
covering both fixed income and equity. These address both supply and demand side issues, such as 
easing constraints to cross border activity, forging alliances and linkages among the exchanges, as 
well as establishing a regional infrastructure. Challenges still remain. For example, we have to work 
out and implement efficient solutions across countries that have different start points, practices and 
regulatory frameworks. But it is encouraging that governments are more seized with this problem, and 
more ready to collaborate with one another, than ever before. 
Singapore has taken the lead in several of the regional initiatives. Financial institutions here should 
also take part actively. This is the time to engage regulators and government officials in the region, to 
enter their growing markets and position yourselves for the business opportunities that the initiatives 
create. 
As  a  leading  foreign  exchange  centre  with  a  critical  mass  of  global  fixed  income  and  equities 
expertise, Singapore can service international investors operating in Asia. Our market is well placed to 
facilitate the hedging activities that are essential for risk management and improving market efficiency. 
BIS Review 39/2004 
 5
These will complement the domestic markets in the countries of the region. Our strong legal system 
and the availability of international legal expertise and product structuring teams equip us to structure 
complex  cross-border  transactions.  The  growing  wealth  management  industry  will  also  generate  a 
steady source of funds for regional investment products. 
Human capital 
A  major  issue  that  concerns  all  parts  of  the  financial  sector  is  human  capital.  A  distinguishing 
characteristic of a successful financial centre is that it attracts talented and dynamic professionals from 
a broad range of disciplines and experiences. They make the financial centre what it is. Deepening 
and broadening our talent pool will be a continuing challenge for the financial sector and for MAS. 
MAS  and  industry  players  have  taken  steps  together  to  address  this.  The  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Finance  had  been  re-organised  to  better  meet  the  needs  of  the  industry  as  a  financial  training 
intermediary. It will also serve as a platform for the industry to provide regular feedback on manpower 
needs and issues. 
The  industry  has  established  the  Financial  Industry  Competency  Standards  Committee,  which  will 
develop internationally aligned competency benchmarks for the whole financial industry. MAS is also 
working  with  specific  industries  to  address  their  human  resource  needs  through  a  manpower 
conversion  scheme.  This  scheme  will  help  mobilize,  train  and  channel  resources  to  support  growth 
areas quickly. 
MAS will work with financial institutions to build and upgrade talent in the financial sector workforce. 
Singapore  has  always  welcomed  talented  individuals  to  live  and  work  here.  They  have  contributed 
much to the vibrancy of our financial sector. Singapore must remain open to talent and continue to be 
a conducive environment to work and live in, so that we can continue to attract talent here, and also 
retain able Singaporeans. 
Conclusion 
MAS  is  committed  to  the  vision  of  Singapore  as  a  leading  global  financial  sector,  one  which  is 
competitive,  fosters  enterprise  and  innovation,  and  maintains  high  regulatory  standards.  We  have 
made  steady  progress  toward  this  goal  and  must  continue  to  do  so.  We  must  never  become 
complacent and satisfied with the status quo, or else we will soon be overtaken and left behind. 
MAS will strive to create an environment where market forces, enterprise and innovation can thrive. 
We will stay abreast of market developments, and be sensitive to the needs of the industry, without 
compromising on supervisory standards. Our experience has shown that the two are not incompatible; 
indeed listening to industry players, without being overwhelmed by them, helps us to become better 
regulators and supervisors. 
I am grateful for the full support and cooperation which the industry has extended to MAS, and to me 
personally, over the years. I am also grateful to the staff of MAS, whose professionalism, dedication 
and  hard  work  have  enabled  us  to  reorientate  our  approach  and  transform  the  financial  sector 
smoothly and safely. MAS and the industry will need to continue to work together to realise the vision 
of a more dynamic, competitive and vibrant financial sector in Singapore. That is the ultimate test of 
the success of our efforts to grow the sector, and make Singapore a key financial hub in Asia. 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2004
