Jean-Claude Trichet: A stability-oriented monetary policy as a necessary 
condition for long term growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  UNICE 
Competitiveness Day, Brussels, 9 December 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  today  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience,  which  best  represents  the 
European entrepreneurial capacity and dynamism. Today I would like to discuss first the general role 
of policy institutions in a developed market economy. I shall then dwell more specifically on how the 
conduct of monetary and fiscal policy in the euro area contributes to foster high and sustainable output 
growth  and  job  creation.  Finally,  I  shall  stress  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  in  labour  and 
product markets in ensuring that our economy is endowed with the degree of flexibility that is needed 
for firms and workers to be able to withstand successfully the challenges that the contemporaneous, 
highly interrelated world economy poses to us. 
The determinants of sustainable long term growth 
The determination of the factors that increase the individuals’ standard of living is the main issue that 
scholars have analysed since economics was born as a modern science more than 250 years ago. 
The evolution of the economic theory has greatly furthered and deepened our understanding of this 
issue. Nevertheless, one core conclusion remains today as important as it was in the late eighteenth 
century:  the  amount  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  any  given  economy  grows  at  its  highest 
possible rate when the rules of market economies are applied.  
We have learned that this prescription cannot possibly be translated into a pure laissez-faire doctrine, 
because when the production and the exchange of goods and services is carried out without a proper 
legal  and  institutional  framework  the  potential  of  the  economy  would  not  be  fully  exploited.  For  this 
reason, societies need to equip themselves with the right framework, which enhances the collective 
welfare  by  clearly  defining  and  ensuring  property  rights  and  ensuring  the  efficient  supply  of  public 
goods. This means in particular that economic policy must ensure that individuals have the necessary 
incentive to earn their income by working and producing goods and services which other individuals 
need. It also means that enterprises must take their decisions on the basis of market signals without 
relying on subsidies or being protected from competition. This will foster the accumulation of human 
and physical capital and a high level of employment, which are the determinants of long term growth. 
To  fulfil  this  objective,  economic  policy  must  create  and  maintain  a  “stable”  macroeconomic 
environment, ensure an appropriate level of flexibility of the economic system and provide incentives 
to work and invest in both physical and human capital in order to maximise employment and output 
growth.  
In Europe and more particularly in the euro area, the stability of the macroeconomic framework and 
the  flexibility  of  the  economic  structures  are  two  guiding  principles  of  economic  policy  that  are 
enshrined  into  the  Treaty  and  the  Lisbon  Agenda,  respectively.  How  can  these  principles  be  best 
applied in practice? 
The role of a stability oriented monetary policy  
Let me start by illustrating the role that the ECB’s monetary policy plays in fostering long term output 
growth in the euro area. The EU Treaty establishes the maintenance of price stability as the primary 
objective of the ECB. This objective refers to the general price level in the euro area and the ECB has 
made it clear that it aims  at keeping inflation (as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices)  below  and  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  ECB  does  all  what  is  necessary  to  be 
credible in the delivery of price stability - in line with its definition - over time, including in the medium 
and long term. By credibly maintaining price stability, the ECB brings about a decisive contribution to 
long run output growth, and it does this through several channels.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
First,  price  stability  ensures  the  transparency  of  the  relative  price  mechanism,  thus  enhancing  the 
efficiency of resources allocation. In an environment of price stability economic agents can more easily 
discern the change in the relative value of each single good and service produced as well as that of 
labour and capital. In a situation of increasing inflation, instead, resources could be wrongly allocated 
to  the  production  of  goods  and  services  whose  relative  demand  has  not  increased.  Furthermore, 
households may have difficulties in discerning the relative price of goods and services thus choosing a 
consumption bundle that turns out to be suboptimal. 
Preserving  price  stability  also  contributes  to  fostering  private  consumption.  Lower  inflation  supports 
private consumption via its positive impact on the real value of households’ income and wealth.  
Another  important  channel  through  which  price  stability  fosters  economic  growth  consists  in  the 
reduction of borrowing costs for individuals and firms. As we all know, inflation erodes the purchasing 
power  of  the  nominal  return  on  long  term  loan  contracts  or  bonds.  In  case  of  high  and  uncertain 
inflation, savers or those who lend their liquid funds would then require a higher rate of return from 
borrowers, in order to compensate for the higher risks related to the uncertainty about future inflation. 
This inflation risk premium implies that in an economy with high inflation, less investment projects with 
a rather high rate of return will be profitable. In such circumstances, capital accumulation will be lower 
than  it  could  have  been  in  a  situation  of  price  stability  and  the  output  growth  rate  is  consequently 
reduced.  
Financial market developments during the past few years are indeed a testimony to the success of the 
ECB’s  stability  oriented  monetary  policy  in  securing  low  and  stable  long-term  inflation  expectations 
and thereby low interest rates in the euro area. Over the period between 1995 and 1999, the latter is 
the year when the euro replaced the national currencies of eleven EU member states and the ECB 
started to run a single monetary policy, long-term inflation expectations, as measured by Consensus 
Economic  Forecasts,  swiftly  converged  towards  the  “below  2  per  cent  level”,  which  is  the  ECB’s 
definition  of  price  stability,  from  levels  much  higher  still  in  the  mid-1990s.  Such  a  high  degree  of 
credibility  was  reflected  in  the  developments  of  euro  area  long  term  interest  rates,  which  by  the 
beginning of 1999 had declined to around 4%, which was the level prevailing for the most credible and 
stable  currencies,  thus  resulting  for  a  number  of  countries  and  economies  in  a  decline  of  around 
9 percentage points since the beginning of 1995.  
Since 1999 the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy and, overall, the ECB credibility in delivering 
price stability has been remarkably successful and has contributed to maintain financing costs - from 
the short term to the long term up to 30 years - at historically low levels. Inflation expectations have 
remained at low levels and have not been significantly affected by short-term developments in actual 
euro area headline inflation. Furthermore, in the period since the start of the single monetary policy, 
the  fluctuation  of  key  macroeconomic  variables  has  declined  significantly.  In  comparison  with  the 
average  level  of  the  first  half  of  the  nineties,  the  volatility  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  (as 
measured by the Consensus Economic Forecast) has declined by more than one half. From a longer 
term perspective, when compared with the average levels recorded in the 1980s and the first half of 
the nineties the observed volatility of inflation and long term interest rates declined by around three 
quarters.  Furthermore,  over  this  latter  period  the  decline  in  the  volatility  of  both  real  GDP  and 
employment  figures  by  more  than  one  quarter  should  also  be  associated  with  the  contribution  of 
successful stability-oriented macro-economic policies in the euro area. 
The ECB manages monetary policy in a systematic and transparent manner so that private agents are 
in the best possible conditions to gauge the likely evolution of interest rates in response to economic 
developments. First of all, the ECB is very clear about its monetary policy strategy. In addition, the 
ECB  informs  the  public  through  the  monthly  press  conference  held  just  after  the  first  Governing 
Council  meeting  of  the  month  where  the  economic  and  monetary  diagnosis  of  the  ECB  and  the 
decisions taken by the Governing Council are displayed and explained almost in real time. The ECB 
has been a pioneer in this domain and has been followed by other central banks keen on increasing 
the transparency of their actions and decisions. This transparency is one further element contributing 
to macroeconomic stability and long-term growth. In an environment where the predictability of interest 
rates  movements  and  their  likely  relation  with  key  macroeconomic  developments  is  relatively  high, 
firms can better manage their balance sheets. This reduces both their vulnerability to economic shocks 
and their risk management costs and creates the condition for better decisions as regards domestic 
and foreign investment. 
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of maintaining price stability in enhancing the functioning 
of  the  labour  market  and  contributing  to  sound  nominal  wage  developments  and  competitive  unit 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
labour costs, which fosters firms’ competitiveness, growth and job creation. In a credible regime of low 
inflation workers do not ask for extra-wage increases to compensate for inflation risk and firms and 
trade unions know ex-ante that firms will not be able to pass higher wages on to consumer prices. This 
helps to avoid excessive nominal increases, thus enhancing the ability of firms to efficiently manage 
their production costs and create new jobs. At the current juncture, it is important that there are no 
second round effects on wage and price settings arising from the recent increase in oil prices. Such 
effects have not been observed till now. All economic agents know without any doubt that we are very 
vigilant  in  this  respect;  and  we  trust  that  it  is  this  vigilance  and  our  credibility  that  are  decisively 
contributing to prevent second round effects.  
The role of a stability oriented fiscal policy 
Of great importance for the maintenance of macroeconomic stability and long term growth are sound 
public  finances.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  complements  and  further  specifies  the 
EU Treaty,  provides  a  set  of  rules  for  the  national  fiscal  authorities  with  the  aim  to  ensuring  fiscal 
soundness, by avoiding excessive deficits and safeguarding government finances, as defined by the 
attainment in the medium-term of budgetary positions “close to balance or in surplus”. Far from being 
a straightjacket on national policymakers, these rules derive from the experience accumulated in past 
decades  showing  that  increased  debt  ratios  -  as  well  as  the  implicit  debt  associated  with  social 
security  systems  in  ageing  societies  -  cast  a  permanent  shadow  over  long  term  output  growth  and 
constantly limit the scope for fiscal policy to act as a stabilising instrument.  
Although  its  implementation  has  been  far  from  satisfactory,  we  should  see  that  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  brought  about  significant  improvements  in  the  fiscal  performance  of  the  EU  over  the 
years. In other major economies outside Europe fiscal deficits reached very high levels in the recent 
economic slowdown, and the ratio of debt to GDP in these countries is now on a very worrisome path. 
In contrast, the euro area public finances weathered the economy cyclical downturn with aggregate 
deficit  to  GDP  ratios  remaining  between  2%  and  3%  and  with  debt  to  GDP  ratios  only  moderately 
rising. While this is less than what the ECB - as well as the Council and the Commission - had hoped 
for, it is a significant achievement for Europe where in the early 1990s average deficit to GDP ratios of 
above  5%  were  still  recorded.  The  euro  area  is  now  in  a  better  starting  position,  in  terms  of 
macro-economic  policies, compared  to a  number of major economies  to emerge  from  the phase  of 
economic slowdown. These achievements are from time to time forgotten in the ongoing debate on the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  they  demonstrate  how  important  it  is  for  Europe  not  to  weaken  this 
Pact.  
As  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  clarified  on  several  occasions,  it  is  important  that  the  Stability  and  the 
Growth Pact and the excessive deficit procedure remain key cornerstones of the Economic Union. Let 
us never forget that we cannot have a Monetary Union (MU) without and Economic Union (EU), to 
make a coherent and economically rational EMU. This implies that both the Pact and the excessive 
deficit  procedure  are  respected  in  their  current  form.  Their  implementation  could  be  improved,  in 
particular as regards the preventive arm of the Pact, ie the implementation of those rules aiming at 
avoiding that excessive deficits arise in the first place. 
Experience shows that if financial markets are uncertain about the future soundness of fiscal policy, at 
some stage long term interest rates are likely to increase. This tends to exert a negative impact on 
private  investment  and  physical  capital  formation.  Ultimately,  unsound  fiscal  policies  reduce 
production, output suffers a permanent loss and consumption possibilities are diminished in the long 
run.  To  be  sure,  being  in  a  monetary  union,  like  the  euro  area,  does  not  shield  countries  that  are 
expected to follow an unsustainable fiscal course from sooner or later being forced to pay higher credit 
risk premia on their government bonds relative to more disciplined countries in the union. The Treaty 
explicitly  prohibits  that  individual  governments,  which  run  policies  that  are  not  sustainable,  can  be 
bailed-out by other governments or by the ECB. 
In recent years budgetary developments in the euro area have not been fully satisfactory and there is 
growing concern among market participants and observers that consensus on the importance of fiscal 
discipline is weakening in the euro area. While fiscal accounts in the euro area have been affected by 
the  sluggish  economic  growth  experienced  in  the  past  two  or  three  years,  it  is  undeniable  that,  in 
general, the resilience of fiscal deficits in the euro area is mainly due to high - and, sometimes, very 
high  -  structural  public  expenditure,  which,  by  definition,  are  not  dependent  of  the  cyclical 
developments.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
It is of crucial importance that euro area member states take advantage of the ongoing recovery and 
focus  on  the  pursuit  of  balanced  budgets  or  surpluses  in  the  medium  term.  Such  a  policy  would 
contribute to ensuring that the conditions for long-term growth in the euro area are strengthened and 
to  meeting  the  challenges  arising  from  an  ageing  population.  Empirical  evidence  supports  the 
conclusion  that  comprehensive  fiscal  consolidation  programmes,  if  appropriately  designed  and 
credible,  can  have  favourable  effects  on  confidence,  investment  conditions  and  thereby  on  output 
growth  even  in  the  short  term.  Notably,  if  fiscal  reform  is  based  on  the  consolidation  of  public 
expenditure  rather  than  on  an  increase  in  taxation,  the  adjustment  in  fiscal  accounts  would  tend  to 
support  both  private  consumption  and  investment  -  because  the  current  and  expected  after  tax 
disposable income of household and firms increases.  
Comprehensive  and  credible  expenditure-based  fiscal  stabilisation  programmes  would  in  particular 
have positive supply effects as well. A number of empirical studies suggest that there are two main 
reasons  why  this  can  be  the  case.  First,  lower  expected  deficits  reduce  long  term  market  interest 
rates,  which  creates  more  opportunities  to  invest  and  increase  the  productive  potential  of  the 
economy. Second, following the reduction in labour taxation that is possible when public expenditure 
is  reduced,  the  expectation  of  higher  after-tax  income  induces  higher  labour  supply  and  mitigates 
wage increases, thus boosting the country’s international competitiveness and job creation. 
The role of structural reforms  
A  stability  oriented  macroeconomic  policy  framework  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  that  high  long-term 
growth  is  achieved.  When  private  agents  take  their  decisions  over  consumption,  saving  and 
investment,  they  should  also  not  have  impediments  in  the  form  of  unnecessary  and  excessive 
regulations.  A  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  framework  has  to  be  complemented  by  structural 
policies that make the economy more flexible and dynamic.  
Since  March  2000,  when  the  European  Council  launched  the  Lisbon  agenda,  European  national 
governments, parliaments and social partners have become increasingly aware of the importance of 
implementing a substantial, courageous and far-reaching agenda of structural reforms. The ECB, from 
its  side,  fully  endorses  the  Lisbon  agenda  and  shares  its  objectives.  We  also  agree  with  the  main 
conclusion of the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok that - in preparation of the mid-term review of 
the Lisbon Strategy - has stressed the advantages of sharpening the focus on the key issues in order 
to revamp the structural reform process in Europe. 
Indeed, in the last decade, euro area countries have made some tangible progress with their structural 
reform programs. Competition in product markets due to, for example, a lower level of state aid and 
de-regulatory  measures  has  increased,  especially  in  network  industries.  This  resulted  in  significant 
downward price effects in some sectors like telecommunication. 
The ECB is supporting strongly governments that are courageously embarking on reforms and does 
not underestimate the difficulty to implement them. In particular it has proven to be more difficult than 
previously  expected  for  European  governments  and  social  partners  to  implement  labour  market 
reforms that could strengthen the positive employment trends recorded in the EU in the second half of 
the 1990s.  
Breaking the reform deadlock is of the utmost importance, also in light of growing role played by new 
economies  in  the  international  market  place  that  exposes  European  firms  to  new  and  challenging 
competitive pressures. It is not my intention today to provide suggestions to government, parliaments 
and social partners about specific policy actions, but it is clear to me that in the area of labour market 
reform, increasing flexibility and suppleness with a view to maximize job creation and to augment the 
capacity of outsiders, like unskilled youth, to enter the job market is of the essence.  
In another domain there is a number of countries where the lengthening of retirement age, allowing 
workers to work longer hours per week and the reduction of non-wage costs of labour - like labour 
income  taxation  and  social  security  contributions  -  are  necessary  to  increase  labour  supply  and 
demand, thus raising the productive capacity of the economy. Recent events involving a number of 
important euro area companies demonstrate that social partners are aware of the collective benefits 
induced by  a  better  management of  resource  utilisation,  as workers  and  employers  could agree  on 
measures that would preserve competitiveness and consolidate jobs.  
Moreover, other measures facilitating workers reallocation, reducing both employment traps - due to 
generous unemployment subsidies and high marginal income taxes - and costs related to adjustments 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2004
in the labour force are often useful to increase the resilience of the economy to unforeseen shocks. A 
more flexible economy will make it easier for the corporate sector to maintain competitiveness without 
large cuts in employment.  
Finally, a more flexible cost structure will increase the expected rate of return from private investment 
in both physical capital and research and education of the labour force. Hence, both the productivity 
and  the  quality  of  the  labour  force  employed  will  increase,  thereby  setting  the  stage  for  virtuous 
dynamics that lead to higher output growth. 
Conclusion  
All policymakers are called to play their role in making the euro area a more dynamic economy. By 
maintaining price stability, and by being credible in delivering it over the medium and long term, the 
ECB makes its own indispensable contribution to foster growth in the euro area. The rate of potential 
economic  growth  very  much  depends  also  on  the  other  policy  actors.  It  requires  fiscal  policy  to  be 
sound and sustainable, and it requires reforms ensuring that the structure of the economy is flexible 
and  supple  enough  to  augment  the  growth  potential  of  Europe  and  to  allow  economic  agents  to 
respond smoothly to economic shocks.  
In a very rapidly changing environment, where new technological advances, not only in the IT area, 
are  extremely  powerful  and  seem  to  be  comparable  only  with  the  start  of  the  industrial  revolution, 
where creativity and conceptual innovations are flourishing in all economic sectors, particularly in the 
global financial system, and where economic globalisation is rapidly transforming the very structure of 
the world economy, the euro area and its 306 million fellow citizens are called to adapt in order to take 
advantage of the opportunities offered by this new world and to respond to new challenges. 
A  lot  has  been  done  in  Europe  over  the  last  20  years:  the  combination  of  the  bold  single  market 
endeavour starting in the mid eighties and of the single currency starting at the end of the nineties are 
perhaps the most striking historical set of structural reforms at the level of a continent in peace time. 
We have proved we were able to move and to restructure. We still have a lot to do as Wim Kok is 
wisely and strongly recommending. 
In this respect, permit me a last remark: at the moment I am speaking most of the reforms that are 
necessary  at  the  level  of  our  continent  have  been  implemented  with  success  in  some  European 
economies,  generally  on  the  basis  of  a  bi-partisan  consensus  and  with  a  large  accord  of  the 
entrepreneurs  and  of  the  unions.  Benchmarking  in  each  particular  domain  of  structural  reforms  the 
entire euro area and the European Union on the best European performers might well be the most 
powerful tool to make the necessary progress. Let’s just do it! 
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 5
