Benny Popoitai: The savings and loan industry - Papua New Guinea 
Speech  by  Mr  Benny  Popoitai,  MBE,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  to  the 
Savings and Loan Societies/Credit Union Day luncheon, Port Moresby, 21 October 2004. 
 Acknowledgement 
Mr.  Michael  Koisen,  President  and  Board  of  Directors’  Chairman  of  the  Federation  of  Savings  and 
Loan Societies Limited Members of the Federation of Savings and Loan Societies Limited Participants 
to  the  Federation  of  Savings  and  Loan  Societies  Workshop  Distinguished  guests  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen 
Thank you for the invitation to participate at this year’s International Credit Union Day (ICUD) and to 
open the Federation of Savings and Loan Societies Limited’s Strategic Planning Workshop. 
Introduction 
The theme for this year’s celebration is: Credit Unions: 
Dream……Belong……Achieve 
Dream Belong Achieve 
To me - it means that all S&L Societies must do all within the bounds of the S&L Act to deliver the 
services  required  of  it.  After  all  every  member,  manager  &  board-member  wants  to  be  part  of  the 
success story. 
This is a worthwhile theme, given the past history of the credit union movement in Papua New Guinea 
and the developments taking place today. It is now an ideal time for all of us involved in the movement 
as well as in the wider management and participation in the financial service sector to take stock of our 
achievements. We need to also assess the challenges that remain. In so doing, we acknowledge the 
efforts of many people, including all of you here today, who have and continue to promote the savings 
and loan society movement in Papua New Guinea. 
Today is also the time when we join our colleagues in the 40,000 other Credit Unions in 94 different 
countries  to  celebrate  this  movement.  About  112  million  people  around  the  world  participate  in  this 
movement, reflecting its cooperative and financial empowerment ideals. 
My speech will focus on the three theme words; namely, Dream, Belong and Achieve. Specifically the 
roles  and  challenges  we  as  the  regulator,  you  as  the  providers  and  the  wider  community  as  the 
participants  or  recipients  play  or  face  towards  the  development  of  the  movement  in  contributing 
towards a sound financial system that is beneficial to all in the country. 
The dream 
The Bank of Papua New Guinea’s involvement with the savings and loan society movement goes back 
a  long  way.  In  fact,  prior  to  the  Central  Bank’s  own  establishment  in  1973,  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia’s branch in Papua New Guinea encouraged the development of the movement to promote 
financial  knowledge  and skills  amongst  the  populace,  in  the  lead-up  to  independence.  The Bank of 
Papua New Guinea has since carried on this dream. 
The  Societies  promoted  thrift  amongst  their  members,  educated  them  in  financial  responsibility, 
received  their  savings  and  in  turn,  provided  loans  to  enhance  their  economic  well-being.  This  also 
enabled their participation in the economic growth of the nation. 
The  services  that  the  savings  and  loan  societies  provide  are  complementary  to  those  provided  by 
other financial institutions such as banks and finance companies. Operationally they differ from other 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
financial institutions in the way they are run. That is, the members have a say in how their society is 
being run through representation on the Board and at annual general meetings. As such, the members 
collectively own the society. 
The success of a society therefore depends on the ability of the board and its management to run the 
society’s business professionally and prudently, while the members need to provide effective oversight 
on  the  affairs  of  their  society  through  their  supervisory  committee  representative.  The  Savings  and 
Loan  Societies  Act  provides  this  selfregulating  mechanism  where,  if  managed  effectively,  the 
movement would ensure greater prosperity for all. 
Belong 
The  movement  has  over  the  years,  developed  with  mixed  results.  From  just  over  200  societies  in 
mid-1977 with 90,681 members, the number has declined to 20 active societies in June 2004 with only 
127,276 members. Total assets have however grown from K14.1 million to K172.8 million over this 
period. 
The decline in the number of societies and the slow growth in membership reflect the problems the 
movement has been plagued with. Some of these problems still exist today, providing challenges as 
well as opportunities for all of us to consider. These problems include mismanagement by the board 
and  management  of  the  societies,  failure  to  comply  with  Directives  from  the  Registrar  and 
requirements  of  the  Savings  and  Loans  Act.  Mismanagement  has  occurred  by  granting  loans  in 
excess  of  lending  limits,  lending  to  friends  and  relatives  who  do  not  qualify  for  loans,  uncontrolled 
expenditures, and outright abuse and theft of society property. 
The Bank recognizes the important role the movement plays in the financial system and for the people 
of  Papua  New  Guinea.  We  have  sought  the  assistance  of  the  Federation  of  Savings  and  Loan 
Societies Limited, overseas Credit Unions and other interested parties to help promote the movement. 
A five-year revitalisation programme in the 1990’s saw the liquidation and de-registration of dormant 
societies, 
introduction  of  a  centralised  computer  system  and  promotion  of  provincial  and 
industrial-base societies. A new feature of the industry involves the establishment of contributor-based 
societies. 
The achievements 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  Savings  and  Loan  industry  in  Papua  New  Guinea  today  consists  of 
20 savings  and  loan  societies.  Five  (5)  are  provincial  based  while  the  rest  are  industrial  based 
societies.  Total  assets  of  the  industry  were  approximately  K172.8  million  with  loans  and  advances 
forming  about  48.74%  of  total  assets  at  end  June  2004.  Members’  savings  deposits  were  about 
K133.8 million from 127,276 members. 
The overall health of the industry is satisfactory.  Capital, asset quality and liquidity are satisfactory, 
while earnings are relatively fair. 
Capital Adequacy 
a.  
The capital of the industry is satisfactory. Accumulated profits increased from K12.9 million in June 
2003 to K21.9 million in December 2003 and slightly decreased to K20.8 million at end-June 2004. 
However, capital funds to total assets increased to 18.9% from 12.4% in the same period last year. 
The capital of the industry is not threatened by Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) as NPLs as a ratio of 
capital funds improved from 30.0% in June 2003 to 10.8% in June 2004. 
Asset quality 
b.  
Asset quality of the industry is satisfactory. Loans and advances increased to K85.9 million in June 
2004  from  K80.5  million  in  June  2003,  of  which  only  4.6%  of  the  loan  portfolio  is  non-performing. 
Provision  to  total  loans  decreased  to  4.2%  in  June  2004  from  7.0%  in  the  same  period  last  year. 
However, provisioning level is sufficient to cover up to 89.8% of non-performing loans. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
Earnings 
c. 
Earnings of the industry are less than satisfactory. Net income decreased to K2.7 million in June 2004 
from  K4.8  million  in June 2003. Return  on  Assets  decreased  to 3.0%  from  6.2%,  while net  interest 
margin decreased to 3.0% from 3.6% in the same period last year. This is due to decline in Treasury 
bill interest rates, where most of the industry’s unlet funds are invested. 
Liquidity 
d.  
Liquidity  is  adequate  to  cover  for  day-to-day  liquidity  requirements.  Liquid  assets  decreased  to 
K32.9 million  in  June  2004  from  K41.4  million  in  June  2003,  while  loans  to  deposits  increased  to 
64.2% from 58.9% in the same period last year. However, liquid assets level can cater up to 24.5% of 
any additional loan and withdrawal requests. Fixed assets decreased to 14.1% from 26.6% in June 
2003. 
The road head 
The successes of the movement are shown by its performance over the years. I have mentioned some 
of the problem areas faced by the societies and we as the regulator. 
Based on these experiences, the Bank of Papua New Guinea came up with certain arrangements to 
address  these  issues  with  a  view  to  protecting  members’  funds  from  mismanagement  and  abuses. 
The Central Bank has had to place societies under administration for noncompliance. Currently, two 
societies remained under administration. 
And  besides  liquidation,  we  have  issued  stricter  Directives  to  suppress  or  control  certain  abusive 
practices and established an industry code of Conduct requiring all directors and management to sign 
up before assuming responsibilities. 
The Bank’s regulatory responsibility over the Savings and loan industry will remain a big challenge in 
the future, due significantly to the way the legislative framework is set out. This is an industry where, 
over the years, the Central Bank has been overwhelmed with dealing on a lot of administrative matters 
and issues. These matters could be dealt with through a strong industry association or each society’s 
own internal risks management and control systems, and a strong corporate governance culture. 
The Act, which governs the licensing and regulation of societies, requires that a society can only be 
licensed if it has secured more than 500 members who share a common interest. The composition of a 
board of directors of a society is determined by the members who perform a general election over a 
list of nominated candidates. Over the years this requirement has given rise to the establishment of 
15 small  industries  based  societies  and  5  provincial  based  societies.  These,  of  course,  were  the 
surviving societies after the liquidation of some 100 odd ones. 
With such concentration of small interest groupings, experience have shown that there have been a 
continuing deficiency in establishing boards of directors with good background understanding of legal, 
accounting  and  business  issues  and  ethics.  These  weaknesses,  exacerbated  by  weak  poor 
management  reporting  systems,  have  only  resulted  in  ill-informed  decision  making  and  excessive 
borrowing  beyond  prudential  limits.  A  number  of  those  societies  have  been  placed  under  statutory 
management due to these weaknesses to good corporate governance. 
Another  area  worth  noting  is  the  role  of  an  industry  association  in  setting  and  influencing  a  strong 
governance and accountability regime towards an efficient self-regulating industry. A vibrant industry 
association  could  contribute  to  a  successful  self  regulating  industry,  which  can  aspire  to  promote 
solvency and innovation in the operation of all societies. The societies, which are now operating do not 
compete with each other as they have been set up to serve specific interest groups. 
They have therefore the opportunity within them to talk to each other and to be able to resolve very 
simple administrative matters, which could be commonly faced by them. I have come across different 
societies,  which  have  turned  to  the  Regulator  for  solutions  to  very  similar  questions  and  situations. 
While these societies are not discouraged to do so, it would be preferable that they first share their 
experiences and problems amongst themselves to find solutions. 
There is potential for the movement to grow and offer the services the members need. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 3
Corporate Governance and the requirement to ensure ‘fit and proper’ persons hold the positions on 
the board and management cannot be emphasized enough. It should be a challenge for every society, 
and  more  importantly  every  member,  to  ensure  that  credible  people  get  to  hold  those  responsible 
positions. 
As part of enforcing good corporate governance, the BPNG established the industry code of conduct 
thus requiring all directors and management to sign up before assuming responsibilities. Furthermore 
the  Bank  instituted  ‘fit  and  proper’  requirements  to  ensure  all  directors  undergo  these  tests  before 
taking up their roles. As part of this initiative they need to undergo certain training courses conducted 
by the Federation of savings and loans societies and BPNG. 
Good  Corporate  Governance  is  the  key  to  enhancing  strong  reporting  system,  efficient  internal 
controls and risk management systems. Good governance is synonymous to an effective compliance 
culture. This should be the dream of all societies to Achieve. 
We need to move from the dreaming stage, to the belonging stage and finally to the achieving stage. I 
hope  the  Federation’s  Strategic  Planning  workshop  would  deal  with  and  address  the  issues  I  have 
raised. It is important that we all work together to ensure that the savings and loan industry achieve its 
full potential for the benefit of its members. 
With these remarks, I would like to thank the organisers of the Credit Union Day celebrations. 
I  now  declare  the  Strategic  Planning  Workshop  of  the  Federation  of  Savings  and  Loan  Societies 
Limited open. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2004
