I J Macfarlane: Monetary policy and financial stability 
Talk  by  Mr  I J Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  CEDA  Annual  Dinner, 
Melbourne, 16 November 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here again in Melbourne addressing CEDA’s Annual Dinner. This is the fifth 
time I have done so, and it is like returning to be with old friends. I usually talk about some aspect of 
monetary policy, and will do so again tonight, starting with something very familiar and then moving to 
newer territory. 
When we look back to fifteen or twenty years ago, the thing about monetary policy that stands out is 
the lack of clarity about what it was expected to achieve. That is, what should be its ultimate objective, 
and therefore what should it be accountable for? This lack of clarity applied both inside the Reserve 
Bank and outside it. I am sure some of you are familiar with the wide variety of objectives for monetary 
policy that were put forward at the time. As well as the familiar aims of low inflation, low unemployment 
and  good  economic  growth,  there  were  those  who  felt  it  should  also  be  aimed  at  improving  the 
balance of payments, promoting investment or limiting the growth of credit or some other monetary 
aggregate. Others put forward the view that it should aim to rein in the growth of asset prices. 
We now recognise that there are a lot of good economic arguments against having such a wide set of 
aims,  but  I  will  not  go  into  those  tonight.  Instead,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  accountability  and 
independence.  A  government  cannot be  expected to  allow  independence  to its  central  bank  unless 
that bank is also accountable to it and to the wider public. That is, the central bank must be able to be 
judged on whether or not it has achieved its agreed objective. When there are half a dozen objectives, 
this  becomes  impossible  because  there  is  very  little  chance  that  the  optimal  outcome  for  all  these 
variables could  be  achieved  at  the  one  time.  If  the  central  bank  was held  accountable  for  failing  to 
achieve one objective, it could always defend itself by saying that its efforts were directed at one or 
more of the other objectives which it viewed as more important at the time. Thus, the old system failed 
the test of being accountable, and hence there was a reluctance to fully recognise the independence 
that was essential for the ultimate success of monetary policy. It is true that the Reserve Bank Act 
specified  multiple  objectives  for  monetary  policy,  but  the  Bank  had  failed  to  articulate  a  clear 
framework for setting priorities among these objectives. 
The  resolution  of  this  problem  was  found  in  the  present  monetary  policy  regime  whereby 
independence  was  recognised,  and  the  central  bank  was  given  the  task  of  achieving  an  inflation 
target.  This  made  sense  in  terms  of  economic  logic  because  in  the  long  run  it  is  only  a  nominal 
variable such as the rate of inflation (or nominal GDP) that can be influenced by monetary policy. It 
also,  in  time,  received  community  support  because  it  became  recognised  that  low  inflation  was  a 
necessary  condition  for  sustained  economic  growth,  which  in  turn  was  the  pre-condition  for  lower 
unemployment. In this way, it placed the general objectives in the Reserve Bank Act within a logically 
coherent framework. 
But in addition to these purely economic improvements, the system now fulfilled the requirement of 
accountability. Everyone could see whether the central bank had achieved its agreed objective or not. 
I  mention  this  because  it  is  often  forgotten  that  the  origin  of  inflation  targeting  was  the  desire  for 
accountability. When the economic reformers in New Zealand under Roger Douglas came into power 
they  recognised  that  no  arm  of  their  government  had  a  quantifiable  objective  by  which  it  could  be 
judged.  They  then  began  the  process  of  setting  out  objectives  for  each  department,  agency  and 
authority. When they came to the central bank they concluded, after much discussion and research, 
that the most sensible objective to judge it by was the rate of inflation. So in 1989, they - that is, the 
government - set an inflation target for the central bank. It was thus the desire for accountability that 
was the initial impetus for the inflation targeting model, which was eventually adopted in various forms 
around the world. 
We in Australia are very comfortable with this model, although we adopted a less rigid one than the 
early starters like New Zealand and Canada. In our view, it is the best monetary policy regime we have 
experienced and the best one available, but it is not perfect. It has yielded excellent results so far for 
its central objective - an average rate of inflation of two point something per cent during the eleven 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
years  it  has  been  in  operation.  This,  in  turn,  has  underpinned  an  economic  expansion  that  is  in  its 
fourteenth year and has helped the unemployment rate fall to its lowest level for a quarter of a century.  
But  there  are,  no  doubt,  some  people  who  are  still  disappointed  with  the  outcome  for  some  other 
economic  variables.  Some  have  pointed  to  weaker-than-hoped-for  export  growth  and  a  current 
account deficit of about 6 per cent of GDP. Others, including ourselves, have worried about a high rate 
of growth of credit and, until recently, an excessive rate of growth of house prices. I can understand 
people’s concerns and their desire for better and better economic performance, but I hope they are not 
pinning  too  much  faith  in  monetary  policy  because  there  is  a  limit  to  what  it  can  be  expected  to 
perform. 
In essence, monetary policy has one instrument - it can set the path of short-term interest rates. Over 
the past dozen years or so, it has set a path which has achieved the outcomes for inflation, growth and 
employment which I have just outlined. 
What  would  have  happened  if,  instead,  we  had  aimed  our  monetary  policy  at  one  of  the  other 
objectives put forward, say a substantially lower growth of credit. I am not sure whether we would have 
been able to achieve this, but I do know that the attempt to do so would have required setting a path of 
interest rates which was significantly higher than the one we did. This, in turn, would have meant that 
the outcomes for inflation and economic growth would have been lower than we actually achieved. I 
do not think this would have been a good economic result, and it certainly would have violated the 
letter  and  the  spirit  of  our  agreement  on  accountability.  As  I  said  earlier,  a  central  bank  cannot  be 
accountable for everything, and our monetary regime recognises this, while at the same time choosing 
the right objective to be accountable for. 
This, of course, does not mean that we ignore credit and asset prices. Movements in these variables 
can affect the future path of the economy and the evolution of inflation. So we need to study them 
closely, understand the forces driving their movements, and the risks that they pose. But they are not 
appropriate targets for monetary policy. 
I hope that what I have just said does not leave you with the impression that we have a very narrow 
interpretation of our responsibilities. If that has happened, it is unintentional and is because I have only 
spoken so far about our monetary policy responsibilities, but we also have a duty to do what we can to 
ensure  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  means  the  avoidance  of  financial  shocks  that  are  large 
enough to cause economic damage to the real economy. It should not be forgotten that many central 
banks,  including  most  notably  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  owe  their  origins  to  the  desire  to  avoid 
financial crises - the monetary policy functions only came later in their life. 
At the Reserve Bank, our financial stability responsibilities are handled in several ways. For a start, we 
run the high-value wholesale payments system, which is the epicentre of the financial system. We are 
also responsible for the policies and procedures that ensure that the system can continue to operate, 
even if one or more of its members fails. Our payments responsibilities go further than this and extend 
to  the  competition  and  efficiency  of  the  system,  for  which  the  Government  has  provided  us  with 
separate legislative powers and a separate Board, but I do not need to delve further into these in the 
context of tonight’s talk. 
While our responsibilities and powers with respect to the payments system are clearly defined, that is 
not the case with our more general responsibilities for financial system stability. In this broader area, 
we have to work closely with other bodies that have clearly defined regulatory powers. An important 
role  for  the  Reserve  Bank  is  to  identify  potential  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system,  conduct 
research  and  provide  our  twice-yearly  Financial  Stability  Review.  Externally,  I  chair  the  Council  of 
Financial  Regulators,  which  also  includes  the  Chairman  of  APRA,  the  Chairman  of  ASIC  and  the 
Secretary to the Treasury. 
The  Council  of  Financial  Regulators,  at  its  meetings  and  on  an  informal  basis  between  meetings, 
keeps  members  aware  of  developments  in  each  of  the  separate  areas,  and  attempts  to  achieve  a 
co-ordinated  approach  to  problems  that  extend  beyond  one  regulator.  It  also  tries  to  plan  ahead  in 
order to put in place policies that reduce the risk of a financial crisis, or help to manage one should it 
occur.  In  this  latter  aim,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  ability  to  act  as  lender  of  last  resort  is  crucial.  The 
exchanges  of  views  that  occur  at  these  meetings  are  extremely  valuable,  as  is  the  opportunity  the 
Council provides  for staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  APRA,  ASIC  and  the  Treasury  to  work  together  on 
common projects. 
Many of the subjects discussed are regulatory in nature, but the Council also affords an opportunity to 
exchange  views  on  economic  and  market  developments  which  may  affect  the  vulnerability  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2004
financial system. This is of particular interest to the Reserve Bank, as these developments have more 
of  a  macro-economic  character.  It  is  where  our  responsibilities  for  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability overlap.  
At the moment, as our recent Financial Stability Review pointed out, all the conventional measures of 
the  health  of  the  Australian  financial  system  are  giving  extremely  favourable  readings.  For financial 
intermediaries,  capital  positions  are  strong,  profits  are  high  and  non-performing  loans  exceptionally 
low. In financial markets, volatility is low, as are spreads on corporate debt over treasuries. It is not 
hard to see why many market participants would feel that things have never been safer. 
But we should remember that it is in these circumstances where the biggest mistakes can be made. 
When everyone feels that risks are at their minimum, over-confidence can take over and elementary 
precautions  start  to  get  watered  down.  In  addition,  competitive  pressures  from  those  who 
under-estimate risk can push even the more prudent institutions into actions they will later regret. 
Let  me  illustrate  this  point  in  relation  to  household  borrowing.  Following  the  more  than  halving  of 
inflation and interest rates that occurred over the past decade or so, there was a surge in household 
borrowing  and  an  accompanying  rise  in  house  prices.  We  have  examined  this  process  at  length 
before, so I will not go over it again tonight. During this process, banks and other lenders were able to 
grow their balance sheets rapidly and, despite narrowing margins, were able to record rising profits 
year after year. At some point, however, the surge in household borrowing had to slow, and house 
prices  stabilise,  or  fall.  That  is  what  has  been  happening  over  the  past  three  quarters,  and  it  is  an 
entirely helpful development. Had the credit growth and house price growth of 2003 continued through 
2004, the risks of future financial instability would have been much larger than is now the case. 
It is important that this slowing in household credit be accepted by financial intermediaries as a fact of 
life,  even  though  it  probably  means  the  heady  growth  of  profits  from  mortgage  lending  they  have 
become  accustomed  to  may  not  continue.  There  is  a  risk,  however,  that  in  attempting  to  resist  the 
slowing in credit demand, financial intermediaries may be tempted to further lower lending standards, 
and that would carry with it serious medium-term risks. 
When  I  said earlier  that  lenders  may  be  tempted  to  further  lower  lending standards,  the  use  of  the 
word further was deliberate. The incentives in the mortgage distribution system have changed in such 
a way that there has been a step-by-step reduction in credit standards over recent years. A significant 
proportion of mortgages are now sold by brokers who are paid by commissions on volumes sold. The 
growth of low-doc home loans means that intermediaries are now lending to individuals whose income 
is not substantiated. There has also been an upward drift in the maximum permissible debt-servicing 
ratio.  When  once  a  maximum  of  30  per  cent  of  gross  income  was  the  norm,  now  it  is  possible  for 
borrowers on above-average income to go as high as 50 per cent of gross income (and a much higher 
percentage  of  net  income).  The  new  lending  models  used  by  the  banks  (and  provided  on  their 
websites  to  potential  borrowers)  seem  to  regard  the  bulk  of  income  above  subsistence  as  being 
available for debt-servicing. 
It  is  not  hard  to  see  how  a  situation  like  this  develops.  Once  a  few  lenders  adopt  an  aggressive 
approach,  others  must  match  them  or  lose  market  share.  They  are  then  re-assured  by  standard 
risk-management  models,  which  are  based  on  Australia’s  history  of  extraordinarily  low  mortgage 
defaults. Even those lenders who have reservations find it difficult to follow a different path, especially 
as the lenders taking on more risk may well be rewarded by higher profits (and higher share prices) in 
the short run. 
There  have  been  a  few  occasions  recently  where  banks  have  taken  the  decision  to  tighten  up  on 
lending to particular sectors, e.g. inner city apartments. Despite this causing some pain to developers, 
it is a good thing overall for the economy. But these have been small steps compared to the much 
bigger drift to lower credit standards, and it may be more difficult to expect future instances of such 
prudence in an environment of slowing overall credit growth. 
We highlighted some of these concerns in our recent Financial Stability Review, and I am taking the 
opportunity  tonight  to  repeat  them.  They  were  also  made  last  week  by  Dr  Laker,  the  Chairman  of 
APRA, in a speech which sadly went unreported. I am not suggesting we have an urgent problem on 
our hands, but if present trends continue we could well have one in a few years. More importantly, I 
think the time to air these concerns is when confidence is at its highest and people are least likely to 
worry about the future. 
One of the great benefits of the long economic expansion we have now had is that it has restored 
consumer  and  business  confidence,  and  people’s  pride  in  Australia’s  ability  to  achieve  economic 
BIS Review 68/2004 
 3
success in a difficult world. But when thinking about financial stability, it is important to look beyond the 
present favourable circumstances and attempt to foresee potential risks ahead. In doing so, one runs 
the risk of sounding like a Cassandra occasionally, but, for central bankers, this has to be accepted as 
one of the risks of the job. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2004
