Hermann Remsperger: Foreign direct investment (FDI) and the Deutsche 
Bundesbank 
Dinner speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, on the occasion of the workshop on Multinationals and International Integration by the 
Kiel Institute for World Economics and the Deutsche Bundesbank, Kiel, 8 October 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
The topic of our workshop today and tomorrow is “Multinationals and International Integration”. This 
evening, I’d like to give you 3 reasons, why we at the Bundesbank have a soft spot for this subject, 
namely: supply of data, research and economic policy.1
The  first  reason  is  very  simple,  but  also  very  important:  We  supply  the  public  with  data  on  foreign 
direct investment (FDI). Just think about the flow statistics from the balance of payments or the stock 
figures from our survey on enterprises’ international capital links.2
We have anonymously processed the individual data taken from our statistics on German enterprises’ 
international capital links in a database. And we make this database available for research purposes.3
Our data currently cover 14 years starting in 1989. For the year 2002, this data record contains reports 
from  around  6,000  German  enterprises  with  22,000  foreign  affiliates.  And  we  have  data  on  over 
7,000 foreign enterprises with 10,000 subsidiaries and branches in Germany. Our statistics not only 
provide a breakdown of FDI stocks by country and industry. 
They also include several important indicators of the respective investments such as the number of 
employees, the annual turnover and the balance sheet total. 
Our experts at the Bundesbank, working together with external researchers, have managed to link the 
individual  data  on  FDI  with  other  statistics.  The  links  made  with  the  banking  and  the  balance  of 
payments  statistics  have  proved  to  be  very  promising.  This  is  documented  in  research  papers  by 
Claudia Buch and Alexander Lipponer on the investment behaviour of German banks abroad.4
Now we are examining how to enrich our data on direct investment with further data. Some examples 
are banks’ reports on their external position, which are collected by the Bundesbank, as well as a data 
set of the Federal Employment Agency. 
You can imagine, Ladies and Gentlemen, that we do not only want to supply data on FDI. We also 
have a great interest that these data are being used appropriately. 
For example, FDI often serves as an indicator for the sound financing of a current account deficit and 
for  the  quality  of  a  country  as  an  industrial  base  or  its  competitiveness.  However,  owing  to  the 
complexity  of  the  motives  driving  FDI  at  the  enterprise  level  and  the  problems  of  defining  and 
recording  foreign  direct  investment,  great  caution  ought  to  be  exercised  when  interpreting  the 
statistical data. 
I would like to thank Dr Ulrich Grosch for his assistance in preparing this talk. 
                                                      
1 
2   Deutsche Bundesbank, International capital links, Special Statistical Publication 10, May 2004. The corresponding regular 
analyses appear in the Monthly Report; see Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of German enterprises’ international 
capital links between end-1998 and end-2001, Monthly Report, June 2003, pp 51 ff. 
3  The  database  was  presented  in  Alexander  Lipponer,  A  “new”  Micro  Database  for  German  FDI,  in  Heinz  Hermann, 
Robert Lipsey (ed), Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial Countries, Berlin 2003. 
4  Claudia  M  Buch,  Alexander  Lipponer,  FDI  versus  cross-border  financial  services:  The  globalisation  of  German  banks, 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Discussion  paper,  Series  1:  Studies  of  the  Economic  Research  Centre,  No  05/2004  and 
Claudia M Buch,  Alexander  Lipponer,  Clustering  or  competition?  The  foreign  investment  behaviour  of  German  banks, 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Discussion paper, Series 1: Studies of the Economic Research Centre, No 06/2004. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
In my view, an assessment of the locational quality and competitiveness of a country requires very 
differentiated approaches.5 FDI can certainly play a role. 
However, it is only one indicator among many. Above all, one must keep in mind what the statistical 
term “foreign direct investment” actually means. 
The international definition of FDI represents the mutual comprehensive intra-group financial relations 
provided  there  is  a  “lasting  interest”.  This  means  that  borrowing  and  reinvested  profits  are  to  be 
included in the statistics. There are good reasons for this. 
For  example,  long-term  loans  which  a  parent  company  grants  to  its  subsidiary  abroad  can  be  a 
substitute for equity capital. Furthermore, it would not be right to treat retained earnings as anything 
but new equity capital as part of a socalled “distribute-recapture” policy. 
However, I do see problems with the interpretation of foreign direct investment when taking a look at 
short-term  loans  and  trade  credits.  True,  these  credits  count  as  FDI.  But  they  do  not  tell  us  much 
about the locational quality of a country. In particular cases, short-term intra-group loans can have a 
decisive influence on the direction of direct investment, thus allowing false conclusions to be drawn. 
For  example,  in  the  past  year,  German  parent  companies  borrowed  more  from  their  foreign 
subsidiaries (€ 25 bn) than they invested abroad in new equity capital (€ 13 bn). In this case, it would 
surely  be  a  mistake  to  take  the  net  position  of  these  flows  to  judge  the  quality  of  Germany  as  a 
location to do business. 
And there is another problem: the low threshold for participating interests for FDI. It’s only 10 %. Such 
a low threshold tells us very little about an investor’s lasting interest. The Bundesbank introduced the 
reduction in the participation threshold and the inclusion of short-term financial loans and trade credits 
into the direct investment flows only in 1999 when EMU was set up. 
Ultimately, there is a trade-off between the narrow definition of foreign direct investment, on the one 
hand, and the necessity to provide internationally comparable data, on the other.6
We have tried to solve this conflict by presenting direct investment data as detailed as possible. The 
researchers can select the data and definitions in such a way as to adjust them to fit their respective 
analysis. At the same time, the data are compatible internationally (and within EMU).7
After  my  short  discussion  of  the  Bundesbank  being  a  data  provider,  I’d  like  to  turn  to  the  second 
reason for our soft spot for the subject of this conference. It’s research. 
We try to show that the German economy is not only affected by globalisation, but also has a strong 
impact on globalisation. 
The  German  economy,  with  its  extensive  cross-border  investment  and  its  substantial  foreign  trade, 
has actually been one of the driving forces behind the globalisation process. The diverse and ever-
changing transmission mechanisms of foreign impact on the domestic economy make it all the more 
important for a central bank to constantly analyse these developments. 
In the past few years, we have studied intensively the reasons behind foreign direct investment.8
Our  research  at  the  Bundesbank  shows  that  there  are  many  different  motives  for  conducting  FDI. 
These  motives  cannot  be  simply  reduced  to  cost  aspects,  and  particularly  not  only  to  labour  costs, 
however  important  they  may  be.9  There  are  also  tax  considerations  and  regulatory  differences  to 
consider. 
                                                      
5  See, for example, Richard Reichel, Ökonomische Theorie der internationalen Wettbewerbsfähigkeit von Volkswirtschaften, 
Wiesbaden 2002. 
6  See Deutsche Bundesbank, Problems of international comparisons of direct investment flows, Monthly Report, May 1997, 
pp 77ff. 
7  See Deutsche Bundesbank, German balance of payments in 1998, Monthly Report, March 1999, p 43, particularly p 55. 
8  See, for example, the conference volume Heinz Hermann, Robert Lipsey (ed), Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and 
Financial Sector of Industrial Countries, Berlin 2003. 
9  The latest survey of the German Chamber of Industry and Commerce shows that 39% of respondent enterprises indicated 
cost savings with respect to wages, taxes and levies as the most important reason for foreign direct investment. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
Furthermore, the liberalisation of capital movements, the creation of a single European market as well 
as  the  privatisation  of  state  enterprises  have  played  and  continue  to  play  an  important  role  for 
investing abroad. 
Part of the outcome of this has been the creation of new markets and the provision of market access 
to  foreign  investors. One example  is  the  telecommunication  industry which  in  the  late 1990s  was  a 
very active investor. However, many other service sectors such as financial services and energy were 
also heavily involved in FDI. 
The opportunity to gain access to new markets plays a key role for FDI.10 Those enterprises which 
want to be successful in the world markets must be present on-site. Direct investment and external 
trade often go hand in hand. It is thus not surprising that there is a relatively close correlation between 
German foreign direct investment and German exports.11 Econometric studies confirm this.12
At year-end 2002, for example, almost 86% of German FDI went to industrial countries and just over 
14%  to  reforming  and  developing  countries.  These  groups  of  countries  accounted  for  82½%  and 
17½%  of  German  exports  respectively.  Particularly,  a  gravity  model  analysis  of  the  strong  German 
foreign trade with the central and east European countries shows that German FDI in these countries 
is an important factor.13
Now I’d like to address very shortly the third and final reason for our interest in the topic “Multinationals 
and International Integration”. It’s a political one. 
As we all know, the focus of the debate on direct investment has shifted towards the effects of FDI on 
the  domestic  economy,  particularly  on  employment.  In  Germany,  this  was  sparked  by  the  EU 
enlargement.  This  development  has  directed  attention  towards  the  ongoing  process  of  enterprises 
shifting production to central and eastern Europe, a process which has been going on for many years 
now. 
A similar debate on the advantages and disadvantages of outsourcing is currently under way in the 
United  States.  This  received  much  attention  through  comments  made  by  Gregory  Mankiw  and  has 
been intensified in a paper by Paul Samuelson.14
Our studies indicate that, on balance, the German economy has benefited from outsourcing parts of its 
production to less expensive locations. By doing so, German enterprises have been able to maintain 
their global competitiveness in a difficult environment. After all, Germany’s exports have increased by 
nearly 11% in the first eight months of this year. 
Of course, we do know the argument that German exports are being decoupled from domestic value 
added  owing  to  the  increase  in  imports  of  foreign  intermediate  goods.  Germany,  so  the  argument 
goes, is more and more passing on goods produced abroad. Yes, it is true that the import content of 
German exports has increased considerably in the past few years. This share has risen from around 
27%  in  1991  to  almost  39%  in  2002.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  share  of  gross  value  added 
attributable to exports rose from 18% to nearly 21%. 
In my view, the final word is still out on the impact that outsourcing is having on employment, both in 
the economy as a whole and at the enterprise level. More research is needed in this sphere to provide 
robust results. 
We at the Bundesbank will remain committed to this area of research. 
                                                      
10  See, for example, Thomas Jost, Direct investment and Germany as a business location, Discussion paper 2/97, Economic 
Research Group of the Deutsche Bundesbank, June 1997. 
11  One  major  exception  is  the  United  States,  which  at  year-end  2002  accounted  for  nearly  37%  of  German  foreign  direct 
investment  but  only  around  10%  of  exports.  Correspondingly,  euro-area  countries’  share  of  German  direct  investment  is 
lower than their share of German foreign trade.  
12  See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Development  and  determinants  of  international  direct  investment,  Monthly  Report,  August 
1997, pp 63 ff and Claudia Buch, Jörn Kleinert and Farid Toubal, Determinants of German FDI: New Evidence from Micro-
Data, Discussion paper, Economic Research Centre of the Deutsche Bundesbank 09/03, March 2003. 
13  See Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany's relative position in the central and east European countries in transition, Monthly 
Report, October 1999, p 15 ff. 
14  Paul  A  Samuelson,  Where  Ricardo  and  Mill  Rebut  and  Confirm  Arguments  of  Mainstream  Economists  Against 
Globalization, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol, 18, No 3 Summer 2004 (forthcoming). 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 3
Ladies and gentlemen, by attending this workshop and contributing to it, you have shown your interest 
in all these issues. 
I very much welcome your active participation. Thank you once again for coming. 
Last  but  not  least  special  thanks  go  to  the  Kiel  Institute  for  World  Economics  for  its  hospitality  and 
cooperation and to Claudia Buch and Heinz Herrmann for their excellent teamwork in organising and 
presenting this workshop on Multinationals and International Integration. Our experience here in Kiel 
and with the Institute have stimulated us in Frankfurt to intensify our research activities. As our new 
president at the Bundesbank is a driving force in research I would like to pass on Professor Weber’s 
warmest regards. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2004
