Niklaus Blattner: A look behind the scenes of system oversight 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. 
 It is the task of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to contribute to the stability of the financial system. 
Implementation  rests  on  three  pillars:  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  banking  sector  (Financial 
Stability  Report),  oversight  of  systemically  important  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems 
(system  oversight)  and  crisis  management  measures.  This  is  what  I  talked  about  at  the  last  press 
conference. Today, I would like to give you a look behind the scenes of system oversight. Then I will 
turn to the regulatory environment, which we are also obliged to critically monitor and shape. 
System oversight: a look behind the scenes 
In  the  last  few  months,  we  had  to  define  which  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems  are 
systemically important. Only these systems have to comply with the minimum requirements stipulated 
in  the  National  Bank  Ordinance.  To  be  classed  as  systemically  important,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  a 
system is significant to the national economy, ie we do not merely consider the number and volume of 
transactions settled through a system. Rather, we focus on whether the failure of a system jeopardises 
the economy’s supply of liquidity. This is the case particularly if participants in a flawed payment or 
securities  settlement  system  have  no  other  alternatives.  The  fewer  alternatives  available,  the  more 
serious the liquidity bottlenecks and counterparty risks. An additional aspect relates to the network. It 
comes into play when a system is the connecting link between other systems, such as in the case of 
the  central  counterparty  SIS  x-clear,  which  links  the  trading  platform  virt-x  and  the  securities 
settlement system SECOM. The failure of such a connecting link can significantly affect operations at 
the upstream and downstream systems, even if the link itself is only of minor direct relevance to the 
market participants. 
Our  analyses  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  following  systems  should  be  classified  as  systemically 
important:  the  interbank  payment  system  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  (SIC),  the  securities  settlement 
system  SECOM,  the  central  counterparty  SIS  x-clear  and  the  multi-currency  payment  system 
Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS). PostFinance is not classed as systemically important. This may 
be surprising given the economic significance of postal payment transactions, but it is a direct result of 
the existence of alternatives, ie bank payment transactions, which are instantly available should the 
postal payment system experience any serious problems. 
Of the systemically important systems, CLS has been exempted from the minimum requirements as it 
is already adequately overseen by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and because the exchange 
of information between the New York Fed and the National Bank runs smoothly. By strictly avoiding 
duplications, we can reduce the burden of oversight, ie the density of regulation, also in the case of 
SECOM  and  SIS  x-clear.  The  operators  of  these  systems  are  supervised  as  banks  by  the  Swiss 
Federal Banking Commission (SFBC). Cooperation between the SFBC and the SNB is facilitated as 
the provisions in the Banking Act and the requirements stipulated by the National Bank Ordinance are 
partly similar, and both authorities wish to minimise the regulatory burden. This is also in the interest of 
the systems that are subject to oversight. I should add that not only the SFBC, but all of the evaluated 
systems have the opportunity to comment on our classification. The classification will be finalised at 
the beginning of next year. 
Basel II: a never-ending story? 
The  National  Bank  is  involved  in  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  on  the  international 
convergence  of  capital  measurement  and  capital  standards,  known  as  Basel  II.  The  National  Bank 
does  not  only  provide  a  member  to  serve  on  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  As  an 
authority committed to system stability, it also shares the responsibility of adequately implementing the 
Committee’s recommendations. 
The SFBC’s fundamental hypotheses are undisputed, namely that the current provisions are in need 
of  reform  and  that  the  recommendations  of  the  Basel  Committee  are  to  be  implemented  with 
   1/2 
moderation,  while  at  the  same  time  any  dilution  of  the  capital  adequacy  requirements  aimed  at 
reducing the insolvency risks has to be avoided. We are confident that the parties directly involved, ie 
the SFBC and the banks, will again succeed in agreeing, within the given time frame, on pragmatic 
and acceptable solutions. 
With a view to the future, I should note that the current reform will further increase the complexity of 
the capital adequacy requirements. Although the potential of capital adequacy regulation has not yet 
been  exhausted,  other  possibilities  should  also  be  investigated  in  the  future.  Complementing  the 
capital  adequacy  approach  with  improved  liquidity  management  of  the  banks  seems  to  be  a 
particularly promising measure. Shortcomings in liquidity management may give rise to problems that 
cannot be resolved by adequate capitalisation. It is not surprising that such considerations are made 
primarily by central banks. After all, liquidity concerns are typical for central banks. On the macro level, 
maintaining the supply of liquidity is a monetary policy task. On the micro level, however, it is the task 
of  each  bank  to  bring  its  solvency  into  line  with  the  risks.  This  requires  that  the  liquidity  risks  be 
correctly assessed and managed, and that assets, which can if necessary be used as collateral, be 
made available. The central banks and supervisory authorities of the G-10 countries should, therefore, 
increasingly focus their attention on minimising liquidity risks. This is of particular relevance to banks 
that are systemically important and internationally active. 
Integrated financial market oversight: what now? 
In the meantime, the Federal Council decided on the further procedure regarding the Federal Act on 
Financial Market Oversight (FINMA Act). The Federal Department of Finance will prepare a statement 
by the end of next year and submit it to the Federal Council. The statement shall comprise the first two 
parts of the report by the Zimmerli Expert Commission (on the creation of integrated financial market 
oversight and sanctions). The third part of the project (examination of expanded prudential oversight) 
will be dealt with at a later point in time. 
The Federal Council has taken various concerns of the National Bank into account. As regards the 
division of tasks between the supervisory board and the management board in particular, the Federal 
Council has moved closer to the view held by the National Bank, which believes it important that the 
power  of  disposition  remains  with  the  management  board.  As  a  non-professional  body,  the 
supervisory  board  is  inevitably  faced  with  conflicts  of  interest,  which  could  prove  an  obstacle  to 
individual dispositions. However, the experience and know-how of the supervisory board can be fully 
exploited with regard to the deliberation of questions of principle, budget and important staff issues. 
Furthermore,  we  support  increased  budgetary  autonomy  of  the  Federal  Financial  Market  Oversight 
Authority (FINMA), as we are convinced that a financial centre that is as complex and significant as 
the  Swiss  financial  centre  requires  an  authority  with  a  supervisory  and  management  board  whose 
powers are equal to those of the corresponding bodies of banks and insurance companies. 
The National Bank backs the project regarding the FINMA Act. We continue to view the integration of 
financial market oversight as a means to improve oversight rather than as an end in itself. Should it 
emerge  in  the  course  of  work  -  either  with  regard  to  sanctions  or  prudential  oversight  -  that  the 
planned  reform  is  becoming  so  cumbersome  that  it  jeopardises  the  present  level  of  banking 
supervision, we reserve the right to reassess the project. 
Conclusion 
My explanations clearly reflected the National Bank’s wish to adopt a moderate stance with regard to 
public interventions. We are pleased that the Federal Council requests through the FINMA Act that the 
regulation  consequences  of  new  projects  be  assessed.  The  ongoing  reform  of  capital  adequacy 
requirements is driven by international standards (Basel II). It is the responsibility of the SFBC and the 
banks to find correct and acceptable solutions. Everything beyond this must be prepared by the G-10 
bodies.  The  call  for  moderation  directly  affects  the  National  Bank  with  regard  to  the  oversight  of 
payment  and  securities  settlement  systems.  We  contribute  to  minimising  the  regulatory  burden  by 
interpreting the term “systemically important” in line with the law, by closely cooperating with the SFBC 
and by taking into account the activities of foreign oversight authorities. We will continue on this path 
in the future, too. 
   2/2 
