Ben S Bernanke: The logic of monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the National Economists Club, Washington, DC, 2 December 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 When I speak about monetary policy at occasions like this one, more often than not the focus of my 
remarks is on recent policy actions or the near-term outlook. However, just as good tactics are useful 
only  insofar  as  they  serve  a  larger  strategic  purpose,  so  individual  policy  decisions  are  best 
understood in the context of an encompassing policy framework. Today I would like to step back a bit 
from  current  policy  concerns  to  address  the  broader  topic  of  the  logical  framework  within  which 
monetary policy is made. Specifically, I will introduce and briefly discuss two competing frameworks for 
making monetary-policy decisions, each of which has vigorous proponents among leading monetary 
economists, and I will relate these frameworks to policy practice at the Federal Reserve. In the latter 
portion  of  my  remarks  I  will  argue  that  the  choice  of  policy  framework  has  important  practical 
implications, most notably for the communication policy of the central bank. Before proceeding further, 
I  should say that  the  views  I  will  express  today  are my  own  and are not  necessarily shared  by  my 
colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1
Car and driver: a misleading analogy 
Eight times each year the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meets to set U.S. monetary policy 
- which, under current operating procedures, amounts to choosing a target for the federal funds rate, a 
short-term interest rate that the Federal Reserve influences by controlling the supply of bank reserves. 
What logical framework guides these decisions? 
Superficially,  the  FOMC  decision  process  may  appear  straightforward.  A  commonly  used  analogy 
takes the U.S. economy to be an automobile, the FOMC to be the driver, and monetary policy actions 
to be taps on the accelerator or brake. According to this analogy, when the economy is running too 
slowly  (say,  unemployment  is  high  and  growth  is  below  its  potential  rate),  the  FOMC  increases 
pressure  on  the  accelerator  by  lowering  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate,  thereby  stimulating 
aggregate spending and economic activity. When the economy is running too quickly (say, inflation 
appears  likely  to  rise),  the  FOMC  switches  to  the  brake  by  raising  its  funds  rate  target,  thereby 
depressing spending and cooling the economy. What could be simpler than that?2
I wish it were that easy. Unfortunately, the simplistic view of monetary policymaking derived from the 
automobile analogy can be seriously misleading, for at least two reasons. 
First, policymakers working to keep the economy from going off the road must deal with informational 
constraints that are far more severe than those faced by real-world drivers. Despite the best efforts of 
the  statistical  agencies  and  other  data  collectors,  economic  data  provide  incomplete  coverage  of 
economic  activity,  are  subject  to  substantial  sampling  error,  and  become  available  only  with  a  lag. 
Determining even the economy’s current “speed,” consequently, is not easy, as can be seen by the 
fact that economists’ estimates of the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP) for the current quarter 
may vary widely. Forecasting the economy’s performance a few quarters ahead is even more difficult, 
reflecting  not  only  problems  of  economic  measurement  and  the  effects  of  unanticipated  shocks  but 
also the complex and constantly changing nature of the economy itself. Policymakers are unable to 
predict  with  great  confidence  even  how  (or  how  quickly)  their  own  actions  are  likely  to  affect  the 
economy.  In  short,  if  making  monetary  policy  is  like  driving  a  car,  then  the  car  is  one  that  has  an 
I thank a number of colleagues who provided constructive comments on an earlier draft. 
                                                      
1 
2  One complication that is not easily captured by the automobile analogy arises when the Fed’s objectives of price stability 
and maximum sustainable employment come into potential conflict, as sometimes occurs over short periods (for example, 
following an aggregate supply shock). In that case the choice of whether to slow  down or speed  up the economy is not 
straightforward and depends on a variety of considerations, such as the stability of inflation expectations and the credibility 
of the central bank. This issue is not central to the points I wish to make today and so I will not discuss it further. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 1
unreliable  speedometer,  a  foggy  windshield,  and  a  tendency  to  respond  unpredictably  and  with  a 
delay to the accelerator or the brake. 
The  second  problem  with  the  automobile  analogy  arises  from  the  central  role  of  private-sector 
expectations  in  determining  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  actions.  If  the  automobile  analogy  were 
valid,  then  the  current  setting  of  the  federal  funds  rate  would  summarize  the  degree  of  monetary 
stimulus being applied to the economy, just as the pressure a driver exerts on the accelerator at any 
particular moment determines whether the automobile speeds up or slows down. However, in fact, the 
current level of the federal funds rate is at best a partial indicator of the degree of monetary ease or 
restraint. 
The  current  funds  rate  imperfectly  measures  policy  stimulus  because  the  most  important  economic 
decisions, such as a family’s decision to buy a new home or a firm’s decision to acquire new capital 
goods, depend much more on longer-term interest rates, such as mortgage rates and corporate bond 
rates,  than  on  the  federal  funds  rate.  Long-term  rates,  in  turn,  depend  primarily  not  on  the  current 
funds rate but on how financial market participants expect the funds rate and other short-term rates to 
evolve over time. For example, if financial market participants anticipate that future short-term rates 
will be relatively high, they will usually bid up long-term yields as well; if long-term yields did not rise, 
then  investors  would  expect  to  earn  a  higher  return  by  rolling  over  short-term  investments  and 
consequently  would  decline  to  hold  the  existing  supply  of  long-term  bonds.  Likewise,  if  market 
participants expect future short-term rates to be low, then long-term yields will also tend to be low, all 
else being equal. Monetary policy makers can affect private-sector expectations through their actions 
and  statements,  but  the need  to  think  about  such  things  significantly  complicates  the  policymakers’ 
task (Bernanke, 2004). In short, if the economy is like a car, then it is a car whose speed at a particular 
moment depends not on the pressure on the accelerator at that moment but rather on the expected 
average pressure on the accelerator over the rest of the trip - not a vehicle for inexperienced drivers, I 
should think. 
I hope that this short discussion convinces you that making effective monetary policy is no Sunday 
drive in the park. With both the informational limitations facing policymakers and the role of private-
sector expectations in mind, I turn next to a discussion of two alternative frameworks for thinking about 
monetary policy. 
Making monetary policy: two candidate frameworks 
The two frameworks for monetary policymaking I will compare today are generally referred to in the 
recent economics literature as instrument rules and targeting rules (Svensson, 2003; McCallum and 
Nelson,  2004;  Svensson,  2004b).  Unfortunately,  for  my  purposes  at  least,  this  terminology  is 
somewhat misleading. First, the term “rule” suggests a rigid and mechanistic policy prescription that 
leaves no room for discretion or judgment. However, the argument that monetary policy should adhere 
mechanically to a strict rule, made by some economists in the past, has fallen out of favor in recent 
years. Today most monetary economists use the term “rule” more loosely to describe a general policy 
strategy, one that may include substantial scope for policymaker discretion and judgment. Here I will 
use  the  term  “policy”  instead  of  “rule”  to  avoid  the  connotations  of  the  latter.  Second,  the  terms 
“instrument” and “targeting” are products of the intellectual history of the debate and, to my mind, are 
not particularly descriptive. I will refer to the approaches known in the literature as instrument rules 
and  targeting  rules  instead  as  simple  feedback  policies  and  forecast-based  policies,  respectively.  I 
hope  that  the  benefits  of  greater  descriptive  accuracy  will  outweigh  the  costs  arising  from  any 
terminological confusion. 
How do these two policy approaches differ, and what are their underlying rationales? Under a simple 
feedback policy, the central bank’s policy instrument - the federal funds rate in the United States - is 
closely linked to the behavior of a relatively small number of macroeconomic variables, variables that 
either  are  directly  observable  (such  as  employment  or  inflation)  or  can  be  estimated  from  current 
information (such as the economy’s full-employment level of output). I exclude from my definition of 
simple  feedback  policies  any  policy  that  links  the  policy  instrument  to  forecasts  of  macroeconomic 
variables, such as output and inflation; hybrid policies of this type raise difficult issues that would take 
me too far afield today.3 Generally, the macroeconomic variables that drive simple feedback policies 
                                                      
3   Svensson (2001) presents some arguments against the use of feedback policies based on forecasts. McCallum and Nelson 
(2004) and Svensson (2004b) debate this issue. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2004
are chosen to reflect the central bank’s objectives, and policymakers are directed to adjust the short-
term interest rate (or other policy instrument) as needed to offset deviations of these variables from 
their desired levels. That is, current macroeconomic conditions “feed back” into the setting of the short-
term  rate.  The  adjective  “simple”  refers  to  the  presumption  that,  in  this  regime,  policymakers  will 
respond to only a relatively short list of economic variables. However, as I have already mentioned, 
contemporary  advocates  of  simple  feedback  policies  generally  recommend  applying  these  policies 
flexibly, subject to modification in special circumstances and as judgment dictates. 
A classic example of a simple feedback policy is the famous Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993). In its most 
basic version the Taylor rule is an equation that relates the current setting of the federal funds rate to 
two variables: the level of the output gap (the deviation of output from its full-employment level) and 
the difference between the inflation rate and the policy committee’s preferred inflation rate. Like most 
feedback policies, the Taylor rule instructs policymakers to “lean against the wind”; for example, when 
output  is  above  its  potential  or  inflation  is  above  the  target,  the  Taylor  rule  implies  that  the  federal 
funds rate should be set above its average level, which (all else being equal) should slow the economy 
and bring output or inflation back toward the desired range.4 Numerous simple feedback policies other 
than those based on the Taylor rule have been proposed and analyzed.5
How  does  the  use  of  simple  feedback  policies  address  the  issues  I  raised  earlier  -  namely,  the 
problem of limited information and the need to account for private-sector expectations when making 
policy?  With  respect  to  the  informational  constraints,  advocates  argue  that  policies  of  this  type,  if 
judiciously  chosen,  are  likely  to  give  reasonably  good  results  even  when  policymakers’  knowledge 
about  the  economy  and  its  underlying  structure  is  severely  limited.  The  principal  evidence  for  this 
claim  comes  from  computer  simulations  of  mathematical  models  of  the  economy.  Specifically, 
researchers have attempted to identify particular simple feedback policies that lead to good economic 
outcomes when  applied  to  a  range  of  alternative  economic  models  (McCallum,  1988;  Taylor,  1999; 
Orphanides and Williams, 2002; Levin and Williams, 2003). As it turns out, simple feedback policies 
that produce good results in a variety of simulated economic environments - so-called robust policies - 
can  often  be  found.  Proponents  of  simple  feedback  policies  argue  that,  as  we  are  far  from  certain 
about which of many possible economic models provides the best description of the U.S. economy, 
the  safest  course  is  to  adopt  one  of  these  robust  feedback  policies,  modified  as  necessary  by 
policymakers’ insight and judgment, and to stick with it.6
The use of simple feedback policies also addresses to some degree the complications raised by the 
role  of  private-sector  expectations.  Because  simple  feedback  policies  link  the  central  bank’s  policy 
instrument to a short list of macroeconomic variables, these policies should be relatively easy for the 
public to understand and to use in forming expectations of the way monetary policy will evolve in the 
future. Say, for example, that the feedback policy employed by the central bank stipulates that, when 
inflation rises 10 basis points, policymakers will raise the short-term interest rate 15 basis points on 
average,  subject  to  possible  judgmental  adjustments.  Armed  with  this  information  and  their  own 
                                                      
4  Actually, the Taylor rule has the stronger implication that the nominal funds rate should rise more than one-for-one when 
inflation rises, implying an increase in the real funds rate  as  well (this prescription is the so-called Taylor principle). The 
Taylor  principle  seems  likely  to  be  a  feature  of  any  good  monetary  policy  and  thus  provides  an  important  guidepost  for 
policymakers. 
5  For example, one proposal would have the Federal Reserve adjust the growth of the monetary base in response to current 
macroeconomic conditions (McCallum, 1988). Another would replace the output gap in the Taylor rule with output growth, a 
variable  that  (unlike  the  output  gap)  can  be  measured  directly  without  reference  to  unobserved  variables  like  “full-
employment output” (Orphanides and Williams, 2002). 
6  Robust feedback policies may also be useful when members of the policy committee disagree among themselves about 
how the economy works, if such a policy seems likely to produce acceptable results in each of the competing models or 
frameworks. 
Although the simulation-based literature described in the text has produced many valuable insights, it also has a number of 
shortcomings:  First,  in  conducting  simulation  exercises,  researchers  of  necessity  can  consider  only  a  relatively  small 
number of simple and highly stylized economic models out of the large universe of possible alternatives. Thus, simulations 
cannot  demonstrate  conclusively  that  any  particular  simple  feedback  policy  would  be  robust  to  the  types  of  uncertainty 
actually faced by policymakers. Second, although these analyses are predicated on the assumption that policymakers do 
not know the structure of the economy, they usually assume (somewhat inconsistently) that private agents not only know the 
true  model  but  also  know  the  central  bank’s  feedback  policy,  which  allows  them  to  form  accurate  policy  expectations. 
Allowing for symmetrical uncertainty on the part of policymakers and private agents is difficult analytically but might produce 
different results. Third, in assessing competing policies, these analyses (with some exceptions) often ignore the possibilities 
that  policymakers  will  learn  from  their  mistakes,  modify  or  abandon  policies  that  are  producing  bad  results,  or  take  into 
account their uncertainty about the underlying economic structure when they form their policies. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 3
estimates of how strong inflation pressures are likely to be over the next few quarters, financial market 
participants should be able to forecast future values of the short-term interest rate, allowing them to 
price  bonds  and  other  financial  assets  more  efficiently.  Because,  under  a  simple  feedback  policy, 
private-sector  expectations  are  likely  to  be  broadly  consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  plans,  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy would be enhanced as well. 
The second general approach to making monetary policy is what I am today calling a forecast-based 
policy (Svensson, 2004c). As the name suggests, under a forecast-based policy regime, policymakers 
must predict how the economy is likely to respond in the medium term - say, over the next six to eight 
quarters  -  to  alternative  plans  for  monetary  policy.  For  example,  monetary  policy  makers  might  be 
interested  in  evaluating  a  strategy  of  keeping  the  federal  funds  rate  low  for  a  period  against  an 
alternative plan that implies a gradual rise in rates.7 Under a forecast-based approach, for each policy 
plan  under  consideration,  the  policymakers  and  their  staffs  must  make  their  best  guess  of  how  the 
economy  is  likely  to  evolve  should  that  plan  be  implemented.  They  may  also  try  to  assess  the 
likelihood  of  outcomes  other  than  their  principal  scenario.  For  example,  they  might  conclude  that  a 
certain policy plan is likely to produce good results under most circumstances but that less-probable 
scenarios also exist under which the policy plan under consideration would lead to very bad results. 
Taking both their baseline forecast and the various risks to that forecast into account, policymakers 
then choose the plan that seems most likely to produce the best results overall. Their current choice of 
interest  rate  corresponds  to  the  first  step  in  implementing  the  preferred  plan.  This  process  is  to  be 
repeated  at  each  meeting,  with  the  policy  plan  being  modified  as  necessary  in  response  to  new 
information or new knowledge about the economy. 
How do forecast-based policies deal with informational constraints and the role of expectations, the 
two  issues  I  raised  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks?  Clearly,  forecast-based  policies  require  more 
information to implement than simple feedback policies, a fact that is often stressed by opponents of 
this approach. Indeed, opponents of this approach argue, a major risk of using forecast-based policies 
is  that  monetary  policy  makers,  like  other  human  beings,  may  be  prone  to  thinking  that  they  know 
more than they really do. Excessive optimism about what monetary policy can realistically accomplish, 
some  claim,  might  conceivably  lead  to  worse  economic  outcomes  than  would  a  more  intellectually 
modest stance. 
In response to this critique, proponents of forecast-based policies suggest that our ability to forecast 
the economy, though modest, is not nil, and that we should make use of the knowledge we do have. In 
particular,  they  note,  the  use  of  forecast-based  policies  does  not  require  that  the  policy  committee 
members adhere strictly to a particular econometric model or economic theory. Economic forecasts, in 
central banks as in the private sector, typically reflect the output of a suite of models and statistical 
methods, plus a heavy dose of the judgment and insights of experienced economists. Forecasts can 
also be structured to take into account model and data uncertainty - for example by down-weighting 
changes in variables, such as the output gap, that are known to be poorly measured (Williams, 2004). 
So long as policymakers and their staffs remain appropriately humble about their forecasting ability 
and their knowledge of the economy, proponents argue, forecast-based policies are likely to provide 
better results than simple feedback policies. 
Supporters  also  point  out  that,  in  comparison  with  simple  feedback  policies,  the  forecast-based 
approach  provides  more  guidance  about  how  to  incorporate  judgment  and  special  information  into 
policymaking.  As  I  have  noted,  advocates  of  both  approaches  agree  that,  in  principle,  good  policy 
practice leaves scope for discretion and the use of expert judgment. But how, specifically, is this to be 
done?  Simple  feedback  policies,  which  presume  a  good  deal  of  agnosticism  about  the  economy’s 
underlying  structure,  do  not  provide  a  clear  framework  for  answering  this  question,  except  in  very 
qualitative  terms.  Under  a  forecast-based  approach,  in  contrast,  the  answer  is  straightforward: 
Judgment or special information should affect policy choice to the extent that it affects the forecast or 
the risks to the forecast. For example, simulations of an econometric model may imply that policy A is 
likely  to  produce  better  outcomes  than  policy  B;  but  if  expert  judgment  suggests  that  the  model’s 
                                                      
7  More  realistically,  the  plan  might  include  contingent  elements;  for  example,  it  might  involve  keeping  the  funds  rate  low 
unless inflation begins to rise, in  which case rates would be allowed to  rise as well. Stipulating  a policy plan, at least in 
general terms, is essential in the context of forecast-based policies, as specifying only the current value of the policy rate 
does not provide enough information to construct a forecast. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2004
forecasts do not take special information or circumstances fully into account, or that policy A entails 
some economic risks not captured by the model, then policy B may be preferred instead. 
What  about  the  role  of  private-sector  expectations  in  determining  the  effect  of  policy?  Again  the 
information requirements of forecast-based policies are relatively more demanding. In contrast to the 
case of simple feedback policies, under a forecast-based policy financial market participants have no 
simple formula to guide them in forming expectations about future short-term rates; instead, they must 
infer  the  likely  course  of  policy  based  on  their  own  economic  forecasts  and  their  knowledge  of 
policymakers’ outlook and objectives. Given the complexity of the central bank’s forecasting and policy 
evaluation  processes,  making  these  inferences  is  a  daunting  challenge.  Clearly,  under  a  forecast-
based  policy,  central  bankers  have  scope  to  provide  considerable  help  to  the  private  sector  in  its 
attempts to anticipate policy changes. To the extent that policymakers can accurately communicate 
their outlook, objectives, and tactics to the public, financial markets will be more efficient and monetary 
policy more effective (Bernanke, 2004). I will return to the issue of communication shortly. 
The policy framework of the Federal Reserve 
It  would  be  nice,  at  this  point,  if  I  could  tell  you  definitively  whether  simple  feedback  policies  or 
forecast-based  policies  represent  the  superior  approach  to  making  monetary  policy.  But  drawing 
strong conclusions at this juncture would be premature, to say the least. The debate in the monetary 
economics literature remains lively. Moreover, to some degree, central bank practice remains eclectic. 
At  the  Federal  Reserve,  both  simple  feedback  and  forecast-based  approaches  are  used  to  provide 
information to policymakers. For example, FOMC members routinely compare their policy choices with 
both the prescriptions of various forms of the Taylor rule (as noted, a type of simple feedback policy) 
and the results of model simulations and forecasting exercises undertaken by staff at the Board and at 
the twelve Reserve Banks (as required by the forecast-based approach).8
Although I will not try here to resolve the deeper debate about frameworks, I can say something about 
the degree to which central banks rely on these approaches in practice. Both simple feedback policies 
and  forecast-based  policies  influence  how  policymakers  think  about  their  decisions,  as  I  have  just 
noted.  However,  in  my  judgment,  reliance  on  these  two  approaches  is  not  symmetric;  instead,  the 
forecast-based approach has become increasingly dominant in the monetary policymaking of leading 
central banks. This dominance is reflected in the resources that central banks devote to data collection 
and  modeling  and  in  the  increasing  sophistication  and  detail  of  central  bank  forecasts.9  Indeed,  a 
number  of  central  banks  with  explicit  inflation  objectives  publish  regular  forecasts  and  closely  link 
monetary policy decisions to those forecasts.10
The  Federal  Reserve  does  not  explicitly  link  policy  actions  to  forecasts,  but  projections  of  how  the 
economy  is  likely  to  perform  under  different  policy  plans  are  nevertheless  central  to  the  monetary 
policy process in the United States; that is, the Federal Reserve relies primarily on the forecast-based 
approach for making policy. To provide some evidence for this assertion, as well as some reasons for 
it, I draw your attention to a speech that Chairman Greenspan made earlier this year, entitled “Risk 
and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy” (Greenspan, 2004). To be sure, the Chairman’s remarks make 
clear  that  he  is  profoundly  aware  of  the  uncertainties  that  policymakers  must  face  in  making  their 
decisions, and he is appropriately cautious about relying too heavily on any particular model, theory, or 
                                                      
8  Reifschneider, Stockton, and Wilcox (1997) describe the forecasting process and its role in the policymaking process at the 
Federal Reserve. 
9  Sims  (2002)  analyzes  the  policy  process  in  four  major  central  banks,  including  the  Federal  Reserve.  He  describes  the 
central  role  played  by  forecasts  of  inflation  and  output,  developed  by  a  combination  of  models  and  expert  judgment. 
Forecasts may be contingent on different assumptions about the policy path or about the shocks hitting the economy. To an 
increasing degree, forecasts are accompanied with measures of uncertainty, such as the “fan charts” published by the Bank 
of England to describe the range of statistically probable outcomes. To obtain a more accurate assessment of the current 
state of the economy and to improve forecasts, central bank staffs collect and analyze large amounts of data; the hunger for 
data seems inconsistent with a simple feedback policy, which uses limited data inputs. Sims criticizes certain aspects of the 
forecasting methodologies that are used and suggests improvements, but he does not question that these central banks put 
forecasting at the center of their policymaking. 
In  a  comprehensive  study  of  twenty  inflation-targeting  central  banks,  Fracasso,  Genberg,  and  Wyplosz  (2001)  find  that 
nineteen of the twenty routinely report their forecasts to the public. Forecast horizons typically range from one to two years, 
with  two  countries  (New  Zealand  and  Switzerland)  extending  their  forecasts  to  three  years.  About  half  the  central banks 
studied use fan charts to communicate the uncertainty of the forecasts. 
10 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 5
data series. Nevertheless, his speech presents several reasons for concluding that good policies must 
be  primarily  forecast-based.  These  reasons  include  the  need  for  preemptive  policymaking,  the 
importance  of  taking  account  of  the  changing  structure  of  the  economy,  and  the  value  of  what  he 
terms a risk-management approach to policy. I will discuss each of these briefly. 
Preemption refers to the idea that policymakers achieve better results when they act in advance to 
forestall developing problems. Early action works best both because monetary policy works with a lag 
and because developing problems (such as rising inflation) may often be defused at lower cost in their 
early stages. In principle, simple feedback policies are not inconsistent with a preemptive approach; 
however, to the extent that each episode has unique features, more information than can be captured 
in  a  simple  feedback  policy  may  be  needed  to  deal  effectively  with  emerging  issues.  Referring  to 
monetary policy developments in the 1980s, Greenspan writes: 
In recognition of the lag in monetary policy’s impact on economic activity, a preemptive 
response  to  the  potential  for  building  inflationary  pressures  was  made  an  even  more 
important feature of policy. As a consequence, this approach elevated forecasting to an 
even more prominent place in policy deliberations. 
Structural changes in the economy are notoriously difficult to assess as they happen, but to the extent 
that such changes can be identified and incorporated into the central bank’s forecast, forecast-based 
policies are again likely to perform better than simple feedback policies. In the mid-1990s, Chairman 
Greenspan  and  his  FOMC  colleagues  famously  recognized  an  important  structural  change,  an 
apparent increase in trend productivity growth. To quote the Chairman’s speech: 
As  a  consequence  of  the  improving  trend  in  structural  productivity  growth  that  was 
apparent from 1995 forward, we at the Fed were able to be much more accommodative 
to the rise in economic growth than our past experiences would have deemed prudent. 
In short, upon determining that an important structural change was occurring, the FOMC did not feel 
constrained  to  respond  to  current  developments  in  output  and  inflation  as  it  had  in  the  past  -  an 
indication that the Committee’s policymaking was based on a forecast-based analysis, not a simple 
feedback approach. 
Perhaps the most interesting confirmation of the role of forecasts in Federal Reserve policymaking, 
however,  is  Chairman  Greenspan’s  description  of  what  he  calls  the  risk-management  approach  to 
monetary policy. The risk-management approach is clearly a forecast-based policy. In describing the 
implementation  of  this  approach,  Greenspan  describes  how  models  and  expert  judgment  are 
combined to project not only the most likely scenarios for the economy but also what amounts to a 
probability  distribution  of  possible  economic  outcomes.  Under  the  risk-management  approach, 
policymakers  choose  the  policy  strategy  that  implies  the  most  desirable  of  these  probability 
distributions. To quote Greenspan one more time: 
Given our inevitably incomplete knowledge. . . . a central bank needs to consider not only 
the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes 
about  that  path.  The  decisionmakers  then  need  to  reach  a  judgment  about  the 
probabilities,  costs,  and  benefits  of  the  various  possible  outcomes  under  alternative 
choices for policy. 
Moreover,  under  the  risk-management  approach,  models,  judgments,  forecasts,  and  policies  are 
continually updated in light of new information, as theory would suggest. 
Operationally,  the  risk-management  approach  differs  from  the  forecast-based  policies  described  in 
much of the monetary economics literature in only one important respect. For simplicity, researchers 
have  generally  analyzed  forecast-based  policies  under  the  assumption  that  policymakers  care  only 
about average economic outcomes. However, in practice, policymakers are often concerned not only 
with the average or most likely outcomes but also with the risks to their objectives posed by relatively 
low-probability events. For example, although the probability last year of a pernicious deflation in the 
United States was small, the potential consequences of that event were sufficiently worrisome that the 
possibility of its occurring could not be ignored. In that spirit, Greenspan’s risk-management approach 
sensibly reflects the fact that the entire distribution of possible outcomes, not just the average or most 
likely expected outcome, matters for policy choice. This view is certainly realistic, and the analysis of 
forecast-based  policies  when  the  central  bank  cares  about  the  whole  probability  distribution  of 
potential  outcomes  is  beginning  to  receive  more  attention  in  the  literature  (see,  for  example, 
Svensson, 2004a). To reiterate, however, the policy framework espoused by Chairman Greenspan is 
very much a forecast-based approach; indeed, because it requires making judgments about unlikely 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2004
as  well  as  likely  economic  outcomes,  it  places  greater  demands  on  our  ability  to  forecast  and  to 
assess risks than do simpler forecast-based approaches that focus on average outcomes only. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  will  not  try  to  draw  definite  conclusions  today  about  the  relative  merits  of 
simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies. I note, however, that not only have most central 
banks  chosen  to  rely  most  heavily  on  forecast-based  policies  but  also  that  the  results,  at  least  in 
recent  years,  have  generally  been  quite  good,  as  most  economies  have  enjoyed  low  inflation  and 
overall economic stability.11 So long as this good performance persists, at least, the simple feedback 
approach  will  face  a  sort  of  Catch-22  problem:  Without  a  demonstrated  record  of  success,  central 
banks will be reluctant to adopt this approach; but unless some central banks begin to rely on simple 
feedback policies, real-world evidence in support of this approach will be lacking.12
Flexibility and communication 
In previous talks I have argued that clear communication by the central bank is an important element 
of effective monetary policy (Bernanke, 2004). I will conclude with a few brief remarks about how the 
distinction between simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies bears on the value of central 
bank  communication  and  on  the  relationship  between  central  bank  communication  and  policy 
flexibility. 
Central bank communication and transparency are important precisely because of the role of private-
sector expectations in determining the effectiveness of monetary policy, a theme I have highlighted 
today.  The  economic  stimulus  provided  by  monetary  policy  depends  mostly  on  longer-term  interest 
rates, which in turn are largely determined by the expectations of financial market participants about 
the future course of monetary policy. As a general matter, the more guidance the central bank can 
provide the public about how policy is likely to evolve (or about the principles on which policy decisions 
will be based), the greater the chance that market participants will make appropriate inferences - and 
thus the greater the probability that long-term interest rates will move in a manner consistent with the 
outlook and objectives of the monetary policy committee. 
My  discussion  today  suggests,  however,  that  the  benefit  of  central  bank  communication  depends 
crucially  on  the  policy  approach  that  is  used.  As  I  have  noted,  if  the  central  bank  follows  a  simple 
feedback  policy  (with  relatively  few  judgmental  deviations),  the  private  sector’s  problem  of  inferring 
future policy actions is greatly simplified. The principal task of market participants in this case would be 
to forecast the macroeconomic variables featured in the simple feedback policy, from which the course 
of  policy  could  be  inferred  with  reasonable  accuracy.  Extensive communication  by  the  central  bank 
may  not  be  essential  when  a  simple  feedback  policy  is  employed,  except  in  those  cases  when 
policymakers decide to deviate substantially from the prescriptions of the simple feedback relationship. 
Under the forecast-based approach, in contrast, the public will generally find inferring the likely course 
of policy to be a great deal more difficult. In that regime, policy plans depend in a complex way on 
policymakers’  outlooks,  risk  assessments,  and  objectives,  which  the  public  is  unlikely  to  deduce 
accurately without guidance. Clear communication thus appears to be especially important for central 
banks that employ a forecast-based approach to policy - a category that includes most contemporary 
central banks, including the Federal Reserve. 
This  conclusion  bears  in  turn  on  the  relationship  between  communication  and  policy  flexibility  in 
modern central banking. One sometimes hears the view that providing information to the public about 
the  central  bank’s  forecasts,  plans,  and  objectives  inhibits  the  flexibility  of  policy  by  effectively 
restricting policymakers’ future choices. This claim might be correct if the current setting of the federal 
funds rate fully described the overall degree of monetary stimulus or restraint, in the same way that the 
                                                      
11 
I attribute this improved performance not only  to technical improvements in modeling and forecasting but, perhaps more 
importantly, to increased attention by policymakers to the objective of keeping inflation low and stable. The framework of 
what  has  been  called  constrained  discretion  -  the  idea  that  short-run  stabilization  policy  must  be  constrained  by  the 
requirement that inflation remain low and stable - has enhanced overall stability by anchoring inflation expectations while 
giving policymakers some leeway to respond to short-run disturbances (Bernanke, 2003). 
12  An  alternative  approach  to  evaluating  feedback  policies  is  to  compare  their  predictions  to  actual  policy  decisions  during 
periods in which monetary policy was judged to be “successful.” Kozicki (1999) performs this exercise for Taylor rules and 
concludes that they do not provide robust guides to policy. In any case, this evaluation method has the shortcoming that it 
does not allow for the possibility that the use of an alternative policy approach would change how the private sector forms its 
expectations, which in turn would affect the optimal policy path. 
BIS Review 73/2004 
 7
position of the gas pedal at a particular moment fully describes the impetus that a driver is providing to 
his  or  her  vehicle.  In  that  case,  central  bank  talk  could  only  limit  future  policy  options,  much  as 
providing  an  advance  itinerary  for  an  automobile  trip  may  reduce  the  flexibility  to  take  unplanned 
detours if required. However, as we have seen, the automotive analogy is a poor one. Monetary policy 
works largely through indirect channels - in particular, by influencing private-sector expectations and 
thus  long-term  interest  rates.  Consequently,  failing  to  communicate  with  the  public  does  not  create 
genuine policy flexibility but only reduces the potency and predictability of the effects of given policy 
actions.  To  keep  monetary  policy  both  flexible  and  effective,  particularly  under  a  forecast-based 
approach to policy like that employed by the Federal Reserve, clear communication on the part of the 
central bank is essential. 
8 
 BIS Review 73/2004
