Glenn Stevens: Economic and financial conditions December 2004 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business  Economists  and  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (NSW  Branch),  Annual  Forecasting 
Conference Dinner, Sydney, 14 December 2004. 
 2004 turned out to be a year of considerably stronger output in the global economy. According to the 
international panel of private forecasters recently polled by Consensus Economics Inc, global GDP1 
will  have  risen  by  5  per  cent  in  2004.  This  does  not  include  the  recent  round  of  data  revisions  in 
Japan, and so may be adjusted down a little. Even so, it is hard to see how the outcome will not be at 
least a full percentage point above the long-run average and as strong as any year in the past thirty. 
Graph 1 
Click to view larger
 As always, there were short-term departures from the established trend. The US “soft patch” in mid 
year  followed  a  brief  period  when price  statistics  in  the  US had  people worried  about  inflation.  The 
number  one  topic  of  discussion  the  previous  year,  of  course,  had  been  deflation.  There  were  also 
periodic concerns that the attempts to engineer a slowdown in China might over-achieve, resulting in a 
slump of global significance. The various short-term concerns were overdone, as is so often the case, 
but  were  to  be  expected  given  that  an  innumerable  army  of  analysts,  commentators  and  financial 
market players extensively debate every twist and turn of the economic data, many of which turn out 
to be statistical noise. A more genuine reason for some discomfort is perhaps that, despite vigorous 
global growth in total, there is a feeling that it is a little lop-sided, with some areas participating less 
than fully. The euro area, for example, has struggled to “gain traction”. 
                                                      
1   As measured by the IMF's PPP-weighted approach. 
   1/7 
In 2005, some slowing is envisaged but forecasters apparently expect growth still to be better than 
average. It might be revised down a bit in the near term reflecting some softer recent data. But even a 
noticeable  downgrade  would  leave  growth  at  about  average,  which  would  be  quite  a  reasonable 
outcome. In the course of expansions lasting a number of years, it is quite common for there to be the 
odd slower year; they can’t all be above average.  
One  factor  affecting  people’s  expectations  will  presumably  be  energy  prices.  Measured  against  the 
SDR,  so  as  to  avoid  valuation  effects  of  the  decline  in  the  US  dollar,  the  average  oil  price  in  the 
second half of 2004 was about 50 per cent higher than the average over the period 2001-2003. 
Assessing the implications of this change requires us first to ask why it occurred. The oil shocks of the 
mid and late 1970s resulted from OPEC actions to drive up the price by restricting supply. In such a 
scenario, costs of production for industrial users of energy are raised, which means some combination 
of higher prices and lower profits ensues. Possibly some of the capital stock is rendered uneconomic. 
For households, the rise in oil prices reduces purchasing power, so imparting a contractionary impact 
on other areas of demand.2  
The  situation  when  the  disturbance  emanates  on  the  demand  side  is  different.  The  initiating  shock 
here  is  expansionary  in  nature:  somewhere  in  the  world,  there  is  unexpected  strength  in 
energy-intensive production of goods and services. Prices rise, but so does output. Admittedly, output 
would have risen even further had the supply of oil been perfectly elastic, but a demand-driven rise in 
oil prices is a sign of global growth strength, not weakness. 
Graph 2 
Click to view larger
 That is the bulk of the story in the past few years. With global GDP having grown by about 12 per cent 
over the past three years, oil demand is estimated to have increased by about 6½ per cent over the 
same  period.  Granted,  there  have  been  periods  of  pressure  on  prices  driven  by  uncertainty  over 
current or future supply, but the main story is one of demand. 
                                                      
2   A key assumption of this analysis is that there is only limited short-term scope to substitute towards other sources of energy or to 
otherwise use oil more efficiently, which is reasonable for the short term though not the long term. It also assumes that the income 
gain accruing to oil exporters does not lead to demand expansion in those countries sufficient to offset the contractionary impact in 
the oil-importing countries. 
   2/7 
There is, of course, an important compositional element too. Much of the additional growth in demand 
is coming from the Asian region. This means that traditional big users of oil in the developed countries 
are competing for resources in a way they had not been accustomed to doing in the past. A rise in the 
oil price could well seem to them quite like the supply shock scenario - higher prices and lower output. 
Hence, if oil prices were to remain quite high, economic prospects for some of the western industrial 
countries, particularly those whose economies were not especially robust to begin with, could be more 
noticeably affected than would be the case in, say, China or India. 
A really serious adverse shock from this source looks less likely now, however, than it did a month or 
two ago, with oil prices having declined quite sharply from their peak. Financial markets have certainly 
responded in a fairly relaxed way to these developments. Bond yields remain fairly low by historical 
standards,  particularly  given  the  back-drop  of  a  tightening  cycle  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  This  is  a 
rather different response to some other episodes where oil prices have risen substantially, as shown in 
the  table  below,  which  suggests  that  a  persistent  rise  in  inflation  is  regarded  as  unlikely.  This  may 
reflect  an  expectation  that  the  adverse  effects  on  growth  for  the  industrial  countries  will  inhibit  any 
lasting  inflation  impact,  but  is  also  consistent  with  the  idea  that  neither  growth  nor  inflation  may  be 
affected by very much or for very long. 
 
Change in US 10-year Government Bond Yield 
1 year into oil price rise 
Beginning of oil price rise 
Change in bond yield (bps) 
September 1973 
December 1978 
June 1990 
February 1999 
October 2003 
 +104 
+118 
–19 
+113 
–28 
Source: US Federal Reserve, Global Financial Data 
 
The  latter  view  probably  fits  more  easily  with  the  fact  that  markets  are  demanding  relatively  little 
compensation for credit risk. A significant weakening of growth in the industrial countries would surely 
have some adverse implications for emerging market countries, and lesser quality corporates. If that 
were  expected,  we  would  presumably  see  it  reflected  in  risk  spreads  -  but  we  do  not  see  that.  At 
present,  then,  markets  apparently  do  not  anticipate  much  in  the  way  of  adverse  impact  from  the 
energy  price  changes.  Either  that,  or  there  is  a  tension  between  various  markets,  the  resolution  of 
which will be fascinating to watch. 
But the main point is still that the current level of oil prices is mainly a sign of global demand strength - 
it is just that some of the strength is in different places from historical patterns. For Australia, a global 
growth situation that is strong enough to be exerting upward pressure on energy (and other resource) 
prices, and where growth is weighted towards Asia, seems for the moment to be quite a favourable 
one. 
 According  to  the  national  accounts,  Australia  recorded  moderate  growth  in  2004.  It  looks  like  GDP 
growth over the four quarters to December will be less than 3 per cent unless there is a big surprise 
for the December quarter or upward revisions to previous quarters. Let me leave aside the apparent 
contrast with the picture painted by the various business surveys, which is considerably stronger, and 
for the moment take the figures as given.  
That leaves growth running more slowly than was anticipated earlier in the year. But if output growth 
fell slightly short of expectations, it was not due to apparent lack of demand. Growth in domestic final 
demand has run at something like 5 per cent over the past year, and an average rate of nearly 6 per 
   3/7 
cent per year over the past three years. And growth in global demand for things Australia produces 
has, over the past year or two, been generally as strong as at any time in the past few decades.  
Graph 3 
Click to view larger
 If demand growth is so strong, why hasn’t the economy grown faster? Have we hit capacity limits? 
Indicators of capacity utilisation available in business surveys are certainly at or close to the highest 
levels seen in the past 15 years. This is a feature across surveys, and has been for some time. In the 
labour market, the rate of unemployment is at its lowest for more than 25 years. Other measures of 
under-utilisation of labour are not at two-decade lows, but have nonetheless declined a good deal. A 
significant proportion of firms refer to difficulties in finding suitable staff. Areas of skill shortage have 
emerged. Observable upward pressure on wage and salary rates is minor at this stage, though there 
are reports of non-wage employment costs rising in some sectors. 
The clearest evidence of hard capacity constraints is probably on the export side. In some parts of the 
resource sector there was a significant volume of investment in the second half of the 1990s, but a 
subsequent period of weak commodity prices saw investment decline to very low levels. Hence, the 
increase in demand in the past two years apparently left some producers without the capacity to take 
full advantage of the conditions by shipping higher output, though of course they have enjoyed higher 
prices.  The  rise  in  prices  presumably  reflects  pressure  on  capacity  globally,  which  suggests  that 
producers everywhere were surprised. There have also been reports of capacity constraints in some 
of the key areas of transport infrastructure, such as ports and rail. A decline in exports of some fuels 
was due to a rundown in reserves, a capacity constraint of another sort.  
At the margin, the weakness of manufactured exports might reflect the strength of domestic demand, 
which for some producers may have presented an opportunity for sales in an easier market than some 
foreign  alternatives.  It  might  reflect  the  rise  in  the  exchange  rate  (ie  demand  rather  than  supply), 
though the export weakness dates from a time when the exchange rate was much lower. 
So where does this leave us? There is no hard and fast answer, but there are reasonable grounds for 
thinking that the Australian economy is now operating closer to full capacity than it has for some time. 
We don’t want to overstate this: it could not be claimed that physical limits have been reached across 
the board (though apparently they have been in a few areas). The best forecast for inflation, moreover, 
remains one of only a gradual increase over the coming two years, and no recent price or wage data 
have cast any doubt on that view. But it does seem to be getting a bit harder to coax above-average 
growth from the economy. 
   4/7 
In the thirteenth and fourteenth years of expansion, this is not surprising. Most of the easy gains in 
lifting output by reducing cyclical slack are by now behind us. It just means that very strong demand 
growth is now less likely than before to foster rapid output growth and more likely, at some stage, to 
risk pressure on prices, even though that does not seem imminent at the moment. It was therefore 
appropriate to have the somewhat less accommodative monetary stance of the past year and to signal 
in recent Statements the likelihood - assuming the economy evolved as expected - of higher interest 
rates at some stage. A continuation of a robust expansion will, it seems, be increasingly dependent on 
enhancing  the  supply  side:  growing  the  capital  stock,  more  effectively  matching  the  supply  of  and 
demand for both skilled and unskilled labour, and innovation to lift the productivity of all the factors of 
production.  
 I have talked about exports, but not as yet addressed the issue of Australia’s current account deficit. 
But since it has been in the news recently, is there anything useful to be said? The risk in this is that 
people may misinterpret my remarks as indicating that the current account deficit is, per se, something 
to be addressed by monetary policy. So I shall state clearly that it is not. Actually, whether the current 
account position should be an objective of any policy is not obvious - that would need to be argued. 
But whatever one’s view on that question, let me be clear that the current account is not, and should 
not be, an objective for monetary policy. We have had that debate in Australia. It was settled more 
than a decade ago, and I do not wish to re-open it.  
With those preliminaries, let us see what can be said about recent trends. The trade arithmetic is well-
known. It may therefore be of more interest to examine the financial counterparts - that is, to look at 
the changes in saving and investment behaviour. The table examines, from this perspective, the six 
episodes of current account widening over the past 25 years. 
 
Cyclical changes in Australia’s 
saving-investment position 
Per cent of GDP 
 ∆Saving 
∆Investment 
Of which 
dwellings 
∆Net 
∆CAD 
Dec-79 to Dec-81 
Dec-83 to Jun-86 
Mar-88 to Mar-90 
Dec-93 to Mar-95 
Jun-97 to Mar-99 
Sep-01 to Sep-04 
Source: ABS 
 –0.9 
–1.0 
0.3 
–0.8 
–1.4 
–1.3 
 3.9 
1.9 
1.5 
0.7 
2.9 
3.0 
 0.7 
0.2 
0.7 
0.2 
0.7 
1.7 
 –4.8 
–2.9 
–1.2 
–1.5 
–4.3 
–4.3 
 –4.8 
–3.1 
–3.1 
–3.5 
–4.0 
–4.7 
 
In  the  majority  of  episodes,  the  share  of  national  income  being  saved  declines.  In  every  episode, 
investment increases. In each case, part of the rise in investment is dwelling investment. But what is 
striking is the prominence of dwelling investment in the latest episode. The size of the run-up is much 
larger than in the other five episodes. As of the middle of 2004, moreover, according to the national 
accounts, dwelling investment was almost 7 per cent of GDP,3 higher even than the feverish pre-GST 
peak, and a full percentage point of GDP higher than at the other peaks in the past 40 years.  
Graph 4 
                                                      
3   This figure excludes the transfer expenses associated with investment activities, which for dwellings grew to be about 1½ per cent of 
GDP by mid 2004 (but has since fallen due to the decline in real estate turnover). 
   5/7 
Click to view larger
 This was not obviously related to population growth, which was not unusually high in the recent period. 
The number of new dwellings constructed was not unusual compared with previous booms. What is 
new is that the quality and size of dwellings, both new dwellings and those being renovated, are higher 
than in the past. That is to say, the community has much higher standards for accommodation than 
was formerly the case, and is investing additional resources accordingly. 
Was this a good investment? For that part of the investment undertaken in expectation of commercial 
returns, some reservations must be recorded. Rental yields are now low compared with history, and 
hence  capital  gain  is  presumably  required  for  an  acceptable  return  to  be  earned.  But  with  assets 
generously priced, and signs that capital values are in fact declining, there is a good chance many of 
these investors will find themselves disappointed.  
For owner-occupiers, the question of whether it was a good investment has no clear answer. Unlike 
investment for business purposes, which is presumably undertaken in expectation of a cash return, 
the main return from a higher quality dwelling stock for owner-occupiers will be an enhanced flow of 
dwelling  services,  which  is  not  received  in  cash.  These  households  were  confident  that  their  future 
income would be sufficient to afford that higher consumption of dwelling services, paid for in the form 
of higher debt servicing. We can’t know as yet whether or not that judgement was correct.  
Is the rise in the current account deficit associated with this, in itself, a problem?  
To assess that, it is helpful to ask two questions: 
• 
• 
In cross-border capital flows, the main complication is that someone is bearing exchange rate risk. If a 
current account deficit turns out to be a problem, it is usually because domestic entities have borrowed 
foreign  currency  unhedged.  At  some  point  the  exchange  rate  falls,  leaving  the  financial  position  of 
borrowers under strain, as both the principal value and the debt servicing cost of the loan are higher in 
terms of the local currency in which the borrowers earn their income. 
But in this case the borrowers’ obligations are in Australian dollars, not foreign currency, and the same 
is true for the intermediaries who funded the loans (and hedged their risk). Foreign suppliers of capital 
are,  in  fact,  bearing  the  exchange  rate  risk.  So  if  there  is  a  problem  here,  it  is  not  that  Australian 
households borrowed from foreigners, in particular, to fund investment in the dwelling stock, it is that 
they borrowed from anyone to do so. The risk they are running is not exchange rate risk, it is simply 
that  their  future  income  may  not  be  as  high  as  expected,  leaving  it  harder  than  they  anticipated  to 
what are the risks? and  
who is running them?  
   6/7 
service their Australian dollar borrowings. This is another way of saying what we have said a number 
of  times:  that  a  position  of  higher  leverage  leaves  households  more  vulnerable  than  they  would 
otherwise have been to a negative shock to income. How serious a risk this ultimately is remains to be 
seen,  but  the  same  degree  of  concern  would,  in  my  view,  be  there  regardless  of  the  state  of  the 
current account.  
In saying this, I am mindful that those who are bearing the foreign exchange risk might wish to change 
that exposure, or just slow the rate at which they accumulate it, for one reason or other, at some time 
or other. What would be the implications of such a change in view?  
It  is  fairly  extreme  to  assume  that  there  would  be  a  total  ‘sudden  stop’  of  capital  flow,  as  occurs 
periodically for some emerging market countries operating under fixed exchange rates that become 
unsustainable.  In  all  Australia’s  experience  under  the  floating  exchange  rate  over  the  past  two 
decades, that has never occurred. Even in the days of greatest concern about the external accounts in 
the 1980s, substantial capital inflow into Australia continued - the equivalent of between 3 and 6 per 
cent of our GDP per annum. What did occur, on occasion, was that the cost of foreign capital rose, 
mainly  in  the  form  of  a  decline  in  the  foreign  currency  price  of  Australian  assets  -  ie  a  fall  in  the 
exchange  rate.  Were  concern  about  the  current  account  position  to  emerge  at  some  point  in  the 
future, a similar result might be expected. 
Having said that, no one can know if such an adjustment will occur, let alone when. But if it did occur, 
the experience of the past decade suggests we would be able to cope. We have absorbed substantial 
exchange rate movements, without the economy being derailed. So it seems to me that rather than 
fretting  about  the  current  account  deficit  per  se,  it  is  more  sensible  to  focus  on  the  underlying 
imbalances in the economy. The current account outcomes may be pointing out those imbalances - 
indeed the high current account deficit of the past couple of years does point to the housing story - but 
it was the behaviour driving the imbalance, rather than the nationality of those supplying the funds, 
that was the issue. 
Conclusion 
At this time of year, it is often tempting to think that the year was full of the unexpected. But as these 
things go, 2004 was not especially exciting. Despite various risks, global economic growth went pretty 
well. It was not derailed by geopolitical uncertainty, SARS, financial crisis or by “global imbalances”. In 
fact, it offered an external environment for Australia that has seldom been bettered. 
At  home,  the  economy  turned  in  a  steady  performance.  Unemployment  is  lower  than  a  year  ago, 
confidence and profits are high, inflation contained. Even if growth seemed, on the official data, a little 
lower  than  expected,  it  was  not  for  want  of  demand,  suggesting  that  the  focus  on  supply-side 
improvements  -  always  very  important  -  should  come  even  more  to  the  fore.  The  most  significant 
imbalance - a credit-funded boom in purchase of housing - began to unwind in about the most benign 
fashion one would dare imagine. One can only hope that 2005 turns out to be similarly uneventful, at 
home and abroad.  
No doubt there is something unexpected coming down the road. In time we shall see what it is. But for 
now, I wish you all a very merry Christmas, and a prosperous (and uneventful) new year. 
 
   7/7 
