Tarisa Watanagase: Risk-focused supervision and risk assessment  
Opening address by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC 
Financial  Regulators  Training  Initiative  Regional  Seminar  on  Risk-Focused  Supervision  and  Risk 
Assessment, Bangkok, 6 September 2004. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies und Gentlemen, 
lt is a pleasure for me to be here at the opening of the APEC Financial Regulators Training Initiative on 
Risk-Focused  Supervision  und  Risk  Assessment.  In  making  this  opening  address,  I  would  like  to 
personally  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  the  participants  and  to  express  my  appreciation  to  the 
Federal Reserve experts who have kindly agreed to share with us their knowledge und experience on 
risk-based supervision. 
This regional seminar is held at an opportune time, about two months after the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  released  the  Basel  II  capital  framework.  As  you  all  are  undoubtedly  aware  of, 
Basel  II  aims  to  strengthen  financial  stability  by  encouraging  sound  risk  management  practices  at 
banking  organizations.  The  tools  uscd  are  a  more  risk-sensitive  capital  regime  (Pillar  1);  the 
application  of  risk-based  supervision  (Pillar  2);  und  improved  public  disclosures  to  enhance  market 
discipline (Pillar 3). 
Of the three pillars, one of the most formidable challenges for emerging market supervisors will be to 
properly implement the Pillar II risk-based supervisory framework. 
Since  risk-based  supervision  is  the  main  topic  of  this  seminar,  it  may  be  useful  to  provide  a  few 
thoughts on some of the broader regulatory und supervisory implications associated with implementing 
this framework. 
On the regulatory side, thc adoption of a risk-focused supervisory framework entails a shift away from 
a  rigid,  rules  based  approach  to  regulation  and  towards  more  “incentive  compatible”  prudential 
standards.  By  “incentive  compatible”,  I  am  referring  to  broad,  principles  based  standards  that 
encourage  banks  to  develop  and  continuously  update  their  internal  risk  management  systems  to 
ensure that it is commcnsurate with the scope and complexity of its operations. While the benefits are 
obvious, there are also some consequences for the supervisory side of our business that may not be 
readily transparent. 
First, an emphasis an broad prudential standards - while useful rot fostering sound risk management 
practices - will inevitably create significant challenges for front-line supervisors. This is because they 
will  need  to  rely  much  more  on  sound  professional  judgment  and  critical  analysis,  and  less  on 
rules-based compliance criteria, in order to make proper risk assessments. This in turn, will require 
supervisory staff members to have a fundamental grasp of risk-based supervisory concepts and how it 
is applied in the field. The challenge for every emerging market supervisory authority is to equip our 
front  line  supervisors  with  the  requisite  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities,  in  order  to  help  make  their 
transition to a risk-based framework as smooth as possible. 
At the Bank of Thailand, we have placed greater reliance an this risk-based philosophy during the past 
several  years.  Wc  are  increasingly  moving  towards  more  principles  based  prudential  standards;  in 
addition, we have revamped our supervisory framework to provide a more structured and risk-oriented 
approach to the on and off-site examination process, while encouraging our front-only supervisors to 
think analytically. Despite these achievements, we still have substantial work ahead of us. Above all, 
our  experience  with  risk-based  supervision  indicates  that  there  is  no  going  back  to  the  mles-based 
approach of supervision given the dynamic nature of the banking business. And second, building a 
robust risk-based supervisory regime requires substantial time and resources and it will necessitate a 
material  shift  in  the  way  both  supervisors  and  bank  managcment  think  about  risk  and  risk 
management. 
I must therefore, commend APEC for this initiative in bringing together bank supervisors from the Asia-
Pacific region to learn and to share views on this very important topic. It is my sincere hope that all of 
you take this opportunity to gain insights from our highly experienced and knowledgeable experts as 
well as from each other on the practical aspects of risk-focused supervision. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  pleased  to  declare  open  the  APEC  Pinancial  Regulators  Training 
Initiative  Regional  Seminar  on  Risk-Focused  Supervision  and  Risk  Assessment.  I  wish  you  all 
stimulating discussions in the week ahead and a very pleasant stay in Bangkok. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
