M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Financial markets and new financial instruments 
Opening  address  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
SEACEN-IMF  Institute  course  on  Financial  Markets  and  New  Financial  Instruments,  Bangkok, 
6 September 2004. 
 Dr. Subarjo Joyosumarto, 
Mr. Sunil Sharma, 
Distinguished Speakers and Participants, 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be here this afternoon to officially open the SEACEN-IMF Institute 
Course  on  Financial  Markets  and  New  Financial  Instruments.  On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  I 
would like to extend a warm welcome to everyone of you to Bangkok. Today’s course is the second of 
three SEACEN courses that the Bank of Thailand plans to host this year. We are pleased to be given 
the opportunity to support the work of the SEACEN Centre, and all its member central banks. 
These series of courses are indeed most topical, as the global economic recovery gathers momentum, 
financial market activities also pick up, along with innovative financial practices and instruments. The 
IMF recently adjusted its forecast of global GDP from 4.6 percent to 4.9 percent, the highest growth 
rate in nearly three decades. Economic performance in Asia has also been in sharp contrast to the 
situations we faced four or five years ago, reflecting the synchronized recovery of the global economy. 
With  the  strong  economic  recovery  comes  the  demands  from  firms  and  enterprises  for  more 
sophisticated and efficient services from their financial intermediaries. This is expected to happen in 
Asia as well. The authorities therefore need to be mindful of the inherent risks associated with new 
financial instruments and practices. 
To promote growth and financial stability sound macroeconomic and prudential policics are required, 
as well as  vigilance  in  the  supervision  and regulation  of  markets  and  intermediaries.  These  include 
being  better  prepared  to  withstand  increased  volatilities  in  financial  markets  and  improving  the 
structural  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  As  we  all  know,  the  cost  of  financial  instability  can  be 
grave  not  only  for  the  country  in  which  thc  financial  turmoil  emerges,  bot  also  for  the  international 
financial system as a whole. We saw this in the Mexican crisis in 1994/95 and again in the Asian crisis 
in  1997/98  where  international  investors’  confidence  was  undermined  thus  imposing  significant 
economic and social costs in all affected countries. 
The globalisation of markets and the increasing importance of financial stability have prompted central 
banks  to  be  active  and  vigilance  in  guarding  against  instability.  The  increased  focus  on  financial 
stability,  is  closely  tied  to the  issue of  globalisation,  as  events  in  one corner of  the  world can have 
unavoidable systemic impact on the other parts of the world. Promoting financial stability involves not 
only  the  promotion  of  macroeconomic  stability,  but  also  promoting  a  strong  legal  and  regulatory 
framework  that  would  support  the  development  of  deep  and  robust  financial  markets.  This  in  turn 
would promote sound financial institutions and a stable overall infrastructure for the financial industry. 
In short, both the market and the intermediaries must be strong and efficient. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  timely  that  SEACEN  Centre  has  initiated  this  course  to  explore  the 
nature of financial intermediation, the role of financial markets in the allocation of resources and the 
need for appropriate regulatory framework. As regulators, we need to understand the concepts and 
the  basics  of  the  working,  the  pricing  and  trading  strategies  of  the  derivatives  markets  and 
instruments, how financial entities use them in risk management, as well as their potential impact on 
financial system stability. 
But  more  importantly,  in  these  two  weeks,  we  will  benefit  from  the  presence  of  a  number  of 
distinguished  speakers  that  have  kindly  given  up  their  time  to  be  with  us.  I  hope  we  will  use  this 
opportunity  fully.  On  this  note,  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Sunil  Sharma,  Chief,  Asian  Division,  IMF 
Institute, for his efforts to coordinate this course with the SEACEN Centre and the Bank of Thailand. 
I trust that this course will be most fruitful and rewarding for all the participants, but above all that the 
interaction  among  yourselves  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  you  to  learn  from  one  another,  and 
strengthen the bonds of friendship that bind the works of our institutions for many years to come. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  without  further  ado,  I  now  declare  the  SEACEN-IMF  Institute  Course  on 
Financial  Markets  and  New  Financial  Instruments  open  and  wish  everyone  of  you  success  in  your 
deliberation, success in your career, and most importantly, that you would take back with you pleasant 
memories of your brief stay in Thailand. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
