Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global leadership development 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Official Launch of 
ICLIF  Alumni  Association  and 
ICLIF  Leadership  Competency  Model,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
30 November 2004. 
 ICLIF Alumni Members, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to the official launch of the Alumni Association of 
the International Centre For Leadership In Finance (or ICLIF) and the ICLIF Leadership Competency 
Model (ILCM). 
ICLIF Alumni Association 
It was just over a year ago that we witnessed the Official Launch of ICLIF on 28 October 2003. Within 
this period, ICLIF has already made considerable progress in meeting its objective to provide a more 
focused  and  coordinated  approach  towards  the  development  of  world-class  leaders  in  the  financial 
services sector in Malaysia and in the region.  
To-date,  ICLIF  has  successfully  concluded  two  sessions  of  its  flagship  Global  Leadership 
Development  Programme  or  GLDP,  in  addition  to  a  Directors’  Forum  and  a  seminar  on  Scenario 
Planning. Besides providing participants with an opportunity to learn from the “top thinkers” from world-
renowned  institutions  and  industry  practitioners  and  experts,  one  of  the  key  strengths  of  ICLIF’s 
programmes  lies  with  the  unique  opportunity  for  the  participants  to  establish  strong  social  and 
professional networking and build lasting fraternity bonds. The launch of the ICLIF Alumni Association 
has been designed to play this role. For this purpose, all participants, faculty members and facilitators 
of ICLIF programmes will automatically be accredited as members of the Alumni Association. With the 
rapid  changes  taking  place  in  the  financial  and  corporate  landscape  in  the  country  and  the  greater 
integration in the region and the world, networking among leaders and captains of industries is most 
valuable in contributing towards greater understanding and in increasing the potential for collaborative 
efforts that are of mutual interest.  
The establishment of the Alumni Association represents an important part of ICLIF’s commitment to 
provide a platform for members to maintain active networking and productive collaborative alliances. It 
is also in line with our philosophy that leadership development is a continuous journey. The Alumni 
Association would thus provide a forum for continuous sharing among its members. Alumni members 
will also receive automatic notification and invitations to all ICLIF programmes and activities that will 
be organized in the future. 
As the members of the Alumni are spread across the region, ICLIF will leverage on Information and 
Communication Technology to help members stay connected. To facilitate networking opportunities, a 
special  section  has  been  created  on  ICLIF’s  website  to  cater  for  the  activities  of  the  Alumni 
Association.  This  would  include  the  facility  to  disseminate  information  among  its  membership, 
including the publication of an alumni directory, highlights of important events and latest developments 
that may be of interest to its members. The Centre will serve as the secretariat to support all activities 
undertaken by the Alumni Association. 
As  we  advance  forward,  the  reputation,  image  and  stature  of  the  Centre  will  depend  on  the 
performance of its participants and their contributions to the environment and the organisations they 
represent.  ICLIF  regards  its  alumni  members  as  important  and  looks  forward  to  your  continuous 
support to building ICLIF into a regional centre of excellence for leadership development in financial 
services.  
While  ICLIF  has  put  in  great  efforts  in  working  with  leading  international  consultants  and  the  best 
schools  in  the  design  and  delivery  of  its  leadership  development  programmes,  we  see  this  as  an 
evolving process. In this context, we see alumni members as an important sounding board in providing 
feedback  to  enhance  the  relevance  and  effectiveness  of  ICLIF’s  programmes.  As  beneficiaries  of 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
ICLIF’s programmes, the alumni members are the best intermediaries in making ICLIF better known to 
the industry. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,       
ICLIF Leadership Competency Model 
One of the first initiatives by ICLIF upon its inception is to develop a unique leadership competency 
model that will analyse and enhance the understanding of what makes for great corporate leaders in 
the regional context. The Competency Model was developed through a participatory process involving 
strategic  insights  by  industry  leaders  in  the  country  and  the  region.  This  was  achieved  through 
behavioural-event interviews as well as benchmarking exercises based on literature research and the 
database of leadership competency models of world class companies.  
The  preliminary  model  was  further  refined  in  a  Validation  Seminar  attended  by  visionary  and 
prominent leaders with proven track record of business performance excellence from both the private 
and public sectors. The Model forms the foundation to guide the philosophy and drive the design and 
delivery of ICLIF’s leadership development programmes. I wish to take this opportunity to express our 
appreciation  to  the  industry  luminaries  who  have  given  so  much  of  their  time  in  participating  in  the 
validation seminar for the ICLIF Leadership Competency Model. 
Let  me  share  with  you  some  of  the  interesting  findings  of  the  consultants  in  assessing  our  leaders 
based on the competencies identified in the Model. 
Among the positive findings of the exercise was the observation by the consultants that many of the 
leaders interviewed exhibited strong competencies in the area of focus, drive, execution, negotiations 
(and  deal  making)  and  entrepreneurial  drive.  These  are  all  competencies  resulting  from  high 
achievement needs and high achievement values. There is also a high sense of national pride and 
desire to enable Malaysia to meet the challenges of 2020. Participants also displayed a strong sense 
of performance drive for excellence.  
There  are  areas  of  competencies  that,  however,  require  further  development.  The  review  detected 
some degree of performance complacency by some respondents, as reflected by a lack of drive to 
achieve  and  the  lack  of  desire  to  benchmark  against  the  global  best.  Participants  seemed  quite 
satisfied with what they had personally achieved. 
In the studies of how joint ventures between multinationals and local firms sometimes fail, one of the 
main reasons cited was the misalignment of the ambitions of global multinationals and local partners. 
The  results  showed  that while  global multinationals  had  unlimited  appetite  for  growth  and ambition, 
fuelled  mainly  by  shareholders’  demands  and  driven  by  professional  managers,  local  joint  venture 
partners  may  have  achieved  their  personal  goals  as  professional  managers  and  thus  reached  a 
plateau in their ambitions.  
Another area of shortfall was in cognitive energy as reflected in the low desire to putting energy into 
the thinking process and to pushing the mental discipline when the issues gets a little more complex.  
Another  important  issue  was  in  the  area  of  Talent  Management.  Although  the  leaders  interviewed 
spoke about the importance of leadership and talent management, there was little or no supporting 
evidence  of  action  on  this  important  area.  Also,  there  was  a  need  for  systems  to  be  in  place  for 
constructive,  honest  and  candid  assessments  about  the  capabilities  and  potentials  of  subordinates 
who may someday assume a leadership position in their organizations. Such feedback is vital for the 
development of  the  intellectual capital and  management  capabilities  of senior  management  to  drive 
strategic direction and operational excellence in the industry to pave the way for the development of 
their future leaders in the industry.  
Those observations and insights have brought to the fore the importance of leadership competencies 
in articulating the combination of essential skills, attributes and behaviours required by leaders for the 
successful and effective performance on the job. It is our hope that the ICLIF Leadership Competency 
Model  will  be  a  constant  source  of  reference,  inspiration  and  impetus  to  our  leaders  in  building  a 
dynamic organizational culture and in meeting future challenges. 
In order to better position ourselves in this more challenging environment, one that is more globalised, 
more  integrated,  more  competitive  and  more  complex,  we  need  to  play  a  more  pro-active  role  in 
strengthening our own organizations, we need to prepare ourselves for difficult periods, we need to 
also contribute towards the development of the environment in which we operate, the markets and the 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
financial infrastructure and finally and importantly we also need to invest in people, in their skills, to 
enhance  our  organisational  capacity  to  bring  about  institutional  development  so  as  to  enhance  our 
respective organizational effectiveness. Leadership is an integral part of this process. Our investment 
in ICLIF hopes in some part to contribute to achieving these goals.  
Alumni members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is now my privilege and pleasure to 
officially launch ICLIF Alumni Association and ICLIF Leadership Competency Model. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
