Lucas Papademos: The new EU member states - convergence and stability 
Opening address by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the Third 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The new EU Member States: convergence and stability”, Frankfurt, 
21 October 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
“This is the third time. I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.” So wrote William Shakespeare, and I am 
quoting  him  as  a  fitting  reference  for  our  conference:  This  is  the  third  ECB  Central  Banking 
Conference  to  which  I  welcome  you  all.  After  the  ECB  conferences  in  the  years  2000  and  2002, 
entitled,  respectively,  “Why  price  stability?”  and  “The  Transformation  of  the  European  Financial 
System”, we chose as the topic of this year’s conference “The new EU Member States: convergence 
and stability”. I speak on behalf of all my colleagues on the Executive Board and all ECB staff involved 
in the preparation of this conference when I say that we are delighted to host such a distinguished 
group of academics and policy-makers here in Frankfurt.  
Obviously, in 2004 - the year of the historic enlargement of the European Union with ten countries of 
Central, Eastern and Southern Europe - our theme is a very topical one. For that very reason it is also 
a difficult one: a plethora of academic conferences and gatherings of policy-makers have examined 
the  issues  related  to  EU  enlargement.  That  said,  I  believe  that  the  subjects  and  the  quality  of  the 
papers  to  be  presented,  the  impressive  expertise  and  experience  of  our  speakers,  discussants, 
chairpersons  and  panellists  will  provide  a  particularly  “fertile  ground”  to  nurture  fruitful  debates, 
enhance our understanding and generate new ideas regarding the topics we will address.  
So what can we look forward to today and tomorrow? The headings of the three sessions provide the 
framework to structure our discussions. 
After enlargement - where do we stand? 
1.  
We will start off by devoting this afternoon to the economic and structural transformation of the new 
EU Member States. And I am very grateful indeed that Christian Noyer has kindly agreed - at very 
short notice - to replace Eugenio Domingo Solans (who unfortunately could not join us) as chairman of 
this session. On the basis of the paper by Gérard Roland, we seek to ascertain where the new EU 
Member  States  stand  today,  with  regard  to  nominal  and  real  convergence,  and  in  particular  their 
institutions and market structures. I find it very useful that such a comprehensive stock-taking exercise 
is undertaken at this moment in time, since the accession of these countries to the Union is a distinct 
step marking the beginning of a new phase in their economic and monetary integration within the EU. 
Looking  back  over  the  past  years,  it  is  obvious  that  the  new  EU  Member  States  have  made 
remarkable progress in terms of macroeconomic stabilisation. Eight of them transformed their planned 
economies into market economies and integrated them through trade and financial relations with the 
euro area. The prospect of EU accession and future euro adoption has already served as a powerful 
focal  point  and  driving  force  for  economic,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  and  has  guided 
policy-makers as well as market participants. In that process of transformation from planned to market 
economies, “institutions” played a key role - and here I understand “institutions” in a broader sense as 
also  encompassing  appropriately-designed  policy  frameworks.  Countries  that  have  established  high 
levels of political and civil liberties and the effective rule of law have made significant progress in the 
crucial area of  institution building.  The  existence  of  well-designed  policy  frameworks  has also  been 
conducive  to  achieving  a  high  degree  of  sustainable  nominal  convergence,  which  is  the  essential 
prerequisite for the eventual adoption of the euro by the new EU Member States. If we look at the data 
for inflation, long-term interest rates, and fiscal positions, it seems that already a number of the new 
EU countries would fulfil - at least some of - the Maastricht criteria.  
But, of course, all the Maastricht criteria for nominal convergence must be fulfilled and in a sustainable 
manner. Moreover, it is also important to aim at real convergence - structural and institutional - as real 
GDP per capita levels in the new EU countries are still well below those in the euro area. Even though 
progress has been achieved in the areas of privatisation and product market deregulation (with the 
exception  of  utility  prices)  and  today  the  relative  size  of  different  sectors  (agriculture,  industry  and 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
services) and the distribution of employment have converged towards EU levels, we cannot deny that 
there are still large differences.  
A number of issues could be raised in this context, for instance, with regard to labour markets and the 
development of the financial sector. I believe, however, that the core message remains the same: a lot 
has  been achieved,  but many  issues still  remain  to  be  tackled.  Assessing  the  current  situation  and 
establishing in which fields further action will be required - be that with respect to further trade and 
financial  integration,  to  intra-industrial  specialisation  or  to  fiscal  consolidation  -  is  of  paramount 
importance, especially to policy-makers. 
Economic and monetary integration  
2.  
The second session tomorrow morning is devoted to international linkages and the macroeconomic 
performance  of  the  new  Member  States,  by  looking  at  the  interrelation  between  the  processes  of 
integration into the EU-25 and into the global economy. This may seem as a rather specific angle from 
which to analyse the enlargement process. But it is one that I find particularly important, not least since 
it counteracts the assertion on the part of some international observers that the EU is “obsessed with 
its own internal dynamics”. 
Over  the  past  two  decades,  the  world  economy  has  become  increasingly  integrated.  The  new  EU 
member countries are particularly striking examples of this process. Those of them which were part of 
the  former  Soviet  economic sphere  used  to  form  a largely  isolated  trade  bloc,  with  few  interactions 
with the world economy. Today, these countries export and import more than two-thirds of their goods 
and  services  to  and  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  They  also  attract  significant  amounts  of  foreign 
investment. Openness and international integration can lead to a dramatic improvement in economic 
performance through the introduction of new technologies and access to larger markets. The paper by 
Douglas  Laxton  and  his  co-authors  provides  interesting  insights  and  helps  to  estimate  some  of  the 
dynamics that are at work. At the same time, international integration places significant demands on a 
country’s  economic,  political  and  social  institutions.  In  this  context,  three  principal  subjects  would 
deserve, in my view, particular attention: trade, capital flows and labour mobility. I would expect that 
the  conceptual  approaches  in  understanding  the  phenomena  that  we  are  observing,  as  well  as  the 
concrete  policy  challenges  related  to  these  subjects  will  take  centre-stage  in  the  discussions 
tomorrow. 
Macroeconomic adjustment, convergence and the role of policy 
3.  
The  third  session  tomorrow  morning  as  well  as  the  policy  panel  in  the  afternoon  will  address  the 
questions which are probably closest to home for central bankers: What is the role of national policies, 
both at the micro and macro levels, in the process of economic adjustment? What are the key policy 
challenges  for  the  new  Member  States  on  the  road  to  euro  adoption?  And,  looking  ahead,  what  is 
required  to  ensure  a  successful  participation  in  monetary  union  of  any  future  new  entrants  into  the 
euro area?  
The paper by Jürgen von Hagen provides a comprehensive treatment of the issues at stake and will 
serve  as  a  good  basis  for  discussion.  Allow  me  to  whet  your  appetite  for  these  issues  with  a  few 
preliminary thoughts. 
Clearly,  short-term  and  medium-term  economic  prospects  depend  on  factors  such  as  the  stance  of 
fiscal  or  monetary  policy,  the  movements  in  commodity  prices  and/or  global  economic  activity. 
However,  the  degree  of  long-term  economic  success  is  ultimately  determined  by  the  progress  in 
structural and institutional reforms. These include, for instance, the creation of a business environment 
conducive to investment and entrepreneurial initiative; incentives for the formation of human capital; 
investment in education and research; competition policy; and appropriate policies concerning labour 
markets and social security systems. These are significant issues that deserve attention, and not only 
in the EU Member States that seek to adopt the euro in the future, but also in the current euro area 
countries. 
On  the  road  to  the  euro,  convergence  and  stability  are  key  objectives  -  hence  the  title  of  our 
conference. I view real and nominal convergence as interdependent processes, which can be mutually 
reinforcing.  Indeed,  by  fostering  real  convergence  through structural reforms,  thereby  improving  the 
supply-side  of  the  economy  through  enhanced  flexibility  in  goods  and  labour  markets,  nominal 
convergence will also be enhanced. Likewise, by advancing nominal convergence, anchoring inflation 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
expectations  and  reducing  the  inflation  bias,  prospects  for  economic  growth  and  thus  real 
convergence  will  improve.  The  role  of  macroeconomic  policies  in  general,  and  the  stability-oriented 
policy  framework  of  the  Union  in  particular,  is  to  make  sure  that  the  dynamics  of  the  economic, 
financial and monetary integration process do not jeopardise an orderly convergence process. It is in 
this  light  that  participation  in  the  ERM  II  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria 
should be seen.  
EU  membership  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  continued  economic  success  and  real  economic 
convergence of the new EU countries with the older Member States. There is a risk that reform fatigue 
will set in after EU accession, because the incentive for reform may no longer be as strong as before. 
At  the  same  time,  I  would  expect  further  pressures  for  reform  to  come  from  increased  competition 
within the Single Market which is now confronting domestic producers; from the limitations on state aid 
and public subsidies that are laid down in the acquis communautaire and are applied by the European 
Commission; and from the constraints on macroeconomic policy which derive from the objective of all 
new Member States to adopt the euro.  
To what extent these expectations are justified and, more importantly, what can - or should - be done 
in  order  to  address  the  challenges  accompanying  these  processes  of  economic  adjustment  and 
structural  reform will  be discussed  tomorrow.  Given  that  the  policy  panel  will consist  of  high-calibre 
policy-makers from both old and new Member States and from EU institutions, one does not have to 
be a follower of the rational expectations hypothesis to anticipate a lively debate, be that on labour and 
product market reform; on financial sector policies; on monetary and fiscal policies; or on exchange 
rate policy and the merits of ERM II membership. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
As I said at the beginning, this is the third time - the third time the ECB is organising a Central Banking 
conference.  And  I  hope  there  is  not  only  good  luck  in  odd  numbers.  I  also  hope  that  our  third 
conference  will  again  offer  a  valuable  forum  to  have  intellectually  stimulating  debates,  exchange 
insights, generate new ideas, and enhance the good contacts between central bankers and academia. 
Judging by the experiences of the first two conferences, I have every reason to be confident. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
