Rafael Buenaventura: Brief overview of inflation in the Philippines  
Opening remarks by Mr Rafael Buenaventura, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank 
of the Philippines), at the BSP Inflation Report Press Briefing, Manila, 29 October 2004. 
 Good morning, everyone.  
Transparency is a hallmark of good monetary policy, and for this reason the BSP continually strives to 
bring across its policy message to the public and its reading of the outlook for inflation. This is the 
main reason why we publish a quarterly inflation report, and we would like to thank everyone here for 
joining us at this morning’s presentation.  
Conducting monetary policy in the present economic environment is a considerable challenge for the 
BSP. The continued rise in inflation during the last few months has led to public concern over its likely 
effects on both the public’s purchasing power and economic activity. In our previous public statements 
on monetary policy, we have been careful to emphasize that the inflation uptrend over the past year 
has been driven mainly by supply-side factors arising in large part from a series of shocks coming from 
the  sharp  increases  in  oil  prices,  food  and  other  key  non-food  commodities  particularly  fuel  and 
transport. This view has led to the BSP’s prevailing policy stance of accommodating the supply shocks 
which  are  one,  transitory  in  nature  and  two,  if  addressed  by  monetary  action,  could  have  adverse 
impact on growth and in turn inflation itself.  
The  inflation  report  we  will  be  presenting  today  outlines  the  reasons  why  we  have  kept  our  policy 
interest rates unchanged so far despite perceptions of a need to tighten monetary policy. We believe 
that supply-side developments continue to play a dominant role in the inflation outlook, and we find as 
yet  no  preponderant  evidence  of  demand-driven  inflationary  pressures  or  second-order  inflationary 
effects  from  the  ongoing  supply  shocks.  The  expected  path  of  future  inflation  continues  to  be 
hump-shaped, as supply factors push headline inflation above the 4-5 percent target in 2004 and 2005 
before  quickly  tapering  off  and  reverting  to  the  4-5  percent  range  by  2006.  We  find  no  compelling 
reason, therefore, to modify the settings for monetary policy at this time.  
In  closing,  let  me  emphasize  that  the  BSP  remains  strongly  committed  to  good  monetary 
policymaking. We try to ensure our accountability by formally submitting ourselves to public judgment 
on the basis of how we go about achieving our inflation targets. We also make sure that the stance of 
monetary  policy  is  properly  communicated  to  our  constituency,  the  Filipino  public,  through  such 
documents as the inflation report and regular press statements. We welcome your comments on the 
contents of the report and hope that you will continue to actively participate in the public dialogue on 
the monetary policy process.  
Thank you and good morning.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
