Toshihiko Fukui: Overall review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary 
policy  
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Councillors, Tokyo, 28 October 2004.  
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2003 to the Diet in June 2004. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an overall 
review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan’s economy 
I.  
Japan’s economy continues to recover. Overseas economies, one of the factors behind this recovery, 
are maintaining their expansion, although decelerating somewhat from their high growth so far. In the 
United States, growth in private consumption has decelerated due partly to the rise in crude oil prices. 
The  pace  of  increase  in  the  number  of  employees  has  also  slowed  compared  with  early  spring. 
However,  it  appears  that  momentum  for  economic  expansion  is  being  maintained,  since  corporate 
profits  and  business  fixed  investment  have  been  increasing.  East  Asian  economies,  particularly  the 
Chinese economy, continue growing relatively fast.  
Amid these developments in overseas economies, Japan’s exports and production have been on a 
rising  trend,  albeit  at  a  slightly  slower  pace,  leading  to  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  an 
expansion in business fixed investment. This virtuous cycle is a factor behind the current economic 
recovery.  
Another factor behind the economic recovery is the considerable progress being made in dealing with 
structural elements such as excessive capital stock, debt, and labor in the corporate sector, and the 
vulnerability in the financial system, all of which had delayed the recovery of the Japanese economy. 
As a result of the progress in these adjustments, corporate profits have increased substantially and the 
employment situation has been improving.  
Looking forward, Japan’s economy is expected to continue recovering with the ongoing expansion of 
overseas  economies  and  the  easing  of  structural  adjustment  pressure  in  Japan,  although  attention 
should  be  paid  to  factors  such  as  the  effects  of  the  significant  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  on  both  the 
domestic and overseas economies and developments in global IT-related demand.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been rising due to the strengthening at home 
and  abroad  of  the  prices  of  commodities  such  as  crude  oil  and  to  the  improvement  in  supply  and 
demand  conditions.  Consumer  prices  (excluding  fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide  basis),  in  contrast, 
continue  to  fall  slightly  on  a  year-on-year  basis  partly  because  the  increase  in  productivity  and  the 
restraint on labor costs by firms have absorbed the effects of the rise in commodity prices.  
The  money market  remains stable  overall against the  background  of  the  Bank’s  provision  of  ample 
liquidity. In the capital markets, long-term interest rates rose somewhat toward the middle of 2004, but 
have  been  moving  at  around  1.5  percent  recently.  Stock  prices  have  been  generally  firm  with  the 
ongoing economic recovery.  
The  environment  for  corporate  finance  is  becoming  more  accommodative  on  the  whole,  although  it 
remains severe for firms with high credit risks. The lending attitude of private banks is becoming more 
accommodative,  and  the  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  has  been 
improving.  The  pace  of  decline  in  credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  is  becoming  somewhat 
moderate. Under these circumstances, the rate of decline in lending by private banks has basically 
been diminishing. Moreover, the fund-raising environment for firms in the capital markets through CP 
and  corporate  bonds  remains  favorable,  and  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds 
issued continues to be above the previous year’s level.  
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
The Bank has been conducting the quantitative easing policy with the outstanding balance of current 
accounts held at the Bank as the operating target. In accordance with the current target range for the 
outstanding balance of “around 30 to 35 trillion yen,” the Bank is providing ample liquidity to the money 
market.  The Bank  has  also  made  a commitment  to maintain  the quantitative  easing  policy  until  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide 
basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  
The Bank’s commitment has contributed to stabilizing market participants’ projection of future interest 
rates, and thus market interest rates have been stable. In this situation, firms have been able to raise 
funds at low interest rates. The commitment’s positive effects through interest rates on the economy 
will strengthen as corporate profits increase with economic recovery.  
With these policy effects in mind, the Bank has firmly maintained its quantitative easing policy with the 
commitment based on the CPI.  
The Bank has been making efforts to make credit intermediation in the market more diversified and 
efficient  so  that  monetary  easing  effects  permeate  throughout  the  economy,  and  these  efforts  are 
expected  to  improve  the  Japanese  financial  and  capital  markets  in  the  long  term.  As  part  of  such 
efforts, the Bank started to purchase asset-backed securities (ABSs) in summer 2003, and the total 
amount of ABSs purchased to date has reached around 1.5 trillion yen.  
In  addition,  in  May  2004,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  liquidity  of  Japanese  government  securities 
(JGS) markets, the Bank introduced a facility which temporarily provides the markets, as a secondary 
source,  with  JGSs  held  by  the  Bank  when  market  participants  experience  difficulties  in  securing 
specific  issues.  The  Bank has been  making a  wide range of  efforts  to  improve  the  infrastructure  of 
financial markets and will continue to do so.  
Purchases of stocks held by commercial banks 
III. 
The Bank had been purchasing stocks held by commercial banks since November 2002 to reduce the 
risk that stock price fluctuations might impact negatively upon the business management of individual 
financial institutions, potentially resulting in instability of the financial system as a whole. This program 
was wound up at the end of September 2004. The accumulated total of stocks purchased by the Bank 
amounted to 2,018.0 billion yen.  
Conclusion 
Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  with  the  ongoing  expansion  of  overseas 
economies. To ensure that this recovery will become sustainable and to overcome deflation, the Bank 
considers it essential that a wide range of economic entities continue to make efforts to revitalize the 
economy.  
The  Bank  is  determined  to  firmly  support  Japan’s  economy  from  the  financial  side  by  maintaining 
monetary  easing  with  the  commitment  based  on  the  CPI  even  in  a  situation  where  the  economy 
continues to recover.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
