Toshihiko Fukui: Global imbalances and exchanges 
Speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Annual Meeting of the World 
Federation of Exchanges, Tokyo, 13 October 2004. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is an honor as well as a pleasure to be invited to the annual meeting of the 
World Federation of Exchanges, to offer some thoughts on recent developments in the international 
financial system. Taking this opportunity, I would like to congratulate you on the tremendous success 
exchanges around the world are achieving in promoting trading of various financial instruments, and 
on the role your association has played in facilitating such developments. 
Today, having just chaired this month’s first Monetary Policy Meeting, I would like to briefly comment 
on the monetary policy of the Bank of Japan. The Japanese economy continues to recover steadily, 
but mild deflation persists, reflecting factors such as increasing productivity. Against this background, 
the Bank of Japan decided to maintain the so-called “quantitative easing” framework. 
For the rest of the evening, I would like to focus on a medium term structural issue that never seems to 
go  away  -  global  imbalances,  and  offer  my  views  on  what  role  exchanges  will  be  able  to  play  in 
meeting this challenge. 
Global imbalances 
Let me begin by briefly laying out how unbalanced the world is. 
At the beginning of this month, I attended a series of meetings in Washington. Those meetings were 
held in conjunction with the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
Group, and included the meeting of the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of 
Seven countries. A common theme running through those meetings was surprisingly robust growth in 
2004.  The  global  economy  is  expected  to  grow  by  5%  this  year,  which  is  the  highest  growth  in 
30 years. The above-potential growth would probably have to slow down next year, but the estimate 
given  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  4.3%,  still  somewhat 
higher than the potential. Against this relatively favorable outlook, we have identified some risks. After 
all, central bank governors are paid to worry. 
One risk is obviously the high prices of oil. I will not go into details of this issue today, because so 
much is written about it. 
Another risk is global imbalances. The current account deficit of the United States reached 542 billion 
dollars last year. This is almost 5% of the nominal GDP of the United States. For this year, we have 
seen  no  sign  of  this  deficit  shrinking  to  any  significant  extent.  If  we  look  back  to  the  middle  of  the 
1980’s, the last time global imbalances were considered to be a problem of the world economy, the 
current account deficit of the United States peaked at 3.5% of GDP. 
Looking at the details, however, there are some interesting differences between 2004 and the middle 
of the 1980s. First is the size of the imbalances, which I have just mentioned. The second is who are 
in the deficit club. In the mid-eighties, not only the United States but also many other countries were 
running  deficits.  On  the  other  hand,  today,  most  of  the  deficits  are  concentrated  in  the  external 
account  of  the  United  States.  Third,  related  to  the point  I  have  just  mentioned,  the  emerging  Asian 
economies are now in the black instead of being in the red. 
Having said this, I must make this clear: I am not saying that imbalances per se are bad. As a matter 
of simple arithmetic, if there were no trade in the first place, there would be no imbalances. When we 
start  trading,  unless  everyone  is  balanced,  imbalances  are  inevitable.  We  are  certainly  better  off 
trading than not. More conceptually, an economy with abundant investment opportunities relative to its 
savings, most notably a developing economy, is likely to run a deficit. In this sense, some imbalances 
are  a  reflection  of  enhanced  economic  welfare.  Furthermore,  the  size  of  the  imbalances  is  not 
necessarily  disruptive,  either.  At  present,  the  United  States  is  financing  a  current  account  shortfall 
amounting to 542 billion dollars, the size of the economy of Netherlands, with no visible difficulties. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
You may perhaps remember the concerns voiced in the market some twelve months ago. There were 
worries  that  the  U.S.  dollar  might  fall  sharply,  were  it  not  for  continued  and  heavy  currency  market 
interventions by Asian monetary authorities. That has not been the case so far. In the case of the yen, 
even  in  the  absence  of  official  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  since  mid-March,  the 
dollar has held up well against the yen. This suggests that private capital flows are now playing a more 
important role in determining market dynamics. I might even say that we should be proud of ourselves 
in allowing the international financial markets to develop into such a resilient system. 
If this is so, why are we saying that global imbalances risk the stability of the international financial 
system and the global economy? 
Large imbalances are worrisome, because imbalances cannot grow forever. In fact, the imbalances 
we saw in the middle of the 1980s led to a rather painful correction of the dollar. As one accumulates 
more dollars, he or she would begin to worry about the danger of putting all his or her eggs in one 
basket. Alternatives are there. It can be the euro, the yen or any other currency or a physical asset. If 
sentiment  shifts  suddenly  in  such  an  environment,  there  would  be  a  rush  to  convert  dollars  into 
alternative  assets.  With  the  large  accumulation  of  deficits  to  start  with,  the  resulting  flows  could  be 
quite large. They might be of a magnitude that could impair the smooth functioning of the international 
financial system. Though unlikely, that is still a risk we must not ignore. In order to reduce such risks, 
we must think about how to adjust the imbalances to more comfortable and manageable levels. 
Policy makers cannot adopt benign neglect in this context. I believe many things are best left to the 
market  and  the  government  should  keep  out  of  its  way.  We  cannot,  however,  always  say  that  the 
market would take care of itself. If left to the market, there is a risk, however remote, of a sudden shift 
in  sentiment  over  the  dollar.  Policy  makers  must  reassure  the  market  that  they  are  not  letting 
imbalances get out of hand. 
We need to have a good mix of policies. 
To begin with, we need to ensure flexibility in the financial system and the economy. In many cases, 
unleashing  market  forces  is  a  key  to  efficient  adjustment,  and  flexibility  is  essential  to  the  financial 
system and the economy to withstand shocks arising from adjustments. 
Beyond  this,  there  are  basically  two  routes  to  reach  a  level  of  imbalances  that  would  be  more 
comfortable and manageable in the long run: realigning exchange rates and rethinking policies that 
influence absorption in economies. Adjusting imbalances entirely through exchange rate realignments 
is neither practical nor desirable. Meanwhile, policy choices can influence absorption. If dissavings by 
the government are resulting in current account deficits, consolidation of fiscal expenditure would be 
necessary.  Governments  of  deficit-running  economies  might  also  review  any  policies  that  are 
discouraging  private  savings  or  adopt  policies  that  encourage  private  savings.  Surplus-running 
economies can adopt policies to encourage domestic absorption. For example, enhancing confidence 
in social security systems would persuade households to avoid excessive savings. It is responsibility 
of policy makers to formulate and implement an appropriate mix of policies. 
Imbalances and Asia 
Adjusting imbalances, however, is easier said than done. The United States now imports 50% more 
than it exports. If imports are to grow by 5% per year, exports must grow by 7.5% just to keep the 
dollar amount of current account deficits at present levels. Viewing from a slightly different angle, even 
if the income elasticity of U.S. imports to U.S. demand growth were to suddenly drop to zero while 
exports continued to grow at 5%, it would take nearly 5 years before the deficit halved. 
How  then  could  we  realize  this  significant  adjustment?  What  should  Asian  economies,  which  are 
running surpluses, do in the context of global imbalances? 
First of all, economies should, in principle, accept adjustment through market forces. Rigidity can lead 
to a build-up of stress in the system. Many words have already been spent on this subject, and I will 
not repeat them. I would just note that, in our recent meetings with central bank colleagues from Asia, 
they were fully aware of the need for flexibility and the challenges facing them in pursuing that goal. 
In addition to enhancing flexibility, today I would like to explore another option: the possibility of Asian 
economies enhancing absorption in their economies. 
For Japan, demography would aid the adjustment process. Academic literature tells us that the rate of 
savings tends to decline in an aging society. In our case, as baby-boomers begin to retire in the next 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
few years, they would start drawing down their savings. This should gradually influence the overall rate 
of savings and hence the level of external surplus. In this context, one important element would be 
rebuilding confidence in the social security systems that are now under pressure from the rapid aging 
of the population. 
In many non-Japan Asian economies, the government does not provide a sufficient social safety net. 
This is one area where a quick action is needed. 
In a financial context, one challenge is to explore a better use of capital. Emerging Asia collectively 
earns  about  150  billion  dollars  a  year  in  surpluses.  These  dollars  are  often  invested  in  the  United 
States.  Meanwhile,  as  developing  economies,  emerging  Asia  has  an  almost  insatiable  appetite  for 
capital.  There  are  still  numerous  investment  opportunities  out  there  in  the  region.  Today,  these 
ventures  are  often  financed  by  overseas  investors,  often  from  the  United  States.  At  a  risk  of 
oversimplification, I would say that dollars earned by emerging Asia are invested in the United States, 
which are, in turn invested in emerging Asia. We should ask if there are better ways for capital to flow. 
Having  put  this  question  on  the  table,  let  me  spend  a  few  minutes  on  investment  opportunities  in 
emerging Asia. 
Emerging  Asia  has  a  huge  population.  China  alone  has  1.3  billion  people.  If  one  adds  India  with 
1.1 billion, there are almost three billion people in the region. These people are not just inexpensive 
sources  of  labor  for  goods  and  services  exported  to  markets  in  industrialized  economies.  These 
people will become happier if they enjoy material wealth like we do. 
You can see vending machines virtually at every corner in Tokyo, peddling one-dollar cans and bottles 
of soft drinks. If the three billion people in emerging Asia can each drink just one can or bottle a day, 
the sales add up to three billion dollars. In a year, it will become more than one trillion dollars. To put 
this into perspective, the annual revenue of the Coca-Cola Company was 21 billion dollars in 2003. Of 
course, this is not yet a plausible story because many of these people are living on just a couple of 
dollars a day. For example, 3 dollars in China, 2.6 dollars in Indonesia and 1.5 dollars in India. Today, 
not every one can afford to spend one dollar for the pleasure of drinking a refreshing can of soft drink. 
However, if jobs are created for these people, huge untapped demand could be unleashed. 
Workers  are  at  the  same  time  consumers.  Investments  in  goods  and  services  targeted  for  intra-
regional consumption can create jobs and, in turn, the market for those goods and services. If and 
when  this  happens,  domestic  absorption  will  increase  in  emerging  Asia.  Global  imbalances  will  be 
alleviated. 
This scenario is not a pipe dream. In many parts of emerging Asia, consumer demand is picking up. 
From  Myondong  in  Seoul  to  Nanjin  Lu  in  Shanghai  to  Siam  Square  in  Bangkok,  consumers  are 
flocking to fashionable shops and cafes. This demand is creating a favorable cycle by creating new 
jobs  and  hence  greater  consumer  demand.  For  this  model  to  work,  however,  a  thorough 
understanding  of  the  region  and  the  needs  of  the  people  is  essential.  The  deepening  of  regional 
integration will, I hope, give birth to a new breed of intra-regional investors, who will focus on these 
opportunities. 
In connection with this scenario, an interesting question is how to finance the efforts of the region’s 
entrepreneurs.  A  key  issue  here  is  how  can  we  mobilize  the  region’s  rich  reservoir  of  savings  to 
finance  regional  investments.  Financial  institutions  in  this  region  must  enhance  their  ability  to 
intermediate  between  savings  and  investments.  I  also  find  it  important  to  strengthen  the  financial 
infrastructure of the region. 
There  are  many  important  initiatives  now  underway.  Since  I  have  recently  had  a  chance  to  explain 
them, I will not repeat them here. 
I would just like to draw your attention to ongoing efforts, such as the launch of the Asian Bond Fund 
by EMEAP central banks and the Asian Bond Market Initiative by ASEAN+3 countries. These efforts 
attempt  to  become  catalysts  for  developing  the  bond  market  in  the  east  Asian  region,  which  still 
remains in an infant stage. In the case of the Asian Bond Fund, the seed money provided by central 
banks ought to strengthen confidence among investors contemplating to enter the market. 
Imbalances and exchanges 
Let me now turn to possible roles that exchanges can play in this world with imbalances. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 3
You  know  more  than  I  do  that  exchanges  are  important  channels  to  distribute  funds  for  various 
investment opportunities. Exchanges facilitate the flow of funds in the market. Since financial markets 
are  interconnected,  efficiency  gains  accorded  by  exchanges  contributed  to  the  expansion  of  global 
capital flows. In this regard, exchanges are part of the international financial system that helps finance 
global imbalances. 
Before moving on, I would like to discuss one important efficiency-enhancing feature of exchanges. 
Exchanges  are  highly  transparent  form  of  connecting  sellers  and  buyers  of  financial  assets.  In  the 
over-the-counter market, a seller must search for buyers. The seller does not know precisely at what 
price the asset traded. The seller does not have an idea of the depth or the liquidity of the market. 
Exchanges bring together sellers and buyers in one place to maximize the chance of a seller finding a 
buyer. Prices are available and the distribution of bids and offers could also be seen in some cases. In 
short, exchanges facilitate the trade matching process through its transparency. 
Exchanges can also be a mitigating factor of imbalances. 
In the context of Asian economies, one should look at a common structural problem in the domestic 
financial  systems  of  emerging  Asian  economies.  In  these  countries,  much  financing  still  moves 
through  the  banking  channel.  Strengthening  of  capital  markets  is  therefore  a  common  goal.  The 
initiatives related to the bond market, which I referred to a few moments ago, should be seen in this 
light.  Exchanges  can  play  a  role  here  as  well.  Providing  a  full  range  of  financing  options  to 
entrepreneurs is a key element in the mobilization of the region’s rich reservoir of savings to finance 
regional investments. 
Another  contribution  that  can  be  made  by  exchanges  is  enhanced  transparency.  In  some  cases, 
investors  are  said  to  be  discouraged  from  investing  in  the  emerging  Asian  market,  partly  because 
transparency  is  so  low.  With  their  transparent  trading  systems,  which  I  have  just  mentioned, 
exchanges may help overcome this problem. 
Finally, exchanges could be linked across borders. Such linkages would create additional efficiency. In 
the context of emerging Asia, it is important to strengthen the intra-regional as well as extra-regional 
linkages  between  exchanges.  Listing  of  overseas  assets,  cross-listing  of  products  and  trading  links 
between  exchanges  can  all  be  designed  to  enhance  intra-regional  capital  flows.  I  hope  the 
distinguished  leaders  of  established  exchanges  assembled  here  today  would  assist  their  emerging 
Asian colleagues to achieve these goals. 
Concluding remarks 
Central  banks  operate  in  the  markets  to  achieve  its  policy  goals.  As  a  result,  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy depends on the sound development of financial markets. In this context, central banks 
have  more  than  a  passing  interest  in  enhancing  market  infrastructure.  Exchanges  are  important 
building blocks of this infrastructure. 
I  should  stress  that  in  a  globalizing  world  supported  by  information  technology,  the  certainty  of 
transactions is a crucial factor for sound development of the financial system. Central banks provide 
certainty through the finality of payments effected through their accounts. Exchanges provide certainty 
through its settlement arrangements. In light of these common roles, I believe that we can cooperate in 
many ways to enhance the efficiency and soundness of the financial system. I look forward to working 
together with you in this regard. 
Thank you for your kind attention, and good evening. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2004
