Norman Chan: The new membership regime of ACI - The Financial Markets 
Association of Hong Kong 
Remarks  by  Mr  Norman  Chan,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and 
Chairman  of  Treasury  Markets  Forum  of  Hong  Kong,  at  the  cocktail  reception  to  mark  the  new 
membership  regime  of  ACI  -  The  Financial  Markets  Association  of  Hong  Kong,  Hong  Kong, 
14 October 2004. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  reception  to  mark  the  successful  launch  of  the  new 
membership regime of ACI - The Financial Markets Association of Hong Kong, and the introduction of 
accredited educational programmes for market practitioners. This is a major milestone in raising the 
professionalism of treasury market practitioners in Hong Kong. 
The  Treasury  Markets  Forum  of  Hong  Kong  was  established  in  March  this  year  with  a  view  to 
promoting  co-operation  and  synergy  to  raise  the  professionalism  of  practitioners  and  the  overall 
competitiveness  of  the  treasury  markets  in  Hong  Kong.  The  Forum  brings  together  the  providers, 
users and intermediaries in treasury markets, including representatives of Hong Kong Association of 
Banks,  ACI  -  The  Financial  Markets  Association  of  Hong  Kong,  Hong  Kong  Capital  Markets 
Association,  Hong  Kong  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers,  DTC  Association  and  Hong  Kong 
Foreign Exchange and Deposit Brokers’ Association, to consider how we can co-operate in raising the 
professionalism of market practitioners. I am pleased to report that we are made major progress in 
raising the professionalism of treasury market practitioners. 
Treasury  markets  comprise  a  wide  range  of  products  including  foreign  exchange,  fixed  income, 
derivatives and so on. The boundaries between various markets have become blurred alongside more 
innovative and sophisticated structuring of new products. Whether dealing, sales or back-office staff in 
treasury  markets  all  require  strong  technical,  up-to-date  knowledge  in  order  to  cope  with  the  rapid 
changes in treasury markets. In the discussions between the Treasury Markets Forum and ACI - The 
Financial  Markets  Association  of  Hong  Kong  on  the  design  of  the  new  membership  scheme,  we 
consider that there is a need to bring together qualifying practitioners from various treasury markets. 
This can facilitate the exchange of views among practitioners within the industry on the one hand and 
promote  the  professional  standing  of  practitioners  on  the  other  hand.  In  addition,  accredited 
educational programmes should be introduced to raise the professionalism of practitioners and provide 
training to those who are interested to join the industry. 
Following  the  active  co-ordination  among  industry  bodies,  I  am  glad  that  the  ACI  -  The  Financial 
Markets Association of Hong Kong has successfully launched the new membership regime and made 
a major stride in raising professionalism of treasury market practitioners. While ACI - The Financial 
Markets Association traditionally is composed of professionals in foreign exchange market, today, it 
has  expanded  the  membership  to  those  engaged  in  other  treasury  markets  (such  as  bonds  and 
derivatives), encompassing dealing, sales, broker and back-office personnel. 
In  the  introduction  of  accredited  training  courses,  it  is  necessary  to  co-operate  with  leading  and 
renowned educational institutions to provide quality training so as to achieve the objective of raising 
professional standard and gain wide recognition. I am happy to announce that the Chinese University 
of  Hong  Kong  and  the  University  of  Science  and  Technology  will  offer  certificate  programmes  on 
dealing,  settlement  and  fixed  income  securities.  Practitioners  can  take  these  courses  to  obtain  a 
professional qualification to meet part of the membership requirement of the Association. In addition, 
the  new  regime  recognises  the  rapid  evolution  in  financial  markets,  and  the  need  for  continuous 
professional  training  in  upgrading  the  skills  and  expertise  of  practitioners.  A  new  requirement  on 
continuous professional training is therefore introduced for the renewal of the membership. 
In  strengthening  the  international  financial  centre  status  of  Hong  Kong,  it  is  important  to  foster  our 
advantage  in  having  a  professional  workforce.  We  believe  that  the  launch  of  the  new  membership 
regime of ACI - The Financial Markets Association of Hong Kong and educational programmes will 
help upgrade the technical skills and expertise of treasury market professionals and help them to catch 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
up  with  the  latest  developments  in  the  markets.  This  will  work  towards  our  ultimate  goal  in  raising 
overall competitiveness of treasury markets in Hong Kong. 
Alongside the rapid growth of the Mainland economy and the gradual liberalisation of their markets, 
there  is  an  increasing  demand  for  treasury  markets  products  and  services  from  the  Mainland.  The 
Treasury Markets Forum, as a broad-based and authoritative group, can help explore opportunities for 
closer co-operation with the Mainland on market development issues. Since the establishment of the 
Treasury  Markets  Forum,  we  have  made  visits  to  the  Mainland  financial  regulatory  bodies  and  the 
China Association of Banks to deepen our mutual understanding of the markets in two places. They 
were interested to learn about the work of the Forum, including those in raising the professionalism of 
our  practitioners.  The  Forum  also  participated  in  the  Hong  Kong  Financial  Services  Expo  held  in 
Shanghai in September to promote our treasury markets services to Mainland financial institutions and 
enterprises. We will also organise a seminar for the Mainland to promote their understanding in our 
financial markets, and responses from the Mainland have been very favourable. In addition, we will 
maintain close contacts with major overseas financial centres. In particular, we intend to invite major 
members  from  New  York  and  London  foreign  exchange  committees  to  meet  with  the  Forum  to 
facilitate the exchange of views on issues of mutual interest. 
In the past half year since its establishment, the Treasury Markets Forum has made good progress in 
its  work.  We  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  industry  associations  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the 
competitiveness of Hong Kong’s treasury markets and promoting Hong Kong’s status as the preferred 
hub for treasury markets services. 
Finally, may I represent the Treasury Markets Forum to thank the Chinese University of Hong Kong 
and the University of Science and Technology in developing the certificate programmes on dealing, 
settlement and fixed income securities. I would also like to congratulate ACI - The Financial Markets 
Association of Hong Kong in successfully introducing the new membership regime and expanding the 
membership. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
