Jean-Pierre Roth: Swiss franc and euro - two sister currencies? 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Swiss-Brazilian Chamber of Commerce, Sao Paulo, 19 November 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to talk to you today about the Swiss franc and the euro after six years of 
monetary integration in Europe. 
Looking at the map, you might wonder whether Switzerland, a small spot in the middle of Euroland 
could still follow an autonomous monetary policy. What are the consequences of the introduction of 
the  euro  on  the  Swiss  franc  and  on  the  effectiveness  of  Swiss  monetary  policy?  And  what  are  the 
effects  of  this  new  international  monetary  order  on  countries  outside  the  dollar-euro  block  more 
generally? 
I  will  try  to  provide  some  insights  on  these  questions  today.  First,  I  will  present  the  change  in  our 
monetary  framework  due  to  the  creation  of  the  euro.  Then  I  will  enumerate  the  main  fears  that  we 
originally  had  regarding  the  effects  of  that  transformation,  and  our  experience  with  the  new 
environment. Finally, I will share some lessons on the influence of the introduction of the euro for the 
international monetary system and for the autonomy of Switzerland’s monetary policy. 
A new international framework 
1. 
January 1, 1999, constituted a true revolution for Europe. Many observers argue that the introduction 
of the euro represents the major postwar stage in European integration. They are right. The Maastricht 
Treaty, by removing national currencies and defining budgetary rules, leads to an important transfer of 
power  from  national  capitals  to  European  institutions.  The  French  franc,  the  Italian  lira,  and  the 
German  mark  were  all  symbols  of  national  identity.  The  euro  is  now  playing  an  integrating  role  in 
people’s minds. In this regard too, the new currency brings a revolutionary dimension. Remember that 
national  currencies  were  almost  always  and  everywhere  brought  about  by  fundamental  political 
changes: the French franc was the “franc Germinal”, the Italian lira was created on the occasion of the 
Italian  unification,  and  the  Reichsmark  appeared  in  1873  at  the  foundation  of  the  German  empire. 
These are very strong political symbols indeed. 
For  Switzerland  too,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  was  a  kind  of  revolution.  For  the  first  time  in  our 
history,  our  country  was  completely  surrounded  by  a  single  currency  area.  In  terms  of  population, 
Switzerland,  with  its  7  million  inhabitants,  could  be  compared  to  Missouri  in  the  middle  of  the 
United States. Just try to imagine Missouri with its own currency! It would not be very realistic.  
Until 1999, Switzerland had been living amidst very diverse European currencies. In fact, our country 
had always lamented about this situation. Indeed, given our large export sector, we could only dream 
of  a  stable  monetary  environment  without  exchange  rate  fluctuations,  which  always  interfere  with 
economic decisions and distort price comparisons. 
A  common  view  should  be  corrected  here,  that  of  Switzerland  somehow  benefiting  from  external 
monetary disorders. The notion that the welfare of a country boils down to the short-run profits of a few 
foreign exchange dealers is of course narrow minded. The reality offers a completely different picture. 
Switzerland has always suffered from external monetary turbulences and always wished for a stable 
monetary order. For example, the various crises of the European Monetary System in the 1990s, with 
a dramatic drop of the Italian lira, have led to the complete removal of the traditional textile industry 
from our economic geography. Such structural adjustment could arguably have occurred anyway, but 
the decisive factor at the time was of monetary origin. 
The purpose of the creation of the common currency was not only to concentrate the monetary power 
in the hands of the European Central Bank, but also to promote the conditions for transparency and 
competitiveness that would in turn foster trade, investment and growth in the single European market. 
Price comparisons are indeed easier today, and trade and liquidity management are much simplified, 
although it is still too early to numerically assess the impact of these effects on growth. 
Simplifying trade and investments benefits all members of the European monetary zone, and it also 
helps anyone interested in being active in the European market. Switzerland, with its high degree of 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
integration in the euro zone, reaps large benefits from this stable situation. Thus, it is clear that on 
those aspects, the introduction of the euro was very good news for the Swiss economy. 
Potential drawbacks of the new framework on a small open economy 
2. 
But would the introduction of the euro be only good news for the Swiss economy? 
We know that a revolution is always associated with risks and uncertainties, thus it should not surprise 
you that we were very much concerned about possible negative developments. 
In  the  mid-1990s,  as  the  European  monetary  construction  was  under  way,  we  tried  to  imagine  the 
potential negative effects of the euro introduction on the Swiss economy. Our goal was to be prepared 
to face difficult situations. We had identified three main challenges: 
a) 
First, the major risk was that the new European currency would destabilize the Swiss franc. 
In the past, the Swiss franc, along with the German mark, played the role of a safe haven 
currency  whenever  monetary  crises  occurred.  With  the  disappearance  of  the  German 
currency,  the  Swiss  franc  would  find  itself  first  in  line  of  fire  in  case  of  a  dollar  crisis,  for 
example, or even worse, in case of doubts about the stability of the European currency. 
Second,  we  risked  seeing  the  euro  being  increasingly  used  as  a  means  of  payment  in 
Switzerland. As the common currency was about to become the main unit of account for our 
exports,  we  feared  that  domestic  firms  might  adopt  the  euro  as  well,  so  as  to  minimize 
exchange rate risks. Some were even considering wages being paid in euro. If use of the 
franc  were  to  be  crowded  out  by  the  euro,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  would  have  had  little 
leverage  left  to  influence  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  It  would  become  a  sort  of 
paper tiger! 
Third,  even  short  of  a  full  “euro-ization”  of  the  Swiss  economy,  we  feared  the  loss  of  our 
monetary  policy  autonomy.  Given  the  importance  of  the  common  currency  for  the  Swiss 
economy,  what  else  could  the  Swiss  National  Bank  do  other  than  follow  the  European 
Central  Bank’s  policy  and  de  facto  integrate  the  franc  into  the  euro  zone?  A  gradually 
shrinking  interest-rate  differential  between  euro  and  Swiss  franc  investments  as  well  as  a 
loss in monetary autonomy would have resulted. 
How does our recent experience relate to these concerns? 
b) 
c) 
3. 
Our experience as an independent monetary entity 
The euro/swiss franc relationship 
a) 
Our fears of a euro destabilizing the Swiss franc did not materialize. Relative to the euro, and since its 
introduction,  the  franc  has  been  fluctuating  in  a  relatively  narrow  band  of  plus  or  minus  5  percent, 
about four times less than against the dollar during the same period. The Swiss franc appears now to 
be less affected by exchange rate shocks and more shielded from speculative movements. In the past, 
the  franc  was  overreacting  to  the  dollar’s  fluctuations,  so  that  the  pain  of  an  appreciation  of  our 
currency relative to the greenback was exacerbated by a simultaneous appreciation of the Swiss franc 
relative to the German mark. This double whammy effect, attributed to the narrowness of the Swiss 
franc market, was highly penalizing for our export sector. 
Since the introduction of the euro however, this pattern is no longer observed. Thus, the evolution of 
the Swiss franc sticks closer to our economic fundamentals. I will address this issue more extensively 
later on and argue that this trend can be generalized to apply to other currencies as well. 
The euro as a means of payment 
b) 
Those who thought that the euro would make the Swiss franc obsolete as a means of payment were 
also mistaken. True, our ATM machines have been adapted to provide euro banknotes, so that it is 
now possible to pay in euro almost everywhere in Switzerland. Yet, despite these efforts, the demand 
for euro notes is still weak and those notes do not circulate any more extensively than French francs, 
Italian  lira  and  German  marks  used  to.  In  stores  and  restaurants,  prices  denominated  in  euros  are 
usually  not  very  attractive.  Obviously,  small  shop  and  café  owners  are  not  thrilled  by  the  idea  of 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
accepting  cash  payments  in  euros.  Anyway,  they  cannot  offer  as  good  financial  services  as 
commercial banks or credit card companies! 
Monetary autonomy 
c) 
The last fear we had was related to the potential loss of monetary autonomy. Could Switzerland, a 
country completely surrounded by the euro zone, possibly hope to implement an interest rate policy 
different  from  the  one  of  the  European  Central  Bank?  With  the  loss  of  its  monetary  identity, 
Switzerland would have seen its interest rates, traditionally below German rates, converge to higher 
European interest rates causing severe pains to the Swiss economy. 
Fortunately, we did not experience this outcome. First, in the months following the introduction of the 
euro, it became apparent that markets were not anticipating a pegging of the franc to the euro. An 
expected peg would have generated a convergence in interest rates, which simply did not happen. 
Second, and as could have been expected, the monetary needs of the Swiss economy differed from 
those of the euro zone: 
• 
As an open economy strongly oriented towards global markets, the Swiss economy felt more 
deeply the slowdown in global trade than the euro zone. 
Furthermore,  the  Swiss  franc  kept  playing  its  role  -  although  to  a  smaller  extent  -  of  safe 
haven in tense international situations. 
Finally,  Swiss  inflation  was  considerably  lower  than  inflation  in  the  euro  zone,  where 
adjustments and catch-up phenomena took place. 
  Facing this reality, we decided to act independently and lowered interest rates initially in March 2001, 
a  few  months  before  the  European  Central  Bank.  Then,  seeing  a  clear  economic  slowdown  and  a 
strengthening  of  the  Swiss  franc,  we  lowered  interest  rates  repeatedly  and  aggressively.  The 
magnitude of our policy loosening has exceeded that of the ECB. This year, with growth accelerating 
again an adjustment of monetary policy became necessary. We raised interest rates by 25 bp in June 
and September. We thus kept our monetary autonomy intact. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Let  me  conclude  by  first  emphasizing  the  positive  global  influence  that  the  euro  has  had  since  its 
introduction in 1999. Not only does the common currency contribute to the integration of the European 
market, but the appearance of a counter-weight to the US dollar has helped stabilize the international 
monetary  order.  Exchange  rates  of  third  currencies  can  thus  evolve  closer  to  their  economic 
fundamentals,  and  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  on  capital  flows  and  foreign  trade  are 
dampened. 
Developments  in  the  financial  markets  over  the  past  5  years  have  shown  us  that  although  highly 
integrated in international markets and despite the emergence of a bipolar currency environment, the 
SNB can keep its monetary autonomy and follow an independent monetary policy that is adapted to 
the needs of the Swiss economy. As a result of our independent and successful policy, together with 
the global character of the Swiss economy, the Swiss franc has retained its own profile. However, as 
we  know,  this  particular  profile  is  not  without  risks.  Extreme  volatility  of  exchange  rates  cannot  be 
excluded,  but  our  experience  with  the  euro/Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  has  shown  that  currency 
markets are not as irrational as some people believe. With a relatively stable exchange market, low 
inflation  and  lower  interest  rates  than  the  rest  of  Europe,  the  monetary  situation  of  Switzerland  is 
relatively comfortable. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The title of my speech was “Swiss franc and the euro: two sister currencies?” I can now answer the 
question. 
Indeed, our recent experience has shown impressive convergence between Switzerland and the EU in 
monetary matters. The inflation differential has decreased and interest rates have moved closer. But 
we are still far from a monetary integration. On the contrary, the Swiss National Bank has been able to 
operate more freely since the introduction of the euro than before. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
Thanks  to  a  much  more  stable  monetary  landscape  in  Europe,  the  Swiss  franc  is  today  much  less 
under speculative pressure than before. Our currency has still its international dimension, but it sticks 
closer  to  economic  fundamentals,  which  is  good  news  for  our  exporters.  It  also  means  that  the 
exchange rate volatility between the franc and the euro is today less pronounced than the volatility we 
observed in the past between the franc and the German mark. Clearly the franc belongs to the family 
of the European currencies, reacting similarly vis-à-vis dollar fluctuations. 
In that sense, for sure, the franc and the euro are sister currencies. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2004
