Lucas Papademos: The economic outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy - 
some key issues 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Nomura 
annual Euro Conference “A challenging future for Europe”, Tokyo, 11 November 2004. 
 Introduction 
The  annual  Euro  Conference  in  Tokyo,  which  is  now  well  established,  provides  a  useful  forum  for 
examining various policy issues relating to the European economy, also from a global perspective. It is 
a great pleasure to have the opportunity to address you today and I thank you for the invitation. In my 
presentation, I would like to focus on two topics:  
• 
First,  the  state  of,  and  outlook  for,  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  current  stance  of  the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy.  Addressing  this  topic  requires  me  to  assess,  in  particular,  the 
implications  of  increased  oil  prices  for  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  single  monetary 
policy. 
Second,  I  thought  it  might  be  of  particular  interest  to  you  to  also  address  the  challenges 
posed for monetary policy by large swings in asset prices, especially housing prices. Given 
the  Japanese  experience  in  the  1990s,  it  is  particularly  appropriate  to  re-examine  here  in 
Tokyo the impact that large asset price swings can have on macroeconomic stability and the 
difficult choices for policy-makers confronting strong asset price dynamics. As you all know, 
these issues are not only of interest for Japan; they are of increasing relevance worldwide. 
 The economic outlook and monetary policy in the euro area 
I will start by discussing the current state of the euro area economy and the medium-term economic 
outlook. The performance of the euro area economy this year is characterised by the ongoing recovery 
of  economic  activity  at  a  pace  somewhat  faster  than  previously  envisaged.  Inflation,  however,  has 
remained above (though relatively close to) 2%. This outcome is not in line with our notion of price 
stability and is higher than the average inflation expected a year ago for 2004. The sharp rise in oil 
prices since the beginning of this year, by about 60% (in US dollar terms), has been the main reason 
for the higher than earlier expected inflation.  
Let me elaborate a bit on the pace of the economic recovery, the factors that have contributed so far to 
the pick-up in growth, and the conditions and basic factors that are expected to influence the medium-
term economic prospects. 
Since the start of the economic recovery in the second half of 2003, we have seen robust growth rates 
in the first half of 2004, with real GDP increasing by 0.7% and 0.5% in the first and second quarters, 
respectively. The recovery in growth has so far been driven partly by buoyant external demand and 
partly by domestic demand. Private consumption increased moderately but investment was subdued.  
Although  short-term  indicators  have  become  more  mixed  over  the  past  couple  of  months,  the 
underlying determinants of economic activity remain favourable, and growth is expected to continue in 
2005. On the external side, euro area exports should continue to benefit from positive global demand 
conditions in 2005. I admit, we have seen some moderation in global growth rates following a period in 
which  the  world  economy  has  experienced  its  strongest  dynamism  in  many  years.  We  view  this 
moderation,  however,  as  an  orderly  return  to  sustainable,  and  still  robust,  rates  of  growth.  On  the 
domestic  side,  investment  has  thus  far  been  subdued,  partly  due  to  weak  construction  investment. 
Looking ahead, investment should be supported by the global environment and the continuing very 
favourable financing conditions in the euro area. In addition, improved earnings and greater corporate 
efficiency gained through business restructuring should support investment. As regards consumption, 
we see scope for it to strengthen further, particularly once employment prospects have improved more 
visibly. 
As with any assessment of the future, this outlook is surrounded by some uncertainty. In particular, 
there are risks to growth prospects stemming from unfavourable developments in oil markets. In this 
respect, let me emphasise a number of characteristics of the recent rise in oil prices. First, it is evident 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
that recent oil price developments differ somewhat from previous oil price shocks, as they have been 
partly driven by buoyant global demand, and not only by constraints on the supply side. Second, oil 
prices,  in  real  terms,  have  remained  at  a  much  lower  level  than  in  previous  episodes.  Third,  the 
oil-intensity of production is lower in the euro area than it was in the past. And finally, in percentage 
terms,  the  oil  price  increase  has  not  been  as  high  as  in  previous  oil  price  shocks.  Despite  this, 
however, oil price increases constitute a significant adverse shock to the euro area economy - through 
their direct impact on energy prices, their implications for global economic growth, and their adverse 
effect on the euro area’s terms of trade. If oil prices were to remain at close to USD 50 per barrel, or 
even increase further, they would dampen the strength of the recovery. 
With regard to inflation, oil price developments have had a powerful direct impact on the year-on-year 
change in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), particularly in recent weeks. In October, 
annual inflation increased to 2.5%, according to a provisional estimate, from 2.1% in September. The 
oil  price  shock  may  feed  through  the  economy  and  generate  further  indirect  effects  in  the  coming 
months. This is indicated by developments in producer prices, which showed a year-on-year increase 
of around 5% in September. 
On  the  whole,  however,  the  information  available  so  far  does  not  suggest  that  stronger  underlying 
inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area. Wages have grown at rates of around 2- 2½% 
over recent quarters. This trend should persist for some time in view of the high level of unemployment 
in  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  unit  labour  cost  growth has  been  low  (2.0  %  in  2003,  coming  down  to 
around 0.7% in the first half of 2004) and it can be expected that it will be contained in the coming 
quarters by moderate wage developments and labour productivity gains. 
Notwithstanding these encouraging developments, there are still several upside risks to the outlook for 
price stability. These risks are mainly associated with oil price developments, possible new increases 
in indirect taxes and administered prices, and potential second-round effects stemming from wage and 
price-setting behaviour. The rise in measures of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area in the 
course of this year is also a cause of some concern. 
In  addition,  our  monetary  analysis  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  Since  mid-summer,  the 
dynamics of M3 have strengthened again, mainly reflecting continued strong demand for transaction 
balances,  which  are  included  in  the  narrow  aggregate  M1,  the  most  liquid  component  of  M3.  The 
acceleration of money growth is driven by the stimulative effect of the historically low level of interest 
rates in the euro area.  
The low level of interest rates is also fuelling private sector demand for credit. In particular, the growth 
rate of loans for house purchase continues to rise in the euro area and is now approaching double 
digits.  This  goes  hand  in  hand  with  relatively  fast  rises  in  real  estate  prices  in  many  euro  area 
countries. In recent months, the annual rate of growth of loans to non-financial corporations has also 
picked up.  
Over the past few years, M3 growth has been very strong in the euro area, partly as a consequence of 
flight-to-safety portfolio shifts out of stock markets in the period of heightened stock market volatility 
between 2001 and 2003. As a consequence, there is now substantially more liquidity in the euro area 
than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This excess liquidity could pose inflationary risks in 
the future. Moreover, the persistently high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a 
source of unsustainable asset price increases, particularly in property markets. I will elaborate on this 
point later on in my presentation. 
In summary, our assessment of the outlook for price stability, on the basis of the economic analysis 
and  cross-checking  with  the  monetary  analysis,  leads  to  the  following  conclusions:  underlying 
inflationary  pressures  are  still  contained;  there  are  still,  however,  a  number  of  medium-term  upside 
risks to price stability that must be monitored carefully; and for this reason, strong vigilance is required 
with regard to the materialisation of such risks. Against this background, the ECB’s Governing Council 
decided at its meeting on 4 November 2004 to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. On that 
occasion, we again noted that the level of interest rates in the euro area remains very low by historical 
standards. Indeed, at 2%, money market rates are the lowest since the end of the Second World War, 
and at 4%, long-term government bond yields are also well below long-run averages. The low level of 
interest rates, both in nominal and real terms, and the generally favourable financing conditions have 
been lending support to the ongoing economic recovery in the euro area. 
Fiscal  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  have  not  improved  in  2004,  while  the  current  account  balance 
remained  virtually  unchanged.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  the  average  general 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
government deficit in the euro area increased to an estimated 2.9% of GDP in 2004 (from 2.7% of 
GDP in 2003), while the current account is expected to record a surplus of close to 1% of GDP, slightly 
higher than in 2003. Although the Commission is projecting a decline in the total euro area fiscal deficit 
to  2.5%  of  GDP  in  the  years  2005  and  2006,  the  slow  pace  of  fiscal  consolidation  is  a  cause  of 
concern,  especially  in  view  of  the  expected  growth  in  the  coming  year  and  given  the  underlying 
imbalances associated with population ageing. Greater progress towards healthier public finances will 
strengthen confidence and support, rather than hinder, the ongoing recovery. 
Economic effects and policy implications of higher oil prices  
In this presentation of our assessment of the economic outlook and of our decision on the monetary 
policy stance, one aspect stands out which is of particular interest to investors, consumers and the 
financial markets at large - the recent sizable rise in oil prices. This is an important issue, and one on 
which clear and convincing communication from the central bank is warranted. 
Oil prices, which reached historical highs in nominal US dollar terms in the last week of October, are a 
key factor determining near-term prospects for economic activity and inflation, both globally and in the 
euro area. As I noted earlier, persistently high and rising oil prices have had a visible direct impact on 
consumer prices in the euro area, and inflation is likely to remain above the upper limit of our definition 
of price stability of 2% in the coming months. This is a worrisome development, although there is little 
indication that medium-term inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area.  
What would be the potential impact of a sustained rise in oil prices on key macroeconomic variables in 
quantitative  terms?  For  purely  illustrative  purposes,  and  using  a  variety  of  macroeconomic  models, 
ECB economists have estimated the potential impact of a hypothetical permanent oil price increase of 
50% on both inflation and output. According to these calculations, such an increase would add 0.3 to 
0.6 percentage points to overall inflation in the euro area in the first year and 0.1 to 0.4 percentage 
points  in  the  second  year,  before  petering  out  in  the  third  year  (0.0  to  0.1  percentage  points).  The 
estimated impact on output would be, of course, negative, dampening real GDP growth by 0.1 to 0.8 
percentage points in the first year; in subsequent years, the average cumulative impact suggested by 
these models would be roughly neutral (-0.3 to 0.2 percentage points in the second year; -0.1 to 0.4 
percentage points in the third year).  
Needless to say, these estimates are surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty related to the model 
specifications and other factors, for instance, the assumed initial cyclical position of the economy, the 
nature of the oil price shock, and the possible existence of non-linearities in the transmission of the oil 
price shock to the economy. More importantly, these (and other comparable) simulations are based on 
the assumption that the monetary policy stance is given; that is, the central bank’s interest rates are 
assumed to be kept constant and not to be adjusted in response to the impact of the oil price shock on 
inflation. Of course, this assumption is made for the purpose of isolating the “pure” impact of the oil 
price shock. In reality, monetary policy has an important role to play in influencing the effects of oil 
price shocks on the economy.  
Oil price shocks present policy-makers with difficult choices as they simultaneously pose upside risks 
to inflation and downside risks to growth. In responding to oil price shocks, it is essential to understand 
that policy-makers cannot offset the real effects of oil price increases. An oil price increase triggers a 
loss in the economy’s terms-of-trade and implies a transfer of wealth from oil-importing countries to oil 
exporters.  This  change  in  the  terms-of-trade  (in  relative  prices)  requires  an  adjustment  of  the  real 
economy  and  must  be  absorbed  by  markets.  The  policy-makers’  aim  should  be  to  facilitate  this 
adjustment by minimising inflationary pressures and aggregate output losses. 
In reacting to oil price shocks, it is, therefore, important that policy-makers do not repeat the mistakes 
of the past by attempting to stabilise output growth at unrealistic levels. In the 1970s, such attempts 
led to a prolonged period of high and costly inflation, rising unemployment and sizeable fiscal deficits. 
Monetary  policy  should  aim  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  are  not  adversely  affected  by  the 
unavoidable “first-round” direct and indirect effects of an oil price shock on the price level and that they 
remain anchored to price stability. By preventing oil price shocks from having “second-round” effects 
on inflation expectations and on wage and price-setting behaviour, monetary policy can contain the 
unfavourable consequences of these shocks on both inflation and growth. It can prevent the fuelling of 
an inflationary spiral and the persistence of inflationary pressures, it can facilitate the real economy’s 
adjustment  to  the  change  in  relative  prices  implied  by  the  oil  price  shock,  and  it  can  thus  help  to 
minimise the associated output losses. This is why we at the ECB stress the need to be extremely 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
vigilant against the materialisation of second-round effects that may result from a rise in oil prices. The 
ECB’s commitment to maintaining price stability in the euro area over the medium term implies that it 
will react promptly if there are indications that second-round effects are likely to emerge. 
Asset prices and monetary policy 
As  has  become  clear  from  the  previous  discussion,  monetary  policy-makers  may  face  very  difficult 
choices in the event of large swings in important economic variables - like the price of oil and other 
raw materials - that can have a significant impact on the state of the economy. The same is true for 
large movements in asset prices, especially when markets - notably equity and housing markets - are 
seen  to  be  moving  out  of  line  with  what  could  be  considered  fundamentals.  Such  asset  price 
misalignments,  or  “bubbles”,  and  their  eventual  correction,  can  potentially  have  severe  economic 
costs.  
Asset prices are important for monetary policy, not just because abrupt changes in asset prices may 
have severe implications for macroeconomic stability, but also because asset prices play a key role in 
the transmission of monetary policy. Through balance sheet effects and through their influence on the 
cost  of  capital,  wealth,  and  confidence,  asset  prices  affect  spending  decisions  by  households  and 
companies.  In  addition,  asset  prices  provide  useful  information  to  monetary  policy-makers,  notably 
about private sector expectations.  
Over  recent  years,  central  banks  and  economic  research  have  paid  increasing  attention  to  these 
issues. Indeed, the experience in Japan over the past two decades underscores how harmful bursts in 
asset  price  bubbles  can  be  for  macroeconomic  stability,  and  how  difficult  it  is  for  policy-makers  to 
mitigate these costs. Indeed, there are quite a number of historical episodes when a collapse in asset 
prices triggered sustained deflationary trends and problems of financial instability.  
When discussing asset prices and monetary policy, four questions come to mind:  
• 
First, is it possible to identify the emergence of an asset price bubble in the markets? And if 
so, how?  
Second, assuming that a bubble has been identified, what can policy-makers do about it? 
What are their choices and dilemmas?  
Third,  what  is  the  concrete  situation  in  equity  and  housing  markets  in  the  euro  area  at 
present?  
Finally,  what  role  do  asset  prices  play  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  what  challenges 
could they pose? 
   How to identify a bubble? 
Answering the first question is both easy and tricky at the same time: I think, we can all agree that it is 
very difficult to identify bubbles, not least since we need to distinguish asset price changes that are 
justified by changes in fundamentals, such as technological advances or changes in risk preferences, 
from those that are due to misalignments or “irrational exuberance” - to quote a prominent central bank 
colleague. For these reasons, central banks need to be - and they are - very cautious in identifying 
and pointing to the existence of a bubble. However, a number of indicators may help us to form an 
assessment  about  whether  an  asset  price  misalignment  or  a  bubble  is  under  way.  A  widely  used 
indicator  to  gauge  major  stock  price  misalignments  -  which  I  am  sure  many  of  you  employ  in  your 
professional  activities  -  is  to  compare  price-earnings  ratios  with  historical  averages.  In  the  housing 
market, one method is to look at trends in the price-rent ratio relative to the historical averages, or at 
affordability  (price-income)  measures.  All  these  indicators  can  be  informative  in  judging  the 
sustainability of asset price valuations.  
In  addition,  a  number  of  researchers  have  stressed  that  important  complementary  information  for 
assessing  the  sustainability  of  asset  price  movements  can  be  derived  from  monetary  and  credit 
developments. In particular, it has been shown that periods of high money and credit growth often give 
rise  to  boom-bust  cycles  in  stock  and  property  prices,  which  then  causes  high  costs  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  Overall,  we  have  several  tools  which  could  help  us  to  detect  bubble 
phenomena. While individual tools are subject to caveats, applying a broad range of methodologies 
should help limiting the risk of making mistakes in the assessment of asset prices. 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2004
What can central banks do about bubbles?  
Coming to my second question, how should central banks react if they see the risk of an emerging 
asset  price  bubble?  The  options  range  from  not  reacting  at  all  to  consciously  trying  to  prick  an 
emerging bubble. Obviously, attempts to deflate an asset price bubbles are likely to require substantial 
interest rate increases which, in turn, could adversely affect economic activity and inflation. In view of 
the difficulties in identifying a bubble, it seems established wisdom today that central banks should be 
exceedingly careful in dealing with asset bubbles. 
There is, however, a more subtle way: to cautiously consider “leaning against the wind” when an asset 
price bubble is developing. Indeed, some academics have argued that, by accepting some short-term 
deviation  from  the  pursuit  of  its  stated  objective  of  price  stability,  a  central  bank  may  improve  the 
conditions for maintaining price stability over the medium to long-term. If a potentially costly bubble is 
firmly under way, then a somewhat tighter monetary policy stance than would otherwise be needed 
could be warranted. 
Certainly,  there  are  also  risks  involved  in  “leaning  against  the  wind”.  First,  as  I  mentioned  already, 
there  can  never  be  full  certainty  as  to  whether  an  asset  price  bubble  is  under  way.  Second,  by 
influencing market psychology, a monetary policy tightening could trigger dynamics that are difficult to 
foresee and may be hard to control ex post.  
Effective communication, as always, is crucial, especially in situations of heightened uncertainty. The 
central  bank  can  consider  adjusting  its  communication  pre-emptively  in  order  to  discourage  the 
formation of overly optimistic expectations regarding future returns and/or in order to signal concerns 
about  too  low  risk  premia.  In  any  case,  monetary  authorities,  through  their  communication,  should 
avoid  appearing  complacent,  thus  possibly  contributing  themselves  to  unrealistic  expectations  and 
asset-price dynamics that are not in line with fundamentals. 
Finally, central banks should not be seen as reacting asymmetrically to asset price movements; that is, 
as only reacting to mitigate the consequences of a fall in asset prices. Obviously, such asymmetric 
behaviour  can  lead  to  moral  hazard  in  the  market,  with  the  central  bank  becoming  a  potential 
contributor to excessive asset price fluctuations, if its actions induce private agents to take higher risks 
than would otherwise be the case. 
What is the situation in the euro area housing and equity markets?  
After these rather general considerations, let us look at the current situation in the euro area? What 
are  the  underlying  factors  fuelling  recent  developments  in  asset  prices?  Are  these  developments  a 
cause  for  concern  and  what  are  the  associated  risks?  Let  me  first  focus  on  residential  property 
markets.  As  already  noted,  growth  rates  in  euro  area  property  prices  have  been  rather  dynamic  in 
recent  years.  After  relatively  modest  price  increases  of  less  than  3%  between  1993  and  1998, 
residential property prices on average for the euro area as a whole have been rising at annual rates of 
around 6-7% in each of the past four years. In real terms, this corresponds to growth rates of 4-5%, 
which  is  relatively  high  by  historic  standards.  Differences  across  euro  area  countries  have  been 
considerable: while in Spain, France, Ireland and Italy, residential property prices were rising on an 
annual basis by between 11% and 17% in 2002 and 2003, they have been falling slightly in Germany 
and Austria in the last four years. 
The dynamism of property prices in several euro area countries is very much related to the very low 
levels of interest rates brought about by the introduction of the euro. For several euro area countries, 
the adoption of the euro marked a significant fall in real interest rates, as it implied a “regime change” 
towards  a  more  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  The  fall  in  interest  rates,  in  turn,  allowed 
households to borrow more and accumulate more debt. As a consequence, household indebtedness 
in the euro area has increased significantly in recent years. In 2004 it is estimated at 54% of GDP, up 
from 46.5% in 1998 and 43% in 1995.  
The rise in household debt has not, however, been accompanied by higher interest payments as a 
ratio of disposable income in the euro area as a whole. This ratio amounted to 4.6% in 2003, similar to 
the 4.8% observed in 1998. However, the strong rise in house prices and the substantial increase in 
household  indebtedness  have  raised  some  concerns.  Given  the  differentiated  path  of  house  price 
increases across countries, this concern is obviously more relevant and stronger in some countries 
than in others. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 5
The concern relates in particular to the likelihood that some households may be underestimating the 
risks they face. These risks are associated first, with the higher sensitivity of households to changes in 
interest rates. In this regard, we have seen a tendency in some euro area countries to increasingly 
focus on borrowing at conditions which are linked to short-term interest rates. For many households 
this  seems  to  be  an  attractive  option  as  it  implies  a  rather  low  interest  rate  burden  notably  at  the 
beginning of the contract. What is often overlooked, however, is the fact that the currently low interest 
rates could well change over time. 
A  second  risk  relates  to  future house price changes.  Some  valuation  measures  for  property  prices, 
such  as  the  price-to-rent  ratio,  are  now  10-15%  higher  than  their  average  levels  during  the  period 
1995-2003 in the euro area as a whole. These valuation measures have even reached levels as high 
as  17%.  Against  this  background,  concerns  have  been  expressed  that  substantial  house  price 
increases  in  some  countries  entail  risks  of  a  reversal  of  this  trend  that  may  currently  be 
underestimated. 
It is not the first time we have been confronted with pronounced movements in asset prices in the euro 
area. Indeed, current movements in house prices are small when compared to some swings in stock 
market prices over the last six years. We have witnessed rather substantial share price fluctuations 
resulting  from  the  new  economy  euphoria  and  the  subsequent  disillusionment.  And  we  have,  of 
course,  tried to  assess  the  impact  of  the  dramatic stock  market  decline  from  the  peaks  in  2000  on 
macroeconomic conditions and financial stability.  
In this regard, it mattered that, partly linked to the introduction of the euro, the outstanding amount of 
shares substantially increased in the euro area. For non-financial corporations in the euro area, the 
annual net issuance of shares increased from 1.7% of GDP in 1995 to 7.3% of GDP in 2000. At the 
same  time,  during  the  late  1990s,  the  distribution  of  shares  across  the  euro  area  population 
broadened  significantly,  implying  that  more  households  invested  in  shares  in  the  late  1990s  than 
before. Corrected for valuation effects, the amount of household’s holdings of shares and mutual fund 
shares increased between 1995 and 2003 by 78%.  
Against this background, stock prices have become more relevant to economic conditions in the euro 
area  in  recent  years.  And  indeed,  when  stock  prices  started  to  fall,  we  could  see  that  this  had  a 
notable dampening effect on the euro area economy in the period 2001-2003.  
into 
the  outlook 
the  assessment  of 
for  price  stability  and  how 
What role do asset prices play in the ECB’s monetary policy? 
After this description of the current situation, the crucial question is: how do asset price developments 
enter 
the 
policy-formulation of the ECB. Recently, much attention has been devoted to the question of which 
monetary  policy  strategies  are  optimal  in  an  environment  of  strong  asset  price  fluctuations.  With 
regard  to  inflation  targeting  strategies,  it  has  been  acknowledged  that  if  financial  imbalances 
accumulate  and  there  is,  for  example,  substantial  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of  asset  price 
movements,  it  is  not  advisable  to  strictly  pursue  an  inflation  forecast  for  consumer  prices  over  a 
horizon of one to two years. In such circumstances, it may be better instead to set interest rates with a 
view  to  a  time-frame  extending  well  beyond  conventional  forecast  horizons.  The  ECB’s  monetary 
policy strategy has some features that can become quite useful in this respect:  
• 
influence 
they 
First,  from  the  beginning,  the  ECB  has  adopted  a  “medium-term  orientation”.  This  implies 
that  policy  is  not  set  for  a  time  horizon  of  one  or  two  years.  Rather,  the  ECB  pays  due 
attention to the need to take into account the entire horizon over which monetary policy and 
macroeconomic shocks impact on the state of the economy. This lengthening of the policy 
horizon helps to trace out the likely macroeconomic impact of a financial misalignment. 
Second, the monetary policy strategy of the ECB is broad-based implying that a whole range 
of  several  indicators  and  models  are  employed  and  cross-checked,  thus  making  the 
assessment  and  policy  response  to  financial  imbalances  robust.  In  particular,  the 
commitment  to  monitor  and  assess  money  and  credit  developments  -  besides  being 
instrumental in identifying longer-term risks to price stability in general - may help to guard 
against  ignoring  asset  price  bubbles.  Indeed,  growth  rates  of  money  and  credit  which  are 
persistently  in  excess  of  those  needed  to  sustain  non-inflationary  economic  growth  may, 
under  certain  circumstances,  provide  early  information  on  emerging,  and  potentially 
destabilising,  asset  price bubbles.  In  this respect,  they  act  as  a  permanent admonition  for 
vigilance in the face of unusual movements in asset prices. 
 6 
 BIS Review 66/2004
From what I have said, it has become clear that it is important to monitor asset prices and to try to 
avoid  the  emergence  of  unsustainable,  pronounced  movements  in  asset  prices  which  may 
subsequently lead to sharp recessions. Obviously, there cannot be a mechanical link between asset 
prices and monetary policy instruments. Central banks, however, should take asset price movements 
into account, especially if large swings in asset prices imply long-term risks to financial and economic 
stability. 
Concluding remarks 
As you can see, there are a number of key concepts which I have emphasised in my speech today: 
“strong  vigilance”;  “careful  monitoring  and  analysis”;  “medium-term  orientation”;  “prompt  reaction”. 
These are central elements of our approach to monetary policy-making, both at the current juncture 
and in connection with the specific topic of asset price developments that I discussed in the second 
part  of  my  address.  We  live  in  a  world  of  considerable  uncertainty,  not  just  in  terms  of  economic 
shocks - which by definition are impossible to predict - but also in terms of our knowledge of how the 
economy  functions,  how  economic  agents  form  expectations  and  react  to  events  and  changing 
conditions.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  central  bank’s  unambiguous  commitment  to  attaining  its 
objectives  is  an  indispensable  anchor.  A  credible  central  bank  with  a  clear  commitment  to  price 
stability can, and must, provide such a haven of trust and confidence within the complex and uncertain 
web of interrelations in a modern economy. This is precisely what the ECB is seeking to do. Our track 
record over the past, almost six, years shows that we have been rather successful.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 7
