Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - small, but global 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Swiss-Argentine Chamber of Commerce, Buenos Aires, 16 November 2004. 
 Argentina is a country that fascinates us Swiss. At one time it offered my fellow countrymen a new 
home  when  they  could  no  longer  see  a  future  in  Switzerland.  Today,  Argentina  largely  attracts 
business people and tourists. As you know, Switzerland is a tiny country in comparison with Argentina. 
Situated in the heart of Europe, it has more or less come to resemble one huge agglomeration. It is 
therefore not surprising that many Swiss view Argentina as a land of space and opportunity. But as to 
what Switzerland could mean to the Argentineans is only something I can guess at. Perhaps you still 
associate  my  country  with  chocolate  and  watches.  On  the  other  hand,  maybe  you  recently  visited 
Switzerland  and  discovered  that  a  great  deal  has  changed.  The  country  has  become  more 
liberal-minded and has begun to question its traditional views - partly of its own accord and partly as a 
result of external pressures. 
I am delighted to be here this evening and to have this opportunity to give you a brief overview of the 
challenges  facing  Switzerland  in  an  era  of  growing  globalisation,  under  the  heading  “Switzerland: 
small, but global”. 
Switzerland according to common view 
1. 
Switzerland has the reputation of being a special case - one which in some ways is slowly becoming a 
normal case. A good example of this is the development of the public spending ratio. Still quite low by 
international standards at the beginning of the eighties, it has now almost reached the EU average. As 
in most industrialised countries, the financing of the social security system has become a political hot 
potato also in my country. At the same time, the wealth gap between Switzerland and other OECD 
nations  is  shrinking;  and  there  is  no  consensus  as  to  how  Switzerland  might  boost  its  economic 
growth. Political debates have intensified and politicians’ telegenic skills have become an issue there, 
too. 
However, certain aspects of Switzerland’s time-honoured image still prevail. Despite all the prophecies 
of doom, our democracy is under no threat; the Alps still shine in all their majestic glory; and the Swiss 
people - a fifth of whom are non-Swiss in origin - are just as hard-working, punctual and reliable as 
ever.  The  level  of  employment  is  in  fact  remarkably  high:  almost  80  percent  of  the  population  of 
working  age  are  in  employment.  While  it  is  true  that  the  unemployment  rate  rose  sharply  at  the 
beginning of the nineties, it is still less than half as high as the EU average. Important areas of the 
working  world,  such  as  unemployment  insurance  and  the  protection  against  unfair  dismissal,  are 
regulated  in  such  a  way  that  companies  are  willing  to  create  new  jobs,  and  the  unemployed  are 
anxious to find work again quickly. 
In addition, Switzerland still has a very competitive export sector, which is well able to hold its own in 
today’s global environment. It comprises both large international companies as well as a great deal of 
small and medium-sized enterprises. These are able  to maintain their leading position in the world, 
thanks to high productivity and innovative products. 
A  greater  cause  for  concern,  however,  is  our  domestic  economy.  It  includes  a  number  of  different 
sectors, such as agriculture, tourism, and trade and industry, as well as public and semi-private areas, 
such  as  telecommunications,  post  and  electricity.  In  many  sectors,  the  domestic  industry  is  not 
productive enough and too costly. Many prices are kept high by state regulations, cartels and other 
anti-competitive agreements. The enforcement of the Domestic Market Act, which was introduced in 
the nineties with the purpose of standardising the Swiss market, failed at a cantonal level. As a result, 
price  levels  in  Switzerland  are  significantly  higher  than  they  are  abroad.  The  affected  sectors  put 
forward the argument that like hadn’t been compared with like and that the differences in quality hadn’t 
been  taken  into  consideration.  There  is  undoubtedly  some  truth  in  what  they  say.  Furthermore,  the 
desire to mitigate competitive pressure may reflect a Switzerland that wants to avoid conflict. Indeed, 
this  attitude  has,  in  many  respects,  proved  highly  advantageous  for  the  country.  Nonetheless,  it 
doesn’t change the fact that international competition has increased and that the Swiss are making the 
most of the growing number of possibilities to avail themselves of goods and services from abroad. 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 1
Of course, we can’t talk about Switzerland without also talking about the Swiss franc. The Swiss franc 
forms the basis for the Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy autonomy and for price stability. It also 
underpins the efficient Swiss capital market, which is characterised by a low interest rate level, when 
compared internationally, and which represents an important locational advantage for the country. 
The  European  political  and  economic  environment  -  of  which  Switzerland  is  an  integral  part  -  has, 
however, gone through a great deal of change. It is therefore not surprising that our relationship with 
Europe is a topic of much discussion in my country. 
Switzerland and the European scene 
2. 
For almost six years now, Switzerland has been surrounded by the single European currency. And for 
six years we have been trying to make it clear to our friends abroad that Switzerland is nevertheless 
not an island, but is in fact deeply integrated into Europe. Approximately 20 percent of our workforce 
comes from EU member states. A total 60 percent of our exports go to the EU and 80 percent of our 
imports come from there. A large proportion of the transit travel from the north to the south of Europe 
goes  right  through  Switzerland.  In  order  to  make  this  more  efficient,  we  are  currently  digging  a 
57-kilometer-long railway tunnel through the Gotthard Mountain - an undertaking that is going to cost 
Switzerland a lot of money. So I hope that it will manage to be the longest railway tunnel in the world - 
for a few years at least. 
The country’s economic relations with the European Union are governed by the Bilateral Agreements - 
this comes after the electorate voted against Switzerland’s accession to the European Economic Area 
in 1992. Agreements in seven sectors have been in force since mid-2002; a further eight agreements 
were signed by the EU and Switzerland just three weeks ago. These now need to be approved by 
parliament or, if necessary, by the people. 
Opening up the Swiss labour market vis-à-vis the EU is of particular importance. For our country, the 
enlargement of the workforce through the immigration of foreign nationals has long been crucial, given 
its  own  limited  labour  potential.  Earlier  arrangements  were  customised  to  suit  the  needs  of  certain 
sectors,  notably  the  construction,  tourism  and  agricultural  industries.  However,  since  the  bilateral 
agreement  on  the  free  movement  of  persons  entered  into  force  two  years  ago,  the  Swiss  labour 
market has been open to EU citizens. And vice-versa - Swiss nationals seeking employment are free 
to  work  anywhere  in  the  European  Union.  There  are,  however,  still  quotas  in  place.  These  will  be 
removed  in  2007.  In  June  of  this  year,  the  preference  clause  favouring  Swiss  employees  was 
abolished. A company in Switzerland may now employ EU nationals without first having to prove that 
an equally qualified person could not be found for the position in the country. 
Thanks  to  the  agreement  on  the  free  movement  of  persons  between  Switzerland  and  the  EU, 
Switzerland now has access to an extensive highly-trained workforce. It has not yet been possible to 
estimate just how much of this potential will be used. Up until now, there has been no major influx of 
people into Switzerland, although this may be attributable in part to the weak labour demand, which in 
turn is due to the current economic situation. In the medium term, we expect the proportion of labour 
coming from the EU to Switzerland to increase. 
However,  opening  up  the  Swiss  labour  market  also  gives  rise  to  fears.  People  are  concerned  that 
Swiss salary levels will come under pressure and that employment conditions will deteriorate. In an 
effort  to  counteract  any  serious  repercussions  on  the  Swiss  labour  market,  the  authorities  have 
implemented a number of accompanying measures. These, however, will not be able to completely 
prevent  competitive  pressures  in  Switzerland  from  intensifying.  The  attempt  to  avert  any  wage 
adjustments  by 
instance,  would  be 
counterproductive. Switzerland would be unable to benefit from the opportunities that this opening up 
presents. The Swiss labour market would become less flexible, and the country would lose one of its 
most crucial locational advantages. It is more important to ensure that the goods markets also adjust 
and the inflated price level drops - this can be achieved by systematically promoting competition and 
by reducing state regulations. 
The eastward  enlargement  of  the  EU inevitably  begs  the question  as  to whether  the rocky  bilateral 
road on which Switzerland has set out will also be a fit for the challenges of the future. Accession to 
the  EU  is  currently  not  an  issue,  however.  Reasons  for  the  scepticism  of  the  Swiss  people  in  this 
regard are manifold. For instance, Switzerland would have to give up the Swiss franc if it joined. This 
in turn would mean a higher interest rate level and an end to our autonomous monetary policy. 
introducing  minimum  wages  across 
the  board, 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2004
It  was  precisely  in  the  past  three  difficult  years,  that  the  possibility  of  conducting  an  independent 
monetary policy proved advantageous. At the beginning of 2001, the Swiss National Bank relaxed its 
monetary policy before the European Central Bank and, in the following months, also cut its short-term 
interest rates more drastically than the ECB. In March 2003, we lowered our key rate, the three-month 
Libor  rate,  to  almost  zero.  This  was  in  reaction  to  the  deflationary  risk  in  the  wake  of  the  strong 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. We have, in the meantime, pushed our interest rates back up slightly. 
Our economy has now returned to its growth path and the risk of deflation has been overcome; so 
there is no longer any reason to keep the short-term interest rate level so close to zero. 
The sharp decrease in interest rates certainly helped to bolster domestic demand and thus avoid an 
even worse downturn. It was nevertheless not possible to completely escape an economic slump. It 
goes to show, yet again, just how close Switzerland’s ties are with the EU and the global economy 
- both in good times and in bad. 
Switzerland as a global player 
3. 
Switzerland does not only feel the winds of change in Europe. As a small and open country, it is also 
strongly  exposed  to  globalisation.  Foreign  trade  -  measured  as  the  sum  of  exports  and  imports  in 
relation to the gross domestic product - has risen further in the past ten years. At the same time, the 
export  and  import  structure  has  become  more  diverse.  While  the  old  EU  countries  have  lost  some 
ground, the emerging countries in Eastern Europe and Asia have gained substantial shares. 
Globalisation  brings  with  it  an  increase  in  competition  for  the  most  attractive  business  locations.  In 
recent years, Swiss companies have founded or taken over companies outside Europe on a significant 
scale  -  partly  to  cut  costs,  but  in  many  instances  also  to  be  closer  to  the  markets.  To  what  extent 
Switzerland has already become a global player is reflected by the impressive development of direct 
investments. These are investments through which an investor participates with at least 10 percent in 
a company abroad or establishes a subsidiary or branch abroad. In 2002, the stock of Swiss direct 
investment abroad amounted to almost 100 percent of Switzerland’s GDP, as against only 29 percent 
in 1990. Compared with other industrialised nations, Switzerland is in the top league. 
In  the  financial  sector,  globalisation  has  manifested  itself  particularly  clearly.  In  the  past  few  years, 
Swiss banks have seriously boosted their investment abroad, mainly by taking over foreign financial 
institutions. At the same time, however, the Swiss banking sector has undergone an intensive process 
of concentration, which partly resulted from domestic problems, but also came as a reaction to fierce 
international  competition.  The  total  number  of  banks  halved  from  roughly  600  institutions  at  the 
beginning of the nineties to less than 300 institutions today. Of the four big banks, only two remain. 
Apart  from  this  restructuring  process,  a  number  of  other  challenges  have  arisen  over  the  past  few 
years. Notably the clean-up of the legacy from World War II, the participation in the combat of money 
laundering, and also the protection of our interests vis-à-vis the EU, particularly with regard to banking 
secrecy  and  the  taxation  of  savings  income.  Lastly,  the  stock  market  slump  in  2001/2002  put  the 
earning power of the financial industry to the test. 
The  Swiss  financial  sector  proved  it  could  tackle  these  challenges.  It  was  able  to  consolidate  its 
position  as  a  significant  international  financial  centre,  and  thus  remains  an  important  pillar  of 
Switzerland’s  economy.  Stiff  global  competition,  meanwhile,  is  still  forcing  the  financial  sector  to 
increase its efficiency and lower costs. The days when banks and insurance companies were reliable 
job machines are gone and will probably not return in the foreseeable future. 
The challenges I mentioned - from securing the social security institutions to standing our ground in a 
global environment - will be major issues for the Swiss economy, politics and the public in the coming 
years, and they will put Switzerland’s adaptability to the test. Allow me now to comment briefly on a 
few of these challenges. 
Current challenges 
4. 
As  in  most  industrialised countries,  demographics  create a  need  for  action  in  Switzerland,  too.  The 
population is steadily aging and grows only slowly. It is thanks to immigration that it is rising at all. We 
will  therefore  face  a  massive  increase  in  social  security  expenditure  in  the  decades  ahead.  At  the 
same time, economic growth in Switzerland is weak. This constellation threatens to destabilise public 
finances. There are solutions, yet none of them come for free. 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 3
The first two solutions, i.e. cutting back social benefits and/or increasing social contributions, are not 
very  popular.  In  the  first  instance,  the  people  are  opposed  to  such  measures.  As  to  the  second 
solution,  it  does  not  make  economic  sense  to  further  increase  the  already  heavy  tax  burden.  This 
leaves a third alternative - that is to boost income through stronger economic growth. A majority of 
people favour this solution, yet there is no consensus as to how it might be realised. Some support 
stimulating  demand,  especially  with  a  view  toward  monetary  policy.  Others  put  the  emphasis  on 
supporting the market forces by deregulation and liberalisation. However, these same people will often 
shy away from drastic measures as soon as their own interests are concerned. 
The National Bank can support economic growth with its monetary policy as long as the goal of price 
stability is not jeopardised. This is the case when economic growth reaches capacity limits. However, 
monetary  policy  cannot  increase  the  growth  potential.  To  achieve  this,  measures  are  needed  that 
provide  more  room  for  manoeuvre  and  foster  initiative  and  readiness  for  innovation  on  the  part  of 
individuals and corporations. 
In recent years, Switzerland has seen a number of reforms that head in the right direction and - in 
some cases - that have proven to be successful. For instance, the telecommunications sector and the 
hotel and restaurant industry have been liberalised, the cartel laws revised and - last but not least - 
labour market policies have seen changes as a result of the free movement of persons between the 
EU and Switzerland. Admittedly, some of these reforms have been implemented only half-heartedly 
and - what’s more - under pressure from outside. This is not surprising given the fact that the level of 
prosperity in Switzerland is still high and that we are not in an acute crisis situation. I am confident that 
the  reform  process  will  accelerate  in  the  next  few  years,  with  the  European  domestic  market  and 
globalisation  being  important  driving  forces.  In  order  to  remain  competitive  and  attractive  as  a 
production centre, Switzerland will have to break new ground in many areas. 
The  National  Bank  is  also  confronted  with  some  challenges.  One  change,  which  initially  caused  us 
considerable concern, has turned out to be a big advantage: the creation of the European currency 
area. 
Prior to the launch of the euro, there was a great deal of concern at the SNB. We could not exclude 
the possibility that the euro would destabilise the franc, that it would replace it as a means of payment, 
and that the expectation of the Swiss franc being pegged to the euro would mean a convergence of 
the lower domestic interest rate level with the higher interest level in the euro area. 
None of these scenarios have become a reality. On the contrary - the euro stabilised the exchange 
rates to a degree that we would not have thought possible ten years ago. The franc continues to be 
the means of payment in Switzerland, and the usual interest rate differential vis-à-vis the euro area 
remained. As I have already mentioned, this enabled us to conduct a monetary policy in the heart of 
the euro area that is suited to the needs of Switzerland. 
And that brings me to my concluding remarks. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Switzerland  is  a  small,  open  country,  with  few  natural  resources,  which  in  many  ways  has  become 
global. The export industry and the financial sector have adjusted well to the new structures and have 
become global players. The domestic economy and the political structures, however, are straining to 
make the equivalent adjustments because changes in those areas would often affect vested interests 
and  future  claims  on  the  social  security  system.  Nor  has  there  been  sufficient  pressure  to  act. 
However, in order for Switzerland to stand the test in a dynamic global environment, it must ensure 
that the reform process currently under way will be continued and accelerated. 
By now, some observers have come to question Switzerland’s ability to make comprehensive reforms 
altogether and assert that the country has become a problem case because of its inability to make 
changes. I do not share this pessimistic view. On the contrary, I am convinced that the understanding 
for the necessity of reforms, and with it the willingness to temporarily accept disadvantages, will grow. 
What  ultimately  gives  me  cause  for  optimism  are  Switzerland’s  sense  of  realism  and  its  wealth  of 
experience.  We  are  aware  that  neither  the  European  environment  nor  globalisation  will  take  our 
national feelings into account. However, we have also discovered that a small country can indeed exist 
in a globalised world provided that it considers its comparative strengths. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2004
