Ben S Bernanke: Panel discussion: what have we learned since October 1979? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, to the Conference on Reflections on Monetary Policy 25 Years after October 1979, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St Louis, St Louis, Missouri, 8 October 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 The  question  asked  of  this  panel  is,  “What  have  we  learned  since  October  1979?”  The  evidence 
suggests that we have learned quite a bit. Most notably, monetary policy-makers, political leaders, and 
the public have been persuaded by two decades of experience that low and stable inflation has very 
substantial economic benefits.  
This consensus marks a considerable change from the views held by many economists at the time 
that  Paul  Volcker  became  Fed  Chairman.  In  1979,  most  economists  would  have  agreed  that,  in 
principle, low inflation promotes economic growth and efficiency in the long run. However, many also 
believed that, in the range of inflation rates typically experienced by industrial countries, the benefits of 
low  inflation  are  probably  small  -  particularly  when  set  against  the  short-run  costs  of  a  major 
disinflation, as the United States faced at that time. Indeed, some economists would have held that 
low-inflation policies would likely prove counterproductive even in the long run, if an increased focus 
on inflation inhibited monetary policy-makers from responding adequately to fluctuations in economic 
activity and employment.  
As  it  turned  out,  the  low-inflation  era  of  the  past  two  decades  has  seen  not  only  significant 
improvements in economic growth and productivity but also a marked reduction in economic volatility, 
both in the United States and abroad, a phenomenon that has been dubbed “the Great Moderation.” 
Recessions  have  become  less  frequent  and  milder,  and  quarter-to-quarter  volatility  in  output  and 
employment has declined significantly as well. The sources of the Great Moderation remain somewhat 
controversial, but as I have argued elsewhere, there is evidence for the view that improved control of 
inflation  has  contributed  in  important  measure  to  this  welcome  change  in  the  economy  (Bernanke, 
2004). Paul Volcker and his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee deserve enormous 
credit  both  for  recognizing  the  crucial  importance  of  achieving  low  and  stable  inflation  and  for  the 
courage and perseverance with which they tackled America’s critical inflation problem. 
I could say much more about Volcker’s achievement and its lasting benefits, but I am sure that many 
other speakers will cover that ground. Instead, in my remaining time, I will focus on some lessons that 
economists  have  drawn  from  the  Volcker  regime  regarding  the  importance  of  credibility  in  central 
banking and how that credibility can be obtained. As usual, the views I will express are my own and 
are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 
Volcker  could  not  have  accomplished  what  he  did,  of  course,  had  he  not  been  appointed  to  the 
chairmanship  by  President  Jimmy  Carter.  In  retrospect,  however,  Carter’s  appointment  decision 
seems at least a bit incongruous. Why would the President appoint as head of the central bank an 
individual whose economic views and policy goals (not to mention personal style) seemed, at least on 
the surface, quite different from his own? However, not long into Volcker’s term, a staff economist at 
the Board of Governors produced a paper that explained why Carter’s decision may in fact have been 
quite  sensible  from  the  President’s,  and  indeed  the  society’s,  point  of  view.  Although  the  question 
seems a narrow one, the insights of the paper had far broader application; indeed, this research has 
substantially  advanced  our  understanding  of  the  links  among  central  bank  credibility,  central  bank 
structure, and the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Insiders  will  have  already  guessed  that  the  Board  economist  to  whom  I  refer  is  Kenneth  Rogoff, 
currently a professor of economics at Harvard, and that the paper in question is Ken’s 1985 article, 
“The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  an  Intermediate  Monetary  Target”  (Rogoff,  1985).1  The 
insights  of  the  Rogoff  paper  are  well  worth  recalling  today.  Rather  than  considering  the  paper  in 
isolation, however, I will place it in the context of two other classic papers on credibility and central 
bank design, an earlier work by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott and a later piece by Carl Walsh. 
                                                      
1   Rogoff’s paper was widely circulated in 1982, a sad commentary on publication lags in economics. 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 1
As I proceed, I will note what I see to be the important lessons and the practical implications of this line 
of research.2
Central  bankers  have  long  recognized  at  some  level  that  the  credibility  of  their  pronouncements 
matters. I think it is fair to say, however, that in the late 1960s and 1970s, as the U.S. inflation crisis 
was building, economists and policymakers did not fully understand or appreciate the determinants of 
credibility  and  its  link  to  policy  outcomes.  In  1977,  however,  Finn  Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott 
published a classic paper, entitled “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans” 
(Kydland  and  Prescott,  1977),  that  provided  the  first  modern  analysis  of  these  issues.3  Specifically, 
Kydland  and  Prescott  demonstrated  why,  in  many  situations,  economic  outcomes  will  be  better  if 
policymakers  are  able  to  make  credible  commitments,  or  promises,  about  certain  aspects  of  the 
policies they will follow in the future. “Credible” in this context means that the public believes that the 
policymakers will keep their promises, even if they face incentives to renege. 
In  particular,  as  one  of  Kydland  and  Prescott’s  examples  illustrates,  monetary  policy-makers  will 
generally find it advantageous to commit publicly to following policies that will produce low inflation. If 
the  policymakers’  statements  are  believed  (that  is,  if  they  are  credible),  then  the  public  will  expect 
inflation to be low, and demands for wage and price increases should accordingly be moderate. In a 
virtuous circle, this cooperative behavior by the public makes the central bank’s commitment to low 
inflation easier to fulfill. In contrast, if the public is skeptical of the central bank’s commitment to low 
inflation (for example, if it believes that the central bank may give in to the temptation to overstimulate 
the economy for the sake of short-term employment gains), then the public’s inflation expectations will 
be higher than they otherwise would be. Expectations of high inflation lead to more-aggressive wage 
and price demands, which make achieving and maintaining low inflation more difficult and costly (in 
terms of lost output and employment) for the central bank. 
Providing a clear explanation of why credibility is important for effective policymaking, as Kydland and 
Prescott did, was an important step. However, these authors largely left open the critical issue of how 
a central bank is supposed to obtain credibility in the first place. Here is where Rogoff’s seminal article 
took  up  the  thread.4  Motivated  by  the  example  of  Carter  and  Volcker,  Rogoff’s  paper  showed 
analytically why even a president who is not particularly averse to inflation, or at least no more so than 
the average member of the general public, might find it in his interest to appoint a well-known “inflation 
hawk” to head the central bank. The benefit of appointing a hawkish central banker is the increased 
inflation-fighting  credibility  that  such  an  appointment  brings.  The  public  is  certainly  more  likely  to 
believe  an  inflation  hawk  when  he  promises  to  contain  inflation  because  they  understand  that,  as 
someone  who  is  intrinsically  averse  to  inflation,  he  is  unlikely  to  renege  on  his  commitment.  As 
increased  credibility  allows  the  central  bank  to  achieve  low  inflation  at  a  smaller  cost  than  a 
non-credible central bank can, the president may well find, somewhat paradoxically, that he prefers 
the  economic  outcomes  achieved  under  the  hawkish  central  banker  to  those  that  could  have  been 
obtained under a central banker with views closer to his own and those of the public. 
                                                      
2  
In  focusing  on  three  landmark  papers  I  necessarily  ignore  what  has  become  an  enormous  literature  on  credibility  and 
monetary policy. Walsh (2003, chap. 8) provides an excellent overview. Rogoff (1987) was an important early survey of the 
“first generation” of models of credibility in the context of central banking. 
In another noteworthy paper, Calvo (1978) made a number of points similar to those developed by Kydland and Prescott. 
The extension of the Kydland-Prescott “inflation bias” by Barro and Gordon (1983a) has proved highly influential. 
3  
4  Rogoff was my graduate school classmate at M.I.T., and I recently asked him for his recollections about the origins of the 
conservative central banker. Here (from a personal e-mail) is part of his response:  
[T]he paper was mainly written at the Board in 1982 . . . It came out as an IMF working paper in February 1983 (I 
was visiting there), and then the same version came out as an International Finance Discussion paper [at the Board 
of Governors] in September 1983 . . . The original version of the paper . . . featured inflation targeting. Much like the 
published paper, I suggested that having  an independent central  bank can be a solution to the time consistency 
[that is, credibility] problem if we give the bank an intermediate target and some (unspecified) incentive to hit the 
target . . . I had the conservative central banker idea in there as well, as one practical way to ensure the central 
bank placed a high weight on inflation. Larry Summers, my editor at the [Quarterly Journal of Economics], urged me 
to  move  that  idea  up  to  the  front  section  and  place  inflation  targeting  second.  This,  of  course,  is  how  the  paper 
ended up. 
[Regarding the Fed], Dale Henderson and Matt Canzoneri liked the paper very much . . . many other researchers 
gave  me  feedback  on  my  paper  (including  Peter  Tinsley,  Ed  Offenbacher,  Bob  Flood,  Jo  Anna  Gray,  and  many 
others)  .  .  .  Last  but  perhaps  most  important,  there  is  absolutely  no  doubt  that  the  paper  was  inspired  by  my 
experience watching the Volcker Fed at close range. I never would have written it had I not . . . ended up as an 
economist at the Board.  
2 
 BIS Review 57/2004
Appointing  an  inflation  hawk  to  head  the  central  bank  may  not  be  enough  to  ensure  credibility  for 
monetary policy, however. As Rogoff noted in his article, for this strategy to confer significant credibility 
benefits, the central bank must be perceived by the public as being sufficiently independent from the 
rest  of  the  government  to  be  immune  to  short-term  political  pressures.  Thus  Rogoff’s  proposed 
strategy  was  really  two-pronged:  The  appointment  of  inflation-averse  central  bankers  must  be 
combined  with  measures  to  ensure  central  bank  independence.  These  ideas,  supported  by  a  great 
deal of empirical work, have proven highly influential.5 Indeed, the credibility benefits of central bank 
autonomy have been widely recognized in the past twenty years, not only in the academic literature 
but, far more consequentially, in the real-world design of central banking institutions. For example, in 
the  United  Kingdom,  the  euro  area,  Japan,  and  numerous  other  places,  recent  legislation  or  other 
government action has palpably strengthened the independence of the central banks.6
Rogoff’s  proposed  solution  to  the  credibility  problems  of  central  banks  does  have  some  limitations, 
however,  as  Ken  recognized  both  in  his  paper  and  in  subsequent  work.  First,  although  an 
inflation-averse central banker enhances credibility and delivers lower inflation on average, he may not 
respond to shocks to the economy in the socially desirable way. For example, faced with an aggregate 
supply shock (such as a sharp rise in oil prices), an inflation-averse central banker will tend to react 
too  aggressively  (from  society’s  point  of  view)  to  contain  the  inflationary  impact  of  the  shock,  with 
insufficient attention to the consequences of his policy for output and employment.7 Second, contrary 
to an assumption of Rogoff’s paper, in practice the policy preferences of a newly appointed central 
banker will not be precisely known by the public but must be inferred from policy actions. (Certainly the 
public’s perceptions of Chairman Volcker’s views and objectives evolved over time.) Knowing that the 
public  must  make  such  inferences  might  tempt  a  central  banker  to  misrepresent  the  state  of  the 
economy  (Canzoneri,  1985)  or  even  to  take  suboptimal  policy  decisions;  for  example,  the  central 
banker may feel compelled to tighten policy more aggressively than is warranted in order to convince 
the public of his determination to fight inflation. The public’s need to infer the central banker’s policy 
preferences may even generate increased economic instability, as has been shown in a lively recent 
literature on the macroeconomic consequences of learning.8  
The  third  pathbreaking  paper  I  will  mention  today,  a  1995  article  by  Carl  Walsh  entitled  “Optimal 
Contracts  for  Central  Bankers,”  was  an  attempt  to  address  both  of  these  issues.9  To  do  so,  Walsh 
conducted  a  thought  experiment.  He  asked  his  readers  to  imagine  that  the  government  or  society 
could offer the head of the central bank a performance contract, one that includes explicit monetary 
rewards or penalties that depend on the economic outcomes that occur under his watch. Remarkably, 
Walsh showed that, in principle, a relatively simple contract between the government and the central 
bank  would  lead  to  the  implementation  of  monetary  policies  that  would  be  both  credible  and  fully 
optimal.  Under  this  contract,  the  government  provides  the  central  banker  with  a  base  level  of 
compensation but then applies a penalty that depends on the realized rate of inflation - the higher the 
observed inflation rate, the greater the penalty. 
If the public understands the nature of the contract, and if the penalty assessed for permitting inflation 
is large enough to affect central bank behavior, the existence of the contract would give credence to 
                                                      
5  Walsh  (2003,  section  8.5)  reviews  empirical  research  on  the  correlations  of  central  bank  independence  and  economic 
outcomes. A consistent finding is that more-independent central banks produce lower inflation without any increase in output 
volatility. 
6  The benefits of central bank independence should not lead us to ignore its downside, which is that the very distance from 
the political process that increases the central bank’s policy credibility by necessity also risks isolating the central bank and 
making it less democratically accountable. For this reason, central bankers should make communication with the public and 
their elected representatives a high priority. Moreover, central bank independence does not imply that central banks should 
never coordinate with other parts of the government, under the appropriate circumstances. 
Lohmann  (1992)  shows  that  this  problem  can  be  ameliorated  if  the  government  limits  the  central  bank’s  independence, 
stepping in to override the central bank’s decisions when the supply shock becomes too large. However, to preserve the 
central  bank’s  independence  in  normal  situations,  this  approach  would  involve  stating  clearly  in  advance  the  conditions 
under which the government would intercede, which may not be practicable. 
7 
8   Evans and Honkopohja (2001) is the standard reference on learning in macroeconomics. Recent papers that apply models 
of  learning  to  the  analysis  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  include  Erceg  and  Levin  (2001)  and  Orphanides  and  Williams 
(forthcoming). 
9   Persson  and  Tabellini  (1993)  provided  an  influential  analysis  of  the  contracting  approach  that  extended  and  developed 
many of the points made by Walsh (1995). 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 3
central bank promises to keep the inflation rate low (that is, the contract would provide credibility).10 
Walsh’s  contract  has  in  common  with  Rogoff’s  approach  the  idea  that,  in  a  world  of  imperfect 
credibility, giving the central banker an objective function that differs from the true objectives of society 
may  be  useful.  However,  Walsh  also  shows  that  the  contracting  approach  ameliorates  the  two 
problems associated with Rogoff’s approach. First, under the Walsh contract, the central banker has 
incentives  not  only  to  achieve  the  target  rate  of  inflation  but  also  to  respond  in  the  socially  optimal 
manner  to  supply  shocks.11  Second,  as  the  inflation  objective  and  the  central  banker’s  incentive 
scheme are made explicit by the contract, the public’s problem of inferring the central banker’s policy 
preferences is significantly reduced. 
There  have  been  a  few  attempts  in  the  real  world  to  implement  an  incentive  contract  for  central 
bankers  -  most  famously  a  plan  proposed  to  the  New  Zealand  legislature,  though  never  adopted, 
which provided for firing the governor of the central bank if the inflation rate deviated too far from the 
government’s inflation objective.12 But Walsh’s contracts are best treated as a metaphor rather than as 
a  literal  proposal  for  central  bank  reform.  Although  the  pay  of  central  bankers  is  unlikely  ever  to 
depend directly on the realized rate of inflation, central bankers, like most people, care about many 
other aspects of their jobs, including their professional reputations, the prestige of the institutions in 
which they serve, and the probability that they will be reappointed. 
Walsh’s  analysis  and  many  subsequent  refinements  by  other  authors  suggest  that  central  bank 
performance might be improved if the government set explicit performance standards for the central 
bank  (perhaps  as  part  of  the  institution’s  charter  or  enabling  legislation)  and  regularly  compared 
objectives and outcomes. Alternatively, because central banks may possess the greater expertise in 
determining  what  economic  outcomes  are  both  feasible  and  most  desirable,  macroeconomic  goals 
might be set through a joint exercise of the government and the central bank. Many countries have 
established targets for inflation, for example, and central bankers in those countries evidently make 
strong efforts to attain those targets. The Federal Reserve Act does not set quantitative goals for the 
U.S.  central  bank,  but  it  does  specify  the  objectives  of  price  stability  and  maximum  sustainable 
employment  and  requires  the  central  bank  to  present  semi-annual  reports  to  the  Congress  on 
monetary policy and the state of the economy. Accountability to the public as well as to the legislature 
is also important; for this reason, the central bank should explain regularly what it is trying to achieve 
and  why.  In  sum,  Walsh’s  paper  can  be  read  as  providing  theoretical  support  for  an  explicit, 
well-designed, and transparent framework for monetary policy, one which sets forth the objectives of 
policy and holds central bankers accountable for reaching those objectives (or, at least, for providing a 
detailed and plausible explanation of why the objectives were missed). 
In the simple model that Walsh analyzes, the optimal contract provides all the incentives needed to 
induce  the  best  possible  monetary  policy,  so  that  appointing  a  hawkish  central  banker  is  no  longer 
beneficial. However, in practice - because Walsh’s optimal contracts can be roughly approximated at 
best,  because  both  the  incentives  and  the  policy  decisions  faced  by  central  bankers  are  far  more 
complex than can be captured by simple models, and because the appointment of an inflation-averse 
central  banker  may  provide  additional  assurance  to  the  public  that  the  government  and  the  central 
bank  will  keep  their  promises  -  the  Walsh  approach  and  the  Rogoff  approach  are  almost  certainly 
complementary.13 That is, a clear, well-articulated monetary policy framework; inflation-averse central 
bankers;  and  autonomy  for  central  banks  in  the  execution  of  policy  are  all  likely  to  contribute  to 
increased  central  bank  credibility  and  hence  better  policy  outcomes.  Of  course,  other  factors  that  I 
                                                      
10   An  objection  to  this  conclusion  is  that,  although  the  central  bank’s  incentives  are  made  clear  by  the  contract,  the  public 
might  worry  that  the  government  might  renege  on  its  commitment  to  low  inflation  by  changing  the  contract.  Those  who 
discount this concern argue that changing the contract in midstream would be costly for the government, because laws once 
enacted are difficult to modify and because changing an established framework for policy in an opportunistic way would be 
politically embarrassing. 
11   A key assumption underlying this result is that the central banker cares about the state of the economy as well as about the 
income provided by his incentive contract. 
12   In personal communication, Walsh reports to me that he was visiting a research institute in New Zealand at the time of these 
discussions. Walshs reflection on the New Zealand proposals helped to inspire his paper. 
13   Several authors have shown this point in models in which the inflation bias arising from non-credible policies differs across 
states of nature; see, for example, Herrendorf and Lockwood (1997) and Svensson (1997). 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2004
could not cover in this short review, such as the central bank’s reputation for veracity as established 
over time, may also strengthen its credibility (Barro and Gordon, 1983b; Backus and Driffill, 1985).14
Let  me  end  where  I  began,  with  reference  to  Paul  Volcker  and  his  contributions.  I  have  discussed 
today how Volcker’s personality and performance inspired one seminal piece of research about the 
determinants of central bank credibility. In focusing on a few pieces of academic research, however, I 
have greatly understated the impact of the Volcker era on views about central banking. The Volcker 
disinflation  (and  analogous  episodes  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada,  and  elsewhere)  was 
undoubtedly a major catalyst for an explosion of fresh thinking by economists and policymakers about 
central bank credibility, how it is obtained, and its benefits for monetary policy-making. Over the past 
two decades, this new thinking has contributed to a wave of changes in central banking, particularly 
with respect to the institutional design of central banks and the establishment of new frameworks for 
the making of monetary policy. 
Ironically, the applicability of the ideas stimulated by the Volcker chairmanship to the experience of the 
U.S.  economy  under  his  stewardship  remains  unclear.  Though  the  appointment  of  Volcker 
undoubtedly increased the credibility of the Federal Reserve, the Volcker disinflation was far from a 
costless affair, being associated with a minor recession in 1980 and a deep recession in 1981-82.15 
Evidently,  Volcker’s  personal  credibility  notwithstanding,  Americans’  memories  of  the  inflationary 
1970s were too fresh for their inflation expectations to change quickly. It is difficult to know whether 
alternative tactics would have helped; for example, the announcement of explicit inflation objectives 
(which  would  certainly  have  been  a  radical  idea  at  the  time)  might  have  helped  guide  inflation 
expectations downward more quickly, but they might also have created a political backlash that would 
have doomed the entire effort. Perhaps no policy approach or set of institutional arrangements could 
have  eliminated  the  1970s  inflation  at  a  lower  cost  than  was  actually  incurred.  If  so,  then  the 
significance of Paul Volcker’s appointment was not its immediate effect on expectations or credibility 
but rather the fact that he was one of the rare individuals tough enough and with sufficient foresight to 
do what had to be done. By doing what was necessary to achieve price stability, the Volcker Fed laid 
the groundwork for two decades, so far, of strong economic performance. 
                                                      
14   But see Rogoff (1987) for a critique of models of central bank reputation.  
15   Evidence on the behavior of inflation expectations after 1979 supports the view that the public came to appreciate only very 
gradually that Volcker’s policies represented a break from the immediate past (Erceg and Levin, 2001). 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 5
