Ben S Bernanke: Central bank talk and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Japan Society Corporate Luncheon, New York, 7 October 2004.  
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 A few days before the last meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I noticed a wire 
service  story  about  the  upcoming  meeting  with  the  following  headline:  “It’s  Not  What  They  Do,  It’s 
What They Say.” The story alluded to the fact that, with a 25-basis-point increase in the federal funds 
rate  target  at  the  FOMC  meeting  being  widely  anticipated,  financial-market  participants  planned  to 
focus their attention instead on the statement that would accompany the announcement of the rate 
decision.  In  doing  so,  they  hoped  to  garner  information  about  the  FOMC’s  outlook  and  policy 
intentions that might prove useful in pricing fixed-income securities and other assets. Indeed, it has not 
been uncommon in the past few years for financial markets to react more strongly to changes in the 
wording of the Committee’s statement than to its decision about the target for the federal funds rate 
itself. 
The  increased  prominence  of  the  FOMC’s  post-meeting  statement  is  best  understood  as  the  latest 
step  in  a  journey  toward  greater  transparency  and  openness  on  the  part  of  the  Committee.  This 
increase  in  transparency  is  highly  welcome,  for  many  reasons.  Perhaps  most  important,  as  public 
servants  whose  decisions  affect  the  lives  of  every  citizen,  central  bankers  have  a  responsibility  to 
provide the public as much explanation of those decisions as possible, so long as doing so does not 
compromise  the  decisionmaking  process  itself.  A  more  open  policymaking  process  is  also  likely  to 
lead to better policy decisions, because engagement with an informed public provides central bankers 
with  useful  feedback  in  the  form  of  outside  views  and  analyses.  Beyond  the  basic  rationales  of 
democratic accountability and engagement with the public, however, open and clear communication 
by the policy committee - which in practice includes speeches and congressional testimony by FOMC 
members,  as  well  as  official  statements  -  makes  monetary  policy  more  effective  in  at  least  three 
distinct ways. 
First, in the very short run, clear communication helps to increase the near-term predictability of FOMC 
rate  decisions,  which  reduces  risk  and  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  allows  for  smoother 
adjustment of the economy to rate changes. Indeed, the three recent rate hikes by the FOMC were so 
well anticipated that financial markets hardly responded when those actions were announced. 
Second, in the long run, communicating the central bank’s objectives and policy strategies can help to 
anchor  the  public’s  long-term  expectations  -  most  importantly,  its  expectations  of  inflation.  Public 
confidence that inflation will remain low in the long run has numerous benefits. Notably, if people feel 
sure  that  inflation  will  remain  well  controlled,  they  will  be  more  restrained  in  their  wage-setting  and 
pricing behavior, which (in something of a virtuous circle) makes it easier for the Federal Reserve to 
confirm their expectations by keeping inflation low. At the same time, by reducing the risk that inflation 
will  come  loose  from  its  moorings,  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  may  afford  the  central  bank 
more short-term flexibility to respond to economic disturbances that affect output and employment.  
The third way in which clear and open communication enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy - 
the  channel  that  will  be  the  focus  of  my  remarks  today  -  is  by  helping  to  align  financial-market 
participants’  expectations  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  more  closely  with  the  policy 
committee’s own plans and projections. As I will discuss, to the extent that central bank talk provides 
useful guidance to markets about the likely future path of short-term interest rates, policymakers will 
exert greater influence over the longer-term interest rates that most matter for spending decisions. At 
the  same  time,  expanding  the  information  available  to  financial-market  participants  improves  the 
efficiency and accuracy of asset pricing. Both of these factors enhance the effectiveness and precision 
of monetary policy. 
In the remainder of my remarks I will elaborate on the usefulness of central bank communication as a 
means  of  informing  the  policy  expectations  of  financial-market  participants  and  the  public  more 
generally.  In  doing  so,  I  will  discuss  some  new  empirical  evidence  on  the  effects  of  central  bank 
communication policies in both the United States and Japan, drawn from a recent paper I prepared 
with  two  Federal  Reserve  colleagues.  Before  proceeding,  however,  I  should  say  that  the  views  I 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 1
express today are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or 
in the Federal Reserve System more generally.  
Communication and the effectiveness of monetary policy 
Although  people  often  speak  of  the  Federal  Reserve  as  controlling  interest  rates,  in  fact  the  Fed 
directly affects only one very short-term and (in the scheme of things) relatively unimportant interest 
rate,  the  federal  funds  rate.  As  you  may  know,  the  federal  funds  rate  is  the  interest  rate  at  which 
commercial banks lend each other reserves for short periods, usually overnight. Other than managers 
of bank reserves and some other traders in short-term funds, few people in the private sector have 
much  interest  in  the  funds  rate  per  se.  In  particular,  most  private-sector  borrowing  and  investment 
decisions  depend  not  on  the  funds  rate  but  on  longer-term  yields,  such  as  mortgage  rates  and 
corporate bond rates, and on the prices of long-lived assets, such as housing and equities. Moreover, 
the link between these longer-term yields and asset prices and the current setting of the federal funds 
rate can be quite loose at times. It is striking, for example, that even as the FOMC has raised its target 
for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points in its three meetings since June, the yield on ten-year 
Treasury  securities  has  fallen  by  almost  the  same  amount  during  that  period.  This  unusual  recent 
movement in longer-term yields contrasts with most previous Fed tightening cycles, in which long-term 
yields typically rose, sometimes quite dramatically. 
Although the relation between the FOMC’s setting of the federal funds rate and the more economically 
relevant  long-term  yields  is  hardly  direct  or  mechanical,  a  critical  connection  does  exist.  The 
connection  operates  less  through  the  current  value  of  the  funds  rate,  however,  than  through  the 
interest-rate actions that the FOMC is expected to take in the future. Specifically, financial theorists 
and  market  practitioners  concur  that,  with  risk  and  term  premiums  held  constant,  long-term  yields 
move closely with the expectations that financial-market participants hold about the future evolution of 
the funds rate and other related short-term rates. For example, all else being equal, if short-term rates 
are expected to be high on average over the relevant period, then longer-term yields will tend to be 
high  as  well.  Were  that  not  the  case,  investors  would  profit  by  holding  a  sequence  of  short-term 
securities and declining to hold long-term bonds, an outcome inconsistent with the requirement that, in 
equilibrium, all securities must be willingly held. Likewise, if future short-term rates are expected to be 
low on average, then long-term bond yields will tend to be low as well. 
The fact that long-term yields depend at least as much on expected future values of the federal funds 
rate as on its current setting helps to explain the recent behavior of long-term bond yields to which I 
alluded  a  moment  ago.  This  June,  concerns  about  inflation,  together  with  a  general  belief  that 
economic growth would continue to be strong, led bond traders to anticipate that the Fed would tighten 
policy relatively quickly. Because the funds rate was expected to rise at a comparatively rapid pace, 
longer-term yields were well above short-term rates; in other words, the term structure of interest rates 
sloped steeply upward.  
Since  June,  however,  inflation  fears  have  receded,  and  some  financial-market  participants  have 
become less optimistic about the economy’s near-term growth prospects. Because of these changes 
in  their  outlook,  market  participants  now  expect  the  FOMC  to  proceed  more  slowly  in  its  tightening 
than they did in June.1 Moreover, with inflation now expected to remain low, market participants may 
anticipate  a  lower  short-term  interest  rate  to  prevail  in  the  long  run.  With  expectations  of  future 
short-term rates revised downward, bond yields have declined, and the slope of the term structure is 
much less steep than it was a few months ago. 
I hope that this brief discussion is sufficient to convince you that the current setting of the federal funds 
rate  provides  at  best  only  partial  information  about  the  overall  tightness  or  ease  of  monetary 
conditions. To assess whether monetary policy is providing net stimulus or restraint to spending and 
the economy, one needs to know not only the current value of the funds rate but also the expected 
future path of the funds rate, as priced in financial markets. 
But how are private-sector expectations of the FOMC’s future policy actions formed in the first place? 
We  come  now  to  the  nub  of  why  central  bank  communications  are  so  important.  Without  guidance 
                                                      
1   By the way, my  statements about what the markets expect are not guesses. As I discuss later, various futures markets, 
such as the federal funds futures market and the Eurodollar futures market, provide useful information about how market 
participants expect the federal funds rate to evolve over the next couple of years.  
2 
 BIS Review 57/2004
from  the  central  bank,  market  participants  can  do  no  better  than  form  expectations  based  on  the 
average  past  behavior  of  monetary  policymakers,  a  strategy  that  may  be  adequate  under  some  or 
even most circumstances but may be seriously misguided in others. In contrast, when the monetary 
policy  committee  regularly  provides  information  about  its  objectives,  economic  outlook,  and  policy 
plans, two benefits result. First, with more complete information available, markets will price financial 
assets more efficiently.  Second,  the  policymakers will  usually  find  that  they  have  achieved a  closer 
alignment between market participants’ expectations about the course of future short-term rates and 
their own views. By guiding market expectations in this way, the policy committee attains increased 
influence  over  the  most  economically  relevant  long-term  yields,  reduced  financial  and  economic 
uncertainty, and, in all probability, better economic outcomes. 
These  potential  benefits  have  not  been  lost  on  Federal  Reserve  policymakers.  Certainly,  the 
development  of  the  FOMC’s  post-meeting  statement  over  the  past  decade  suggests  an  increasing 
awareness of the practical advantages of increased transparency and communication. As hard as it 
may be to imagine, given the prominence afforded to FOMC statements today, before 1994 the FOMC 
issued no post-meeting statement, not even an announcement of its decision about the federal funds 
rate. Instead, in most instances, the Committee signaled its decision to financial markets only indirectly 
through the open-market operations used to affect the rate.2 In February 1994, the FOMC began to 
release  statements  to  note  changes  in  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  but  continued  to  remain 
silent after meetings with no policy changes. Statements have been released after every meeting only 
since May 1999. 
The  FOMC  statements  have  evolved  considerably.  In  their  current  form,  they  provide  a  brief 
description of the state of the economy and a somewhat formulaic description of the so-called balance 
of risks with respect to the outlook for output growth and inflation. The “balance-of-risks” part of the 
statement replaced an earlier formulation, known as the “policy tilt,” which loosely characterized the 
likely  future  direction  of  the  federal  funds  rate.  The  balance-of-risks  portion  of  the  statement  also 
provides information about the likely course of policy, but it does so more indirectly by describing the 
Committee’s  assessment  of  the  potential  risks  to  its  dual  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable 
employment and price stability rather than by commenting on the policy rate itself. 
Most recently, the Committee has introduced additional commentary on the outlook for policy into its 
statement.  For  example, 
that  “policy 
accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period,” a formulation replaced a few meetings 
later  with  the  comment  that  the  Committee  could  be  “patient”  in  removing  policy  accommodation. 
These statements conveyed information to markets about the Committee’s economic outlook as well 
as  its  policy  approach.  In  my  view,  this  language  served  an  important  purpose,  illustrating  in  the 
process  the  value  of  central  bank  communication.  At  the  time  that  “considerable  period”  was 
introduced, the market was pricing in a significant degree of near-term policy tightening, presumably 
on the expectation that the sharp pickup in growth in the third quarter of 2003 would induce the FOMC 
to raise rates. However, this market reaction placed insufficient weight, I believe, on the fact that the 
expansion that began in mid-2003 was characterized by exceptional gains in labor productivity, which 
implied in turn that the rapid growth in output did not materially increase the pressure on resources. 
With inflation low and with continuing slack in resource utilization, the rapid tightening projected by the 
markets  did  not  appear  justified,  the  surge  in  output  growth  notwithstanding.  The  language  of  the 
statement in August 2003 and subsequent meetings persuaded the markets that an autumn tightening 
was  not  in  the  cards,  and  market  expectations  adjusted  accordingly.  Crucially,  this  change  in 
expectations resulted in lower interest rates at all maturities, a development that helped support the 
expansion in the latter part of last year. 
When  the  policy  tightening  cycle  finally  began  earlier  this  year,  the  FOMC  indicated  that,  with 
underlying inflation still relatively low, it would proceed “at a pace that is likely to be measured.” As I 
discussed in a speech in May, the gradualist approach implied by this statement is often appropriate 
during  a  period  of  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  (Bernanke,  2004).  At  the  same  time  that  it 
provided  information  on  its  outlook  and  its  expected  policy  path,  however,  the  Committee  properly 
insisted  that  its  policies  would  be  conditional  on  the  arriving  economic  data.  In  particular,  the 
Committee noted that it would respond as necessary to maintain price stability. 
the  August  2003  statement  of 
the  FOMC 
indicated 
                                                      
2   Before 1994 the public did receive relatively immediate notice of monetary policy action if a change in the FOMC’s target for 
the federal funds rate was accompanied by a change in the discount rate, which was always announced in a press release.  
BIS Review 57/2004 
 3
To  be  absolutely  clear,  in  pointing  out  the  benefits  of  clear  communication  I  am  not  asserting  that 
central bank talk represents an independent tool of policy. Indeed, if the central bank’s statements are 
not informative about the likely future course of the short-term interest rate, they will soon lose their 
ability  to  influence  market  expectations.  Rather,  the  value  of  more-open  communication  is  that  it 
clarifies the central bank’s views and intentions, thereby increasing the likelihood that financial-market 
participants’  rate  expectations  will  be  similar  to  those  of  the  policymakers  themselves  -  or,  if  views 
differ,  ensuring  at  least  that  the  difference  can  not  be  attributed  to  the  policymakers’  failure  to 
communicate their outlook, objectives, and strategy to the public and the markets. 
Do FOMC statements affect policy expectations? Some evidence 
In my remarks thus far I have argued in general terms that FOMC communication can help inform the 
public’s  expectations  of  the  future  course  of  short-term  interest  rates,  providing  the  Committee  with 
increased influence over longer-term rates and hence a greater ability to achieve its macroeconomic 
objectives.  Casual  observation  confirms  that  market  participants  do  pay  close  attention  to  FOMC 
statements  and  that  these  statements  often  move  markets.  But  have  FOMC  statements  had  the 
effects that were intended? And how important have these effects been, relative to the impact of the 
rate-setting decision itself? With two Federal Reserve colleagues, Vincent Reinhart and Brian Sack, I 
recently developed new empirical evidence on these questions, some highlights of which I will briefly 
share with you today (Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack, 2004).3
The  effects  of  FOMC  actions  and  statements  are  reflected  most  clearly  and  directly  in  financial 
markets;  so  to  try  to  measure  these  effects  my  coauthors  and  I  studied  the  responses  to  FOMC 
decisions of some key interest rates and asset prices. More specifically, we observed financial-market 
developments  over  the  period  beginning  fifteen  minutes  before  and  ending  forty-five  minutes  after 
each policy decision became known to the public.4 The advantage of restricting the analysis to a short 
period spanning the Committee’s decision is that the changes in yields or asset prices occurring within 
that narrow window are more likely to reflect the impact of the decision, as opposed to the arrival of 
other  information  about  the  economy. We  included in  our data set  all  FOMC policy decisions since 
July  1991  -  both  those  taken  at  regular  meetings  and  those  made  between  meetings,  a  total  of 
116 decisions.  Of  these  116  policy  decisions,  56  were  accompanied  by  an  official  statement,  and 
60 did not involve a statement. 
Of  greatest  interest  to  us  was  determining  how  FOMC  actions  and  statements  affected  the 
expectations of financial-market participants about the likely future course of the federal funds rate. A 
variety of financial instruments convey information about these expectations. In our work we focused 
on a particular futures contract (a Eurodollar futures contract), which provides a good measure of what 
the  market  expects  the  federal  funds  rate  to  be  at  a  horizon  of  about  one  year.5  By  observing  the 
change in the price of that contract in the period around each FOMC decision, we were able to infer 
how  that  decision  affected  year-ahead  policy  expectations.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  our  data  set 
included  some  decisions  accompanied  by  statements  and  some  without  statements  allowed  us  to 
separate  the  effects  of  rate  actions  and  statements  on  policy  expectations  and,  consequently,  on 
longer-term yields. 
Our findings support the view that FOMC statements have proven a powerful tool for affecting market 
expectations about the future course of the federal funds rate.6 Certainly, the market’s expectations for 
year-ahead rates respond to unexpected changes in the FOMC’s target for the federal funds rate, as 
we would expect. However, as most rate actions are well anticipated by financial markets, changes in 
                                                      
3   Sack has very recently left the Board. Our paper was commissioned by the Brookings Institution and was presented there 
on September 9, 2004. It will be published in the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.  
4   Determining precisely when each decision was either announced or conveyed to the market by other means, such as the 
commencement of open-market operations to establish the new rate, was a tedious process. For details and a record of the 
timing of decisions, see Grkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2004). 
5   The future rate implied by the contract embeds a risk premium that generally causes it to deviate from the federal funds rate 
expected by the typical market participant. However, changes in the contract rate that occur in a short period surrounding an 
FOMC  decision  are  likely  to  be  determined  primarily  by  changes  in  the  policy  outlook  rather  than  changes  in  the  risk 
premium. 
6   Kohn and Sack (2003) and Grkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2004), using methods similar to ours, also find evidence that 
FOMC statements have a strong impact on policy expectations and on financial markets generally. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2004
the  federal  funds  rate  alone  account  for  only  a  small  portion  of  the  change  in  expectations  around 
FOMC  decisions.7  Over  the  short  period  around  a  policy  decision,  FOMC  statements,  not  the 
rate-setting action itself, have the greater influence on year-ahead rate expectations, particularly when 
the content of the statement is not fully anticipated by market participants.8 For example, according to 
our estimates, a policy statement that surprises the market leads market participants to revise their 
year-ahead rate expectations about 14 basis points more than they would have in the absence of such 
a statement. 
We also confirmed that FOMC statements tend to move market beliefs in the direction one would have 
expected. In particular, statements that were unexpectedly “hawkish” in tone - that is, statements that 
seemed to indicate that future policies might involve higher rates than previously thought - resulted in 
increases in year-ahead policy expectations of between 12 and 16 basis points on average, whereas 
“dovish”  statements  led  to  similar  decreases  in  rate  expectations.  The  largest  effects  on  policy 
expectations and yields were observed following FOMC statements that directly addressed the likely 
future evolution of policy, such as the August 2003 statement that invoked the “considerable period” 
and the January 2004 statement that introduced the phraseology that the Committee “can be patient.” 
There seems to be little doubt that FOMC statements can have a substantial influence on year-ahead 
policy expectations. We found that they influence expectations and rates beyond the one-year horizon, 
as  well.  For  example,  we  calculated  that  the  content  of  FOMC  statements  accounts  for  about 
68 percent  of  the  variability  in  the  five-year  Treasury  yield  in  the  hour  around  FOMC  decisions.  By 
contrast, the Committee’s decision about where to set the funds rate explains only 12 percent of the 
variance  in  the  five-year  yield,  with  the  remaining  20  percent  of  the  variance  reflecting  other 
influences.  
We investigated a number of other dimensions of FOMC statements and their effects. For example, 
some  observers  have  argued  that,  by  focusing  attention  on  certain  macroeconomic  variables  as 
possible triggers for policy action, recent statements have increased the responsiveness of yields and 
asset prices to news about those particular variables. A possible case in point is the monthly payroll 
employment number, whose importance to markets appears to have been elevated by references to 
employment and resource utilization in recent FOMC statements.9  
If FOMC communication has served to highlight the monthly payroll statistics and their possible link to 
policy  decisions,  then  financial  markets  should  have  become  more  sensitive  to  unexpected 
developments in payrolls. To check this hypothesis, we studied the behavior of the ten-year Treasury 
yield in the thirty-minute window around the monthly release of the payroll data. We broke the sample 
into  the  periods  before  and  after  the  introduction  of  the  “considerable  period”  language  in  August 
2003. We found that, in the earlier period, an announcement that reported 100,000 jobs more than 
expected translated into a 4-basis-point increase in the ten-year yield during the thirty-minute window 
around the announcement. In contrast, since the August 2003 FOMC meeting, a positive surprise of 
100,000 jobs has increased Treasury yields about 11 basis points. This economically and statistically 
important difference is consistent with the view that FOMC statements have increased the sensitivity 
of  financial  markets  to  the  payroll  data.  It  is  interesting  that,  although  central  bank  talk  may  have 
increased sensitivity to certain data releases, overall financial market volatility has declined recently. 
Federal Reserve communications policy has likely contributed to the fall in volatility by reducing the 
uncertainty surrounding the future course of policy. 
                                                      
7   We concentrated on changes in the funds rate that were surprises to financial markets, on the grounds that changes in the 
funds rate that were fully anticipated would already be priced into markets in advance of the FOMC’s action. To determine 
which FOMC rate-setting actions were unexpected, as well as the magnitude of the policy surprises, we followed Kuttner 
(2001) and compared the rate actually set by the FOMC at each meeting to the market’s expectation of that rate, as inferred 
from the prices of federal funds futures contracts. Applying our methodology, we found that an unexpected 25-basis-point 
change  in  the  Committees  funds  rate  target  has  been  associated  with  a  change  of  about  13  basis  points,  in  the  same 
direction, in the expected funds rate one year ahead. As noted in the text, however, most changes in the funds rate are at 
least partially anticipated, implying that the unexpected component of most funds rate decisions is considerably less than 
25 basis points. The effect on year-ahead rate expectations of a typical change in the funds rate is correspondingly reduced, 
to 5 basis points or less. 
8   To determine which statements surprised markets we used a number of sources, including staff commentaries prepared at 
the  Board  of  Governors  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  articles  in  the  Wall  Street  Journal,  pre-meeting 
commentary by a leading financial firm, and pre-meeting surveys of primary dealers and other market participants.  
9   Each  FOMC  statement  that  used  the  “considerable  period”  language  also  discussed  labor  market  conditions,  and  the 
December 2003 statement tied the “considerable period” outlook for policy closely to “slack” in resource use. 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 5
As I observed earlier, much of the potency of monetary policy lies not in the FOMC’s ability to affect 
today’s federal funds rate but rather in the Committee’s ability to influence market expectations about 
future  policy  and,  consequently,  the  economically  more  relevant  long-term  rates.  On  this  important 
metric, the statement has become an increasingly important tool of policy. Of course, as I have already 
emphasized, talk is of no value if market participants do not believe that the FOMC intends to follow 
through on its plans - adjusting as necessary, of course, to developments in the economy. In the long 
run, talk and action must complement and reinforce each other if policy is to be effective. 
Central bank talk when the policy rate is near the zero bound 
The  research  I  have  described  was  actually  a  part  of  a  larger  project  in  which  my  coauthors  and  I 
investigated alternative monetary policies that might be used when the short-term interest rate is close 
to zero. As the attending members of the Japan Society well know, Japan has been in that difficult 
situation  for  more  than  six  years.  Although  effective  communication  by  the  central  bank  is  always 
important, it becomes especially important when the rates are near zero. Indeed, when the proximity of 
the zero bound prevents further rate cuts to stimulate the economy, talking about future policy actions 
may be one of the few tools at the central bank’s disposal by which to influence conditions in financial 
markets. 
The Bank of Japan’s recent policies illustrate the centrality of communication policies. In April 1999, 
the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ)  not  only  reduced  its  call  rate  to  within  a  few  basis  points  of  zero,  it  also 
announced its attention to keep the call rate at zero “until deflationary concerns are dispelled.” This 
policy, known as the zero-interest-rate policy, or ZIRP, was interrupted by a 25-basis point rise in the 
call rate in August 2000 but then effectively re-introduced in March 2001 in conjunction with the BOJ’s 
new  policy  of  quantitative  easing.10  The  BOJ’s  goal  in  committing  to  the  ZIRP  was  to  persuade 
participants in the Japanese bond market that short-term rates would remain low for longer than they 
had thought - a commitment that, if credible, should result in longer-term rates being lower than they 
otherwise would be. 
Did the ZIRP influence longer-term rates as intended? I will spare you the details but report that our 
tentative  answer  is  “yes.”  Our  most  useful  evidence  involved  a  comparison  of  the  actual  Japanese 
term  structure  of  interest  rates  with  estimates  of  the  term  structure  derived  from  an  econometric 
model,  one  that  links  interest  rates  to  macroeconomic  conditions.  We  found  that,  relative  to  the 
predictions of our model, Japanese interest rates fell significantly after the introduction of the ZIRP in 
April 1999, rose after the policy was interrupted in August 2000, then declined again when the ZIRP 
was re-introduced (along with the new policy of quantitative easing) in March 2001. The effects of the 
ZIRP look particularly large for interest rates on securities with maturities between two to five years, a 
result  consistent  with  other  research  on  this  episode  (for  example,  Fujiki  and  Shiratsuka,  2002). 
Apparently, then, central bank talk has had benefits in Japan as well as in the United States. 
Conclusion 
The practice of monetary policy has changed significantly over the past fifteen years or so, both in the 
United States and abroad. We see today a worldwide trend toward greater clarity, transparency, and 
specificity in central bank communication with the public. These changes are important for reasons of 
governance and democratic accountability as well as for promoting the exchange of ideas between 
those  inside  and  those  outside  central  banks.  Significantly,  as  I  have  emphasized  today,  monetary 
policy  is  more  effective  when  the  policy  committee  provides  the  public  guidance  on  its  outlook, 
objectives, and plans. 
Reasonable people differ on how the FOMC statement should evolve from its present form. My own 
view is that we are approaching the limits of purely qualitative communication and should consider the 
inclusion of quantitative information presented in a clearly specified framework (Bernanke, 2003). For 
example, like policymakers at many other central banks, the FOMC could specify its long-term inflation 
objective  and  include  explicit  economic  forecasts,  conditioned  on  alternative  assumptions,  in  its 
                                                      
10    Under  its  quantitative  easing  policy,  the  BOJ  has  committed  to  provide  more  reserves  to  the  banking  system  than  are 
needed to maintain the call rate at zero. The BOJ’s commitment to quantitative easing thereby commits it to the ZIRP as 
well. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2004
statements or in regular reports. That being said, one must recognize that the FOMC is not a “unitary 
actor,” as the political scientists term it, but a committee of nineteen highly independent people. With 
the best will in the world, achieving a Committee consensus on a detailed forecast (for example) will 
always be difficult in the short time available.  Some ambiguity in the FOMC’s communications may 
therefore be unavoidable. 
That  being  said,  the  increases  in  the  transparency  of  the  FOMC  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System 
during the past decade have really been quite impressive, to the credit of those who have served the 
institution  during  that  period.  Experience  has  shown  that  this  greater  transparency  has  had  many 
palpable benefits, including more effective monetary policy and better macroeconomic outcomes. 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 7
