Timothy F Geithner: Hedge funds and their implications for the financial 
system 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  National  Conference  on  the  Securities  Industry,  New  York  City, 
17 November 2004. 
 I want to use this opportunity to share some perspectives on hedge funds and the policy implications 
of their evolving role in the financial system. 
The term hedge fund is used to describe a diverse group of financial institutions, which together play 
an  increasingly  important  role  in  our  financial  system.  The  rapid  growth  in  their  numbers  and  their 
assets under management suggests they provide, or are perceived to provide, significant economic 
value  to  investors  that  is  not  available  in  other  investment  vehicles.  If  hedge  funds  demonstrate 
continued value as investment vehicles, then given the relatively small share of the world’s savings 
they account for today, we could see meaningful further increases both in the aggregate size of the 
hedge fund sector and in the relative significance of their role in financial markets. 
In  the  conventional  wisdom,  hedge  funds  are  conspicuous  more  for  their  perceived  risks  to  the 
financial system than for the positive contribution they make to how financial markets function. In fact, 
however, they provide a variety of very positive contributions to our financial system. 
Hedge funds play a valuable arbitrage role in reducing or eliminating mispricing in financial markets. 
They  are  an  important  source  of  liquidity,  both  in  periods  of  calm  and  stress.  They  add  depth  and 
breadth  to  our capital  markets.  By  taking risks  that would  otherwise have remained  on  the  balance 
sheets  of  other  financial  institutions,  they  provide  an  important  source  of  risk  transfer  and 
diversification. 
They don’t perform these functions out of a sense of noble purpose, of course, but they are a critical 
part of what makes the U.S. financial markets work relatively well in absorbing shocks and in allocating 
savings to their highest return. These benefits are less conspicuous than the trauma that has been 
associated with hedge funds in periods of financial turmoil, but they are substantial. 
Hedge  funds  combine  the  classic  mix  of  factors  that  have  been  associated  with  institutions  at  the 
center  of  past  instances  of  stress  in  financial  markets.  They  can  be  highly  leveraged  and  can  be 
vulnerable to pressure to liquidate assets quickly if they sustain significant losses. They can be active 
in  complex  instruments,  and  assessing  the  risks  in  their  exposures  is  formidably  challenging. 
Additionally,  they  are  not  subject  to  the  public  disclosure  or  regulatory  reporting  requirements  that 
apply to a range of other financial institutions. And they operate largely outside the framework of other 
requirements established by regulatory authorities to protect the stability of the financial system. 
They are not unique in these attributes. Some of the same things are true of other types of financial 
institutions. It’s the combination of the capacity for leverage, the complexity in assessing the risks they 
present,  together  with  their  apparent  importance  in  many  markets,  that  makes  hedge  funds  an 
important focus of attention from a systemic perspective. 
For policy makers, the concerns associated with hedge funds range from investor protection, to market 
practices and potential manipulation, to the potential conflicts and reputational risks they present to the 
financial institutions they transact with, and to potential risks to the stability of the financial system. I 
want to focus on the latter set of concerns - those associated with systemic risk. 
These systemic concerns have two dimensions: 
First is the possibility that the behavior of hedge funds in periods of market stress could amplify rather 
than  mitigate  the  shock,  induce  larger  moves  in  asset  prices,  or  cause  broader  damage  to  the 
functioning of markets when it is most important they function well. 
Second is the possibility that the failure of a major hedge fund or group of funds could significantly 
damage  the  viability  of  a  major  financial  institution,  both  through  direct  exposure  to  the  fund  and 
losses resulting from the impact on other market risks to which the institution is exposed. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
These concerns existed before the events associated with Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 
1998,  but  that  episode  provided  a  powerful  example  of  both  sets  of  risks,  and  how  the  erosion  of 
counterparty discipline can magnify those risks. 
How significant are these risks today? This is not a question that can be answered by a clear set of 
facts that can inform a judgement of probabilities. And of course how the financial system responds to 
a shock is substantially dependent on the nature of the event.  
In assessing this question today, there are numerous factors to consider: 
• 
The  number  of  hedge  funds,  and  their  total  assets  under  management,  have  increased 
dramatically since 1998, significantly more rapidly than total financial assets. Although they 
still represent a relatively small share of total financial assets, they play a significant role in 
some  market  segments.  Total  exposure  of  the  major  bank  and  non-bank  financial 
intermediaries to hedge funds as a group may be larger today, but that exposure is probably 
more diversified than in 1998. Market participants seem to believe that average leverage in 
the hedge fund community, and the extent of leverage for the more highly leveraged hedge 
funds,  is  lower  than  in  1998,  but  clearly  it  is  difficult  to  assess  these  issues  with  any 
precision.  
On  balance,  the  quality  of  risk  management  by  counterparties  to  hedge  funds  has,  we 
believe,  improved  substantially  since  1998.  This  is  important,  given  the  gaps  revealed  in 
market practice at that point. More on this later.  
Capital in banks and in the parts of the financial system affiliated with banks has increased 
significantly in absolute terms - that is, the major intermediaries are significantly larger than 
in  1998.  However,  when  bank  capital  is  measured  relative  to  the  risk  of  the  activities  it  is 
intended to support, the resulting measures - while strong - are not significantly different from 
1998 levels. The earnings capacity of the largest institutions has increased substantially and 
in some cases the volatility of those earnings has declined with the increased scope of their 
operations.  
The  infrastructure  of  the  financial  system,  meaning  the  clearing  and  settlement  system,  is 
stronger and seems better able to handle much larger volumes, which is an important source 
of resilience in periods of stress.  
   Our overall judgement is that the U.S. financial system today is significantly stronger than it was in 
1998.  It  has  proven  to  be  quite  strong  in  the  face  of  a  number  of  fairly  substantial  recent  adverse 
events. And there is some evidence that hedge funds have helped contribute to this resilience, not just 
in  the  general  contribution  they  provide  by  taking  on  risk,  but  as  a  source  of  liquidity  in  periods  of 
increased stress and risk aversion in the rest of the financial system. 
And yet, hedge funds – and financial leverage more generally - still present a source of potential risk to 
the financial system. The nature of these risks are worth reassessing, given the rapid growth in the 
hedge  fund  sector,  the  increased  complexity  of  their  interactions  with  major  dealers,  and  concerns 
about unevenness in risk management practices and some recent possible erosion in the quality of 
counterparty discipline across the financial sector.  
How can these risks best be mitigated in practice? Let me comment on the range of possible options 
that  stop  short  of  direct  regulation.  Prudential  regulations,  in  the  form  of  capital  or  leverage 
requirements, have not been considered a necessary or desirable step to date within the official sector 
in the United States, and are not on the horizon.  
Investors in hedge funds have a compelling direct interest in ensuring they are well managed. A more 
discerning  and  pro-active  approach  by  investors  in  hedge  funds  should  help  to  reduce  the  risk  of 
failure by a major fund. The increasing share of institutional money allocated to hedge funds and the 
growing  role  of  funds  of  funds  could  help  reinforce  the  ability  of  the  investor  class  to  provide  such 
market discipline, in particular if these types of investors undertake more extensive due diligence. 
There has been and continues to be a lot of interest in inducing or requiring hedge funds to disclose 
information that would make it possible to know more about the scale of leverage in particular funds, 
the risk of concentrated positions that could amplify volatility if unwound quickly, and other aspects of 
the risk profile of the fund. These efforts are motivated in part by discomfort about what we do not now 
know and a sense that knowledge itself, by reducing uncertainty, could reduce risks. And they are also 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
motivated  by  the  view  that  greater  disclosure  would  act  as  a  desirable  restraint  on  risk  taking,  and 
make it possible for market discipline to work more effectively. 
There  have  been  several  significant  efforts  to  induce  greater  disclosure  since  1998,  notably  by  the 
President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, by a committee under the auspices of the BIS, and 
by  private  sector  groups  in  the  United  States.  These  efforts  have  fallen  short  of  their  objectives,  in 
significant  part  because  of  the  difficulties  in  designing  a  disclosure  regime  that  would  provide 
meaningful  information  about  potential  systemic  concerns,  without  undermining  the  ability  of  hedge 
funds function profitably and provide the important benefits that I mentioned earlier. 
Thus, while the potential benefits of meaningful progress on hedge fund disclosures could be material, 
we  must  also  be  realistic  about  the  inherent  difficulties  associated  with  such  a  challenge.  Even  if 
additional efforts are mounted in this area, progress is not likely to come easily or quickly. 
The  most  constructive  avenues  for  mitigating  concerns  about  systemic  stability  lie  in  the  areas  of 
comprehensive risk management of potential exposures to hedge funds, the overall strength of capital 
and risk management in the major financial institutions, and the resilience of the market infrastructure.  
And we believe there is room for some further strengthening of market practice in these areas. 
To  begin,  let  me  acknowledge  that  the  events  of  1998,  and  the  resulting  recommendations  of  the 
private-sector  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  (CRMPG),  and  other  groups,  were 
followed  by  very  significant  improvements  in  risk  management  practices,  including  those  related  to 
hedge fund counterparty exposures. At a general level, these changes were significant because they 
offered  the  promise  of  limiting  the  overall  hedge  funds  could  take  on,  as  well  as  the  direct  credit 
exposure of firms to hedge funds. 
Specifically,  firms  put  in  place  stronger  internal  due  diligence  regimes  to  manage  hedge  fund 
exposures. They imposed stricter credit terms, required more collateral, adopted daily margining and 
more conservative practices for valuing collateral. They put greater emphasis on measuring potential 
future credit exposures, while adopting more sophisticated ways of measuring and stress testing those 
exposures. Firms have also sought to obtain more information from hedge funds about the risks the 
funds are taking on, although more often than not this seems to have taken the form of periodic onsite 
visits and informal discussions rather than through a regular and frequent flow of detailed risk reports. 
These  improvements  are  notable,  but  a  few  qualifications  are  in  order.  First,  progress  has  been 
uneven across the major dealers. Second, there are signs of some erosion in standards in response to 
competitive  pressures,  reflected  in  some  lowering  of  initial  margin  requirements  and  a  relaxation  in 
other credit terms. In addition, changes in the market, specifically increasingly complex relationships 
that firms have with hedge fund counterparties, suggest the need for higher standards in some areas 
relative to what seemed appropriate in the wake of the events of 1998. 
Let  me  emphasize  a  few  specific  areas  that  my  colleagues  and  I  believe  should  be  the  focus  of 
attention by market participants: 
First, firms need to give greater attention to the full range of exposures they face in the different, and 
often multiple, relationships they have with hedge funds - including those related to prime brokerage 
and counterparty credit extensions, proprietary investments in hedge funds, the provision of structured 
hedge fund products, and the offering of external funds of funds and in-house managed hedge funds 
as investment products, among others things. 
An  important  part  of  this  involves  managing  the  potential  conflicts  that  arise  from  these  multiple 
relationships  and  the  legal  and  reputational  risks  entailed.  Hedge  fund-related  activities  need  to  be 
integrated into the broader compliance discipline. 
Second, improving the overall discipline of the stress testing regime is critical. This is an area where 
we see the greatest divergence in practice across firms and the greatest gap relative to the achievable 
frontier of best practice. Potential future exposure measures produce what can be misleadingly low 
overall  measures  of  counterparty  credit  risk.  Because  they  are  based  on  value-at-risk  (VaR) 
calculations,  and  reflective  of  recent  historical  market  conditions  and  correlations,  they  do  not 
necessarily  provide  an  effective  measure  of  vulnerability  to  loss  under  more  severe  conditions  of 
market stress and illiquidity.  
Stress tests must be designed and applied to compensate effectively for these limitations. Designing 
an appropriate set of stress tests that can capture the underlying pressure points and concentrations 
across a broad range of relationships with many different hedge funds is not easy, but it’s necessary. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
And, the results of these tests need to inform judgments by the firm on the scale of exposure that it is 
willing  to  take  to  individual  funds,  groups  of  funds  with  similar  strategies,  and  to  hedge  funds  as  a 
whole. Moreover, firms need to find ways to consider assessments of their stress-level exposures to 
hedge funds in tandem with stress tests of their own market risks to inform an overall judgment on the 
extent  of  capital  market  trading-related  risks  that  the  firm  is  taking  on  -  especially  in relation  to  low 
probability but high impact events. 
Third, and especially in light of the current competitive climate, we believe it is appropriate for dealers 
to have more exacting standards for the overall due diligence process, and to adjust credit terms on 
the basis of those higher standards. This is particularly important in those cases where there has been 
innovation in the manner in which credit is extended. For example, it is much more common today 
than in 1998 for hedge funds to seek arrangements that provide contingent credit and thus provide the 
hedge fund with protection against the need to liquidate positions too rapidly. Similarly, many hedge 
funds are today seeking to base margining agreements, including initial margins, on the results of VaR 
calculations  that  incorporate  the  effect  of  netting  across  multiple  products.  While  both  of  these 
developments  have  their  basis  in  sound  risk  management  principles,  firms  extending  such  credit 
should  carefully  examine  the  impact  of  these  and  other  innovations  on  their  potential  exposures  to 
hedge funds in stress conditions, and set the terms for such credit accordingly.  
A reinforced due diligence process also is critical in assessing the operational capabilities of the hedge 
funds, the quality of their risk management process and execution and compliance infrastructure.  
This may sound self evident, but it is not as common as one might think. Timely access to forward 
looking measures of risk by hedge fund counterparties is obviously important for assessing the risks in 
firms’ exposures to hedge funds as a group, and for assessing the impact of hedge funds’ activities on 
a firm’s own positions. To the extent that information is not made available, and there seem to be a 
number of legitimate reasons why hedge funds may resist providing it and are sometimes successful 
in doing so, then it makes sense for the dealer to reduce the exposure it is willing to take to that fund. 
In general, credit terms should be calibrated to the quality of the information provided by the hedge 
fund counterparty. To the extent this is done generally across those funds that are less transparent, 
have weak risk management disciplines and/or inadequate operational infrastructure, they will be able 
to take on less leverage, which would limit the potential risk they may pose in a disruptive event. 
As  these  points  suggest,  it  is  not  enough  to  simply  manage  the  firm’s  direct  potential  future  credit 
exposure to hedge funds within prudently low limits. This has to be complimented with a more exacting 
approach to the evaluation of a firm’s overall vulnerability to market risk that includes full consideration 
of the potential impact of a large shock, including one that involves hedge funds. 
Alongside  these  enhancements  to  risk  management  practices,  we  believe  that  market  participants 
should  also  intensify  their  efforts  to  improve  the  underlying  infrastructure  of  the  markets  in  which 
hedge funds are important. Weaknesses in close-out procedures for OTC derivatives were among the 
areas singled out by the CRMPG for collective action in the wake of LTCM, and important progress 
has  been  made  in  this  area  since.  In  addition,  there  are  potentially  valuable  efforts  underway  to 
standardize documentation and improve the confirmation and execution process in these markets. 
But  looking  forward,  given  the  size  of  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  and  the  participation  of  hedge 
funds in those markets, it is worth reflecting on whether central counterparty clearing arrangements for 
the more standardized portion of the OTC derivatives market could play a useful role. Certainly, there 
are many challenges associated with such a project, and its potential to mitigate risks effectively would 
have to be clearly demonstrated, but surely it is worth looking carefully at whether that or similar efforts 
could  provide  meaningful  improvements  to  the  core  infrastructure  of  what  is  undoubtedly  a 
systemically important set of markets. 
Taken together, these areas of focus are important to ensure that there is adequate capital not just 
against growing direct exposures to hedge funds, but the indirect exposures that could affect market 
conditions and firms’ positions in a more stressful environment.  
We believe that the dealers that act as major counterparties to hedge funds have a collective interest 
in improving market practice in these areas. This is a good time for them to reassess how practice has 
evolved  against  the  standards  set  out  by  the  CRMPG  in  1999,  and  to  examine  whether  the  bar 
established at that time is appropriate for the conditions that exist today. 
It took a major market event to expose the extent of weaknesses in market practice that prevailed prior 
to 1998 and to catalyze improvements across the financial community. Those reforms have played an 
important  role  in  reducing  risk  in  the  system,  alongside  the  overall  improvements  in  capital,  risk 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2004
management,  and  the  financial  infrastructure.  Further  progress  in  strengthening  risk  management 
practices is an investment worth making, particularly at a time when the markets appear to be pricing 
in a relatively benign view of risk in the financial system and in the economy overall. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 5
