Savenaca Narube: Fiji’s economic status and projections 
Address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, to the Australia/Fiji Business 
Council, Gold Coast, Australia, 18 October 2004. 
 Introduction 
This is my third annual update to your joint Councils on the status and projections of the Fiji economy. 
I am always pleased to accept your invitation, not only because of the opportunity to visit such exotic 
places  as  the  Gold  Coast,  but  also  because  each  time  that  I  present  to  you,  the  Fiji  economy 
continues to grow. 
The  statistics  show  that  Fiji  is  now  breaking  out  of  a  20-year  cycle  of  volatile  and  low  economic 
performance. 
The Fiji economy is strong. This year, we are estimating a growth of around 4.7 percent although this 
is  currently  being  revised.  The  tourism  sector  is  again  expected  to  lead  growth  together  with  the 
building and construction sector. There are also contributions from the wholesale and retail trade and 
manufacturing sectors. 
Our macroeconomic fundamentals are firm. Labour market conditions have improved. Investment is 
rising again after a long period of decline. The level of foreign reserves remains healthy. Inflation has 
been well contained at below 3 percent. 
International  commentators  including  the  IMF  and  the  ADB  have  commended  our  economic 
management. Four years of consecutive growth is a performance that was difficult to achieve in the 
past. Not only have we achieved growth, the growth rates have been generally higher. The average 
growth rate in four years is over 4 percent, compared to 3 percent average growth from 1987 to 1999. 
Moreover, we have achieved this performance despite the outbreak of SARS, global terrorist attacks 
and the Middle East war. 
Immediate prospects 
What about the near future? 
Over the next two years, GDP is forecast to grow by 4 percent in 2005 and to slow down further in 
2006.  These  estimates  of  course  may  change  as  new  policy  measures  are  introduced  and  as 
additional information comes to hand. 
Let me briefly take you through the major sectors. 
Building and construction 
One of the major sectors driving growth in 2004 is building & construction. Like tourism, the building 
and construction sector is booming in Fiji. What is more interesting is that growth in this sector is being 
driven by the private sector. A number of major public infrastructure projects are also underway. 
The building industry is doing so well that capacity constraints are being felt in the adequacy of skilled 
labour. This may lead to wage pressures in the industry. 
Wholesale and retail trade 
The wholesale and retail trade sector is also performing well reflecting the high consumer confidence. 
The increase in employment and the buoyant tourism industry together with higher remittances from 
abroad have supported this sector. A reduction in the rate of the top bracket in personal and corporate 
tax rate has also help raise domestic demand. 
In  addition,  buoyant  collections  of  Value  Added  Tax  and  rising  imports  of  finished  goods  are  clear 
indicators  of  this  high  consumption  demand.  Strong  growth  in  the  wholesale  and  retail  sector  is 
expected to continue in the future. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 1
Manufacturing 
The  manufacturing  sector  is  also  growing.  Processed  agricultural  products,  production  of  non-food 
items, and in particular garments, are the main contributors here. 
For garments, production is expected to rise this year following a decline last year. We are told by the 
industry  that  the  larger  garment  companies  and  increased  demand  from  abroad  largely  drive  this 
year’s outlook. 
The future for this sector however, remains under some cloud. The imposition of WTO rules and the 
global  move  to  trade  liberalisation  will  threaten  market  access  and  pose  challenges  to  our 
competitiveness. A welcomed reprieve on this front, albeit temporary, is the Australian Government’s 
extension of the Textile, Clothing & Footwear provisions under the SPARTECA. However, the looming 
expiry of the US quota is a serious threat to the future growth in the industry. 
Sugar 
The daunting problems of the sugar sector are well known. As a result, sugar production has declined, 
and  well  below  the  record  of  517,000  tonnes  achieved  in  1994.  Production  in  2004  is  expected  to 
remain  stagnant  at  last  year’s  level.  The  lower  sugar  exports  have  left  an  $80  million  hole  in  our 
annual export receipts - a gap that no other commodity has been able to plug up to now. 
It is obvious that the commercial reform of the sugar industry must happen sooner rather than later. 
We are running out of time! Preferential sugar prices are being eroded more quickly and significantly 
than we earlier thought. This will put additional pressure on our trade imbalance. 
Tourism 
The tourism industry has been the star performer in the past few years. Tourism accounts for almost 
15  percent  of  overall  output  and  provides  employment  to  more  than  30,000  people.  Although  the 
industry  suffered  several  setbacks  due  to  the  US-Iraq  conflict  and  outbreak  of  the  SARS  virus,  it 
rebounded quickly and registered record visitor arrivals in 2003. 
We  expect  to  set  a  new  record  again  this  year.  The  performance  so  far  in  the  first  seven  months 
supports this optimism with a 20 percent rise in tourist numbers over the same period in 2003. The 
industry has set itself a target of becoming a $1 billion industry in 2007. 
But  there  are  signs  that  the  scarcity  of  hotel  rooms  is  already  imposing  a  glass  ceiling  on  future 
growth. It is therefore encouraging to see several hotel projects under way like the Momi Bay Marriott, 
the  Denarau  Sofitel  and  the  Hilton.  I  think  that  we  will  need  a  lot  more  than  these  to  expand  the 
immense potential of our tourism industry. 
New industries 
Over the years, we have seen the emergence of a number of industries, which have the potential to 
contribute significantly to our economy. 
Mineral  water  is  one  such  emerging  industry.  It  has  climbed  to  be  the  7th  gross  foreign  exchange 
earner for Fiji in a very short period of time. Its exponential growth is a result of aggressive marketing, 
innovation and vision in a very competitive global market. It is a classical model of what our industries 
can  achieve  globally.  Recently,  Natural  Waters  of  Fiji  has  made  additional  investment  to  triple 
production to meet global demand. 
In summary, while growth up to now has been broad based, there are capacity constraints are starting 
to emerge and there are serious threats to some sectors that need addressing. 
Medium term outlook 
What  about  the  medium  term  outlook?  In  my  view,  this  is  where  thediscussion  becomes  very 
interesting. 
We  are  growing  at  the  back  of  domestic  demand  supported  by  a  policy  environment  of  higher 
government deficits and increasing borrowing from financial institutions. This policy environment was 
no accident. It was a deliberate package put in place to help us recover quickly after 2000. During this 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2004
time,  the  government  increased  its budget  deficits to  above  5 percent of  GDP.  We,  in  the  Reserve 
Bank, kept monetary policy very relaxed and allowed interest rates to drop to historical lows. This has 
led to buoyant credit demand. This expansionary policy package has worked extremely well and we 
have  seen  its  fruits  up  to  now.  Investment  is  growing,  incomes  are  rising  and  employment  is 
increasing. 
This consumption driven growth is not a bad thing and many large countries do use this channel to 
expand their economies. But on its own, it does not last in the long run for an economy like Fiji. Fiji is a 
small market relying on a few commodities for exports and heavily dependent on imports. To sustain 
our current economic performance under such an economic set-up, we must try to pay for our local 
spending out of foreign earnings. That means that we must export more. Unfortunately, while tourism 
is  booming,  our  exports  of  goods  have  actually  declined  in  the  last  three  years.  We  simply  cannot 
sustain such a situation where consumption is high and exports are low or even declining. 
Unfortunately,  our  traditional  export  sectors  are seriously  under  performing.  Why  can’t  we  raise  the 
exports  of  our  traditional  agricultural  products?  I  am  told  that  even  hotels  cannot  get  enough  local 
supplies of quality vegetables, fruits and seafood. We must do something to address the stagnant fish 
industry. On sugar, we must continue to call on all stakeholders for a quick resolution to the reforms. 
We also need to get cracking on the harvesting of the much-talked about mahogany. 
In  light  of  this  medium  term  scenario,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  begun  to  tighten  monetary  policy  by 
raising our official interest rate in May this year by 50 basis points. Tightening of monetary policy was 
a clear signal that we are changing our policy stance. It takes time for monetary policy to work itself 
out through people’s choices on savings and consumption. 
Are we going to raise rates further? This depends on a host of reasons like the trend in exports, the 
speed of credit expansion and, very importantly, the stance of the government fiscal policy. Let me just 
say here that interest rates will always be a key policy instrument that we will always consider in the 
future. 
The high oil prices is a big worry everywhere. It has necessitated us raising our forecast of year-end 
inflation to 3.5 percent from 3 percent. Continuing high oil prices will have ramifications on our cost 
structure and the balance of payments. It has come at a bad time for us and will complicate economic 
management. But this is something that we have absolutely no control over and we can only hope that 
supply  factors  that  are  driving  oil  prices  upwards  disappear  soon.  From  a  strategic  angle,  we  must 
avoid policies and practices that ratchet upwards throughout the economy the cost effects of higher oil 
prices. 
Overall, our medium term scenario does not appear to be as strong as our past performance. There 
are structural problems that we need to address in a decisive and timely manner. 
Macroeconomic stability 
Looking  ahead,  our  first and  utmost  challenge  is  to  maintain  at  all  times  economic  stability  that  we 
have now. Without this stability, we will be extremely exposed to the many vulnerabilities that we face 
as a small island nation in the middle of the huge Pacific Ocean. And, like oil prices, we do not have 
any control of most if not all of these vulnerabilities. In my view, we must not sacrifice macroeconomic 
stability for short-term economic gains. As global experiences overwhelmingly show, the price that we 
will ultimately pay will be extremely painful. 
We can  grow  sustainably  if  we  let  growth  be export-driven.  I  have  suggested that  we  embark  on  a 
national export drive. Like what the tourism industry has done, we can set targets for our traditional 
exports and even new exports. We can then mobilise the necessary resources and efforts to reach 
those targets. This cannot be the drive of government only. To be successful, it has to be a collective 
drive of the government, the private sector, industry organisations and even trade unions. 
We in the Reserve Bank are examining several ways that we could help promote exports. First, the 
forward exchange cover is still available for imports associated with exports, not only of goods, but 
also  services.  Second,  we  are  re-assessing  the  credit  export  facility  that  we  offer  through  the 
commercial  banks  to  see  if  it  can  be  more  attractive  to  small  exporters.  Third,  we  are  studying  the 
provisioning  of  export  credit  guarantee  with  the  help  of  the  ADB.  Lastly,  we  intend  to  convene  a 
conference of interested groups on exports in the new year following on from our successful inaugural 
symposium two months ago. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 3
There are some emerging areas of exports that we need to harness. 
Anaconda 2, shot in Fiji and released recently, is, I hope, a leading wedge of what Fiji can offer in the 
audio-visual industry. 
I believe that there is potential for growth in the Information and Technology industry. We have seen 
an  increase  in  back-office  services.  We  are  fortunate  to  have  invested  in  the  Southern  Cross 
Submarine Cable,  which  offers  more  than  enough  capacity  to  cater  for  the  growth  in  the  IT  related 
initiatives. 
Before leaving this issue, I just want to emphasise the important role of fiscal policy in creating the 
enabling  environment  for  growth  and  stability.  Fiscal  policy  has  a  greater  and  faster  impact  on  the 
economy, and the role of Government in promoting sustainable economic development is extremely 
vital. Government has reduced the fiscal deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP this year and further reduction is 
planned in the medium term. Such a fiscal stance will strongly support the long-term sustainability of 
the economy and keep debt at a moderate level. 
Raising the level of growth 
Maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  we  should  be  contented  with 
lower levels of growth. We can and we must raise the long-term potential growth rate of the economy 
while maintaining stability. The only way to raise the potential of the economy is by reforms to remove 
structural  impediments  to  the  effective  allocation  of  our  scarce  resources,  improve  productivity  and 
change our industrial culture. Government has announced initiatives in these areas in public service, 
public  enterprises,  labour  and  financial  management.  I  welcome  the  passage  of  the  Finance 
Management Bill in Parliament recently. But there is a general sense that more could still be done on 
these reforms now. 
The Hon. Prime Minister has challenged us all to a growth of 8 percent. This does not fit in well with 
our slower medium term projection. But one must understand that this higher growth is a target. It is 
my view that we should aspire to do better and adopt this as a national target. But, and let us get this 
straight,  it  will  only  be  achieved  if  we  decisively  succeed  in  the  reforms  that  the  government  has 
embarked upon. I have heard sceptics of this 8 percent target. But I am firmly on the side that says, 
“Yes Prime Minister, we can achieve the target if we are prepared to do the necessary and difficult 
groundwork now”. 
So we certainly have our job cut out for us in the medium term. But I am confident that we can raise 
the rate of growth higher while maintaining economic stability. 
Raising investment 
Let me turn to investment. Investment is the backbone of a dynamic economy. In the early 1980s, we 
achieved investment levels in excess of 25 percent of GDP. Since then, investment in all sectors has 
declined.  Private  investment,  which  was  at  15  percent  of  GDP,  is  now  hovering  at  only  around 
4 percent.  Fiji  is  trailing  behind  the  average  investment  level  in  developing  countries  of  around 
25 percent of GDP. 
However,  the  good  news  is  that  we  have  turned  the  corner.  Investment  has  started  to  grow  again 
since 2001 from around 12 percent of GDP to the current 16 percent. We last achieved this level way 
back in 1986. Interestingly, investment of public enterprises is virtually back to its peak of the 1980s. 
More encouragingly, private investment is heading upwards firmly and is expected to expand further in 
the medium term. 
There are many things that affect investment and these are well known to all of us here. I am pleased 
that government has improved the investment approvals process and it will be useful to track how the 
new  framework  is  performing.  But  we  can  and  should  do  more  to  dismantle  other  barriers  to 
investment in Fiji to take us forward to our investment target. 
Macroeconomic  sustainability  going  forward  and  the  reforms  that  I  talked  about  earlier  are  very 
important considerations for investors. 
Some have raised with me the consistency between promoting investment and raising interest rate. 
While we have increased our official interest rate, the lending rates remain low with ten-year bond rate 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2004
at 5 percent and commercial lending rates at 7 percent. Real lending rates in Fiji, are amongst the 
lowest in the Asia-Pacific Region. Our average commercial banks’ lending rates are very close, if not 
lower, than that of our major trading partners, Australia and New Zealand. 
Financial developments 
Let me end with a few comments on financial development. 
I am glad to say that the financial system continues to be sound. Total assets continue to grow at a 
healthy pace. The key prudential indicators of the banking system remain acceptable. The satisfactory 
performance of the financial system has been characterised by high levels of capitalisation, growing 
profitability and adequate liquidity. 
Given the increasing prominence of the Fiji National Provident Fund in the financial system, it is now 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji.  There  are  also  plans  to  deregulate  the 
superannuation  industry  in  the  medium  term.  The  Fiji  Development  Bank  has  applied  to  us  for  a 
commercial banking license. Credit institutions are making their presence felt in the market place. 
In recent years, we have also seen a whole range of new financial products introduced in Fiji. We are 
no  longer  considered  a  “backwater”  of  the  global  financial  system.  In  my  view,  there  is  a  renewed 
sense of innovation and a concerted move to greater specialisation and financial deepening. In fact, in 
some areas we appear to lead. A classic example is the ANZ roll out of banking services to the rural 
communities. I understand that this project will place Fiji as a global benchmark in this area. 
We are doing our part to prevent terrorist financing and combat money laundering. An independent 
review last year by the Asia Pacific Group on Anti Money Laundering concluded that generally Fiji had 
in place adequate systems in this area. A Financial Reporting Transactions Bill is currently making its 
way  through  Parliament.  This  will  strengthen  the  exchange  of  information  and  surveillance  of 
suspicious  transactions.  At  the  same  time,  a  Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  which  has  been  operating 
since last year, will be formalised through this Bill. 
Fiji  is  also  doing  its  best  to  comply  with  international  standards  and  codes.  The  IMF  completed  a 
review  of  the  Codes  of  Good  Practices  in  Fiscal  Transparency  last  year  and  earlier  this  year 
completed  a  Report  on  Observance  on  Standards  and  Codes  of  Transparency  in  Monetary  and 
Financial  Policies  (ROSC).  The  IMF  has  also  agreed  to  undertake  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Program (FSAP) in 2006. I believe that Fiji is the smallest island member country of the IMF that has 
volunteered to undertake such a comprehensive review. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me summarise. I believe that the Fiji economy has come a long way since 
2000. The economy is recording its fourth consecutive year of growth, the rates of growth are higher, 
incomes are rising and investment is picking up after two decades of decline. 
In  the  immediate  future,  growth  is  expected  to  continue  but  at  a  slower  pace.  There  are  capacity 
constraints that we need to address. 
There are however many challenges for us in the medium term and I have talked about maintaining 
economic  stability  and  as  the  key  one.  Promoting  exports  is  paramount  to  obtaining  sustainability. 
Ridding ourselves of structural impediments to higher growth is necessary and essential if we are to lift 
our growth rates higher. 
Obviously, these are not easy tasks. It requires commitment and perseverance and will. 
But I firmly believe that, as a country, we can overcome these challenges. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 63/2004 
 5
