Jaime Caruana: What’s next for Basel? 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the “Basel II: Reality Check” Conference, sponsored by Financial Times 
Business and the Banker Magazine, London, 10 November 2004. 
 Introduction and overview 
1. 
I would like to thank the Banker magazine and the Financial Times Business for inviting me to join this 
important  discussion  today  on  the  practical  implications  of  the  new  capital  framework  for  banking 
organisations. It is an honour to represent the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision at this event.  
The organisers have selected a provocative and highly appropriate title for this conference. As I will 
discuss  this  morning,  the  “real”  reality  checks  for  Basel  II  lie  just  ahead.  Basel  II’s  effectiveness  in 
encouraging improvements in risk management, and in motivating banks to hold adequate levels of 
capital,  will  depend  principally  on  the  degree  to  which  it  reflects  the  true  risks  and  rewards  facing 
banks. That is the focus for banks and supervisors now as we work toward the implementation of the 
new framework. 
Will Basel II be effective in promoting sound risk management? I am confident that the answer is yes 
on  at  least  two  levels.  On  the  microeconomic  level,  I  believe  that  Basel  II  will  help  to  increase  the 
rigour and comprehensiveness of an individual bank’s decision-making. As I will explain in the first part 
of my remarks, the three pillars of Basel II introduce a coherent system of checks and balances - or 
perhaps reality checks - into the supervision of capital. 
Basel II will likewise contribute to the resilience of the banking system on a macro level. In the second 
part  of  my  remarks,  I  will  discuss  some  of  the  factors  that  suggest  that  Basel  II  will  more  broadly 
become an effective tool of public policy.  
Of  course,  for  Basel  II  to  be  effective  at  the  micro  and  macro  levels,  we  will  need  to  undertake 
considerable work in the months ahead to prepare for its consistent implementation.  
In the third and final part of my presentation today, I’d like to share an update on what supervisors are 
doing  currently  to  prepare  for  the  implementation  of  the  new  capital  framework.  I’ll  include  as  well 
some  thoughts  on additional  things  that  banks  can  do  to  promote  a  smoother  transition  to  the  new 
framework. 
Will Basel II promote sound risk management within individual banks? 
2. 
To  begin,  I  would  like  to  discuss  why  I  believe  that  Basel  II  will  promote  reasonable  and  realistic 
decision-making  on  a  microeconomic  level  with  regard  to  each  bank’s  capital  needs.  This  effect  is 
critical now that qualifying banks choosing an advanced approach to credit or operational risk will be 
allowed to apply some of their own assessments of risk in the calculations of their minimum capital 
requirements. 
We  might  view  the  entire  three-pillar  structure  of  Basel  II  as  a  series  of  built-in  reality  checks  for 
management’s decision-making. In this regard, the three pillars of Basel II are intended to make sure 
that  management  assesses  and  controls  its  risks  carefully  and  that  it  takes  the  steps  necessary  to 
allocate the appropriate capital.  
As you know, in the first pillar, the minimum capital requirements focus management’s attention on 
identifying, assessing and quantifying risk within a specified framework. This puts the onus of analysis 
and decision-making on the right set of shoulders: bank managers are in the best position to evaluate 
their  risks  and  are  ultimately  responsible  for  responding  to  them.  When  banks  consider  their  risks 
more comprehensively and work to evaluate rigorously the magnitude of losses that they may face, 
they are improving the quality of the information at their disposal. That, in turn, should improve their 
ability  to  arrive  at  sound  decisions  regarding  the  amount  of  capital  that  they  may  need  to  weather 
potential losses in the future.  
Considerable attention has been paid to some of the formulas and techniques that we have adopted in 
Pillar 1 to help quantify the potential for losses related to credit and operational risk exposures. We 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
must remember that these formulas are not revolutionary. In fact - in one of many examples of how 
Basel II seeks to reflect reality - the new framework draws on the tremendous advances that many 
firms have already achieved in quantifying their exposures to credit and operational risk. This reflects 
as well one of the Committee’s goals to build the new framework on sound risk management practices 
in use today and to provide sufficient flexibility for it to evolve with advances in the future.  
At the same time, the Committee knows that mathematical formulas and financial models are only as 
good as the assumptions they make. At best, therefore, they serve as supplements to our insight: they 
do  not  replace  our  need  for  expertise  and  judgement.  Even  Einstein  warned  of  the  dangers  of 
confusing mathematical certainty with reality. He said once that, “As far as the laws of mathematics 
refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality.” 
Reasonable supervisors and bankers know that we cannot rely purely on the apparent mathematical 
certainty of models and formulas to make decisions for the uncertainty of the future. Likewise, some 
banks  may  engage  in  unique  activities  that  are  not  captured  in  the  minimum  standards.  To  guard 
against  overdependence  on  quantitative  models,  we  have  included  qualitative  provisions  to  ensure 
that  strong  risk  management  and  internal  controls  are  adopted  throughout  the  organisation  and  to 
ensure  the  involvement  of  boards  and  senior  management.  The  New  Accord  also  stresses  the 
importance  of  independent  assessments  and  audits.  On  top  of  that,  and  to  ensure  that  banks  are 
evaluating all of the risks they face, the Basel Committee has incorporated two other reality checks 
into the new framework, namely Pillars 2 and 3. 
Pillar 2, supervisory review, requires each bank to apply its best human judgement to capital planning. 
Every  bank  is  responsible  for  assessing  its  own  capital  needs,  including  whether  any  activities  or 
exposures may incorporate more risk - and hence may require more capital - than is assumed in Pillar 
1.  Supervisors,  in  turn,  must  evaluate  the  bank’s  judgement  and  processes;  moreover,  they  must 
respond if any bank’s capital planning seems unrealistic. 
Similarly, Pillar 3 - market discipline - provides another external check by offering greater insight into a 
bank’s risk profile to investors, counterparties, rating agencies, and others. Marketplace participants 
are  then  better  able  to  assess  whether  a  bank’s  management  is  engaging  in  the  reasonable  and 
responsible pursuit of opportunity and profit. They are better able to reward companies that are well 
managed  and  to  penalise  those  that  are  not.  That,  in  turn,  encourages  all  banks  to  consider  their 
current risk exposures carefully and to make appropriate plans for risks that may be on the horizon.  
Let me also briefly take this opportunity to recall that the new framework also imposes principles of 
transparency  on  supervisors  as  well  as  on  banks.  Pillar  2  requires  supervisors  to  carry  out  their 
obligations in a transparent and accountable manner, for example making publicly available the criteria 
they  use  in  the  review  of  banks’  internal  capital  assessments,  and  explaining  to  banks  why  any 
remedial actions are considered necessary. So we see transparency as an effective tool and reality 
check for ourselves too. 
The three pillars together can thus be seen as a series of checks and balances that seek to promote 
reasonable  and  realistic  approaches  to  risk  management  and  to  capital  management  in  banking 
organisations. The efforts that banks take to identify and assess their risks rigorously, and to evaluate 
and implement measures necessary to protect themselves effectively, represent not just good steps 
toward maintaining capital adequacy, but also important steps toward improved corporate governance 
on a broader scale. 
Basel II will become an effective standard at the macro level  
3. 
I  believe  that  Basel  II  will  likewise  serve  as  an  effective  standard  at  the  macro  level,  which  is  the 
second topic I’d like to address today. Supervisors and central bankers are increasingly interested in 
standards  that  will  strengthen  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  and  of  the  financial  system  more 
broadly.  Indeed,  just  across  the  street  from  us  here  at  Grocers’  Hall,  the  Bank  of  England  is  an 
example of a central bank that is explicitly charged with promoting financial stability. Another example 
would be my own institution, Banco de España. 
In my mind, three factors will drive Basel II’s success as a public policy standard. 
I  have  already  hinted  at  one  relevant  factor.  The  new  framework  contains  explicit  incentives  to 
motivate prudent risk management. Banks that qualify to use the more advanced approaches will rely 
increasingly  on  their  own  measures  of  credit  and  operational  risk  exposures  when  calculating  their 
minimum  capital  requirements.  Because  these  more  advanced  approaches  will  align  capital 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
requirements  more  closely  with  the  risks  that  banks  actually  face,  I  expect  that  banks  will  seek  to 
develop and improve their risk management processes individually.  
I  would  like  now  to  stress  the  need  for  an  appropriate  time  horizon,  the  need  to  introduce 
forward-looking approaches, and the importance of avoiding excessive short-termism when assessing 
risks. It means that risk managers should be very conscious of how risk-drivers change through the 
cycle and in stress conditions, and incorporate these elements into their decision taking processes. 
Basel II has been sensitive to these concerns and has incorporated a number of elements such as 
long-term average calculations, the need to use longer time horizons in the design of internal rating 
systems and also the need to incorporate stress tests and calculations into downturn conditions. 
I  believe  that  when  risks  are  correctly  assessed,  within  the  appropriate  time  horizon,  and  banking 
systems  are  adequately  capitalised,  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  becomes  more  stable,  less 
sensitive to the ups and downs of the business cycle, and better able to serve as a source of credit 
and growth to businesses and consumers alike. 
A  second  factor  that  suggests  Basel  II  will  be  an  effective  standard  relates  to  the  process  that  the 
Committee used to develop the new framework. The new capital framework emerged from a process 
involving  intense  public  scrutiny.  We  conducted  three  major  public  global  consultations  on  the  new 
framework  and  several  impact  studies.  Over  nearly  six  years,  the  Committee  received  hundreds  of 
formal comment letters from bankers, supervisors, central bankers, academics, politicians and many 
other industry observers. We heard countless more informal views in meetings and discussions.  
Many of you and your institutions participated quite actively in those exchanges. Likewise, the Banker 
magazine,  the  Financial  Times,  and  other  industry  journals  plus  the  mainstream  media  contributed 
greatly to this dialogue by publishing thoughtful articles and opinion pieces on the issues that arose in 
these discussions. The members of the Committee are deeply grateful to all who participated in our 
discussions, who aired views on the proposals, and who contributed data to help assess their likely 
impact. 
In total, the consultations on Basel II represented what might have been an unprecedented degree of 
public  scrutiny  for  such  a  technical  global  agreement.  This  made  the  review  of  the  proposals  more 
comprehensive,  but  also  more  arduous  for  everyone  involved.  Yet  steel  is  forged  only  at  high 
temperatures. Because of your comments and suggestions, the Committee was able to clarify many of 
the rules to achieve a better balance between complexity and risk sensitivity. Our discussions with the 
industry  moreover  helped  to  align  the  requirements  with  the  components  of  risk  that  matter  most. 
Likewise,  the  global  consultations  increased  the  relevancy  of  the  new  framework  to  many  kinds  of 
banks  in  many  different  banking  systems  around  the  world.  Because  of  these  debates,  the  rules 
contained in Basel II are better grounded in the state of the art of risk management today and better 
prepared for likely advances on the horizon tomorrow.  
This  leads  directly  to  the  third  factor  that  I  believe  will  help  to  drive  Basel  II’s  success.  The  new 
framework  builds  on  the  practices  that  leading  banks  already  employ.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  it 
incorporates  advances  in  risk  quantification  and  modelling.  Beyond  those  advances,  it  recognises 
other techniques used to reduce the risk of loss, such as the taking of collateral and guarantees, which 
were not well-integrated into the existing capital framework. By reducing the gaps between regulatory 
approaches and the reality of banks’ own internal processes, I believe that we are making our capital 
framework more relevant and more responsive to the needs of banking in the twenty-first century.  
So, together, what will make Basel II effective as a supervisory standard includes the incentives built in 
to  motivate  responsible  behaviour;  the  extensive  testing  and  public  consultation  that  helped  to 
strengthen and clarify the rules; and the incorporation of sound practices already in use, along with the 
flexibility to evolve as sound practices do. All of these factors reflect the design and intent of the new 
framework as well as the process that we followed to develop it. The third and final topic that I would 
like to address this morning concerns what supervisors are doing right now to prepare for Basel II’s 
implementation - and what banks can do as well. 
What are we doing to prepare for Basel II’s implementation? 
4. 
Now that the framework has been published, the Basel II project has entered a new phase focusing on 
implementation. Over the coming months and years, reality checks will continue to play a role for both 
bankers  and  supervisors  in  ensuring  Basel  II’s  validity  and  feasibility  as  we  implement  the  new 
framework. For our part, I believe that we can divide supervisors’ preparations into three main areas of 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
focus. These include reviewing the calibration of the new framework; adjustments to the framework to 
reflect advances in risk management practices; and fostering a more consistent application of Basel II 
across jurisdictions. I’ll take a few moments to outline our work in each area. 
Evaluate calibration of Basel II 
a) 
First, the Committee has long expressed its commitment to ensuring that the framework performs as 
intended before it is implemented. This includes reviewing whether the framework delivers the amount 
of capital that we believe is necessary to protect the safety and soundness of individual banks on the 
one hand, and the broader banking system on the other.  
In some jurisdictions, national supervisors will conduct additional field tests to determine whether the 
new rules deliver the levels of capital we expect. Similarly, in all jurisdictions, there will be a period of 
time during which banks will calculate their capital requirements in parallel under the 1988 Accord and 
under Basel II.  
National field tests and the period of “parallel running” of the new framework will serve as some of the 
final reality checks for Basel II prior to its implementation. We recognise that these tests and reviews 
will demand resources and substantial efforts from both banks and supervisors. Yet I must emphasise 
that neither banks nor supervisors will be able to evaluate the calibration of the new framework - and 
hence its effectiveness - if banks do not participate fully and seriously in the national field tests or in 
the  periods  of  parallel  running.  I  urge  you  to  devote  your  best  efforts  and  resources  to  these 
undertakings. Only you can provide the data that all of us will need to ensure that Basel II functions as 
we intend. 
Monitor ongoing advances and clarify and provide guidance for selected rules 
b) 
A second area where supervisors are active is in monitoring ongoing advances in risk management 
while clarifying and providing supplemental guidance for some of the rules. Like the development of 
the framework itself, this work will require a great deal of communication and co-operation between 
banks and supervisors.  
Consequently, our dialogue did not end with the publication of the Basel II text this past June. Indeed, 
it cannot cease, because, as I mentioned, one of the Committee’s underlying goals is to develop a 
framework  that  can  adapt  to  future  advances  in  risk  management  practices.  Supervisors  are 
committed  to  monitoring  and  discussing  these  developments  with  the  industry.  The  Committee  will 
make adjustments to the framework to reflect the state of risk measurement and management when 
necessary. 
I  am  pleased  to  say  that  the  Committee  is  already  honouring  this  promise.  One  topic  that  we  are 
studying  carefully  concerns  the  treatment  of  “double  default.”  Some  representatives  of  the  industry 
believe  that  Basel  II  takes  an  overly  conservative  approach  to  the  risk  of  loss  associated  with 
exposures covered by guarantees: they suggest that the risk of both a borrower and a guarantor both 
defaulting on the same exposure is lower than the risk of just one party defaulting. The Committee 
believes  that  the  new  framework  should  recognise  double  default  effects,  and  a  working  group  is 
currently  considering  all  of  the  implications,  including  those  associated  with  measuring  the  effects, 
before we agree on a solution. We remain dedicated to finding a sound treatment of double default 
prior to the implementation of the new framework. 
Other groups are discussing potential improvements to Basel II’s treatment of certain trading-related 
exposures. Industry representatives had expressed the view that while many important advances had 
been achieved in the management and measurement of various risks arising from trading activities, 
neither the existing market risk capital rules nor Basel II went far enough in recognising them.  
We are now evaluating these views. Because the treatment of the trading book is of great interest to 
banks  and  to  securities  firms,  we  are  collaborating  with  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  to  clarify  the  Basel  II  rules  and  to  find  risk-sensitive  capital  treatments  for 
certain trading book exposures that are compatible with Basel II.  
Just last month, for example, the joint working groups completed a survey of trading book exposures 
in banks and securities firms, focusing on three main topics. The first concerns the criteria that firms 
use to determine whether an exposure qualifies for inclusion in the trading book versus the banking 
book. The second deals with the practices banks and securities firms use to value and measure the 
risk of trading positions. The third part sheds light on the treatment of counterparty credit risk issues 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2004
related to repo-style transactions, securities financings and unsettled trades and credit derivatives. Our 
working groups are currently evaluating responses to the surveys and will draw on the surveys to help 
inform their discussions on clarifications and guidance that the Basel Committee can offer to banks 
and supervisors regarding the treatment of the trading book. 
Home-host co-operation 
c)  
A third area of focus for supervisors that I would like to highlight concerns our efforts to promote a 
more consistent application of the new framework across jurisdictions. Certainly one of the goals for 
any international framework is to foster a more level playing field for internationally active competitors. 
The Basel Committee wishes to ensure that competition between internationally active banks is driven 
by  each  bank’s  individual  strengths,  rather  than  by  differences  in  each  country’s  rules.  I  know  that 
banks  are  deeply  interested  in  this  topic  as  well.  Representatives  from  many  internationally  active 
banks have impressed on me their concern that supervisors must work to avoid large differences in 
the adoption of Basel II and, more specifically, in the use of advanced approaches across jurisdictions.  
While we in the Committee share this concern, we have to be pragmatic; I believe that all of us need to 
stop to make a quick reality check of this matter as well. Basel II is intended to promote a more level 
playing field for internationally active banks. Yet Basel II cannot and should not be expected to create 
perfect  harmonisation  across  all  jurisdictions.  Differences  in  legal  systems,  market  practices,  and 
business environments in each country make it an extremely difficult task - and, indeed, an impossible 
one - to level all distinctions across all borders.  
Our goal for Basel II should instead be to facilitate the application of minimum standards and to work 
together,  across  borders,  to  promote  a  more  consistent  implementation  and  application  of  the  new 
framework. With or without Basel II supervisors need to enhance co-operation in a world that moves 
towards  larger  scale  cross-border  activities  and  a  greater  presence  of  systemic  foreign  banks  in 
domestic  economies.  This  enhanced  co-operation  is  a  process  that  will  promote  consistency  and 
convergence of supervisory practices. It will help to avoid performing redundant and unco-ordinated 
approval and validation work in order to reduce the implementation burden on the banks and conserve 
supervisory  resources,  and  will  therefore  contribute  to  a  more  level  playing  field  for  internationally 
active banks. 
In this regard, the Committee’s Accord Implementation Group continues to encourage practical work 
among  supervisors  on  applying  Basel  II  effectively  and  efficiently  to  internationally  active  banking 
organisations. Chaired by Nick Le Pan, the Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada, the AIG 
is currently working with supervisors in non-member countries as well to conduct a number of “real 
case”  studies  to  gain  better  insight  into  the  practicalities  of  co-operation  between  home  and  host 
supervisors that will be essential for Basel II’s successful implementation.  
So  far,  the  AIG  has  identified  at  least  two  findings  that  are  relevant  to  banks  interested  in  the 
cross-border application of the new framework. One is that the ability of supervisors to make plans to 
co-operate across borders, and thereby to reduce the regulatory burden on an individual bank during 
the  transition  to  the  new  framework,  depends  to  a  great  degree  on  the  clarity  of  a  bank’s  own 
implementation plans.  
Another finding is that in some cases the overseas branches and subsidiaries of the bank may know 
very little about its own plans to adopt Basel II. This may be true even in some institutions that plan to 
adopt advanced approaches. Because the bank’s local managers may lack knowledge of how Basel II 
will  be  implemented  internally,  supervisors  in  the  host  jurisdiction  may  be  uncomfortable  with  the 
bank’s  overall  readiness  for  Basel  II.  It  may  simultaneously  increase  the  host  supervisor’s  need  to 
contact  the  bank’s  head  office  or  its  home  supervisor  for  more  information  -  something  that  might 
duplicate requests for information.  
The bottom line is that for home and host supervisors to work toward a more consistent application of 
Basel II, each bank’s own plans for adopting the approaches in the new framework should be clear 
and  comprehensive.  Equally  important,  banks  should  communicate  those  plans  not  just  to  their 
supervisors, but also to their own overseas branches and subsidiaries.  
And now, if you will permit me, before concluding my remarks today I would like to put on a different 
hat for a moment, and speak from my perspective as a banking supervisor from a European Union 
country.  I  strongly  believe  that  Europe  is  in  a  unique  position  to  lead  the  way  in  the  cross-border 
implementation of Basel II and to make faster and more tangible progress than is currently possible on 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 5
a wider international basis. We need to seize this opportunity with both hands, because it will not just 
benefit us in the EU but, I believe, also have a positive impact beyond our borders. 
We have two major advantages in this respect. Firstly, within the European Union, we have a set of 
single  market  legislation  in  the  banking  field,  founded  on  harmonisation  and  mutual  recognition. 
Furthermore,  the  division  of  supervisory  responsibilities  between  our  countries  is  embedded  in  this 
common legal framework and has been in place for some time. 
Secondly,  from  a  practical  perspective,  we  also  now  have  the  Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors - CEBS. This committee is directly charged with promoting convergence of supervisory 
practices  and  co-operation  between  supervisory  authorities,  and  has  a  key  role  to  play  in  the 
implementation of Basel II in Europe. 
For these reasons, I believe that we can - and must - be more ambitious and go further than others 
may  be  able  to  go  in  our  efforts  to  ensure  consistent  implementation  of  Basel  II  and  effective 
supervision on a cross-border basis. We should not only move faster, but also go deeper in our search 
for  convergence.  We  could  deliver  results,  on  matters  like  model  approval,  on  reporting,  on  the 
enhanced role of the consolidating supervisor, even on supervisory disclosure. Therefore, I very much 
support  the  work  which  is  under  way  in  fora  such  as  CEBS  in  these  areas.  After  a  few  months  of 
existence  the  work  done  is  already  very  encouraging.  And  I  think  that  by  making  rapid  and  real 
progress,  we  can  also  promote  greater  convergence  beyond  the  EU,  as  others  may  find  our 
experiences of benefit to the wider search for greater international consistency in the implementation 
of Basel II. 
Concluding thoughts 
5. 
Over the rest of the day, we will hear additional perspectives from bankers and supervisors regarding 
the  realities of  the work ahead  for all of  us  as  we prepare  to  adopt  and  implement  the  new capital 
framework. In thinking about the preparations that all of us must make, we might recall the words of 
the Spanish author, Miguel de Cervantes. In his world-renowned novel Don Quixote de la Mancha, he 
wrote nearly 400 years ago that, “To be prepared is half the victory.” 
In my remarks this morning, I have tried to highlight why I have great confidence in this victory. It will 
no doubt require that we continue to dedicate our resources, our staff, and our talent to realise the 
benefits of Basel II in the coming months and years. Those benefits extend to much more than simply 
a more favourable capital requirement for qualifying individual banks. I believe that, when all banks 
have the proper incentives, Basel II will improve our abilities in risk management more broadly; it will 
ensure  that  capital  supervision  continues  to  serve  effectively  as  a  cornerstone  to  safety  and 
soundness in the banking system; and it will strengthen the stability of our financial system overall. 
Those benefits are worthy of all of our efforts. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2004
