R Basant Roi: Monetary policy objectives in Mauritius and its operational 
framework since 1994 
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, GCSK, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Bank of 
Mauritius’ Annual Dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 3 December 2004. 
 Honourable Chief Justice 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Evening 
I am pleased to welcome you all to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner. In my last six addresses I 
dealt  mostly  with  regulatory  and  supervisory  issues  that  the  business  community  and  the  public  at 
large need to be aware of. The addresses are purported to enhance transparency in the Bank’s policy 
decision-making.  The  theme  for  my  address  this  evening  is:  A  perspective  of  our  monetary  policy 
objective and the evolution of its operational framework since 1994 when our Exchange Control Act 
was suspended. 
Let me start with a remark - a remark that is generally valid. Often, commentators make observations 
that are so framed, either unwittingly or intentionally, as to lend the impression that monetary policy, 
on its own, should be capable of achieving all economic objectives at the same time and all the time. 
This is indeed an unrealistic demand on monetary policy. Monetary policy, though a very important 
arm of macro-economic policy, is only one of several elements in the economic panorama. We need to 
have  a  realistic  appreciation  of  what  monetary  policy  or  any  other  policy  in  any  other  field  can  be 
reasonably expected to deliver. It’s a fact of life that we cannot have all that we want at the same time, 
all the time and under all circumstances. Whether it’s monetary policy, fiscal policy or social policy, 
choices are made between conflicting or potentially conflicting objectives in the short term. Between 
the choices made in the short term and the choices available in the long run there is what economists 
call the long run opportunity cost. Policy choices made today do often constrain the range of choices 
available in the longer run. 
Those of us outside the economics profession and even those in the economics profession frequently 
tend  to  overlook  the  long  run  opportunity  cost  when  it  suits  them.  Whenever  expectations  of  a 
particular  sector  are  not  met,  there  emerges  pressing  demand  to  intervene  and  set  right  sectoral 
problems while dismissing the long run adverse implications of the intervention for the economy as a 
whole.  In  any  dynamic  society  with  ever  changing  priorities,  the  relative  importance  of  any  single 
objective varies over time. A switch from one policy to another as demanded by particular economic 
sectors  out  of  unrealistic  expectations  to  best  serve  their  exclusive  interests  is  likely  to  cause 
unintended damage to other longer term objectives. 
High  level  of  employment  is  a  desired  policy  objective.  But  we  simultaneously  want  low  and  stable 
inflation rate. Consumer protection is warranted in the same way as investor protection is warranted. 
But  we  also  want  free-market  competition.  The  rupee  depreciates.  Exporters  are  silently  happy. 
Consumers are not. The rupee appreciates. Exporters are angry. Consumers are silent. And so goes 
the  story  on  interest  rate  changes.  We  will  have  “expectations  gaps”  all  the  time.  There  are 
“trade offs”. However, policy makers constantly strive to strike the right balance between competing 
ends. Sound minded people cannot reasonably expect  conflicting objectives to be met at the same 
time.  If  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  were  to  meet  everybody’s  expectations,  its  policy  would  swing,  quite 
often  violently,  from  one  extreme  to  the  other.  The  end  result  would  be  much  less  success  in  the 
achievement of its longer-term objective.  
Prior to the 1980s, monetary policy did not have a precisely defined role in an overwhelming majority 
of countries across the world. Monetary policy was expected to achieve a number of objectives: price 
stability, balance of payments equilibrium, promotion of economic growth and full employment. These 
objectives  are  conflicting  in  the  short  term.  With  one  major  policy  instrument,  central  banks  were 
expected  to  achieve  the  conflicting  objectives  simultaneously.  As  priorities  changed  following 
pressures from politicians, industry and commerce, monetary policy shifted legs from one to the other, 
frequently at short intervals. The monetary policy stance of central banks swung from one extreme to 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
the other giving rise to business cycles and higher and higher inflation rates as also higher and higher 
unemployment levels - an excellent way of sharing misery but not of creating solid wealth. 
Central bankers became increasingly disappointed. What should central banks systematically aim at to 
finally  achieve  the  ultimate  goals  of  growth  and  high  employment  levels?  Academics  and  central 
bankers  debated  the  question.  Researchers  emphasized  the  monetary  nature  of  inflation.  Lasting 
price  stability  came  to  be  accepted  as  a  necessary  condition  for  sustained  growth  and  high 
employment levels. Country experiences supported this perception. Those countries with a history of 
low and stable inflation had also performed well in terms of growth and employment. 
Over  the  years,  lasting  price  stability  as  a  policy  goal  for  central  banks  won  broad-based  support. 
Monetary policy came to be assigned the specific objective of achieving and sustaining price stability. 
Rather  than  pursuing  different  policy  stances  depending  on  the  exigencies  of  the  day  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  different  pressure  groups,  it  is  best  to  consistently  pursue  policies  with  a  precisely 
defined objective that best serve society as a whole in the medium and long-term. 
There is a general tendency to believe that the Bank of Mauritius is not concerned with growth and 
employment.  This  is  a  mis-perception.  The  Bank  is  not  insensitive  to  the  unemployed.  Indeed,  the 
Bank does take into account these considerations in policy-making, not with a short term but with a 
medium  and  long-term  view.  Monetary  policy  does  not  directly  promote  growth  and  help  create 
employment; it does it indirectly through the achievement of sustained price stability. Durable growth 
can only be achieved, inter alia, within a framework of monetary stability. This is what central banks 
can be reasonably expected to deliver. In the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 this is what is expected of 
the Bank.  
There are however several underlying and fundamentally important assumptions for monetary policy 
to succeed. Rather than enumerating the assumptions, let me set a few questions and leave them to 
you  for  reflections.  Are  there  serious  imperfections  in  the  determination  of  prices  of  goods  and 
services in the domestic market? Why prices of goods and services do not positively respond in both 
directions to movements in the exchange rates of the rupee? How rational are consumers in making 
decisions? Is the labour market flexible? How many traders, producers, exporters and importers have 
reliable  annual  balance  sheets  on  the  basis  of  which  banks  make  decisions  to  lend?  Have  our 
financial  markets  attained  a  level  of  development  that  facilitates  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
impulses readily? Years ago we had less national savings and more investment. Today we have are 
flushed  with  funds  but  investment  is  sluggish  despite  a  panoply  of  investment  incentives.  Indeed, 
national savings exceed investment by far. Haven’t we overstretched the “welfare state” for too long a 
time  to  a  point  that  has  suppressed  entrepreneurial  instinct,  blunted  creativity,  inventiveness,  and 
undermined work effort? Hasn’t the “welfare state” been overstretched to a point that has given rise to 
a society of free riders? The more free riders there are in a “welfare state” the heavier is the burden on 
Government  finance  and  the  more  difficult  is  the  task  of  monetary  policy  in  achieving  the  desired 
objective.  
The point I want to make here is that monetary policy does not operate in a vacuum, independent of a 
host  of  other  critical  factors,  and  it  alone  cannot  perform  miracles.  Deprived  of  a  number  of  allied 
factors, the achievement of monetary policy objective and ultimately durable growth could be rendered 
difficult. Lasting price stability is, as I stated earlier, a necessary condition but not a sufficient condition 
for growth and employment. A number of catalytic factors should imperatively accompany monetary 
policy for it to succeed.  
Along  with  the  change  in  the  aims  of  monetary  policy  in  the  last  fifteen  years,  the  operational 
framework for the conduct of monetary policy underwent several stages of evolution across the world. 
Here, in Mauritius, since 1994 the operational framework for the conduct of our monetary policy was 
based on monetary programming, with broad money as an intermediate target and inflation as the final 
target with a time horizon of 18 months on a running basis. The first Monetary Policy Committee under 
the  Chairmanship  of  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  was  established  in  1994.  The  monetary 
programming  exercise  ought  to  have  produced  the  desired  results.  The  only  snag  -  a  critical  one 
indeed  -  was  the  issue  of  independence  of  the  Bank  with  regard  to  interest  rate  policy  decisions. 
Notwithstanding this snag, the first operational framework for indirect monetary control was at least 
set. In 1996 the monetary programming was given a different twist. In essence, both exercises had the 
same objective. The framework changed in its form but not in substance. The first was the top-down 
and the second is the bottom - up approach of operating in the balance sheet of the Bank of Mauritius. 
In the following two and a half years, the Bank was at the helm of the ship but could not control the 
storm for reasons that I suspect you may already be aware of.  
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
The Bank had the powers to pursue a realistic interest rate policy but it did not. Even if the Bank had 
decided  to  change  its  interest  rate  policy,  it  would  have  taken  several  weeks  to  do  so  with  no 
meaningful  impact  on  the  interest  rate  structure  of  the  system.  The  Bank  Rate,  which  is  the 
predecessor  of  the  Lombard  rate,  used  to  be  determined  by  the  market  at  the  weekly  auctions  of 
Treasury bills since 1994. The Bank Rate moved weekly like flotsam and jetsam without signalling any 
definite  direction  to  the  market.  This  system  of  determining  the  Bank  Rate  was  anathema  to  the 
financial system of a small highly open economy that had passed the post of financial liberalization. 
Despite the liberalization of exchange control, which by definition allowed for the free movements of 
capital, the “flotsam-jetsam” Bank Rate was retained. 
Towards  the  end  of  1998,  the  systematic  pursuit  of  a  realistic  interest  rate  policy  along  with  an 
imaginative and well-crafted strategy, that is, the sale of Treasury bills over-the-counter to individuals 
re-established  a  number  of  equations  in  our  system.  This  strategy  remedied  to  some  extent  the 
inadequacies  of  our  money  market.  In  1999,  our  operational  framework  was  again  reviewed.  This 
framework encapsulated repurchase operations between the Bank of Mauritius and commercial banks 
along with the concept of a key interest rate, the Lombard rate for signalling the interest rate policy 
decisions.  Admittedly,  the  connection  between  the  Lombard  rate  and  the  money  market  is  not 
sufficiently  strong.  This  is  not  because  the  concept  of  the  key  rate  itself  is  wrong  but  because  our 
money market has not attained the desired level of development and sophistication. The link between 
the Lombard rate and the money market has to be robust for any shift in the interest rate policy stance 
to be instantly transmitted. However, as you may have observed, changes in the Lombard rate have 
been  having  the  intended  impact  on  our  interest  rate  structure.  In  time  to  come  our  operational 
framework for the conduct of monetary policy will be refined with the progress in the development of 
our money market. Depending on the pace of development of our money market in 2005, the Lombard 
rate will be replaced by a Repurchase rate, commonly referred to as the Repo rate. 
As  an  aside,  let  me  say  that  monetary  policy  making  has  never  been  and  can  never  be  a  purely 
mechanical process; it is basically an interpretative and therefore a judgemental process requiring a 
battery of information collected from every available source, including the on-site inspection of banks 
carried  out  by  our  Banking  Supervision  Department.  The  judgemental  process  is  what  makes 
monetary policy decision-making difficult. I need not overstate that what is judgemental is susceptible 
to mis-judgements. The Bank, however, does its best to avoid erring on the wrong side. 
It sounds simple. But it isn’t. Central bankers endeavour to have a clear view of its monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. Our policy decisions involve a good understanding of the roles of short-term 
interest  rates,  exchange  rate,  and  money  and  credit  in  the  economy.  The  Bank  heavily  counts  on 
dependable  inflation  forecasts.  A  fan  chart  for  probabilistic  outcomes  on  the  inflation  front,  duly 
supported  by  a  highly  reliable  inflation  forecasting  model  plays  a  decisive  role  in  our  policy-making 
process. This is a key element since our monetary  policy framework is necessarily forward-looking. 
Academics and central bankers agree that there is no such thing like an “ideal” rate of inflation. The 
specificities  of  our  economy  coupled  with  the  weak  predictable  relationships  between  certain  key 
monetary and other economic variables have not made targeting a specific inflation rate that easy at 
this stage. I suspect you must be aware of the saying: “To be sure of hitting the target, shoot first and 
call whatever you hit the target.” Price stability will continue to be given central importance and will be 
kept clearly in sight as the anchor for monetary policy. Precisely, this is what the Bank of Mauritius 
Act 2004 expects us to deliver.  
Much  progress  has  been  made  in  the  recent  past  in  the  achievement  of  price  stability.  Wide 
fluctuations in the rate of inflation have been drastically reduced over time. Inflation rate in the 1980s 
reached a peak of 44 per cent and a low of less than 1 per cent. In the 1990s, it attained a high of 
14 per cent and a low of 3 per cent. In the last 5 years the highest rate was 7 per cent because of the 
introduction of VAT coupled with an increase in the VAT rate and the lowest was 4 per cent. These 
figures are the headline inflation rate as published by the Central Statistical Office(CSO). It captures 
changes in the cost of living based on a typical household consumption basket.  
Central banks have gone deeper into statistical analyses of inflation. For quite some years they have 
come up with the concept of core inflation - an indicator of the underlying movements in consumer 
prices. Core inflation irons out the effect of temporary disturbances and shocks to prices that are not 
attributable to economic and monetary policy. For instance, the impact of the current increase in world 
price of oil on our inflation rate is a disturbance for which monetary policy is not responsible. That part 
of inflation due to such disturbances and shocks are statistically isolated from the headline inflation 
rate.  The  resultant  rate  of  inflation  provides  a  measure  of  and  an  indicator  of  underlying  long-term 
inflation. We have carried out this exercise for Mauritius. We have had some difficulties in arriving at a 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
specific  core  inflation  rate  for  Mauritius  because  the  prices  of  around  one-third  of  the  items  in  our 
consumption basket are set by Government. Having used two different methods, we obtained a range 
for  our  core  inflation.  For  the  12-month  period  ended  September  2004,  the  core  inflation  ranged 
between  2.9  per  cent  and  3.3  per  cent  lower  than  the  headline  inflation  rate  of  4.1  per  cent  as 
published by the CSO. On average, our core inflation is likely to be between 1 and 1.5 percentage 
points below the headline inflation rate. We expect the core inflation for the current fiscal year to be in 
the  region  of  4  per  cent.  I  may  say  that  we  have  made  considerable  headway  in  achieving  price 
stability in recent years.        
The operational framework for the conduct of monetary policy combined with an increasing degree of 
transparency has led to a higher level of appreciation by the market of policy decisions of the Bank. 
This has clearly aided expectations building. In the past central bankers believed that unanticipated 
changes in their policies were more effective. Contrary to this perception, experience demonstrated 
that policy induced shocks rather harmed economic agents than helped sharpen the effectiveness of 
the policy. Central bankers have thus adopted a stand – not that much palpable - that allows market 
players to formulate a view and anticipate their likely policy moves. We have growing evidence of this 
phenomenon in Mauritius in the last few years. Let me use an anecdote to express what I mean. In the 
19th century a leading newspaper in France announced the death of a famous ailing French author. 
The author, upon hearing the news about his own death, said, “Eh! I have started living again.” A week 
later the author actually died. The day after, the same newspaper came with a headline: “We were the 
first to announce the death of the author.” We have observed such capabilities emerging among our 
market players and commentators. And that augurs well for the stability of our financial industry.  
Ladies and gentlemen, so strong is the weakness of mankind to fall into mutual animosities, that the 
most fanciful artefacts have been sufficient to excite unfriendly passions. Let me conclude with two 
observations: the first is about profits of the banking industry. In our type of an economic system profit 
making is not regarded as a sin. Banks make fat profits. But banks also take high risk. Banks also 
make fat provisions for debts that have gone bad. Banks also need to build reserves and strengthen 
their  balance  sheets.  Strong  and  sound  balance  sheets  make  strong  banks.  The  rate  of  growth  of 
pre-tax profit of commercial banks is observed to be lower than the growth rate of their total assets. 
Moreover, in the last ten years profits of the banking industry have grown at about the same rate as 
the nominal growth rate of the economy.  
My second observation relates to the idiosyncratic view that commercial banks in Mauritius operate as 
a cartel. No; that is not simply barking up at the wrong tree, but being in a different forest altogether. 
It’s a view that is distilled badly, blended poorly, and bottled upside-down. Deposit and lending rates 
do vary from bank to bank. Fees, charges and commissions also vary from bank to bank. This is what 
we  have seen  during  our  on-site  inspections  of  banks.  Now,  let me  assume  for  a  moment  that,  for 
instance, the same rates of interest were offered on deposits by some banks. Should it be necessarily 
seen as an evidence of collusion among banks? Even elementary economics textbooks on the theory 
of  competition  teach  us  that  the  inter-play  of  forces  in  a  competitive  market  drives  down  prices  of 
goods and services to the same level. Over time one price for the same product prevails throughout 
the market not because of necessarily a monopolistic situation but because of competition within the 
industry. The contention that commercial banks operate as a cartel simply because some of the rates 
applied by them are the same does not make commonsense. And Mr. Sneer-well said: 
“I went to the pictures next Tuesday 
And took a front seat at the back 
I said to the lady behind me 
I cannot see over your hat.” 
Seated in an armchair, I cannot feel the fire of competition underneath.     
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Board of Directors and staff of the Bank of Mauritius and on 
my own behalf I wish you and your family a Merry Xmas and a Happy New Year. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2004
