M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: FSAP from the Thai banking perspective 
Statement by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the United Nations 
Conference Center, Bangkok, 15 October 2004.  
 Distinguished guests and participants, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good  morning.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  open  this  important  workshop  and  give  a  keynote 
speech.  The  objective  of  today’s  event  is  to  introduce  the  joint  IMF-World  Bank  initiative  called  the 
Financial Sector Assessment Programme, otherwise known as FSAP, so that at the end of today we 
will all have a common and thorough understanding of what FSAP is about, how much work it would 
require of whom, and what benefits there would be for Thailand to participate in. This is a tall order to 
be achieved in one short day, but I am sure we can do it because we are fortunate enough to have 
with us two senior and highly experienced staff from the IMF: Mr Stefan Ingves and Mr. Udaibir Saran 
Das. On behalf of the Bank of Thailand and all the participants, I would like to thank both of you very 
much  for  making  the  time  to  be  here  despite  your  busy  schedule.  We  are  indeed  grateful  for  your 
assistance. 
By  way  of  introduction,  let  me  very  briefly  give  you  an  overview  of  the  FSAP  and  how  it  might 
complement and enhance our ongoing efforts to improve corporate governance and promote safety 
and soundness of the financial system in Thailand. 
FSAP was jointly developed by the IMF and World Bank in 1999 in response to the financial crisis of 
the late 1990s, when it became clear that financial sector weakness played a critical role in triggering 
and contributing to the severity and contagion of the economic crisis that ensued, and that both the 
standard macroeconomic surveillance by the IMF and the financial sector development work of World 
Bank  were  inadequate.  Thus,  FSAP  was  conceived  with  the  twin  objectives  of  helping  countries  to 
identify and resolve financial sector vulnerabilities and thereby helping to prevent future crises. It also 
aims  to  foster  financial  sector  development  and  efficiency.  I  think  these  are  indeed  admirable 
objectives to which we can all agree. 
As for the implementation, there are essentially three aspects to the FSAP: 
The  first  involves  an  assessment  of  the  health  of  the  country’s  financial  system,  its  short-term 
vulnerabilities,  medium-term  risks,  and  resilience  to  economic  und  financial  shocks.  A  range  of 
analytical tools can be used tot this purpose, including stress testing, macro-prudential analysis, and 
financial  soundness  indicators.  It  is  here  that  private  sector  involvement  becomes  crucial.  Stress 
testing, as a means to gauge institutional capacity in responding to crises, requires real-world data. 
And such can only come from financial institutions. 
The  second  aspect  of  the  FSAP  is  an  assessment  of  the  country’s  compliance  with  international 
standards and codes that are considered best practice. Some would be tempted to say that nowadays 
there are really too many international standards and codes. Thus, to keep things manageable, one 
needs to be selective. Specific standards and codes included in the FSAP therefore differ from country 
to  country  depending  on  their  relevance  and  significance  to  its  financial  system.  In  the  case  of 
Thailand, I suppose the scope of the FSAP would likely include most, if not all, of the following core 
modules: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In order to attest to the efficacy of each of these regulatory mandates, the FSAP assessment process 
also involves face-to-face interviews and discussions with a number of private sector institutions. 
Banking supervision 
Securities market regulation 
Insurance sector regulation 
Payment system 
Monetary and financial policy transparency, and 
Anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
The  third  aspect  of  the  FSAP  involves  identification  of  follow-up  measures  for  the  authorities  to 
address any gaps in the country’s regulatory framework; which also provides a foundation for future 
technical assistance programmes, if necessary. 
In the course of today’s workshop, our experts from the IMF will no doubt enlighten us on what the 
FSAP  process  would  entail  in  practice.  So  please  feel  free  to  ask  any  question  you  may  have, 
especially  those  who  have  already  embarked  on  the  self-assessment  exercise  for  the  relevant 
modules.  I  guess  that  given  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  FSAP  process  that  I  have  just  briefly 
outlined, you can readily imagine that undergoing the FSAP would require a lot of work, a lot of time, 
and a lot of information from people involved with the financial sector - be they regulators, government 
agencies,  bankers,  market  participants,  and  industry  associations.  Because  of  the  enormity  of  the 
tasks ahead and the fact that a country’s participation in the FSAP is entirely voluntary, it is natural to 
ask: Why is Thailand contemplating participation in the FSAP? Is it really worth it? The short answer is 
probably yes. 
First  of  all,  it  is  simply  good  discipline  to  have  a  competent  external  party  conduct  a  thorough 
assessment of our financial system in a holistic and objective manner. 
Second, the FSAP would present a good opportunity for regulators and relevant government agencies 
to enhance or confirm our understanding of where potential vulnerabilities in the financial sector lie, 
and  whether  existing  policy  frameworks  are  adequate  in  preventing  or  responding  to  any  financial 
instability. 
Third, the FSAP process would benchmark our existing regulatory arrangements against international 
standards and codes and, hopefully, provide impetus to the responsible authorities in their efforts to 
plug any gaps in the regulatory framework. Having said that, I must hasten to emphasize that we do 
NOT  seek  to  blindly  follow  every  international  standard  and  code  without  due  regard  to  our  own 
characteristics and needs. Some differences in our practice as compared to international standards 
may not warrant any further action at all, for they reflect our conscious intention to adopt rules that 
best suit our own unique situation as well as rules that should be phased in gradually to comply with 
international standards only at an appropriate time. We welcome the opportunity to discuss and share 
this understanding with the FSAP assessors, who are drawn not only from IMF and World Bank staff 
but also from other countries’ central bankers, regulators, and international experts. 
Before I let you get on with the workshop, I would like to conclude by saying that, with or without the 
FSAP, the Bank of Thailand will continue to strive for a safe and sound financial system, both through 
efforts  to  restructure  financial  institutions  under  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  and  through 
continued  strengthening  of  prudential  standards  and  supervisory  practice.  Risk-based  supervision 
approach has been adopted. Loan classification and provisioning requirements have been and will be 
tightened further. Good corporate governance has been enforced, including appropriate composition 
of  the  Board  of  Directors  and,  most  recently,  fit  and  proper  criteria  for  the  top  management  of 
commercial banks. 
We  have  come  a  long  way  since  the  1997  crisis  and  we  do  not  intend  to  look  back.  Yet,  many 
formidable challenges lie ahead. On the international front, a lot of preparations and adjustments are 
needed in response to the introduction of IAS39 and the new Basel Capital Accord. Though it might be 
worth  underlining  here  that  FSAP  is  independent  of  the  Basel  2  process.  As  a  contemporary 
assessment  of  a  financial  system  relative  to  its  current  regulatory  and  macro  environment,  FSAP 
assessment  will  finish  well  before  the  end  of  2008,  when  Basel  2  is  scheduled  to  go  ‘live’  in  this 
country. Domestically, it is imperative that the new financial institutions law be enacted to give us the 
necessary  power  to  implement,  among  other  things,  the  all-important  consolidated  supervision  and 
prompt corrective action over financial institutions. 
Finally, I would like to thank you all for participating in this workshop, especially those of you who have 
contributed  to  the  self-assessment  exercise  that  has  already  been  in  progress.  Your  continued 
cooperation and support will certainly be much needed in the months and years ahead. I wish you all 
an interesting and useful workshop. Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
