David Dodge: The Canadian economy - adjusting to global economic forces 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Ottawa Chamber of Commerce, 
Ottawa, 6 May 2005.  
 Good morning. It's a pleasure to be here. I'm always glad to deliver a speech in Ottawa and to get a 
chance  to  play  before  the  hometown  crowd.  But  the  opportunity  is  especially  welcome  this  year, 
because this is an anniversary year for both the City of Ottawa and the Bank of Canada. 
The year 2005 marks the 150th anniversary of the establishment of Ottawa as a city. On 1 January 
1855, the logging community of Bytown was formally incorporated as a city and adopted Ottawa as its 
new name. 
This  year  is  also  the  70th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Canada.  The  Bank  opened  its  doors  on 
11 March 1935. Both the City of Ottawa and the Bank of Canada have evolved and grown since their 
early  days.  But  at  the  Bank,  one  thing  that  has  not  changed  is  our  commitment  to  promoting  the 
economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
Our work at the Bank of Canada breaks down into four main functions. Let me briefly review them. 
First, the Bank issues and distributes Canada's paper currency and protects it from counterfeiting. Last 
year we issued new $100, $50, and $20 bank notes with enhanced security features. We are adding 
these security features to an upgraded $10 note, which will begin circulating on 18 May.  
The  Bank  of  Canada's  second  function  is  to  act  as  the  federal  government's  banker,  managing 
government funds and the public debt. Third, the Bank promotes the safety and efficiency of Canada's 
financial  system.  It  provides  banking  services  to  commercial  banks  and  oversees  the  systems  that 
financial  institutions  use  to  transfer  funds  and  settle  their  accounts.  Finally,  the  Bank  of  Canada 
conducts monetary policy in order to preserve the confidence of Canadians in the value of their money 
by  controlling  inflation.  In  this  way,  we  contribute  to  the  long-term  stability  and  strength  of  the 
Canadian economy. 
I will spend most of my time this morning discussing this last function - monetary policy. The Bank of 
Canada  Act  calls  on  us  to  "mitigate  by  its  influence  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production, 
trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and 
generally  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canada."  We  do  this  by  trying  to  keep 
inflation low, stable, and predictable. Specifically, we aim to keep the annual rate of consumer price 
inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range.  
We pursue this objective by trying to keep the economy operating at full capacity; that is, we aim for a 
balance between total demand and supply in the economy. Simply speaking, if the demand for goods 
and  services  is  pushing  the  Canadian  economy  against  the  limits  of  its  capacity,  and  if  inflation  is 
poised to rise above the target, the Bank would raise its official policy interest rate. This, in turn, would 
push up other interest rates and help to cool off the economy. Conversely, if the economy is operating 
below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, the Bank would lower its 
target rate, to help bring down interest rates and stimulate growth. So, by maintaining low and stable 
inflation, monetary policy promotes greater stability in economic output, too.  
A flexible exchange rate is a critical part of our monetary policy framework. We do not have a target or 
preferred exchange rate for the Canadian dollar. But it is an important relative price in our economy. A 
floating currency helps us to achieve our inflation target and can act as a shock absorber to cushion 
our economy from external shocks.  
How monetary policy helps the economy adjust 
Now, let me say a few words about the economic environment in which we're conducting monetary 
policy. There are powerful forces at work in the global economy, including growing competition from 
emerging-market economies, such as China and India, and large and growing financial imbalances in 
the  United  States  and  Asia.  The  growth  of  emerging-market  economies  is  driving  up  demand  for 
commodities,  and  that  is  pushing  up  world  prices  for  oil  and  many  non-energy  commodities. 
Meanwhile,  productivity  improvements  in  some  countries  and  a  competitive  world  environment  are 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 1
lowering the prices for some consumer goods, communications services, and computer equipment. All 
of these forces are causing significant movement in the exchange rates of key currencies. They have 
also contributed to the sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar over the past 
couple of years. 
Some of the adjustments we're now seeing in the Canadian economy are in direct response to these 
forces. Our monetary policy is helping these adjustments by aiming to support continued high levels of 
domestic  demand.  In  our  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Report,  released  in  April,  we  projected  that 
domestic demand will grow by almost 4 per cent in 2005. This will offset softer foreign demand and the 
weaker  contribution  that  exports  are  making  to  economic  growth  this  year.  This  is  important  in  the 
context of the Ottawa region, and I'll return to that in a moment.  
I  mentioned  earlier  that  monetary  policy  works  to  control  inflation.  Low  and  stable  inflation  allows 
businesses and consumers to better read price signals in markets, which helps them to make better 
long-term decisions in the face of major economic developments. These signals prompt sectors that 
are  shrinking  because  of  weak  demand  to  release  resources  that  can  be  absorbed  by  expanding 
sectors, where demand is strong. Of course, adjustment is never simple or without pain. Individuals 
may  have  to  retrain  or  relocate,  and  expanding  businesses  may  require  time  to  put  the  necessary 
capital equipment in place. But from a macroeconomic point of view, adjustment can take place with 
less  social  and  economic  cost  when  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored,  the  economy  is 
operating close to its potential, and a floating exchange rate is helping to absorb external shocks. 
How businesses are adjusting 
Let's now explore ways in which Canada's economy is responding to global economic developments. 
Over the past couple of years, commodity prices have risen dramatically. Our terms of trade - that is, 
the ratio of the prices that Canadians receive for their exports to the prices that Canadians pay for their 
imports - have improved by more than 16 per cent since late 2001. In response to these higher prices 
and  stronger  demand,  we've  seen  stronger  investment  spending  in  oil  and  gas  extraction,  mining 
activity, and wood-product manufacturing.  
We  are  also  seeing  rising  investment  spending  in  sectors  with  low  exposure  to  international  trade, 
such as electric power generation, finance and insurance, and information and cultural industries. In 
these cases, firms are reacting to strong growth in Canadian domestic demand. I should add that the 
increased activity in the construction sector reflects increases in both domestic and foreign demand.  
But there are other sectors that are highly exposed to international trade where the prices of products 
are  not  rising.  Here,  I  am  referring  to  goods-producing  sectors  such  as  auto  parts,  textiles,  and 
clothing  manufacturing,  as  well  as  service  sectors  such  as  tourism.  Firms  in  these  industries  are 
feeling  the  pressure  of  the  higher  Canadian  dollar,  and  they  are  also  facing  increased  competition 
from other regions of the world.  
The good news is that many Canadian firms are making adjustments. Investment spending is being 
channelled 
the 
goods-producing  sector,  where  much  of  the  productivity-enhancing  machinery  and  equipment  is 
produced abroad and priced in U.S. dollars, the stronger Canadian dollar has substantially lowered the 
cost  of  this  machinery  and  equipment  and  has  encouraged  firms  to  buy  tools  that  boost  their 
productivity.  In  the  services  sector,  stiffer  competition  is  encouraging  firms  to  increase  their 
specialization and offer more value-added, customized services.  
Other  adjustments  are  also  taking  place.  A  growing  number  of  firms  are  looking  to  cut  costs  by 
importing  more  inputs.  We've  certainly  seen  this  type  of  adjustment  taking  place  among  the 
manufacturers of telecommunications equipment. Other firms are phasing out the production of goods 
and services with low profit margins and concentrating on those that yield higher returns. 
Monetary  policy  is  working  to  support  this  adjustment  process  by  maintaining  strong  growth  in 
domestic demand. Low interest rates help encourage consumer and business spending to keep the 
economy operating close to its production potential. This is important nationally, but strong consumer 
and  business  demand  will  be  particularly  important  to  Ottawa  this  year  and  next,  as  growth  in  the 
public administration sector is likely to slow. While we at the Bank don't conduct detailed analysis at 
the municipal level, our general analysis suggests that growth in manufacturing can be expected to 
moderate, as the higher Canadian dollar dampens demand for made-in-Canada products - including 
technology products from Ottawa. Like the tourism industry nationally, Ottawa's tourism and hospitality 
increased  specialization,  higher  productivity,  and 
lower  costs. 
towards 
In 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2005
sector  is  also  facing  increased  competitive  pressure  from  the  higher  Canadian  dollar.  On  the  other 
hand,  continued  strong  business  and  consumer  demand  can  be  expected  to  provide  support  for 
Ottawa's business services, software, and retail sectors.  
Financial system efficiency 
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about the financial system and the Bank of Canada's role in 
promoting its efficiency. As I have said before, an efficient financial system is critical to maintaining 
Canada's international competitiveness and long-term economic health. An efficient financial system is 
one that helps to allocate scarce economic resources to the most productive uses, in a cost-effective 
way. The ultimate goal is to have Canada's financial institutions and markets match investors and their 
savings with appropriate, productive investments.  
In other speeches, I have talked about ways to encourage competition, transparency, and efficiency in 
Canada's financial markets and institutions. I won't review these discussions today, but I do want to 
repeat that it is critical that Canada makes headway on these issues. If Canadians want sustainable 
economic growth and prosperity, our financial system must function as efficiently as possible. 
One initiative in this area is benefiting from the attention of Jim Watson, Minister of Consumer and 
Business Services, and the Government of Ontario, and that is the Uniform Securities Transfer Act. 
The  efficiency  of  our  financial  markets  would  be  improved  if  provincial  and  territorial  governments 
would  proceed  with  legislation  to  replace  the  current  patchwork  of  legal  rules  in  this  area  and  to 
provide  a  sounder  legal  basis  for  the  holding  and  transfer  of  rights  in  securities  that  are  held  in 
book-entry form. 
This is just one example of encouraging initiatives that are under way. At the Bank of Canada, we will 
continue to contribute to these efforts by conducting research and promoting discussion on ways to 
improve  the  functioning  of  our  financial  institutions  and  markets  and  to  enhance  the  safety  and 
soundness of Canada's financial system. We share this research with regulators, market participants, 
and the public. Our Financial System Review, published twice a year, is part of that effort.  
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. As I noted at the beginning, there are powerful global economic forces at work, 
and  economies  everywhere  need  to  adjust.  Businesses  in  Ottawa,  and  in  the  rest  of  Canada,  are 
making adjustments to meet these challenges and to take advantage of emerging opportunities.  
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  will continue  to  monitor  these  global  forces closely  and  to  assess  their 
impact.  We  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  keeping  inflation  close  to  our 
target and the economy operating at its full potential. We will maintain our efforts to promote a safe 
and efficient financial system. And, as always, we will work to enhance the confidence of Canadians in 
the value of their money and the stability of their economy. In this way, we will do our part to facilitate 
the adjustments that the Canadian economy is making to changes in the global economy.  
BIS Review 33/2005 
 3
