Goh Chok Tong: MAS’s working relationship with the finance industry in 
Singapore 
Welcome  remarks  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  and  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the MAS Evening 2005, Singapore, 8 March 2005. 
 Welcome  to  the  MAS  Evening  2005.  I  was  pleasantly  surprised  that  MAS  holds  cocktails  for  its 
"clients", who are people from the finance industry. I thought that as a regulator, we should keep a 
certain distance from them and appear stern and correct even when we are warm people. Otherwise, 
we may not be listened to when we have to apply moral suasion. But I was reminded that MAS also 
has a promotional role. And to perform this role effectively, MAS  has to be close to the very same 
people  whom  they  supervise  and  regulate.  So  I  was  persuaded  to  host  this  evening's  function  and 
even give a little speech. 
Since my appointment as MAS Chairman, I have had the opportunity to meet some of you. I hope to 
have some time this evening to meet and speak with more of you. But this evening's function is also 
for you - the industry players - to interact and network amongst yourselves in an informal and relaxed 
setting. So make the most of it. It is not often that you get a free drink from the Government.  
I just want to make a couple of points this evening. 
First, I am pleased that MAS' working relationship with the industry has been strengthening over the 
years. Global financial markets have changed rapidly over the past decade, and they will continue to 
evolve at a very fast pace. Such a dynamic environment calls for close interaction and understanding 
between regulators and industry. 
Second, our financial sector today is more vibrant than eight years ago when MAS embarked on a 
major review. MAS worked closely with the industry to open up the financial sector and identify growth 
areas.  It  also  refined  the  regulatory  framework  and  moved  towards  a  risk-focused  and  consultative 
approach  to  supervision.  Our  partnership  has  been  successful. Today,  the  financial  sector  employs 
5% of our workforce but accounts for 12% of GDP. 
Our  banking  and  insurance  sectors  are  now  among  the  most  liberal  in  Asia,  and  are  anchored  by 
strong local and foreign players. The financial advisory industry has grown, with many firms catering to 
different market segments. The capital markets are also doing well. 
Third, we will continue to do what we can to enhance our position as the regional headquarters for 
corporate financial treasury activities. We will also implement measures to strengthen our position as 
Asia's  premier  wealth  management  centre  and  develop  greater  depth  and  breadth  in  our  capital 
markets. Here, I think the Middle East offers great opportunities. I have been to several Middle Eastern 
countries  in  the  past  12  months.  Singapore  has  a  good  reputation  amongst  the  Arabs.  We  should 
nurture our ties with them. The Middle East is evolving. So is the global economic landscape. MAS will 
continue to engage the private sector to reposition Singapore strategically. 
My last point is to seek your support for an important event which Singapore is hosting in September 
next year - the 2006 IMF and World Bank Group Board of Governors Annual Meetings. 
The Annual Meetings are a major event in the calendar of the international financial community. We 
expect 16,000 delegates from more than 180 countries to come to Singapore. They will include Heads 
of Government, Finance Ministers, Central Bankers, Chief Executives of leading companies and the 
international media. This will be the largest international conference Singapore has ever held. 
Complementing  the  Meetings  will  be  a  series  of  programmes  including  seminars,  fora,  social  and 
cultural events and a Singapore Biennale. The Singapore Biennale, which we are organising for the 
first time, will be a major platform for showcasing contemporary culture and visual arts in Asia. There 
will  also  be  dialogue  and  discussions  between  government  and  business  leaders  on  developments 
and  opportunities  in  the  region.  Global  financial  institutions  and  companies  will  find  this  a  good 
occasion to meet with clients and potential business partners.  
Collectively known as Singapore 2006, the series of events will highlight Singapore as a cosmopolitan 
society, and a dynamic, well-connected and entrepreneurial economy with tremendous opportunities. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
The tagline is "Global City. World of Opportunities." We will make Singapore 2006 an extraordinary 
and truly memorable experience, with your help. 
The  success  of  Singapore  2006  cannot  be  achieved  by  the  public  sector  alone.  It  requires  the  full 
support and partnership of the business community, and in fact, all Singaporeans who must charm the 
delegates  with  their  warmth.  BMW  Asia  has  already  stepped  forward  to  partner  Singapore.  I  hope 
more  will  do  so.  Certainly,  we  will  approach  some  of  you  over  the  next  few  months.  I  hope  that 
together we can make Singapore 2006 a success. 
I wish all of you an enjoyable evening. Now, you can have your free drinks. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
