Marion Williams: What is in store for the Barbadian economy as we enter the 
CSME 
Address  by  Dr  Marion  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  to  the  Barbados 
Employers Confederation, St Michael, 16 March 2005. 
 Mr.  Chairman  and  President,  Dr.  Hensley  Sobers;  Members  of  the  Executive  Council;  Mr.  Harry 
Husbands, Executive Director, Barbados Employers Confederation; Ms. Shirley Farnum, Permanent 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; Mr. Vincent Burnett, Deputy Chief Labour Officer; 
Mr. Raull Harris, Executive Director, Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry; Mr. Trevor King, 
Executive Director, TVET; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  the  employers  of  Barbados  at  this  BEC’s  annual 
luncheon  on  the  topic  of  the  CSME.  I  am,  however,  a  little  alarmed  that  you  may  be  expecting 
something of a crystal ball address and that I will be in a position to tell you what is really in store for 
us under CSME.  
Let me say that economics is about probabilities and economists will never say they are sure about 
anything  in  the  future.  They  will  advise  that  there  is  a  high,  low  or  medium  probability  of  an  event 
occurring or that certain outcomes are likely. 
I am afraid that is precisely what you are about to hear from me. 
One of the basic reasons for the creation of the CSME was that it had become clear that the future for 
small countries and small entities in the rapidly globalising world was becoming increasingly difficult. In 
negotiations, organisations have little time and patience for dealing with a myriad of small countries. 
Secondly, if one wants to be heard, it was very clear that size made a difference to the willingness of 
others  to  listen.  The  significance  given  to  your  view  is  greater  when  you  are  larger  and  you  are 
therefore  able  to  have  somewhat  more  negotiating  influence.  In  addition,  if  you  can  trade  without 
barriers  in  a  single  economic  space  the  possibility  of  growth  and  expansion  is  enhanced  and  the 
hurdles, legal, administrative, regulatory, etc. are lessened. As a single market we can now offer our 
members better terms of operating, and greater freedom from barriers than we offer any third country. 
For these reasons the Caribbean had very little option but to form itself into a single market. We have 
created  a  greater  single  economic  space  and  a  greater  market  for  ourselves  in  which  we  are  the 
beneficiaries. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  requirements  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  CSME  are  the  removal  of 
restrictions  on  the  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  persons  and  capital  and  the  right  of 
establishment.  The  intention  is  to  reduce  the  economic  vulnerability  of  regional  economies  by 
providing an avenue to expand trade and investment opportunities, thereby lowering consumer prices 
and improving standards of living across the region. Enhanced levels of competitiveness should result 
from the extension of the gains of specialisation in production and should fortify the region’s position in 
the global economy.  
There  will,  however,  be  losers  and  gainers.  CSME  will  influence  all  spheres  of  economic  activity 
across Barbados, potentially translating into significant gains for the more efficient business entities. It 
has  already  contributed  to  the  demise  of  some  of  the  less  efficient  companies.  The  financial 
transactions that underpin the free movement of goods and services will intensify with greater trade, 
facilitated  by  the  removal  of  capital  account  restrictions  in  some  countries.  However,  the  gains  are 
expected 
to  better  resource  allocation  and  a  net 
welfare-improving outcome for the country, and without doubt for the region as a whole. 
We have already removed the barriers to trade in goods and services. We have made some strides in 
the removal of barriers to movement of persons, but there is a long and difficult road ahead here as 
witnessed by the frequent dialogue on this topic. In terms of financial liberalisation, we have removed 
the  barriers  to  the  movement  of  capital  in  the  form  of  equity  capital  but  there  are  other  areas  of 
financial liberalisation to be addressed. 
losses,  and  should 
to  offset 
lead 
the 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
The Productive Sectors 
At  the  sectoral  level;  to  date,  the  integration  process  under  CSME  has  proven  to  be  especially 
challenging for some industries in the Barbadian economy. Already, there has been a contraction in 
output of the manufacturing sector and a deterioration of the current account position. Efforts to bring 
Barbadian businesses up to international standards will therefore necessitate a restructuring of their 
production processes, with a possible redirection of resources to those areas where the country may 
have  a  demonstrated  comparative  advantage.  It  is  easy  to  speak  in  general  terms  of  restructuring 
production  processes  but  those  on  the  ground  need  to  translate  this  into  actual  implementable 
changes  in  production.  Some  of  the  weaker  entities  have  already  dropped  out  as  a  result  of 
competition,  and  it  is  important  now  that  we  nurture  the  remaining  entities  –  presumably  the  more 
competitive  ones  -  and  assist  them  in  holding  their  own  in  the  more  open  environment.  Several 
suggestions  have  been  tabled  to  assist  the  manufacturing  sector  in  becoming  more  competitive. 
These include the development of specialty products, particularly those that command higher prices in 
the international market and an emphasis on higher value-added products.  
Understandably, with the right to establish anywhere in the region, industries will gravitate to locations 
with abundant resources, with low energy costs and competitive wages. High production costs, related 
to  high  wage  rates,  and  a  dearth of  abundant  natural  resources place  Barbados  at  a  disadvantage 
vis-à-vis its CARICOM counterparts, in the production of most goods. This means that higher levels of 
productivity will be required of Barbados. It also suggests that we may have to look at our capital - 
labour  ratios  and  retool  our  enterprises  to  make  greater  economies  and  make  greater  use  of 
state-of-the-art equipment. 
At the same time, where Barbadians see the opportunity for operating competitively elsewhere in the 
Caribbean,  they  should  seize  it.  This  option  is  now  open  to  potential  investors.  We  know,  on  the 
ground however, that there are tremendous challenges and that nationalism is still very strong in the 
Caribbean,  despite  CSME,  but  these  are  hurdles  that  we  will  have  to  cross.  Meanwhile,  investors 
wanting to enter into the wider Caribbean should do so as long as the competitive environment and 
the prospects are good, provided of course, it is affordable at the macro level. 
On  the  other  hand,  Barbados  has  always  been  a  strong  supplier  of  services.  A  well-educated 
workforce,  good  infrastructure  and  a  favourable  business  environment,  can  translate  into significant 
gains in the provision of services, and many entities have already moved to supplying their services 
cross-border. We have seen it in the construction sector especially. In addition, consultancy services 
of  every  form  and  description  have  been  provided  to  the  rest  of  the  Caribbean  by  Barbadians  for 
decades.  We  must  not,  however,  believe  that  because  we  may  have  a  comparative  advantage  in 
services – and I say, “may” – that the competition is any less stiff than it is in the trade in goods. We 
must compete here as aggressively as we compete in any other sector. In addition, as globalisation 
overtakes regionalism, we have also to simultaneously compete with the entry of companies from third 
countries outside the region in the provision of services. The technology permits it and it will be very 
difficult to exclude them. We ignore them at our peril. 
Employment 
With labour set to move freely within the region under the CSME, the implications for the employment 
situation  in  Barbados  have  come  under  increasing  focus.  While  production  is  expected  to  gravitate 
towards lower-wage jurisdictions, labour would theoretically be attracted to higher-wage jurisdictions, 
of  which  Barbados  is  generally  acknowledged  to  be  one.  This  would  indicate  a  potential  surplus  of 
supply  over demand  in  the  Barbadian job  market,  at  least  in  the  short-run, which could  push down 
wages.  However,  it  should  also  be  noted  that,  at  least  in  theory,  the  integration  of  regional  labour 
markets  should  ensure  that  over  time,  equilibrium  is  reached  between  labour  supply  and  demand 
across the region. 
A number of other factors could affect the analysis, such as the comparative cost of living in Barbados 
as opposed to other regional jurisdictions. Furthermore, given that the categories of labour currently 
being  allowed  to  move  under  the  CSME  are  those  principally  with  higher  skill  levels,  with  which 
Barbados is perhaps more heavily endowed than other jurisdictions, it is possible that there could be a 
net  outflow  of  labour  from  Barbados  –  provided  Barbadians  are  prepared  to  accept  lower  wages 
elsewhere. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
The External sector 
The contraction in activity in the productive sectors also has implications for the external account of 
the  country.  This  is  particularly  worrying  to  the  extent  that  the  fall-off  in  production  is  being 
accompanied by a significant rise in retained imports from the region. Indeed, the steady deterioration 
in Barbados’ export performance has its genesis in the provision of duty-free access for CARICOM 
goods from the early 1990s and the resulting increase in competition in the domestic market, which 
seemingly impaired local producers’ export capacity. Imports in particular from Trinidad have grown 
tremendously. However, judging from the shopping of Barbadians in Trinidad, shoppers are buying, 
not  only  Trinidad-produced  goods.  If  this  is  so,  then  we  may  have  to  ask  ourselves  why  is  it  not 
possible to purchase these goods directly – is it sourcing? Surely we have a reputation for being a 
nation of traders! 
The challenge for our balance of payments is further compounded by the liberalisation of the capital 
account  required  under  CSME.  The  removal  of  exchange  control  restrictions  on  capital  account 
transactions within the union essentially constitutes a removal of restrictions with the rest of the world, 
given  that  some  other  countries  within  the  Area  do  not  have  exchange  controls  on  extra-regional 
capital transactions.  
However,  in  the  absence  of  capital  controls,  capital  flight  is  possible  where  there  is  a  differential 
between the domestic interest rate and interest rates abroad. Unbridled outflows could therefore put 
the maintenance of Barbados’ current fixed exchange rate regime at risk. Consequently, while capital 
account liberalisation process is ongoing, we are proceeding cautiously with regard to certain types of 
transactions  in  order  to  avoid  any  significant  disruptions  arising  from  unregulated  short-term  capital 
flows. 
Liberalisation  also  has  implications  for  the  independence  of  monetary  policy.  Whereas,  domestic 
economic circumstances might indicate the need to keep interest rates low, if regional rates are high, 
in the context of an open capital account, then there is more pressure to raise rates in order to keep 
money at home, even though the domestic cost situation would suggest that interest rates be kept low 
so as to reduce the cost of operations of businesses. 
On  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  changes  associated  with  the  CSME,  e.g.  the  enhanced  ability  of 
companies  to  establish  a  commercial  presence  anywhere  in  the  region,  could  result  in  increased 
capital flows into Barbados, provided that we maintain and encourage an attractive investment climate. 
We have already seen this inward flow with respect to the banking system. 
Under the CSME regime, current trends in the financial sector are likely to be reinforced, in that the 
cross-border provision of financial services, as well as the integration of financial markets, will become 
even more of a reality. This should produce a number of benefits for consumers: widening the range of 
financial services available to consumers, lowering the cost of these services and generally promoting 
competition  and  greater  efficiency  in  the  day-to-day  transactions  taking  place  within  the  Barbadian 
economy.  However,  full  advantage  can  only  be  taken  of  these  benefits  in  the  context  of  full 
liberalisation. It will therefore be important to judge how far and how fast that liberalisation process can 
take place without creating domestic disruption and excessive loss of foreign exchange reserves. 
The spate of mergers and acquisitions which have taken place in recent years have been influenced 
by  the  need  for  corporations  to  benefit  from  economies  of  scale.  With  large  corporations  now 
dominating  almost  every  sector  in  the  field  of  finance,  regulators  will  have  to  guard  against  any 
attempts  by  financial  institutions  to  abuse  the  rights  and  privileges  associated  with  the  CSME  by 
engaging 
in  anti-competitive  practices.  However,  with  consolidated  supervision  and  policy 
harmonisation  forming  an  integral  part  of  the  CSME  process,  it  is  anticipated  that  this  potential 
problem should be kept at bay. 
Mergers and acquisitions have been more evident in the banking and insurance industries – it may 
abate  but  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  over.  At  the  level  of  securities  trading,  I  expect  to  see  continuing 
strong activity. Hopefully, within the next year or two, we will see greater harmonisation of the stock 
exchanges  in  the  region,  where  there  are  similar  listing  rules,  similar  take-over  criteria  and,  most 
importantly, trading from a single book. 
I  consider  that  the  establishment  of  a  single  stock  exchange  creates  the  opportunity  for  the 
development of a Caribbean numeraire currency. Certainly, if there is one book there should be one 
currency in which transactions are denominated. If we do nothing about it – it will be the US dollar – by 
default.  If  we  take  a  conscious  step  to  create  a  regional  numeraire  currency  –  and  it  could  be  of 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
equivalent  value  to  the  US  dollar  so  as  to  eliminate  any  conversion  difficulty  when  we  actually  do 
create a single transactions currency in the region. 
I  think  also  that  the  use  of  a  regional  credit  rating  agency  will  become  increasingly  important.  We 
already have one in the Caribbean Information and Credit Rating Services (CARICRIS). In order to 
encourage surpluses in the country to be invested in deficit countries it will be important that potential 
investors know the value of their investment. The recently established regional rating agency will help 
to  establish  the  value  of  corporations  across  the  region  so  that  an  investor  in  Barbados  can  more 
easily rely on specialists in the field to value the quality of companies and the strength of the balance 
sheet of companies – say – in St. Lucia or Dominica. 
A number of steps of this kind to set up institutions which facilitate regionalism are being taken both by 
governments,  government  related  institutions  and  by  the  private  sector.  These  are  the  kinds  of 
tripartite initiatives which we need to ensure that the appropriate framework for the smooth functioning 
of the CSME is property enabled. 
In order for the CSME to function effectively, there is a need to harmonise, and I would go so far as to 
say,  “unify”,  the  rules  and  guidelines  governing  the  conduct  of  businesses  across  the  region.  The 
CARICOM  Secretariat  has  started  with  the  financial  sector  and  has  framed  a  Financial  Services 
Agreement.  This  is  a  very  important  step  as  it  sets  out  guidelines  within  which  the  sector  should 
operate. However, we will need to do more to minimise and, preferably, eliminate the differences in 
our  legislation,  and  in  our  criteria  for  establishment  in  the  various  sectors,  in  order  to  eliminate 
regulatory arbitrage and reduce corporate legislative shopping within the Caribbean. 
I  strongly  feel  that  our  Chambers  of  Commerce  across  the  region  must  be  strongly  involved  in  the 
process. This means, by implication, our Employers Confederation as well. I believe that this is why 
the  distinction  is  made  between  the  single  market  and  single  economy.  Yes,  we  can  more  quickly 
become  a  single  market  –  however,  in  order  for  us  to  see  ourselves  as  a  single  economy  our 
economic and corporate rules and legislation will need to be more closely harmonised. In a sense, we 
are fortunate, in that the basis of our system is British – though in recent years many countries have 
modelled  themselves  on  Canadian  legislation  -  that  is,  the  English-speaking  Caribbean.  However, 
harmonisation within the French and Spanish-speaking Caribbean will be a little more complex.  
The implications of the CSME for employers as Human Resource professionals are many. It will be 
important that HR departments work within their organisations to ensure that high standards are set 
and  that  excellence  is  rewarded,  for  it  is  through  this  process  that  the  good  candidates  show  their 
worth  and  the  entire  level  of  performance  is  lifted.  Rewarding  mediocrity  in  the  same  way  that  we 
reward  high  performance,  breeds  complacency  and  leads  to  low  levels  of  productivity.  We  have  to 
keep on lifting the bar so that employees know what is expected of them. In this way, our workforce 
will be able to hold its own and retain their jobs against the competition in the face of free movement of 
labour. It is a well-known fact that those who emigrate are usually those who are willing to work hard. 
Barbadians must be aware of this, and instead of trying to keep them out, they must be prepared to 
work harder. 
I take the opportunity here to speak of training. In the context of CSME, our training must be futuristic. 
We need to look not only at where our firms are today, but where they wish to be and how they get 
there.  If  productivity  requirements  mean  greater  state-of-the-art  equipment,  then  we  must  train 
persons in these fields. I constantly say that we are technologically challenged. When the high-tech 
gadgets  which  we  buy  fail  –  there  seem  to  be  a  few  people  who  can  fix  them.  HR  trainers  must 
therefore  be  conscious  of  the  training  requirements  which  will  make  us  globally  ready  –  if  we  are 
globally ready we will be CSME ready. We will need to use the Internet more, use journals - find the 
right areas  where  training is  being  delivered,  and  encourage  investment  in  training.  This  is the  one 
sure way in which our labour force can be prepared to compete in CSME. If you aim for the skies you 
may land in the treetops. Aim or the treetops you not may get off the ground.  
I am aware that employers and especially human resource professional will wish to focus on the issue 
of culture assimilation within enterprises, and on the application of ground rules which are based on 
giving the best candidate the job – especially where in today’s environment, that candidate may not be 
a Barbadian national. 
However, we have always had to deal with these issues, so this is not new. My only advice is that the 
most important challenge facing Barbados is to improve its competitiveness. I believe that if employers 
and HR professionals focus on this they will get the desired responses from their employees. 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2005
In some organisations the development of pay-for-performance appraisals are being considered. This 
may, at first, appear to have nothing to do with CSME. However, it has to do with motivation, hence it 
has to do with getting the best, getting the best employees means improving our competitiveness – so 
we are back to what is good for us in order to flourish within CMSE – improved competitiveness. 
We  will  all  need  to  put  systems  in  place  that  will  ensure  that  our  employees  aim  for  high  levels  of 
productivity, this will include reducing work stoppages, reducing absenteeism and a closer control of 
wage costs. This, coupled with the nurturing of a culture of greater entrepreneurship, will be the key to 
getting the best out of CSME. 
Already,  given  the  reduction  in  the  rate  of  tax  from  $40,000  to  $37,500  and  other  tax  related 
concessions, there is likely to be a significant increase in disposable incomes. Last year, there was a 
tremendous surge in spending. Net domestic assets of the banking system, which comprise credit to 
government  and  credit  to  the  private  sector,  rose  by  50%.  We  are  looking  at  a  situation  where 
disposable incomes will rise even further in 2005 because of the tax benefits that have been given. 
Ask yourselves “Is there really scope for giving wage increases on top of that? What will happen to 
disposable incomes? What will happen to spending?” I hesitate to incur the wrath of the unions, but I 
am an economist and the numbers stare me in the face. I suggest that you put in to your employees 
that we put Barbados first and that competitiveness is very important – for the good of themselves and 
future generations.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, there are several steps still to be taken to ensure hat CSME becomes the opportunity 
which we are convinced it can be for Barbadians. However, not all of these initiatives are in the laps of 
the officials. Yes, the further liberalisation of the external capital account is. However, the restructuring 
of the productive sectors to make them more competitive is another major challenge facing the country 
going  into  the  CSME,  and  it  requires  a  combined  effort.  With  judicious  action  at  the  policy-making 
level, and with the support and input of the public sector, these challenges can be met. On balance, 
the CSME can produce net benefits to the Barbadian economy by providing a harmonised framework 
for  policy  formulation,  as  well  as  a  larger  market,  with  greater  opportunities  for  employment, 
investment, production and trade. One that will provide Barbados with the economic and bargaining 
power necessary to combat external threats and overcome resource constraints. 
However, what’s in store will, to a large extent, depend on our willingness to seize the opportunities 
presented to us. We can chart our future in CSME – not one sector or group alone – but with every 
group, sector and organisation determining what it wants and setting out to get there.  
What  is  in  store  for  us  in  CARICOM  will  be  largely  determined  by  the  efforts  we  make  and  by  the 
initiatives we take to influence the outcomes we want.  
BIS Review 20/2005 
 5
