Kristina Persson: Monetary policy in a low-inflation economy 
Speech  by  Ms  Kristina  Persson,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Stockholm  Strand 
Rotary Club, Stockholm, 18 February 2005. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to take part in this morning seminar. I intend to begin by giving my views 
on  the  current  prospects  for  the  economy  and  inflation,  including  the  risks  associated  with,  among 
other things, the unwinding of the present global imbalances. I will do so against the background of the 
minutes from this year’s first monetary policy meeting, which were published last week and which gave 
an  account  of  the  Executive  Board’s  discussion  on  27  January.  Then  I  will  discuss  the  Riksbank’s 
remit, different ways to conduct monetary policy and the possible implications of the low inflation rate 
for future monetary policy. 
The current monetary policy situation 
Since  Christmas  the  news  flow  has  been  dominated  by  the  huge  tidal  wave  disaster  that  hit  the 
countries in the Indian Ocean. Despite the scale and extent of the disaster the consequences for the 
world economy will probably be very small. That at least has been the conclusion from the different 
international meetings that have taken place after Christmas. 
International economic activity is thus expected to continue to strengthen and resource utilisation in 
the world economy to become increasingly higher in the coming years. Inflation has risen slightly in 
most countries, owing mainly to the increasing oil price.  But excluding oil, inflation has not risen at the 
same  rate.  There  are  plenty  of  spare  resources  in several  of  the  biggest  economies,  and  in  recent 
years competition has toughened in many industries. As a result, international inflation is forecast on 
the whole to be relatively moderate in the coming years. 
The economic situation in the US and the euro area 
In the US the economic situation is continuing to improve. In the fourth quarter last year GDP in the 
US  rose  by  0.8  per  cent  compared  with  the  previous  quarter,  partly  due  to  a  sharp  increase  in 
investment.  This  reflects  a  benign  investment  climate  in  the  US  with  historically  high  profits  and 
optimism among firms. Indicators of growth prospects for the fourth quarter provide a positive picture 
of the activity level in the US economy. 
As resource utilisation has picked up the Federal Reserve has raised its key policy rate from 1 per 
cent to 2.5 per cent. Many factors suggest that we can expect the tightening to continue in the spring. 
Inflation is estimated to rise in the period ahead, partly because the weakening of the dollar in recent 
months has made US imports more expensive. In the main scenario of the Riksbank’s most recent 
Inflation Report the US economy is expected to continue to perform strongly in 2005 and 2006. 
One source of concern for both the United States and the world as a whole is the large deficits in the 
US  economy.  In  the  third  quarter  last  year  the  current  account  deficit  totalled  USD  165  billion,  or 
around 6 per cent of GDP. Data for November show that the deficit has continued to grow, reaching a 
new record high of just over USD 60 billion. This may result in changes in interest rates and exchange 
rates that could have considerable consequences for world trade. 
A  large  share,  or  about  40  per  cent,  of  Sweden’s  exports  go  to  the  euro  area,  and  as  a  result 
economic developments there are especially important for us. The recovery in the euro area economy 
is going slowly. Growth in the third quarter was lower than expected. Available indicators for the fourth 
quarter  provide  a  mixed  picture.  Germany,  which  is  an  important  market  for  Swedish  products,  is 
showing some signs of an improvement. After several years of extensive cutbacks there should be a 
pent-up need among firms to invest.  At the same time exports are being dampened by the euro’s rise 
against mainly the dollar. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
The economic situation in Sweden 
As  regards  Sweden  the  Riksbank  has  been  positive  in  the  past  year  in  its  outlook  on  economic 
developments. International demand has increased faster than anticipated, with above all exports of 
services proving unexpectedly robust. 
Economic policy is also contributing to the relatively bright growth prospects. Interest rates are at an 
all-time low and the proposals in the Government’s Budget Bill imply a looser fiscal stance. Household 
consumption will continue to grow steadily in the period ahead, and business investment also appears 
to be picking up again following a number of years’ weakness. Taken together, this means that GDP 
growth  in  2004  is  forecast  to  be  around  3.7  per  cent,  after  which  it  will  be  dampened  somewhat, 
standing at about 3 per cent in 2005 and 2006, which is a fairly high level in historical terms. 
Despite the firm growth Swedish inflation is very low – in January it stood at 0.4 per cent, measured as 
the  annual  change  in  UND1X.  The  weak  inflation  is  primarily  due  to  surprisingly  low  import  prices. 
Other causes are the strong productivity growth; the krona’s appreciation in the past half year, above 
all against the dollar but also against the euro; and low electricity prices. There are many indications 
that we won't be seeing any significant inflationary pressures in the coming year either. That made it 
natural for us to decide not to raise interest rates at the end of January. My personal view is that it will 
probably be a while before a rate hike comes into question. 
The risk outlook 
Surrounding this rather bright picture are a large number of risks that our growth and inflation forecasts 
will not be met in the coming two years. The key risk factor is how the US deficits will be corrected. 
Will it come about through a sharp correction in the dollar and, if so, what will the consequences be for 
the world economy? 
The majority of forecasters agree that the large deficits in the US are not sustainable. It’s true that the 
weakened dollar is expected to be able to lead to a certain stabilisation of the current account, but 
since the US imports around 1.5 times more than it exports there would have to be a sharp reduction 
in imports or an even steeper rise in exports for the deficit to be able to narrow. 
At the same time, demand in the US has to a great extent been the engine for the world economy in 
recent years. Expansionary economic policy has contributed to this and also resulted in a very large 
saving deficit. The inflow of capital to the US has stemmed, among other things, from Asian central 
banks’ purchases of US government securities. China has recently accounted for about one-third of 
the US external borrowing requirement. In that way, both China and Japan have built up substantial 
dollar reserves. 
The  logic  behind  this  loss-making  activity  (if  the  dollar  continues  to  fall  in  value)  is  that  it  enables 
Japan and China to maintain low values for their own currencies, thus facilitating continued exports to 
the US and other countries. For China the substantial exports translate into jobs and incomes in an 
economy where a very high percentage of the population still live in the conditions of a developing 
country.  Fast  growth  means  increasing  prosperity,  which  in  turn  may  result  in  a  stable  social  and 
political  climate.  However,  in  order  for  China  to  switch  from  export-led  to  domestic  demand  at  a 
quicker pace – which has to happen in the future – it will require institutional and other reforms that 
take  time  to  implement.  The  financial  infrastructure  in  particular  is  in  great  need  of  change  and 
development. 
Where will demand come from when the economy is tightened in the US? The weak growth in Europe 
and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  developments  in  the  Japanese  economy  means  that  there  is  no 
obvious  candidate  to  take  the  United  States’  place  as  growth  engine.  While  China  has  recently 
become the world’s third biggest trading nation it can hardly assume the mantle on its own. Domestic 
demand in Europe needs to pick up but the current upswing here is sluggish and is being restrained 
by efforts to tackle public finance deficits in countries such as Germany, Italy and France. 
So  how  likely  is  it  that  China  will  abandon  its  fixed  rate  with  the  dollar  in  the  period  ahead?  Most 
commentators  believe  that  China  will  take  a  gradual,  slow  and  cautious  road  towards  a  floating 
exchange rate. Should the dollar continue to weaken, therefore, the euro will continue to bear a large 
part  of  the  adjustment  in  the  future  as  well,  thus  having  an  adverse  effect  on  European 
competitiveness and growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Another  important  growth  factor  is  how interest  rates  develop  in  the  period  ahead.  There  is  little  to 
suggest that the US federal budget deficit will narrow to a sufficient extent. That is worrying, especially 
given that the country in the long term will see sharply increasing costs for medical care, health care 
and pensions. As a result there is a clear risk of rising market rates in the US that could trigger a fall in 
house  prices,  which  in  turn  could  dampen  private  consumption.  A  reduction  in  public  expenditures 
would also have a tightening effect but in the long term would lead to a more balanced development 
and thereby prevent an overly quick rise in rates. 
Another risk factor is the oil price. As the US is more oil-dependent than the euro area countries, its 
economy is more sensitive to changes in oil prices. Should the oil price remain at a high, fluctuating 
level it may curtail growth in the US. 
All in all, this picture of large global imbalances implies a clear risk that growth will be more subdued 
over  the  coming  two-year  period.  The  question  is  how  fast  this  slowdown  may  come  about.  If 
controlled, the moderation would be softer, while rapid changes could entail a considerable weakening 
of the world economy and thereby also check Sweden’s economic performance in the period ahead. 
In addition to the competition problems that an ever stronger euro means for Europe there is the issue 
of how we are to meet the competition from low-wage countries, both the new member states of the 
EU  and  the  emerging  economies  in  Asia.  The  differences  in  labour  costs  are  very  large.  The 
toughening competition places great demands on the ability of Swedish economic players to adjust. 
What  can  Sweden  do  to  attract  and  keep  new  investment  that  can  create  jobs  and  incomes  here? 
Swedish investment is among the lowest in Europe and must in all likelihood increase as a share of 
GDP to ensure continued growth. 
The global exchange rate adjustments may result in more subdued growth, which makes them a big 
uncertainty factor in the period ahead. The rebalancing of demand between currency areas takes time, 
and the relative price changes via the currencies creates, in the same way as inflation, an uncertainty 
that may have an adverse impact on both investment and demand. 
The Riksbank’s remit and inflation targeting policy 
The Swedish parliament has decided that the Riksbank’s objective shall be to maintain price stability, 
and the Bank has since defined this to mean an annual change in inflation, measured in terms of the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI),  of  two  per  cent,  with  a  tolerance  for  deviations  of  plus/minus  one 
percentage point. In practice we often choose to look at a measure (UND1X) that excludes the effect 
of changes in indirect taxes and subsidies as well as mortgage interest expenditure – i.e. what we can 
call political or administrative decisions. 
Our interest rate decisions are based on forecasts of price developments one to two years ahead. If 
our  forecasts  are  higher  than  the  inflation  target  the  Bank  normally  raises  interest  rates,  and  vice 
versa. In other words the policy rate is normally adjusted so that inflation 1-2 years ahead, taking into 
account the balance of risks, is in line with the target. 
The Riksbank introduced the current regime of a floating exchange rate and inflation target in 1993, 
after  a  number  of  decades  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate.  The  new  regime  has  meant  a  new  way  of 
working whereby we attempt, with the aid of monetary policy, to adjust economic growth to what the 
inflation target allows. A common analogy is that the economy is like a car with certain characteristics 
that enable it to drive at certain speeds but not at others. In that case we in the Executive Board are 
the driver, using the policy rate to accelerate or slow down. If the car is going too fast, its tyres will start 
to overheat and we risk driving off the road, i.e. prices will rise and we have to raise the policy rate to 
slow down. Conversely, when the car is going too slowly we accelerate by lowering the policy rate. 
In reality the analogy with a car is somewhat misleading. First, it is difficult to know exactly the speed 
at  which  the  economy  is  actually  growing.  The  statistics  that  we  use  when  forecasting  economic 
growth  contain  errors,  do  not  provide  a  comprehensive  picture  of  the  economic  situation  and 
furthermore are produced with a lag. Another problem is the difficulty in knowing exactly how long it 
takes before a rate adjustment has the desired effect. Since it takes time – we allow for a time horizon 
of one to two years before the transmission mechanism has worked through the economic system – 
we have to form an opinion of the state of the economy in the long run. 
Predicting  the  future  is  difficult  for  many  reasons,  not  just  due  to  statistical  shortcomings  but  also 
because the economy is changing all the time. The economy can be hit by different kinds of shocks, 
e.g. the increased electricity prices when there was a shortage of water in Sweden’s reservoirs, and 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
the price of meat and other food when cows in Europe were affected by a number of diseases. It is 
difficult to determine early on what changes in the economy are temporary and what are permanent. 
Another factor complicating the picture is that inflation expectations in society greatly influence price 
and wage formation, and thereby inflation. In other words the car – to continue with the analogy – has 
a  fogged  windscreen,  a  speedometer  that  is  very  difficult  to  read  and  pedals  that  sometimes  are 
sluggish and sometimes easy to push down. 
How can we make the economy go at an appropriate speed?  
In  somewhat  simplified  terms  there  are  two  different  ways  to  describe  monetary  policy  based  on 
inflation targeting: The first is to employ a simple monetary policy rule whereby the policy rate is set as 
a  function  of  the  current  inflation  rate  and  the  output  gap,  which  is  a  measure  of  the  difference 
between actual and potential output and reflects resource utilisation in the economy.1 When the output 
gap  is  negative,  actual  output  is  lower  than  potential  output,  which  means  that  there  are  plenty  of 
spare resources in the economy. In such a scenario price and wage increases are small and inflation 
is generally below target. 
When  the  output  gap  is  positive  the  situation  is  the  reverse:  resources  are  overstretched  and  the 
excessive  demand  generates  inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  So  according  to  the  rule  the 
policy rate should be raised if growth is above its potential rate and inflation is higher than the inflation 
target,  and  vice  versa  in  the  reverse  situation.  When  actual  and  potential  output  are  the  same  the 
economy is in balance and inflation is normally in line with the target, provided that policy is credible. 
A  common  argument  in  favour  of  conducting  monetary  policy  in  this  way  is  that  the  central  bank’s 
knowledge  of  how  the  economy  functions  is  too  limited  for  a  forecast-based  monetary  policy  to  be 
formulated in a good enough way. Incorrect forecasts can also burden the central bank with credibility 
problems, which is one reason to prefer a simple rule. 
The other method, applied by the majority of central banks including the Riksbank, is to forecast how 
the economy will evolve over the next couple of years and adjust monetary policy accordingly. One 
complication here is that something unexpected can always happen, causing the economy to move in 
a different direction than that expected. For this reason the central bank must take account of different 
risks when setting the policy rate. The forecasts are produced by experts through the use of various 
statistical methods and models. The results are often presented in the shape of a main scenario and 
one or more alternative scenarios. 
A  monetary  policy  that  is  based  on  forecasts  requires  more  information  about  the  economy  than  a 
rule-based  policy,  and  according  to  its  critics  there  is  a  risk  that  forecasters  will  overestimate  their 
ability,  perhaps  leading  to  poorer  results  than  would  have  been  the  case  with  a  less  complicated 
approach.  Advocates  of  the  method,  on  the  other  hand,  say  that  we  should  make  full  use  of  the 
knowledge that we nevertheless have. 
Since a forecast-based monetary policy requires the analysis of many more variables than is the case 
for a simple rule, it is more difficult for external players to predict how the central bank is going to act. 
For  this  reason  a  forecast-based  policy  places  high  demands  on  the  bank’s  openness  and 
transparency in relation to external parties, as well as on its ability to communicate. 
There are also other advantages associated with a forecast-based monetary policy. Since it is forward-
looking the central bank can at least try to foresee future problems or structural changes and meet 
them through a rate adjustment. The ability to act quickly is essential, as monetary policy acts with 
some  lag  and  the  economic  cost  of  increasing  inflation  becomes  lower  if  it  is  checked  at  an  early 
stage. Another benefit is that the central bank does not become as tied as with a rule, but instead can 
take  account  of  alternative  scenarios  and  risks.  Moreover,  these  assessments  can  be  regularly 
updated in the light of new information about economic developments.2  
                                                      
1   This is known as the Taylor rule.  The US economics professor John B. Taylor is Under Secretary for International Affairs at 
the US Department of the Treasury. He has formulated a simple rate-setting rule that has come to be known as the Taylor 
rule and that has become very popular.  This is one of many examples of monetary policy rules. 
2   See  the  speech  by  Federal  Reserve  Board  Governor  Ben  S.  Bernanke,  "The  Logic  of  Monetary  Policy"  (2004).  In  his 
speech  Bernanke  discusses  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  following  a  simple  monetary  policy  rule  compared  with  a 
forecast-based  policy.   See  also  Apel,  M.,  Nessén  M.,  Söderström  U.  &  A.  Vredin  (1999),  "Different  ways  of  conducting 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Flaws in the data underlying decisions and the difficulty of predicting what will actually happen in the 
future mean that the ability to evaluate and weigh up a large amount of complex information is what 
most  distinguishes  an  accurate  monetary  policy  from  a  less  accurate  one.  Judgement  is  therefore 
highly significant for how good the final result is. This favours the use of a forecast-based monetary 
policy, which allows greater scope for judgements than a simple rule. 
Openness and communication 
The  choice  of  monetary  policy  strategy  is  of  key  importance  for  a  central  bank’s  external 
communication.  Good  communication  with  external  players  is  extra  important  for  central  banks  that 
conduct a forecast-based monetary policy. It is therefore important that the Riksbank is open about 
how we view economic developments and the inflation outlook and about how we have reasoned in 
our conduct of monetary policy. The aim is to create an understanding of what governs the Bank’s 
interest rate decisions and to generate support among the Swedish public for the inflation target. 
This  is  also  a  reason  why  we  in  the  Executive  Board  often  give  public  speeches.  Openness  and 
transparency  from  our  side  can  help  stabilise  expectations  regarding  inflation  and  interest  rate 
developments and lower the risk of unease in the financial markets. So inflation expectations play a 
key role for monetary policy and for that reason we keep a close eye on how they are developing.3 
Perhaps the most important task of monetary policy is to influence inflation expectations since it is via 
market  rates,  and  not  the  repo  rate  itself,  that  demand  in  the  economy  is  affected.  That  is  why 
communication and credibility are so significant. If we can get our message across we increase the 
chances of a successful monetary policy. 
Monetary policy in a low-inflation economy 
The  Riksbank’s  rule  of  action,  which  says  that  the  policy  rate  should  be  adjusted  when  inflation  is 
above or below target one to two years ahead, is not at all as mechanical as is sometimes perceived. 
The  Executive  Board’s  clarification  in  1999  made  it  clear  that  the  practical  formulation  of  monetary 
policy takes account of developments in the real economy. 
According to the clarification there may be reason for the Riksbank to deviate from the target if inflation 
is being affected by a temporary shock that will not fully dissipate during the coming two-year period 
but that is nonetheless not deemed to have any lasting influence on inflation developments. Another 
reason is when a bigger shock makes a return to the target one to two years ahead associated with 
excessive undesirable effects on the real economy. 
There are many examples in recent years of when we have taken such factors into account. At the 
turn of the year 2002-2003, for example, rising energy prices were pushing up inflation quickly. But 
since the high energy prices were expected to gradually fall back entirely we saw them as temporary 
and decided to leave the repo rate unchanged. 
When the current regime of inflation targeting was established in the early 1990s it had been preceded 
by  a  long  period  of  high,  fluctuating  inflation  in  both  Sweden  and  other  countries.  Many  countries 
around  the  world  experienced  a  similar  shift  in  regime  around  this  time.  Partly  as  a  result  of  this, 
international inflation fell sharply during the 1990s, from about 30 per cent to below 4 per cent a year 
on average.4  
The inflation targeting regime and its practical application has been underpinned by the conviction that 
high,  variable  inflation  is  bad  for  the  economy.  Now  we  are  living  in  a  world  with  very  weak  price 
increases,  particularly  for  manufactured  goods.  Is  there  anything  in  the  current  circumstances  that 
could motivate a change in the Riksbank’s thinking? The integration of China's and India's large, fast-
growing economies into the world economy will most likely affect world growth and inflation for a long 
                                                                                                                                                                      
inflation targeting – theory and practice", Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 4, 13-42, for a similar discussion that is linked 
to the monetary policy framework in Sweden. 
3   Read more about this in, for example, Palmqvist S. & Strömberg L. (2004), "Households’ inflation opinions – a tale of two 
surveys" in Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 4, 24-43. 
4   See Rogoff, K. (2003), "Disinflation: An Unsung Benefit of Globalization?" 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
time. Globalisation has been given a powerful push forward. Even though setbacks are possible, it is 
reasonable  to  believe  that  the  supply  shock  produced  by  Asia’s  low-price  exports  will  continue  to 
depress prices in the world for many years ahead. China’s government has set a target of quadrupling 
its GDP during 2000-2020, as happened over the last twenty-year period. In rural parts of China there 
are hundreds of millions of people who dream of a better life in the cities and of working in a modern 
company. 
In  Sweden  we  can  see  how  inflation  in  recent  months  has  turned  out  lower  than  we  expected, 
because  price  increases  for  imported  goods  have  been  weaker  than  anticipated.  The  productivity 
gains that we have witnessed, and that have also contributed to such a low inflation rate, may also be 
due to the increased global competition. Another dampening effect can be expected from the abolition 
of the import quotas for textiles. 
At  the  same  time  there  is  as  usual  reason  to  believe  that  world  market  prices  will  increase  as 
economic activity improves. The rapid growth in the new industrial countries is also pushing up the 
prices  of  commodities,  not  least  oil.  It  is  therefore  uncertain  how  long  import  price  pressures  will 
remain very low. In any event this is a very important issue for monetary policy in the coming year, and 
at the Riksbank we are keeping a close eye on import price developments. 
Allow me to round off with some thoughts regarding the stance of monetary policy. Given that inflation 
is anticipated to be below target for a large part of the coming two-year period, I think one can argue 
that there has been scope to lower the repo rate somewhat more than we have done recently. But I 
have, like my colleagues, decided against this. There are several reasons for that – interest rates do 
not always have to be changed when inflation prospects differ from the target. 
The reasons are that growth is currently firm.  We believe that the problems in the labour market are 
chiefly  due  to  structural  factors;  it  is  therefore  likely  that  they  would  only  be  marginally  affected  by 
lower interest rates. Moreover, the demand for labour is expected to begin to rise during 2005-2006, 
Swedish  monetary  policy  is  already  loose,  real  interest  rates  are  low,  household  borrowing  is 
increasing quickly and house prices are rising - and have been for a long time. Even lower rates could 
further fuel the willingness to borrow, entailing risks in the long term in the shape of a growing property 
bubble. 
In addition, if monetary policy is to try to fully offset the low import prices by driving up domestic prices, 
for example in the service sector, this could lead to a domestic inflation rate that would be difficult to 
stop  if  economic  activity  were  to  continue  to  develop  strongly  for  a  longer  period  and  resource 
utilisation thereby to rise. 
The clarification of monetary policy that was published in 1999 can thus be applied to today’s situation: 
Out  of  consideration  for  developments  in  the  real  economy,  i.e.  growth  and  employment,  in  the 
somewhat  longer  term,  we  can refrain  from  lowering  the  repo  rate  now,  even  though  a  mechanical 
application of our rule of action could justify such a move. 
But should economic activity weaken, for example due to the risk scenario that the adjustment of the 
US deficits could trigger, the situation will be different. Then I can see reason to lower the policy rate 
further, especially if the weakening is coupled with a stronger krona. In such a situation I believe it 
would be an advantage that the repo rate is not even lower than it is today. 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2005
