David Dodge: Monetary policy and the exchange rate in Canada 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canada  China  Business 
Council, Beijing, 2 June 2005. 
 It is an honour to be in Beijing and to have the opportunity to speak to you. My purpose today is to talk 
about  what  I  know  best  -  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  Canada.  I  want  to  discuss  Canada’s 
experiences - both positive and negative - in moving from a fixed to a floating exchange rate regime, 
and our subsequent search for a monetary policy anchor. In doing so, I hope that I can provide some 
insights that may prove useful as China makes its own important decisions about its exchange rate 
and monetary policy regimes. 
Canada’s experience is interesting and potentially insightful for two important reasons. First, Canada 
has more experience with a flexible exchange rate than almost any other country. The Canadian dollar 
has floated for all but eight years since 1950. Canada is also one of the few countries to have moved, 
twice, from a fixed to a flexible currency without either an economic crisis or a rapid depreciation of its 
currency. 
A  second  reason  why  Canada’s  experience  may  be  relevant  is  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  had 
considerable  experience  in  conducting  monetary  policy  independently  and  in  controlling  inflation 
through  a  system  of  inflation  targets.  In  1991,  Canada  became  the  second  country  to  introduce 
inflation targets. I’m pleased to say that this monetary policy framework - with inflation targets and a 
flexible  exchange  rate  -  has  proven  to  be  very  successful  in  delivering  high,  sustainable  levels  of 
output and employment in an environment of low and stable inflation. 
Moving from fixed to flexible exchange rates 
So, let me talk first about our experiences of moving from a fixed to a floating exchange rate. As I just 
mentioned,  Canada  did  this  twice  during  the  postwar  period.  The  first  time  was  in  1950,  and  the 
second  was  in  1970,  following  an  eight-year  period  during  the  1960s  when  we  again  fixed  our 
currency to the U.S. dollar. 
In both cases, our decision to float was driven by the desire of the Canadian authorities to do what 
was best for our own economy. We felt that trying to keep the exchange rate fixed at a time of large 
capital  inflows  would  have  had  two  serious  domestic  consequences.  First  of  all,  it  would  have 
generated large inflationary pressures in Canada. Second, and just as important, it could have created 
a “boom-bust” economic cycle. 
But  Canada’s  decision  to  float  in  1950 was  not  an  easy  one  to  make,  particularly  because we  had 
been very active in the founding of the Bretton Woods institutions and the global fixed-rate system. 
Canada had struggled to stay within this system during the late 1940s. But by 1950, sharply higher 
commodity prices and strong capital inflows into our resource sector led to upward pressure on the 
Canadian  dollar.  In  addition,  there  were  speculative  short-term  capital  inflows,  which  added  to  the 
upward pressure on the currency. To maintain the fixed exchange rate, the Canadian authorities first 
intervened  on  a  massive  scale.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  rose  by  40  per  cent  in  less  than  three 
months,  and  the  money  supply  grew  rapidly  at  a  time  when  the  domestic  economy  was  already 
operating at capacity. 
Given the desire to both maintain stable domestic prices and to avoid an economic boom that could 
lead to a bust later on, Canadian authorities felt that they had two options. One was to revalue the 
Canadian dollar; the other was to let the Canadian dollar float. The IMF strongly favoured a revaluation 
- but to what level? It was impossible to know exactly what the correct level for the currency should be. 
So Canada chose to float the dollar. We allowed the market to set its own level for the currency, with 
the intention of re-fixing the Canadian dollar at a new level later on. What was surprising was just how 
quickly the speculative flows eased once we floated our currency. As it turned out, the Canadian dollar 
appreciated by just 5 per cent during the following three months. 
While the IMF was very critical of Canada’s decision to float, it accepted our action on the condition 
that this move would be temporary. The IMF expected Canada to return to the Bretton Woods system 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
as soon as a new equilibrium rate for the Canadian dollar was found. But the flexible exchange rate 
worked better than almost all observers had expected, and the “temporary period” lasted for 12 years. 
With the exchange rate allowed to float freely, the Bank of Canada was able to direct monetary policy 
to the needs of the Canadian economy. We were able to deal with the inflationary threat posed by 
rapid economic growth and strong investment flows. With the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and 
with the end of the speculative flows, inflation came down from more than 10 per cent in 1950 to under 
3 per cent by 1952. 
Like most other countries at the time, Canada had extensive foreign exchange controls in place when 
it  floated  the  Canadian  dollar.  But  with  growing  confidence  in  the  functioning  of  currency  markets, 
capital controls were essentially eliminated in 1951, well before this occurred in most other countries. 
Moreover,  the  elimination  of  controls  and  the  move  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  facilitated  the 
development of our domestic financial markets. And this, along with the floating exchange rate, helped 
the economy to make the necessary adjustments at a time when large numbers of Canadians were 
leaving farms and moving into the cities. 
Now let’s look at 1970, the second time we floated our currency. Canada’s reasons for floating then 
were similar to those in 1950; that is, there was upward pressure on the Canadian dollar and a rapid 
buildup  of  international  reserves.  This  pressure  came  from  high  commodity  prices,  renewed  capital 
inflows,  and  strong  foreign  demand  for  Canadian  goods  -  demand  associated  with  a  strong  global 
economy and very loose fiscal policy in the United States. These pressures again led to concerns that 
an inflationary buildup in Canada could lead to a boom-bust economic cycle. And once again, there 
were fears of speculative short-term inflows that would make the problem worse. 
The authorities looked at a number of alternatives, including the setting of a new higher value for the 
Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar and a revaluation with a wide band. But these options were 
rejected because they might have invited further speculative pressures. It was clear that the least risky 
option for Canada was to return to a floating currency. 
Domestic policy anchors 
The  floating  exchange  rate  again  proved  to  be  useful,  because  it  eased  the  immediate  inflationary 
pressures. But at the time, we did not understand that a flexible exchange rate alone does not provide 
a complete monetary policy framework. What was missing was a nominal anchor. What I mean by the 
term “nominal anchor” is a clear target for monetary policy, a way to give people confidence that policy 
is on track, and a way to tie down or “anchor” expectations of future inflation. The Bank of Canada 
searched for such an anchor throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The outcome of that search was our 
eventual adoption of inflation targets. 
In  February  1991,  the  Bank  and  the  federal  government  announced  a  series  of  inflation-reduction 
targets. The authorities saw explicit inflation targets, with a clear time frame to achieve them, as a way 
to shape inflation expectations. This would make it easier to reduce inflation and, at the same time, 
make the central bank accountable for its actions. The inflation-control agreement has been extended 
three  times,  and  since  1995  it  has  called  for  the  Bank  to  aim  to  keep  inflation  at  2  per  cent,  the 
midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. 
Let  me  stress  a  few  points  about  our  inflation-targeting  system.  First,  our  commitment  to  inflation 
control is the best way that the Bank of Canada can contribute to high sustainable growth of output 
and employment. In other words, inflation targeting is a means to an end, not an end in itself. 
The second key point is that we operate in a symmetric way. We care just as much about inflation 
falling  below  target  as  we  do  about  inflation  rising  above  target.  If  demand  for  goods  and  services 
pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above 
the  target,  the  Bank  will  raise  interest  rates  to  cool  off  the  economy.  And  when  the  economy  is 
operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, the Bank will 
lower interest rates to stimulate growth. 
Finally,  inflation  targeting  is  very  important  in  terms  of  the  Bank’s  accountability  to  the  Canadian 
public. If inflation persistently deviates from the target, we must explain why this has happened, what 
we intend to do to bring inflation back on track, and how long we expect the process to take. 
With the adoption of inflation targets, we have gained all the expected benefits, and even gained some 
that we weren’t expecting! Let me list some of them. Inflation has become more stable, averaging very 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
close to 2 per cent, and private sector inflation expectations have become well anchored. Importantly, 
our symmetric approach has also worked as an economic stabilizer, helping to smooth the peaks and 
valleys  of  the  business cycle.  Businesses  and  individuals  can  make  long-term  economic plans  with 
increased confidence about the future. And scarce economic resources are no longer wasted in efforts 
to hedge against the threat of either high inflation or deflation. 
Moreover,  with  inflationary  expectations  well  anchored,  we  have  found  that  movements  in  the 
exchange rate have much less impact on inflation than in the past. This is because markets know that 
the central bank is committed to protecting the domestic value of the Canadian dollar. 
Because  we  have  a  clear  objective,  and  because  we  explain  publicly  how  we  plan  to  meet  that 
objective, financial markets can now better predict how the Bank will react to different circumstances. 
At the same time, inflation targeting has brought increased discipline and clarity to policy deliberations 
inside the Bank. 
Let  me  make  two  more  points  about  our  inflation-targeting  framework.  First,  our  experience  with 
inflation targets has also allowed us to see the importance of having an anchor for fiscal policy. After 
the adoption of inflation targets in 1991, short-term inflation expectations came down quickly. But long-
term expectations adjusted much more slowly, for a couple of reasons. It took some time for the Bank 
to earn its credibility. But more importantly, the federal government also needed to address its fiscal 
problems. Indeed, the Bank of Canada found that it could not be as accommodative as it wanted to be 
in its monetary policy during the first half of the 1990s because of the difficult fiscal position at that 
time. But by the middle of the 1990s, the government committed to ending a series of budget deficits 
and  to  putting  Canada’s  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio  on  a  sustainable,  downward  track.  With  that 
commitment, Canada finally had anchors for both its monetary and fiscal policies. This now allows us 
to gear monetary policy more directly to our domestic economic conditions. 
The other point I want to make is that with these two policy anchors in place, the floating exchange 
rate  can  work  more  effectively  for  the  Canadian  economy.  It  performs  a  very  important  function  by 
helping the economy adjust to changing conditions. Movements in the exchange rate send appropriate 
signals to businesses and consumers, helping the economy to adjust to changing circumstances. To 
take a recent example, when there is increasing world demand for Canadian goods and services, this 
tends to lead to a stronger Canadian dollar. The stronger dollar, in turn, tends to restrain exports and 
to encourage imports. In doing so, the floating exchange rate helps to maintain a balance between 
total supply and demand in the economy and that helps keep inflation under control. This process also 
works  in  reverse.  The  point  I  want  to  emphasize  here  is  that  with  these  policy  anchors  in  place,  a 
floating exchange rate can be a tremendous asset for an economy by helping to keep total supply and 
demand in balance. 
Conclusion 
In closing, let me say again that Canada has been a pioneer both in having a floating exchange rate 
and in operating with inflation targets. As a consequence, we have a lot of experience that may be of 
use  to  others  who  are  contemplating  changes  to  their  monetary  policy  framework.  Canada’s  long 
experience  with  flexible  exchange  rates  has  been  very  favourable,  and  a  floating  exchange  rate 
continues to be a key part of our monetary policy framework. 
But  our  experience  has  also  taught  us  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  on  its  own  is  not  enough.  A 
country  also  needs  a  domestic  anchor  for  its  monetary  policy.  After  trying  a  number  of  different 
approaches, we have now settled on a monetary policy framework based on inflation targeting and a 
floating exchange rate. This framework helps the economy handle both external and internal shocks. 
These  policies,  together  with  a  fiscal  policy  based  on  keeping  our  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio  on  a 
sustainable downward track, have helped to stabilize output and employment at a high level. At the 
same time, they have delivered low and stable inflation. 
Finally, let me say that the recent transformation of the Chinese economy has been nothing short of 
remarkable. The Chinese authorities and the Chinese people should be congratulated for their efforts 
to  raise  living  standards  and  to  become  a  dynamic  part  of  the  global  economy.  But  there  remains 
much work to do. So, I hope that my description of Canada’s struggle to develop the appropriate policy 
framework  for  our  country  will  yield  some  insights  that  may  prove  useful  as  China  makes  its  own 
decisions about its own policies. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 3
