Kishori J Udeshi: In quest of new cheese 
Speech by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian Banks’ 
Association Seminar, Mumbai, 26 April 2005. 
 IBA deserves to be complimented for having organised this Seminar on the subject of “In search of 
new  cheese  –  Towards  Newer  Profit  Avenues”.  The  subject  holds  considerable  contemporary 
relevance  coming  as  it  does  at  a  time  of  intense  competition,  thinning  margins,  rising  yields,  and 
dwindling trading profits. As we look back we can see that the declining interest rate scenario during 
the last three to four years coupled with prudent regulation, in alignment with international standards 
and effective supervision has strengthened the balance sheets of banks. It’s a different matter that had 
the  asset  quality  been  as  it  should  have  been,  the  profits  could  have  been  more  gainfully  utilised. 
What  is  of  concern  however,  is  whether  the  reduced  NPA  levels  reported  are  sustainable  through 
stronger  credit  appraisal  processes  built  up  over  the  years  or  are  they  only  a  result  of  massive 
provisioning which will be difficult to sustain in a scenario of rising bond yields. Only time will tell. 
Before I talk of cheese let me begin by chalking out two issues on the expenditure side in the future 
scenario. This chalk may serve to highlight the quest for cheese.  
First  and  foremost,  banks  would  need  to  invest  heavily  in  technically  qualified  professionally  skilled 
staff. For this you recognise to invest in ARMS i.e. Attract, Retain and Motivate Staff. Turnover of such 
staff in banks is going to be as volatile as it is for the BPO firms and compensation structures would 
need  heavy  revamping.  This  should  necessarily  be  accompanied  by  good  HRM  system  which  can 
measure performances.  
Secondly,  although  technology  deployment  in  banks  has  increased  remarkably,  this  has  not  been 
leveraged  to  the  maximum  extent  essential  to  achieve  and  maintain  high  service  and  efficiency 
standards.  In  effect,  managing  technology,  is  still  a  key  challenge  for  Indian  banks.  We  have, 
therefore,  had  to  settle  for  just  the  standardised  approach  under  Basle  II.  We  need  to  move  to 
advanced  approaches  under  Basle  II  in  order  to  achieve  greater  efficiency  of  capital  and  be 
competitive in India as also globally. For this, banks not all but certainly the large and significant banks 
need  to  invest  heavily  in  advanced  technology  which  is  another  item  of  expenditure  that cannot  be 
avoided in the near future. 
Given this backdrop, can banks make profits by the same old 3-6-3 rule ? i.e.  
Pay 3% interest on deposits 
Charge 6% interest on loans and 
Head for the golf course at 3. 
Because there is grain of truth in this, I would say that perhaps they may manage to earn some profits 
but they would certainly not remain competitive. 
Banks  would  need  to  think  of  partnerships  and  strategies  that  were  previously  unthinkable  –  and 
perhaps  still  so  –  but  these  would  need  to  be  tackled.  For  example,  investment  banking  may  have 
been thought of as being unreasonably volatile but it may now be the need of the corporate customer. 
Banks need to develop more efficient credit delivery mechanisms and this should form part 
• 
of its repositioning strategy. 
Banking data reveals concentration of banking business in urban / metro areas, with the top 
ten  centres  accounting  for  roughly  70%  of  banking  business  i.e.  potential  of  rural  / 
semi-urban areas remain relatively untapped. I may be naïve, but what beats me is the high 
spreads between the formal and informal sector lending rates in the rural areas. Is cheese 
for the money lender not cheese for a bank ? 
Banking  can  forge  and  nurture  appropriate  public-private  partnerships  for  development  of 
micro finance activities. 
SMEs  have  been  a  neglected  segment  of  bank  lending  –  year  on  year  growth  in  the  SSI 
segment has been barely 5% as compared to 19% growth in total lending. It may interest 
you to know that in its search for improving profitability, a large Japanese Bank introduced a 
   BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
product called “Uncollateralised Business Select Loan” aimed at small businesses in 2002. It 
has been stated that this business generated net margins of 2% -2.5% compared with the 
net  corporate  lending  margins  of  0.8%-1.1%.  For  this,  instead  of  relying  on  collateral,  the 
bank  developed  a  new  credit  scoring  system  and  new  methods  of  measuring  default  and 
counterparty risk as also new marketing methods. 
Securitisation will enable banks to target profit growth from asset turnover based business 
rather than the Balance Sheet. 
It  is  stated  that  non  interest  income  accounts  for  nearly  half  of  all  operating  income 
generated by US commercial banks. In India, it is less than one-fifth. While there is scope for 
increasing fee based income through non-traditional services, studies in the US suggest that 
increased  reliance  on  fee  based  activities  tends  to  increase  rather  than  decrease  the 
volatility of banks’ earnings stream. 
  I am aware that the issues raised are neither new nor profound but if something is oft repeated, there 
is  a  likelihood  of  it  being  acted  upon.  I  am  optimistic  in  that  sense.  I  would  sum  up  by  saying  that 
improved profitability can come through : 
(i) 
(ii) 
Improved asset quality through a more risk-management based banking culture and 
Improved cost and revenue efficiency through use of advanced information technology and 
financial processes.  
And  in  concluding,  I  would  remind  banks  that  the  societal  concerns  of  banking,  which  assume 
relevance in an emerging economy like India, where a significant proportion of the population resides 
in rural areas, should not lose its prominence, in their quest for new “cheese”. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
