Ishrat Husain: Globalisation, regional integration and national development. 
Where does South Asia stand?  
Inaugural address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the South Asian 
Federation of Accountants International Conference on the Transformation of Accounting Profession 
organised by the Joint Committees of ICAP and ICMAP, Karachi, 6 May 2005. 
 I would, at the outset, like to welcome the foreign delegates and particularly those from the countries in 
the South Asia Region. I am extremely happy to join you on this occasion and thank you for inviting 
me, once again, to this important event. 
The views that I would like to share with you this evening will focus on the economic situation globally, 
regionally within Asia and South Asia and nationally within the South Asian Countries. I will then briefly 
examine  the  prospects  and  challenges  that  face  our  region  in  moving  forward  in  this  age  of 
globalization and  integration  to  bring prosperity  to  the  lives  of  more  than  1.5 billion ordinary  people 
living in this region – more than one third of them living below the poverty line. 
World economic growth was quite buoyant in 2004 recording 5.1 percent growth in World GDP – the 
strongest in three decades. It will moderate in 2005 but, to a more sustainable level of 4.3 percent. 
Growth has been strong in most emerging economies led by China. Inflationary pressures remained 
subdued  and  monetary  tightening  underway  in  most  countries  will  keep  these  pressures  well 
contained.  This  benign  and  favourable  outlook  is  likely  to  persist  if  the  key  risks  are  mitigated 
adequately. 
The key risks to the global outlook are (i) a further sharp increase in oil prices; (ii) continued fiscal and 
current  account  imbalances  in  the  United  States  and  (iii)  sluggish  demand  in  European  Union  and 
Japan. 
There is no doubt that the U.S. is living beyond its means. Whether it is the relative attractiveness of 
the  U.S.  economy  that  is  attracting  foreigners  to  place  their  savings  at  the  disposal  of  the  U.S. 
businesses,  consumers  and  the  Government  or  it  is  the  lack  of  demand  in  other  global  centers  is 
beyond  the  scope  of  this  discourse.  All  I  have  to  say  is  that,  unlike  the  past,  the  financing  of  US 
Current  Account  deficit  is  at  present  largely  being  provided  by  the  Central  Banks  of  the  Asian 
Countries who have accumulated large reserves and have invested these reserves mainly in the U.S. 
paper.  This  has  enhanced  the  overall  risks  to  the  global  economic  system.  The  abrupt  and 
simultaneous withdrawal of the Asian Central Banks out of the U.S. financial instruments may lead to 
destabilization  in  foreign  exchange  markets  and  a  hard  landing  within  the  U.S.  The  second  order 
effects of a recessionary U.S. economy on the rest of the world, particularly the emerging markets are 
not likely to be pleasant. 
With  regard  to  oil  prices,  non-oil  producing  emerging  market  countries  will  have  to  watch  the 
movements in oil prices and they are likely to forego some buoyancy if the prices continued to remain 
tight in the foreseeable future. The volatility in oil markets and the risk premia prevailing do not permit 
us at this stage to make any helpful prognosis. 
Growth  in  other  industrial  countries  has  fallen  short  of  expectations  and  the  chances  for  an  upturn 
remain  weak  in  the  Euro  area  and  Japan.  Structural  reforms  have  to  be  undertaken  in  the  EU 
Countries,  sooner  than  later,  to  remove  rigidities  in  goods  and  labour  markets  and  provide  a  boost 
towards a more balanced expansion of the global economy. Japan has once again shown a faltering 
performance and can no longer be relied as a possible stimulant for global economic expansion. As 
the  combined  weight  of  the  OECD  countries  in  the  global  output  and  trade  remains  quite  high,  the 
above risks will have to be mitigated in order to create a benign external environment for the emerging 
market countries to prosper. 
On  the  international  trade  front,  agriculture  and  improved  market  access  for  developing  countries 
remain critical to sustain growth. For South Asian Countries the transition from Multi-Fiber Agreement 
(MFA)  to  Agreement  on  Cotton  and  Textiles  (ACT)  will  have  serious  consequences  in  the  coming 
years. The impact is likely to be highly differentiated contingent upon the response capacity of each 
country to the changed market conditions. The onus lies mainly on the governments and the exporters 
in  these  countries  to  capture  increasing  market  share  by  enhancing  productivity,  improving  quality, 
cutting costs and reengineering logistics supply chain. As cotton textiles are relatively labour intensive, 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
a  rising  share  in  the  world  market  will  not  only  help  expand  their  exports  and  foreign  exchange 
earnings, but also help in mitigating the unemployment problem in the region. 
Coming  to  the  region  –  the  larger  Asia  and  the  sub-region  of  South  Asia  –  we  remain  extremely 
optimistic about the economic prospects and outlook. Led by China, the Asian Countries remain the 
front runner in the race for economic growth, international trade and capital flows. High savings and 
investment  rates,  competitiveness  of  exports,  growing  domestic  market  size,  favourable  business 
environment and sound economic management have reinforced the strengths of these economies to 
take full advantage of the opportunities provided by globalization. I do not see any serious signs of 
slack  in  the  Asean  +3  Group.  Of  course,  the  question  of  currency  alignments  will  remain  highly 
contentious in the near term. 
In  South  Asia,  liberalization  and  deregulation  have,  by  and  large,  removed  the  incentives  for  rent 
seeking  activities  although  the  debris  has  not  been  completely  thrown  off  the  grounds.  Removal  of 
subsidized credit, reduction in import tariffs, current account and partial capital account liberalization, 
increased  dependence  on  market  mechanism  to  allocate  resources,  withdrawal  of  the  Government 
from running businesses have ushered in higher rates of investment, greater efficiency in resource use 
and promoted more rapid export growth in most of our countries. This raised platform has, therefore, 
heightened the potential of the South Asian economies to achieve accelerated growth and reduction in 
poverty.  While  continuation  of  sound  policies  and  prudent  macro  economic  management  is  a 
pre-requisite,  there  are  several  challenges  ahead  which  have  to  be  confronted  by  each  of  our 
countries. 
South Asia is still way behind the East Asian countries on almost all economic and social indicators. 
Although  we  started  from  the  same  place  the  divergence  over  the  last  forty  years  has  created 
enormous disparities in the per capita income growth, incidence of poverty, share in global trade, adult 
literacy, enrolment ratios, status of females, health and well being, physical infrastructure, etc. To give 
you just one example: our region has almost the same number of people as East Asia. But FDI flows 
to East Asian in 2004 were about ten times as high as those to South Asia. We have, therefore, a lot 
of  catching  up  to  do  and  that  too,  quite  fast.  The  paradigm  shift  that  is  taking  place  in  our  region 
makes  me  confident  that  we  will  be  able  to  meet  these  challenges  successfully.  But  all  of  us,  in 
whatever capacity we are working, will have to strive hard to bring about the result. 
In  the  short  run,  the  impact  of  uneven  monsoons  and  higher  oil  prices  will  have  to  be  managed 
carefully and inflationary pressures arising from these shocks have to be moderated. Fiscal deficits will 
have  to  be  brought  down  to  manageable  levels  and  business  climate  will  have  to  be  improved  by 
removing bureaucratic controls, hassles and irritants to allow the private sector to operate in a healthy 
competitive  environment.  Financial  sector  which  is  now  exposed  to  international  interest  rate  and 
exchange rate risks has to be further solidified. 
The  structural  reform  agenda  of  tax  administration,  trade  and  tariff  policy,  labour  markets,  capital 
markets, energy sector will have to be implemented more vigorously than has been the case so far. 
Infrastructure bottlenecks, shortages, congestions in form of frequent power break-downs, inadequate 
gas supplies, inordinate delays in the inland transportation of goods, backlog in clearance at the ports, 
etc. will have to be tackled effectively in order to allow the growth trajectory to remain on track. 
Intra-regional trade, capital flows, technology transfer and dissemination, exchange of teachers and 
students  at  the  top  universities  and  research  institutions  and  opening  of  bank  branches  among  the 
countries of this region will have tremendous externalities and spillover effects over the long run. The 
changed perception that the South Asian Countries are living at peace with each other, facilitate flows 
of goods, services and people easily, are integrating themselves in the global economy actively will not 
only reduce the risk premium but pay higher dividends. 
One  specific  example  which  pertains  directly  to  you,  the  participants  of  this  Conference,  is  the 
production  of  qualified  accountants  and  auditors  for  supply  to  the  advanced  countries.  Since  the 
Sarbanes-Oaxley  Legislation  and  the  unfortunate  demise  of  Arthur  Andersen,  the  demand  for 
accountants  and  auditors  in  the  USA,  UK,  and  European  Union  has  risen  substantially.  The  high 
quality of professionals from this region has endeared the South Asians among the employers in the 
advanced  countries.  We  should,  therefore,  attract,  train  and  produce  more  of  them  without 
compromising on the quality. I found out that in Pakistan the major constraint was the lack of qualified 
teachers. I suspect that this may be the case in Bangladesh, Nepal while India and Sri Lanka have a 
surplus of qualified teachers and I stand to be corrected if this is not true. Even if there is no overall 
excess supply of qualified teachers, why can’t a body such as SAFA pool their teaching resources, 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
develop  a  common  curriculum  and  testing  and  evaluation  procedures,  make  increased  use  of 
videoconferencing,  broad  band  connectivity,  electronic  discussion  groups,  virtual  teaching  and 
economize on physical presence of the teachers. I am quite sure that if you put your heads together 
you will be able to come up with a process that will increase the production and supply of qualified 
professionals in your field ending up with a win-win situation for all the member countries of the South 
Asia  Region.  I  leave  this  thought  for  your  exploration  and  consideration  and,  if  you  are  able  to  do 
nothing  but  to  accomplish  this  particular  goal  or  make  headway  on  it,  this  Conference  would  have 
been highly successful from my narrow viewpoint. 
In  the  end,  let  me  once  again  thank  the  organizers  conferring  the  honour  of  inaugurating  this 
Conference. I wish all of you a pleasant stay in Karachi and successful deliberations during the next 
two days. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 3
