Polibio Cordoba: Overview of activities undertaken by the Central Bank of 
Ecuador 
Speech by Mr Polibio Cordoba, President of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Ecuador, 
held on 17 February at the inauguration of the 2005 BIS Central Bank Legal Experts’ Meeting, Quito, 
17-18 February 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It is an honour for the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) to host the Central Bank Legal Experts’ Meeting 
organised  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and  its  Representative  Office  for  the 
Americas. 
The  role  of  the  BIS  as  one  of  the  most  important  centres  in  the  world  for  monetary  and  financial 
cooperation  between  central  banks  is  fulfilled  precisely  through  forums  like  this  one,  promoting 
high-level legal discussion and research on key economic topics. 
For this reason the government of Ecuador and the central bank are particularly pleased that Quito 
has been chosen as the location for such an important event, with participants including legal experts 
from  Europe  and  America  as  well  as  renowned  international  speakers  representing  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, the European Central Bank, Euroclear Bank and the Hague Conference 
on Private International Law. 
The  main  objective  of  the  meeting  will  be  to  analyse  the  use  of  collateral  and  complementary 
guarantees  in  central  bank  operations as well  as  rights associated with guarantees  in  the  hands  of 
intermediaries and possible conflicts between national laws. At the same time, the meeting represents 
an  ideal  setting  in  which  to  exchange  views  and  opinions  on  this  topic  and  to  reconcile  views  with 
respect to the application of international standards which make central bank operations more viable 
and secure. 
In  this regard,  it  is  very  important  to  the  BCE  to emphasise  its  functions  and role  as  from  the  year 
2000; it was then that the country adopted the dollar as its official currency. This meant that the money 
supply became an endogenous variable; that is, a value determined by each line of the balance of 
payments  (trade  in  goods  and  services,  and  net  capital  inflows).  However,  this  renunciation  of  the 
money issuance function also significantly restricted the central bank’s ability to act as a provider of 
liquidity  assistance  to  the  financial  system  via  money  markets  and  as  lender  of  last  resort,  despite 
ongoing problems relating to economic liquidity, systemic risk and competitiveness. 
For this reason, the BCE’s focus has now shifted more towards economic tasks, resulting in greater 
emphasis  on  functions  such  as  establishing  guidelines  and  carrying  out  activities  linked  to  financial 
and credit policy, aimed at improving conditions for access to financing by the manufacturing sector, 
strengthening the solvency of public and private financial intermediaries and stabilising and deepening 
the payment system in accordance with constitutional provisions. 
In  this  context,  the  BCE  works  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  economy  and  the  prevailing  monetary 
regime via monitoring and analysis of developments in public finances, which, in the short, medium 
and long term, help maintain the financial sustainability of the state. 
With regard to the subject matter of the meeting, the BCE is somewhat restricted when it comes to 
using collateral, since, with the official dollarisation of the economy, its role as lender of last resort is 
very limited. Without prejudice to this, it should be highlighted that commercial trustee accounts were 
and  still  are  the  most  important  collateral  for  the  BCE,  having  been  used  successfully  in  the  past, 
including  in  complex  situations  and  during  bankruptcy  proceedings  for  financial  institutions,  thus 
guaranteeing the interests of the BCE and the state. 
On  the  other  hand,  repurchase  operations,  one  of  the  typical  central  bank  strategies  for  recycling 
liquidity, are another important tool which is used in the same way as in other countries. I am sure 
these aspects will be addressed in detail as part of this event. 
In addition to participating in the meeting itself, you will also have the opportunity to enjoy the historical 
and  cultural  wealth  of  Quito,  a  UNESCO  World  Heritage  Site.  The  city,  together  with  the  BCE, 
welcomes you and wishes you every success with this event. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
