Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Parliament, Brussels, 14 September 2005. 
 les  membres  de 
la  présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
économique  et  monétaire,  j’ai  l’honneur  de  paraître  devant  votre  Commission  aujourd’hui 
dans le cadre de notre dialogue régulier. À cette occasion, je voudrais rendre hommage à 
Wim  Duisenberg,  qui  est  décédé  à  la  fin  du  mois  de  juillet.  Le  premier  président  de  la 
Banque  centrale  européenne  a  apporté  une  contribution  considérable  à  la  construction 
européenne. Il a joué un rôle décisif dans la mise en place des institutions monétaires en 
Europe, dans le lancement réussi de la nouvelle monnaie, dans l’affirmation de la crédibilité 
de  notre  monnaie  unique  –  l’euro  –  et  dans  l’instauration  de  la  confiance  placée  en  elle. 
Nous le regrettons profondément. 
Je commencerai mon intervention aujourd’hui par une évaluation de la situation économique 
et  monétaire  actuelle.  Ich  möchte  außerdem  zu  aktuellen Themen  der  Fiskalpolitik  und  zu 
den  Fortschritten  im  Bereich  der  Strukturreformen  Stellung  nehmen.  Abschließend  möchte 
ich  die  Position  der  EZB  zu  den  Folgeaktivitäten  hinsichtlich  des  EU-Aktionsplans  für 
Finanzdienstleistungen erläutern.  
Economic and monetary issues  
At the time of my last appearance before the European Parliament in July the underlying trend in real 
economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  remained  modest.  Looking  ahead,  we  expected  that  positive 
fundamental  factors  –  notably  strong  global  demand  and  robust  earnings  in  the  euro  area  –  would 
contribute to a certain pick up and a broadening of economic activity.  
The  latest  data  and  indicators  have  not  changed  this  assessment.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash 
estimate,  real  GDP  grew  at  a  quarter-on-quarter  rate  of  0.3%  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year, 
compared  with  0.4%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005,  confirming  that  the  underlying  growth  dynamics 
remained subdued in the first half of 2005. At the same time, the most recent survey indicators have, 
on balance, supported the view that economic growth could improve in the second half of this year. 
Looking further ahead, conditions continue to be in place for positive fundamental factors to influence 
the outlook and for economic activity to pick up beyond the short term. On the external side, ongoing 
growth in global demand and improvements in euro area price competitiveness should support euro 
area exports. On the domestic side, investment should benefit from the exceptionally low level of both 
nominal and real market interest rates prevailing across the entire maturity spectrum, as well as from 
the  robust  growth  of  corporate  earnings  and  ongoing  improvements  in  corporate  efficiency. 
Consumption growth should gradually rise, broadly in line with expected developments in disposable 
income. 
This picture is consistent with the most recent ECB staff projections, which envisage euro area real 
GDP  growing  at  rates  of  between  1.0%  and  1.6%  in  2005  and  between  1.3%  and  2.3%  in  2006. 
Compared with the June projections, the ranges projected for real GDP growth have been adjusted 
slightly  downwards.  For  2005,  this  mainly  reflects  slight  downward  revisions  of  past  data,  while  for 
2006 this reflects the projected effects on disposable income of increases in oil prices. 
This outlook for economic activity is subject to a number of downward risks, relating mainly to higher 
oil prices, low consumer confidence and concerns about global imbalances. In particular, the potential 
further dampening impact of oil prices on the outlook for growth is being monitored very closely. Oil 
prices  have  continued  to  rise,  increasing  considerably  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and 
developments  in  futures  prices  suggest  that  market  participants  expect  the  current  tightness  in  oil 
markets  to  persist.  Obviously,  the  situation  has  been  further  complicated  by  the  tragic  effects  of 
Hurricane  Katrina.  All  our  thoughts  are  with  the  people  of  the  city  of  New  Orleans  and  all  affected 
neighbouring  areas  and we  are  touched  by  the  wave  of  global  solidarity  helping  them  to  cope  with 
   1/3 
their immediate needs. At the same time, it remains difficult to assess the full extent of the damage 
and  the  period  of  time  necessary  for  its  repair.  Normally,  despite  the  significant  wealth  destruction 
resulting from such storms, the economic impact at the national level is limited to the short term and is 
increasingly offset by the positive impacts of rebuilding activity. At the moment, we consider that the 
global impact will most likely remain limited and temporary, but we will of course continue to monitor 
very closely any available further evidence.  
Turning to price developments, recent increases in oil prices have pushed headline inflation rates to 
levels  in  excess  of  2%  over  the  last  months.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP 
inflation was 2.1% in August, compared with 2.2% in July, and inflation rates are expected to fluctuate 
around current levels over the next few months, with some further increases towards year-end. At the 
same  time,  when  analysing  underlying  domestic  inflationary  trends,  there  continues  to  be  no 
significant  evidence  of  upside  pressures  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  wage  increases 
have remained contained over recent quarters and this trend should prevail for the time being, given 
the current labour market situation. 
This picture is broadly in line with the new ECB staff projections. ECB staff project average annual 
HICP inflation to lie between 2.1% and 2.3% in 2005 and between 1.4% and 2.4% in 2006. These 
projections  constitute  significant  upward  revisions  to  the  Eurosystem  staff  inflation  projections 
published in June, mainly reflecting the fact that oil prices have once again increased by more than 
was suggested earlier by forward rates.  
Upside  risks  to  this  new  baseline  inflation  scenario  remain,  relating  to  potential  further  rises  in  oil 
prices,  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes.  More  fundamentally,  the  main  risks  to  the  inflation 
outlook  stem  from  potential  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  triggered  by 
ongoing  oil  price rises.  In this  respect,  it  is  essential  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities.  Against  this  background,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  inflation  expectations  very 
closely.  Particular  vigilance  is  required  in  order  to  ensure  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations 
remain well-anchored in the euro area. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, money and credit have continued to grow robustly in the euro area 
over the last few months, mainly driven by the prevailing low level of interest rates. In particular, the 
growth of mortgage borrowing remains very strong. In this context, price dynamics in housing markets 
need to be monitored closely. The liquidity situation in the euro area remains ample by all plausible 
measures, indicating risks to price stability over medium to longer horizons. 
In conclusion, oil price developments have again led to upward revisions of inflation projections for the 
year  ahead.  At  the  same  time,  medium-term  domestic  inflationary  pressures  still  remain  contained, 
while the balance of risks to the baseline inflation scenario is tilted to the upside. Cross-checking the 
economic  analysis  with  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  need  for  particular  vigilance  in  order  to 
keep  medium-term  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  By 
achieving this, monetary policy is making a significant contribution towards economic growth and job 
creation in the euro area.  
Turning to fiscal policies, the latest available information suggests that the pace of fiscal consolidation 
in  many  euro  area  countries  remains  unsatisfactory.  It  is  of  particular  concern  that  targets  for 
correcting  excessive  deficits  are  at  risk  in  some  cases.  Moreover,  countries  that  have  recently 
breached the 3% deficit limit are being granted relatively long periods to correct the situation in what 
constitutes  a  very  generous  application  of  the  reformed  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Against  this 
background, it is important to recall that the best contribution that fiscal policies can make to stability, 
growth  and cohesion  in  the  euro  area  is  to effectively  tackle  existing  fiscal  imbalances  as part  of a 
determined and well-designed economic reform programme. In this context, a rigorous implementation 
of the new rules is needed. This would reinforce the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact, boost 
expectations  of  sound  fiscal  policies  and  thereby  help  to  increase  confidence  in  economic  growth 
prospects.  
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  European  Commission  has  recently  presented  the  “Community 
Lisbon Programme”, which contains a list of measures at the EU level to relaunch the Lisbon strategy. 
The  ECB  fully  backs  this  initiative,  in  particular  the  measures  to  further  open  EU  markets  and  to 
simplify  the  regulatory  framework  within  which  business  operates.  Progress  at  both  the  Community 
and the Member State level is crucial to addressing the economic challenges facing the EU. 
   2/3 
Financial services policy  
I  would  now  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  European  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Financial 
Services Policy for the period 2005-2010. As already expressed in its contribution to the Commission’s 
public  consultation,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  key  policy  orientation  of  the  Green  Paper,  which 
highlights  the  need  to  focus  on  the  consolidation  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  legislative 
framework  for  financial  services.  To  this  end,  the  potential  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework  should  be 
exploited to the extent possible.  
As regards the area of financial regulation, the Eurosystem concurs with the emphasis placed by the 
Commission  on  the  objective  of  rationalising  the  existing  framework.  The  proposal  for  “better 
regulation”  based  on  open,  transparent  and  evidence-based  policy-making  is  fully  supported.  The 
Eurosystem  also  supports  the  suggestion  by  the  Commission  to  launch  a  feasibility  study  on  the 
development of one body of consistent law. We regard such a “financial services rulebook” as a tool to 
rationalise the existing set of EU rules for financial institutions and, in particular, to reduce complexity 
and legal uncertainties and to eliminate possible inconsistencies.  
Still in the context of financial regulation, the completion of the current FSAP legislative work is also 
important. In that connection, I would like to mention in particular the Capital Requirements Directive, 
on which, I am informed, work is proceeding smoothly. Also, I would like to make a specific reference 
to the issue of securities clearing and settlement, to which the Eurosystem attributes great importance. 
An  efficient  securities  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  is  of  fundamental  importance  to  the 
integration  and  smooth  functioning  of  financial  markets.  To  this  end,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the 
Commission’s intention to put forward a proposal for a directive on securities clearing and settlement. 
On  the  question  of  new  regulatory  initiatives,  we  share  the  view  that  asset  management  and  retail 
financial services are areas where regulatory intervention could be considered.  
In  the  area  of  financial  supervision,  the  Eurosystem  fully  supports  the  Commission’s  view  that  the 
current institutional set-up should be exploited to the maximum extent before any potential structural 
change is considered. In particular, the Eurosystem agrees that the main policy objective in the area of 
financial  supervision  is  two-fold:  first,  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  EU  financial  markets  and 
institutions and to facilitate the development of cross-border finance both in terms of institutions and in 
terms of products and services – the so-called financial integration angle; and second, to ensure the 
effectiveness of standards for oversight and supervision in a more integrated financial system – the 
so-called  financial  stability  angle.  In  this  respect,  we  attach  particular  importance  to  the  consistent 
implementation of financial services legislation and the pursuit of supervisory convergence, as well as 
to the effective cooperation between home and host authorities. We are of the view that it is important 
that home-host coordination be developed on a robust and consistent basis for the financial groups 
involved in a way that both ensures effective supervision and reduces compliance costs. The Level 3 
Committees  play  a  very  important  role  in  this  respect.  Furthermore,  we  see  a  need  for  the  current 
regime for the supervision of liquidity risk to be reviewed against the background of financial market 
developments, including the introduction of the euro. 
As regards financial stability, which represents an area of particular interest to the Eurosystem, we are 
of the opinion that the refinement of financial stability arrangements should remain a key priority for 
the  EU.  There  are  three  broad  areas  where  the  Eurosystem  sees  room  for  enhancing  the  present 
arrangements, namely financial stability assessment, the management of financial stress and deposit 
insurance.  In  this  respect,  let  me  recall  that  the  provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  is  a 
central  banking  function  and  that  there  is  an  agreement  within  the  Eurosystem  on  how  this  facility 
operates  in  the  euro  ara. Thus,  there  are  no specific  issues  relating  to  the  provision  of  Emergency 
Liquidity Assistance that need to be addressed in the context of the post FSAP work. 
Finally, let me stress again that the Governing Council of the ECB is very strongly attached to the full 
completion of the single market for banking services and to a level playing field making absolutely no 
difference between nationalities. 
I am now ready to answer your questions. 
 
   3/3 
