I J Macfarlane: Recent financial and economic developments in Australia  
Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  Sydney, 
18 February 2005. 
 It is a pleasure to be back in front of the Committee after a break of about eight months. As you know, 
we take these appearances very seriously and appreciate the opportunity it gives us to explain our 
position to Parliament and to the public. I hope the new Committee will find it as valuable as we do. 
Earlier this month we issued our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy which set out pretty clearly 
how we see the current situation. So instead of going over the same material again, I would like to 
review the medium-term aspects of economic policy. 
As you know, the current economic expansion, which is in its fourteenth year, is the longest expansion 
we have had since quarterly national accounts statistics were first published in 1959. We had one from 
1961  to  1974  that  was  nearly  as  long,  but  it  ended  up  with  inflation  pushing  up  into  double  digits 
followed by a recession. The following two expansions lasted about eight years each before they came 
to an end. 
In the current expansion, the annual growth rate has averaged 3.7 per cent, but, like all expansions, it 
has not been completely smooth. For example, the annual growth rate has been as high as 6¼ per 
cent and as low as 1½ per cent; on two occasions, there has been a quarterly fall in GDP. But overall 
results have been very favourable: inflation has averaged 2.5 per cent per annum and we have seen 
the  unemployment  rate  fall  from  10.9  per  cent  to  5.1  per  cent.  The  longevity  of  the  expansion  has 
been  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that  it  has  been  possible  to  avoid  obvious  excesses  in  the  economy. 
Relatively small changes in policy have prevented the build-up of the type of excess which in the past 
required a large and determined policy response. 
The excesses on previous occasions have been of three main types. The most common was a rise in 
inflation.  The  second  was  an  asset  price  boom  and  bust,  and  the  third,  particularly  in  the  fixed 
exchange rate era, was a balance of payments crisis. I would now like to review the current situation in 
light of the risks posed by these three types of excesses. 
The  inflation  rate  is  the  one  that  our  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  is  specifically  designed  to 
control. We feel pretty confident that the type of strong monetary policy response to rising inflation that 
had  been  necessary  in  the  past  is  unlikely  to  be  needed  again  as  long  as  we  are  vigilant.  While 
pressures will undoubtedly arise, they should not be as powerful or as widespread as previously. First, 
the inflation-targeting regime means that the longer inflation has been contained, and the lower are 
inflationary expectations, the easier it is to keep things that way. Second, there have been important 
changes in wage setting arrangements that have meant that pressure in labour markets does not feed 
as  quickly  as  previously  into  wage  inflation.  The  main  changes  have  been  the  decentralisation  via 
enterprise bargaining and the lengthening of contracts out to two or three years. The third influence on 
inflation has been the increase in competition both at home and from abroad. 
But  inflationary  pressures  can  not  be  completely  eliminated  and  can  be  expected  to  make  their 
presence  felt  as  the  economy  pushes  up  against  capacity  constraints.  That  is  something  that  is 
happening now, although it is a piecemeal process. There is no economy-wide definite dividing line 
between a situation of ample capacity and one where growth is limited by capacity constraints. For 
example,  there  has  clearly  been  pressure  on  capacity  in  the  building  industry  for  some  years,  as 
anyone attempting to get a house built or renovated will confirm. Over the past year, many parts of the 
resources and heavy engineering sectors have also been at virtually full capacity, and this has, among 
other things, limited our export performance. Some parts of the services sector, such as accountancy 
and other professional services, are also fully stretched. On the other hand, there are other parts of 
the  economy  where  things  are  relatively  normal.  But  overall  we  are  hearing  more  reports  of 
businesses finding difficulty in hiring suitable labour and having to pay more for material inputs. The 
most obvious signs of this are the increases now being seen in producer prices at all levels and output 
prices for building and construction. There has not as yet been a big effect on consumer prices, but 
even so, the rise over the past year has been higher than our earlier forecasts had suggested. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
We have not seen evidence of an acceleration in across-the-board wages in the standard statistical 
series, although there is plenty of evidence from surveys that businesses are finding it more difficult to 
attract labour and that wage pressures are rising. Of course, there is no reason why the inflationary 
process has to be triggered by a wage acceleration; it could just as easily start with prices themselves 
and then move on to wages. 
The second risk that I mentioned earlier was a boom and bust in asset prices. I do not think this is a 
serious risk at the moment, although it was not that long ago that it posed a threat. In 2003, we had 
both  household  borrowing  and  house  prices  growing  at  over  20  per  cent,  and  that  was  on  top  of 
several earlier years of strong rises. If 2004 had produced another year of 20 per cent growth, then we 
would have had the makings of a serious boom and bust situation. As it was, 2004 was a very good 
year in this respect as borrowing slowed and house prices retreated for most of the year. Growth in 
borrowing seems to have now settled for the time being at a rate of about 13 per cent per annum, and 
house prices may have risen in the December quarter of 2004. It is too early yet to know where either 
borrowing or house prices are headed. 
The third risk I mentioned was the balance of payments, where the current account deficit is estimated 
to be 6¾ per cent of GDP. This is not very different to the level reached on a number of occasions 
over the past two decades, but it is disappointing given that it has occurred against the background of 
a  reasonably  buoyant  world  economy  and  a  strong  rise  in  the  Terms  of  Trade.  Strong  domestic 
demand  pushing  up  imports  is  part  of  the  story,  but  the  bigger  part  is  the  failure  of  the  volume  of 
exports to rise sufficiently to take advantage of the strong world demand. We have recently analysed 
this at some length, and presented our conclusions in our quarterly statement. I will be happy to talk 
about this later in more detail. But while the balance of payments result is disappointing, it is not of 
itself a reason for a monetary policy response. 
At this point, I usually look back at the forecasts I gave the Committee last time to see how the outlook 
has changed. I also make a couple of new forecasts. On economic growth, last year was one of the 
few examples where the growth rate we now expect will be well below what we had forecast. In the 
middle of last year we were forecasting 3¾ per cent growth for the year to the December quarter 2004; 
now  we  think  that  when  we  receive  the  December  quarter  national  accounts  next  month,  they  will 
show a growth rate of not much more than 2 per cent. How do we explain the difference? 
One explanation would emphasise that the national accounts are showing a picture of the economy 
which  is  considerably  weaker  than  that  shown  by  most  other  indicators.  For  example,  employment 
growth has been booming throughout the twelve months that GDP has apparently been restrained. 
The lagging nature of the employment/GDP relationship may explain part of this, but not all of it. There 
is a similar discrepancy in the comparison with high business confidence, high consumer confidence, 
increasing business profits, booming share market and government tax receipts. It would be tempting 
to disregard the national accounts entirely and rely instead on the other indicators of economic activity 
mentioned  above.  However,  I  do  not  intend  to  do  so.  While  I  think  there  is  some  tendency  for  the 
national accounts to be understating the level of economic activity at the moment, I think that they are 
right  in  the  sense  that  they  show  that  growth  has  slowed  somewhat  from  2003  to  2004.  The  next 
question is to ask why. 
This is where capacity constraints enter the picture again. Economic policy in Australia, most notably 
monetary policy, has allowed domestic demand over recent years to run at a reasonably fast pace. But 
as can be seen from the numbers below, this has not been translated into an equivalent growth of 
output as measured by GDP. 
Table 1 
Growth of demand
Growth of GDP 
 December 
4 quarter ended growth rate 
4.3 
3.2 
4.3 
3.0 
4.3 
6.7 
5.8 
4.3 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004*
* 4 quarters to September quarter  
BIS Review 10/2005
 2 
 The most obvious explanation for this discrepancy is one particular capacity constraint, namely that 
which has restricted the expansion of our export volumes, particularly resource exports. But it is highly 
likely  that  other  capacity  constraints  have  also  begun  to  operate.  For  example,  the  growth  of 
manufactured and service exports has also slowed and this is partly due to the fact that an increasing 
proportion of existing capacity is used to supply fast-growing domestic demand. After nearly fourteen 
years of economic expansion, we do not have the spare capacity we once had. 
Looking  ahead,  we  have  to  recognise  this  situation.  Attempting  to  maintain  demand  growth  at  the 
rates to which we were accustomed would risk a rise in inflation and would probably not result in an 
appreciable increase in output growth. Fortunately, demand has already started to slow somewhat and 
it is getting closer to the growth of output. Despite its growth probably being understated, GDP is also 
starting to slow under the constraints imposed by capacity limitations. I think we will have to get used 
to seeing GDP growth rates starting with the numbers 2 or 3 rather than 3 or 4 for a time. 
On  inflation,  our  forecast  a  year  ago  for  underlying  inflation  in  the  four  quarters  to  the  December 
quarter 2004 was 1½ per cent. At our June meeting we had raised it to 2 per cent. In the event, it 
came  in  at  2¼  per  cent,  while  the  headline  figure  was  2.6  per  cent.  Some  of  this  was  due  to  the 
increase in the oil price, but some of it was more general, as indicated by the fact that the December 
quarter CPI came in above all forecasters' estimates. Overall, the inflation outcome to date is still a 
good result given the pressures we are now starting to see around us, but looking over a longer period 
it seems that inflation has now reached a trough and is showing signs of turning up. At earlier stages 
of  production,  there  has  been  a  noticeable  pick-up  in  prices  between  the  first  half  of  2004  and  the 
second half. 
Table 2 
 Producer Prices (excluding oil) 
 Preliminary 
Intermediate 
Final 
2004 I 
2.5 
1.6 
2.7 
2004 II 
6.0 
5.1 
4.7 
 
Looking ahead, we forecast gradual rises in underlying inflation, with it reaching 2½ per cent by end 
2005 and 3 per cent by end 2006. Like all forecasts, they are smoother than reality will probably turn 
out to be, and they are subject to risks. Our assessment is that the risks are more likely to be on the 
upside, as we do not see any obvious downward source of risk unless there was a sharp weakening in 
the world economy, an eventuality on which we would place a low probability. 
I  suppose  you  could  conclude  that  this  combination  of  weaker-than-expected  GDP  growth  and 
higher-than-expected inflation is a disappointing situation. But while less than ideal, the figures I have 
quoted  are  still  pretty  good  for  this  stage  of  an  expansion.  Our  feeling  is  that  we  –  that  is,  policy 
makers and the public – will have to realise that there comes a time when we have to accept some 
moderation in growth in order to prevent the build-up in the sort of imbalances that have got us into 
trouble in the past. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
