Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Recessions and recoveries associated with asset-price 
movements - what do we know? 
Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy  Research,  Stanford,  California, 
12 January 2005. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  address  the  associates  of  the  Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy 
Research;  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here.  As  you  know,  the  U.S.  economy  is  currently  continuing  its 
recovery  from  the  relatively  mild  recession  in  2001,  which  ended  the  longest  period  of  economic 
expansion in our nation’s recorded business-cycle history. The 1990s will be remembered not only for 
this remarkably long period of prosperity but also for the excitement of the “new economy” and, less 
happily, for the sharp decline in equity prices that marked its end. This market correction was most 
dramatic  in  sectors  of  the  economy  associated  with  new  technologies,  the  very  sectors  that  had 
experienced the most pronounced run-up in equity prices. 
The  quick  occurrence  of  a  recession  following  soon  after  this  significant  asset-price  correction 
prompted some observers to suggest that the boom-bust cycle in asset valuations was the proximate 
trigger of the economic downturn But a number of aspects of that argument have not yet been fully 
examined. In the interest of advancing the understanding on this issue, I will use this opportunity to 
provide  a  retrospective  on  the  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  and  of  some  other  industrialized 
economies during and following recessions over the past three decades or so. In particular, I will focus 
on  the  role  that  asset  prices  may  have  played  in  expansions  and  recessions.1  Before  going  any 
further,  however,  I  should  emphasize  that  the  views  I  will  express  today  are  my  own  and  are  not 
necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 
What happens during asset-price run-ups? 
Asset prices serve multiple roles in a modern economy. They exert a direct influence by affecting the 
net  worth  of  the  assets’  owners.  Consumers  who  hold  assets  become  richer  during  an  asset-price 
advance.  This  so-called  wealth  effect  -  always  a  key  determinant  of  consumption  -  can  be  quite 
important  during  significant  asset-price  run-ups  as  consumers  spend  out  of  their  capital  gains. 
Historical  evidence  suggests  that  this  effect  ultimately  raises  the  level  of  consumption  spending  by 
between 2 cents and 5 cents per dollar of increase in wealth.2 
Similarly, asset prices also affect business balance sheets. Rising prices for assets raise the net worth 
of  companies  that  own  the  assets.  The  value  of  the  assets  that  a  borrower  owns  is  an  important 
determinant of his or her creditworthiness. In the event of a default and foreclosure on a secured debt, 
collateral that caries a high price provides the lender with a high recovery rate, which makes lending 
less risky. During an asset-price boom, the creditworthiness of borrowers rises, the interest rates at 
which they borrow decline because of lower risk spreads, and business investment increases as firms 
take advantage of the relatively lower interest rates they face. 
A  consequence  of  the  positive  influence  of  asset  prices  on  investment  is  that  if  prospects  for 
profitability as reflected in asset prices in one sector of the economy are advancing relative to asset 
prices in all other sectors, investment in that sector will outpace investment in the rest of the economy, 
all else equal. This circumstance may have important and potentially adverse allocative consequences 
on the economy. In particular, if asset prices do not accurately reflect the productive potential of the 
underlying asset, investment will be channeled to the wrong sectors. However, an asset-price boom in 
a specific sector might simply reflect investor expectations of higher productivity rather than a bubble, 
a term I will define in a few moments. Investment would still tend to be channeled to that sector, but for 
good reason in this instance. One example of a sector-specific jump in asset prices and an associated 
                                                      
1  My presentation is based on work with Refet Gurkaynak and Athanasios Orphanides. 
2  See,  for  example,  Morris  A.  Davis  and  Michael  G.  Palumbo  (2001),  “A  Primer  on  the  Economics  and  Time  Series 
Econometrics of Wealth Effects,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2001-9 (Washington: Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System, February). 
BIS Review 2/2005 
 1
investment increase is the case of the U.S. technology sector in the late 1990s. Over the five years 
from the end of 1994 to the end of 1999, prices of nontech stocks tripled while those of tech stocks 
more than quintupled.3 Correspondingly, the average level of real investment in computers and other 
high-tech  capital  goods  was  more  than  100  percent  higher  over  the  1995-99  period  than  its  level 
during 1994, while spending on other types of fixed capital was only about 15 percent higher than in 
1994. 
Asset-price busts 
By definition, an asset-price bust is preceded by an asset-price boom. If a run-up reflects a bubble, the 
ensuing  price  bust  could  obviously  be  viewed  as  its  bursting.  Alternatively,  asset  prices  may  have 
been driven up by expectations of a productivity boom, which would lead to improved earnings. In that 
case, if the expected productivity boom does not subsequently materialize, asset prices will fall. The 
end result in this case would not be termed the bursting of a bubble. Nonetheless, this case may be 
indistinguishable from such an experience: Among other common elements, one could also see an 
investment overhang in the sector that saw its asset prices rise and subsequently fall. 
Recessions  are  almost  always  accompanied  by  asset-price  declines.  But  such  declines  sometimes 
appear  to  be  the  source  of  adverse  surprises,  and  asset-price  busts  may  subsequently  have 
disproportionately  adverse  consequences.  Falling  asset  prices  create  a  negative  wealth  effect  and 
restrain  consumption.  By  making  collateral  less  valuable,  they  also  increase  the  risk  of  lending  to 
businesses  and  thereby  worsen  the  lending  terms  faced  by  borrowers.  When  asset  prices  fall 
substantially, lenders may also find themselves holding substantial amounts of nonperforming loans 
that  are  backed  by  what  may  have  become,  in  some  cases,  worthless  collateral.  For  this  reason, 
recessions that are preceded by asset-price booms and busts may also be associated with problems 
in  the  banking  industry.  In  such  episodes,  the  ensuing  loss  of  intermediation  may  serve  as  an 
additional force acting to prolong and deepen what might otherwise have been a milder recession. 
Concerns about the severity of downturns that follow significant asset-price collapses suggest that the 
identification and analysis of boom-bust asset-price cycles could be useful for policy. For that reason, I 
would next like to briefly review some of the issues associated with detecting asset-price bubbles. 
Detecting bubbles 
The word bubble is sometimes employed to describe any quick and large increase in asset prices, but 
a more precise definition would associate bubbles with only those increases in asset prices that are 
not due to economic fundamentals.4 Under such a definition, a bubble is present when investors buy 
assets at prices above their fundamental values in the expectation of being able to sell them at even 
higher prices in the future.5 To be sure, such departures from fundamentals may start small, but over 
time they could grow explosively. The fundamental price of an asset typically is defined in terms of the 
discounted present value of the income stream or equivalent services that the asset is expected to 
provide over time. For stock prices, for example, this is the present discounted value of dividends; for 
real estate, it is the discounted value of the rents or services that are expected to accrue to the owner 
over time. In theory, the existence of bubbles, defined in this way, is possible in standard asset-pricing 
models and may even be consistent with rational, profit-maximizing behavior.6 
Ascertaining the existence of bubbles in practice is a very different matter. An immediate difficulty is 
that  the  theoretical  notion  of  the  fundamental  price  does  not  have  an  easily  measured  empirical 
                                                      
3 
In this comparison, I use the Nasdaq composite index as a proxy for the high-tech sector and the Dow Jones industrials 
index as a proxy for the nontech sector. 
4  See John H. Cochrane (2001), Asset Pricing (Princeton: Princeton University Press), p. 402. 
5  Such a bubble would be called a “rational bubble.” It is also conceivable that bubbles are present because some investors 
are not pricing assets rationally; for an introduction to that notion, see Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2004), “Perspectives on 
Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” in Mark Gertler 
and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), pp. 139-94. 
6  See, for example, Jean Tirole (1985), “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica, vol. 53 (November), 
pp. 1499-528;  and  Dilip  Abreu  and  Markus  K.  Brunnermeier  (2003),  “Bubbles  and  Crashes,”  Econometrica,  vol.  71 
(January), pp. 173-204. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
counterpart.  In  part  as  a  result  of  this  measurement  problem,  statistical  tests  using  historical  data 
cannot  easily  distinguish  bubbles  from  failures  of  the  standard  asset-pricing  model  in  some  other 
dimensions,  or  no  failure  of  the  model  at  all.  Indeed,  for  every  study  of  historical  data  that  finds 
evidence  of  a  bubble,  often  another  shows  that  the  findings  could  be  explained  by  an  alternative 
specification  of  the  fundamentals  in  the  absence  of  bubbles.7  That  is,  even  with  the  benefit  of 
hindsight,  statistical  tests  attempting  to  confirm  the  existence  of  bubbles  in  historical  episodes  can 
remain inconclusive. 
Of greater relevance for policy discussions, however, is not whether economists can identify a bubble 
long after it occurs, but whether the presence of a bubble could be detected in real time, when the 
information  might  be  useful  for  policy  decisions.  Unfortunately,  detection  of  a  bubble,  which  is 
problematic even ex-post, is an even more formidable task and arguably becomes virtually impossible 
in real time. Indeed, in real time, it is not uncommon for economists and market participants to fail to 
recognize  important  shifts  in  underlying  trends  that  may  subsequently  be  viewed  as  the  source  of 
significant changes in market fundamentals. Current statistical methods are simply not up to the task 
of  “detecting”  asset-price  bubbles,  especially  not  in  real  time,  when  it  matters  most.8  “Detecting”  a 
bubble appears to require judgment based on scant evidence. It entails asserting knowledge of the 
fundamental  value  of  the  assets  in  question.  Unsurprisingly,  central  bankers  are  not  comfortable 
making such a judgment call. Inevitably, a central bank claiming to detect a bubble would be asked to 
explain why it was willing to trust its own judgment over that of investors with perhaps many billions of 
dollars on the line. 
The issue of detecting bubbles notwithstanding, it is of interest to know whether recessions related to 
sizeable asset-price busts differ from other recessions in some way that might be important for policy 
considerations. 
Are recessions that are related to asset-price busts different? 
Two  of  the  longest  periods  of  economic  weakness  observed  in  the  industrialized  world  during  the 
twentieth  century  are  often  identified  with  the  asset-price  busts  that  preceded  them:  the  Great 
Depression in the United States and the “lost decade” of the 1990s in Japan. In each case, rapidly 
falling asset prices, exacerbated by banking problems, marked the beginning of painfully long periods 
of economic malaise. In part because of these two experiences, it is sometimes suggested that asset-
price booms more generally lead to imbalances in the economy, and that asset-price busts and the 
correction  of  these  imbalances  lead  to  recessions  that  are  longer,  deeper,  and  associated  with  a 
greater fall in output and investment than other recessions. But what is the evidence on this question? 
Additionally,  can  one  make  any  other  generalizations  concerning  recessions  that  follow  asset-price 
booms  and  busts  and  how  they  differ  from  other  recessions?  To  address  those  questions,  it  is 
instructive to examine recession episodes in the Group of Seven economies since 1970. 
Figure 1 presents a bird’s-eye view of the evolution of asset prices and the economy from 1970 to 
2003  for  three  of  these  economies,  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Japan.9  For  each 
country,  the  top  panel  of  the  figure  shows  the  evolution  of  an  aggregate  inflation-adjusted  index  of 
asset prices - which consists of an average of stock prices and residential and commercial real estate 
prices.  The  shaded  areas  cover  recession  periods,  as  determined  by  the  business  cycle  dating 
committee  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  in  the  United  States,  and  a  comparable 
                                                      
7  See,  for  example,  Lubos  Pastor  and  Pietro  Veronesi  (2004),  “Was  There  a  Nasdaq  Bubble  in  the  Late  1990s?”  NBER 
Working Paper Series 10581 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June). They argue that the high 
level of uncertainty about the future growth rate of dividends of tech firms helps explain these firms’ stock prices without 
resorting to a bubble. 
8  The difficulty of satisfactorily “detecting” bubbles is well known in the economics literature. For a recent survey see Refet 
Gurkaynak (2005), “Econometric Tests of Asset Price Bubbles: Taking Stock,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2005-4 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January). 
9  For uniformity across countries, all data shown in this figure, and data discussed later on, including those for the United 
States,  are  drawn  from  international  institutions.  The  asset-price  data  have  been  kindly  provided  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS). For detailed explanations of these data see C.E.V. Borio, N. Kennedy, and S.D.  Prowse 
(1994), “Exploring Aggregate Asset Price Fluctuations across Countries: Measurement, Determinants, and Monetary Policy 
Implications,” BIS Economic Papers 40 (Basel: Bank for International Settlements). 
BIS Review 2/2005 
 3
methodology  for  the  other  countries.10  The  bottom  panels  show  the  evolution  of  gross  domestic 
product in these economies together with a historical estimate of the economy’s potential.11 
                                                      
10  To  be  sure,  business  cycle  chronologies  may  differ  somewhat  depending  on  the  underlying  methodology.  The  dates  of 
peaks and troughs in economic activity for the analysis that follows are from the Economic Cycle Research Institute. For the 
United States, these match the dates determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). For other nations, 
the  institute’s  methodology  yields  dates  that  are  comparable  to  the  NBER  dates  for  the  United  States,  which  facilitates 
comparisons across countries. Recession dating is monthly. To obtain the quarterly time series used here, we converted the 
monthly expansion/recession phases to a quarterly frequency by designating the cyclical peak (the first quarter of recession) 
as the quarter containing the first full recession month - that is, the month following the monthly peak designation. Table 1 
shows the dates of all recessions in the sample. 
Table 1 
Business cycles of G7 countries1
  United States 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan 
 
 
 
Britain 
 
 
Canada 
 
  Germany 
 
 
 
Italy 
 
 
 
France 
 
 
 
Peak 
1969:Q4 
1973:Q4 
1980:Q1 
1981:Q3 
1990:Q3 
2001:Q1 
1973:Q4 
1992:Q2 
1997:Q1 
2000:Q3 
1974:Q3 
1979:Q2 
1990:Q2 
1981:Q4 
1990:Q1 
Table 1 (cont) 
Business cycles of G7 countries1
Peak 
1973:Q3 
1980:Q1 
1991:Q1 
2001:Q1 
1970:Q4 
1974:Q2 
1981:Q2 
1992:Q1 
1974:Q3 
1979:Q3 
1982:Q2 
1992:Q1 
Trough 
1970:Q32
1975:Q1 
1980:Q2 
1982:Q3 
1991:Q1 
2001:Q3 
1974:Q4 
1993:Q4 
1999:Q2 
2003:Q1 
1975:Q2 
1981:Q1 
1992:Q1 
1982:Q3 
1992:Q1 
Trough 
1975:Q2 
1982:Q3 
1994:Q13
2003:Q2 
1971:Q2 
1975:Q1 
1983:Q1 
1993:Q3 
1975:Q2 
1980:Q2 
1984:Q4 
1993:Q2 
1  The quarterly peak and trough dates shown are based on the monthly business cycle chronology from the Economic 
Cycle Research Institute.   2  This episode is excluded because it begins outside of the sample period.   3  This episode is 
excluded because it coincides with German reunification. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2005
The relationship of asset prices to the economy near turning points shows varying patterns (figure 1, 
top and bottom panels). In some episodes, asset-price declines do not appear to have preceded the 
recession.  During  some  recessions,  asset  prices  appear  to  have  simply  moved  sideways,  not 
registering  substantial  declines  at  all.  But  in  other  episodes,  significant  asset-price  booms  and 
subsequent declines do appear before the onset of a recession and continue during the downturn. For 
the United States, for example, the figure highlights the long run-up and subsequent fall in asset prices 
before the 2001 recession. The size of these recent movements dominates earlier boom-bust cycles in 
the U.S. economy in this sample. For Japan, one can see the remarkable run-up of the 1980s and its 
agonizing reversal during the 1990s. For the United Kingdom, one may notice the asset-price boom-
bust cycle of the early 1970s followed by the painful recession beginning in 1974. Indeed, these three 
episodes stand out as perhaps the clearest suggestions of an asset-price boom-bust cycle significantly 
influencing or possibly triggering a subsequent recession and recovery. 
How  do  these  three  cyclical  turning  points  compare  with  other  recessions?  To  be  sure,  such  a 
comparison  rests  on  (1)  our  identification  of  these  three  episodes  as  the  ones  that  appear  to  have 
been preceded by significant asset-price booms and busts and (2) separating these recessions from 
the rest. Such a classification necessarily involves some element of ambiguity, but the three episodes 
highlighted  in  figure  1,  the  U.S.  recession  in  2001,  the  Japanese  recession  in  1992,  and  the 
U.K. recession in 1974, do appear to stand out.12 
  11  Estimates  of  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  the  output  gap,  potential  output,  and  real  investment  are  from  the 
Economic Outlook database of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The investment data (shown 
in  later  displays)  reflect  total  fixed  investment.  In  figure  1,  both  actual  and  potential  output  are  expressed  relative  to  the 
value  of  actual  real  GDP  in  1985.  By  definition,  output  should  equal  the  economy’s  potential  -  and  the  corresponding 
measure of the output gap should equal zero - when productive factors in the economy are employed at their normal levels. 
Output is below the economy’s potential when resources are underutilized and above it when the economy is overheated. 
To  be  sure,  assessing  the  economy’s  potential  with  much  accuracy  is  inherently  difficult,  and  historical  estimates  of  the 
implicit  output  gap  are  highly  imprecise;  however,  these  measures  can  serve  as  helpful  summary  indicators  in  historical 
comparisons such as those discussed below. 
12  There are at least two reasons for the ambiguity in such classifications. The first relates to how one defines an asset-price 
bust. The second relates to the dating of cyclical peaks, which, as noted earlier, may differ somewhat depending on the 
methodology underlying business cycle chronologies. The three episodes on which I concentrate my attention are relatively 
uncontroversial in that the recessions followed rather substantial asset-price boom-bust cycles. But other recessions, which 
followed milder boom-bust cycles, could be added to this list. Examples would be the recessions that started in 1974 in the 
United States, in 1981 in Canada, and in 1990 in the United Kingdom. 
BIS Review 2/2005 
 5
 6
  I
B
S
R
e
v
e
w
2
 i
 2
0
0
5
     We have compared the average path of asset prices around the onset of the recession in these three 
episodes to the average path of asset prices in the other episodes in our sample (figure 2, top panel). 
The vertical line marks the quarter in which the recession began. The dotted curve shows the average 
of  the  three  asset-price  related  episodes,  and  the  solid  curve  shows  the  average  of  the  remaining 
twenty-two recession episodes in the sample.13 This comparison suggests that in recessions related to 
asset-price  busts,  asset  prices  fall  before  the  recession  more,  on  average,  than  they  do  in  other 
episodes. This is, of course, as it should be, given our selection criteria for the classification of the 
three  episodes.  The  more  interesting  question  is  whether  these  recessions  are  different  in  other 
dimensions as well. 
Consider, for example, the average paths of estimated output gaps during asset-price busts relative to 
the remaining recessions (figure 2, middle panel). The data are centered as they were for asset prices, 
but the output gap is normalized to equal zero in the first quarter of a recession. As one would expect, 
the output gap for both groups of episodes on average falls after recessions start, but it falls less for 
the  asset-price-bust  episodes.  Finally,  looking  at  investment  (figure  2,  bottom  panel),  the  data  also 
suggest that, on average at least, investment, like the output gap, was not affected more adversely in 
the three asset-price-bust episodes. If anything, these three episodes on average appear to be slightly 
shallower in terms of output losses and investment declines than the average of other recessions. 
But the comparisons of the averages provided in figure 2 could obscure valuable insights that might be 
obtained by looking at each of our three asset-price-bust episodes individually, as I do next. 
Three asset-price-bust episodes 
Let us first examine the U.K. recession of 1974. To put that episode in perspective, we present an 
overview of the U.K. economy for the 1970-2003 period (figure 3). The boom-bust cycle that preceded 
the 1974 cyclical peak is the most pronounced (and, by the way, not just for the United Kingdom but 
for all of the G-7 countries). The large fall in average asset prices (figure 3, top panel) followed the 
1973-74 oil crisis, which is also associated with somewhat smaller asset-price declines in numerous 
other nations. 
We  take  a  closer  look  at  the  components  of  the  aggregate  asset-price  index  and  compare  their 
evolution around this U.K. cyclical peak to their average evolution during all recessions excluding our 
three asset-price-bust episodes (figure 4). Equity prices registered a remarkably sharp decline in this 
episode.  But  arguably  a  more  distinctive  characteristic  of  this  asset-price  boom-bust  episode  is  the 
swing in real estate prices. Residential real estate prices, and especially commercial real estate prices 
(figure  4,  bottom  panels),  also  registered  rather  dramatic  declines  in  this  episode.  It  may  thus  be 
surprising that this recession does not appear to have been deeper than the average of recessions 
excluding the three asset-price-bust episodes. The output gap (figure 5) fell along with asset prices 
before  the  recession,  but  the  decline  was  from  an  unsustainably  overheated  level.  And  investment 
(figure  5)  stayed  relatively  strong  compared  with  other  recessions.  Despite  this  episode  being 
associated with rather severe declines in equity and commercial real estate prices, no evidence of an 
investment overhang appears in this comparison. 
Next, let us turn to the Japanese experience. The Japanese economy saw rapidly increasing equity 
and real estate prices during the 1980s (figure 6), a remarkably long period of stability and prosperity. 
These  run-ups  in  asset  prices  were  accompanied  by  a  rapid  expansion  of  bank  credit,  which  was 
especially important for financing real estate purchases. But asset prices collapsed at the turn of the 
decade. This “bursting of the bubble,” as the episode is often referred to by Japanese officials, was 
followed  by  a  decade  of  relative  stagnation  marked  by  three  arguably  related  recessions. 
Concentrating  attention  on  just  the  first  of  these  three  recessions,  beginning  in  1992,  proves 
insufficient  to  capture  the  severity  of  the  overall  problem.  The  detailed  comparisons  of  the  1992 
recession  with  other  episodes  (figure  7  and  figure  8)  do  not  indicate  unusual  weakness  associated 
with  the  1992  recession.  Rather,  the  1990s  in  Japan  are  more  notable  for  the  succession  of 
incomplete recoveries than for the recessions themselves (figure 6). 
                                                      
13  To compute these averages, we first centered the path of asset prices around each recession episode. The quarter in which 
the recession began is marked as zero, and quarters from –8 to +8 denote the preceding and subsequent two years. Asset 
prices in each episode are normalized to 100 at the quarter marking the recession start. 
BIS Review 2/2005 
 7
 8 
  BIS Review 2/2005
 BIS Review 2/2005 
  9
   10 
 BIS Review 2/2005
 BIS Review 2/2005 
  11
 12 
   BIS Review 2/2005
 The bursting of the bubble importantly shaped subsequent developments in this case. The asset-price 
collapse hit the Japanese banking system hard, eroding bank capital. The ensuing disintermediation 
subsequently proved an important impediment to the economy’s recovery. However, the extent of the 
problem was not fully appreciated at the time by policymakers. Despite steps toward an expansionary 
policy, the monetary easing of the early 1990s was insufficient to mitigate the underlying weakness 
during the expansion from 1994 to 1996. The continued fragility of the financial system arguably left 
the  Japanese  economy  especially  vulnerable  to  additional  disturbances  that  could  have  otherwise 
been  easily  weathered.  An  economic  crisis  in  Southeast  Asia,  coupled  with  a  previously  planned 
increase in consumption taxes, resulted in a larger-than-anticipated drag on domestic demand and set 
the  stage  for  the  recession  that  started  in  1997.  Following  a  brief  recovery,  monetary  policy  was 
tightened in 2000, and the third recession in a decade followed soon after. 
The Japanese experience offers a reminder of the importance of monitoring the health of the financial 
system and the need to be especially wary of signs of fragility following a period of sharp asset-price 
declines.  It  also  serves  to  highlight  how  the  behavior  of  the  banking  system  during  the  asset-price 
run-up may influence subsequent outcomes. Lastly, it points to the potentially crucial role played by 
fiscal and monetary policies in recoveries following asset-price-bust recessions. 
Last,  let  us  examine  the  U.S.  recession  of  2001  and  the  subsequent,  ongoing  recovery.  We  have 
prepared the U.S. data in the same manner as in the U.K. and Japanese cases (figure 9-figure 11). 
The  evolution  of  disaggregated  asset  prices  (figure  10)  shows  that  the  unusually  large  changes 
surrounding the 2001 recession reflected the movement of equity prices alone. Relative to the average 
episode, commercial real estate prices neither fell much during the recession nor rose a lot during the 
expansion. And instead of declining during the recession, residential real estate prices continued their 
upward  trend.  The  behavior  of  real  economic  activity  around  the  recent  cyclical  peak  (figure  11) 
suggests a second interesting comparison. Relative to other recessions, this recession was shallow 
and did not appear to impart an unusual drag on investment, despite the sharp asset-price correction. 
Why was the 2001 recession relatively short and shallow even though the preceding swing in asset 
prices  was  so  severe?  In  my  opinion,  two  reasons  stand  out.  The  first  regards  the  health  of  the 
financial  sector.  During  the  1980s  and  early  1990s,  the  U.S.  banking  sector  faced  a  succession  of 
challenges:  the  savings  and  loan  crisis  of  the  early  1980s,  the  international  debt  crisis  of  the 
mid-1980s, waves of bank failures and consolidation, and the need to build capital in response to the 
adoption of the Basel I standards in 1988. But by the mid-1990s the banking sector had regained a 
solid footing, and regulators were careful to keep it that way. Prudential regulation coupled with good 
risk management meant that financial firms limited their exposure to risk during the boom years of the 
late  1990s.  This  approach  paid  off  handsomely  when  the  asset-price  break  occurred.  Despite  the 
recession, banks remained well capitalized, and their strength eliminated the threat of a vicious credit 
crunch or the risk of fragility in the system. 
As a result, the elements that appear to have been so detrimental for the recovery of the Japanese 
economy during the 1990s were absent during this episode. Following the “bursting of the bubble” in 
Japan,  the  banking  system  found  itself  holding  a  substantial  amount  of  bad  loans.  And,  as  already 
seen, the woes of the banking system turned into a recessionary force in itself, curtailing the recovery. 
This  comparison  points  to  a  useful  policy  lesson:  A  healthy  financial  sector  and  strong  prudential 
regulation during an asset-price boom offer valuable insurance in case the boom turns to bust with an 
asset-price break. 
The  second,  and  perhaps  equally  important,  reason  that  the  recent  U.S.  episode  was  unusually 
benign  was,  in  my  view,  the  quick  response  of  policy.  Both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  were  eased 
quickly and effectively in this episode. The Federal Reserve cut the federal funds rate rapidly to create 
monetary  accommodation  and  maintained  conditions  of  substantial  monetary  policy  ease  for  a 
considerable period well into the expansion. As well, the Administration and the Congress took quick 
steps early in the recession to provide fiscal stimulus that helped to prop up aggregate demand. 
Placing the policy response in its proper historical context may be critical for drawing the appropriate 
policy lessons for the future. Countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies are unlikely to have been as 
swift and strong during 2001 had earlier policies not set the stage for such action. On the fiscal side, 
the budgetary prudence of the 1990s yielded comfortable surpluses at the onset of the 2001 recession 
that facilitated the large fiscal policy easing. And on the monetary side, the successful completion of 
the  last  stage  on  the  long  path  to  price  stability  during  the  1990s  allowed  substantial  easing  in 
response  to  the  downturn.  As  policymakers  stressed  repeatedly,  the  prevalence  of  low-  and  well-
anchored  inflation  expectations  ultimately  facilitates  pursuit  of  such  countercyclical  policy.  A  clear 
BIS Review 2/2005 
 13
 lesson emerges from this experience for policy over the long haul. By pursuing fiscal prudence and 
price  stability  during  booms,  policymakers  greatly  enhance  their  ability  to  take  swift,  effective 
countercyclical action when it is needed most. 
14 
  BIS Review 2/2005
 BIS Review 2/2005 
   15
 Conclusions 
In closing, let me reiterate some of the key points and lessons I draw from this review. First, as already 
understood, detecting asset-price overvaluations and undervaluations is controversial in hindsight and 
arguably impossible in real time. As a result, although asset-price booms and busts are often linked to 
recessions, a clear-cut policy response to suspected waves of exuberance cannot be suggested. 
Second, sweeping generalizations regarding asset-price-bust recessions and subsequent recoveries 
are  not  easily  made.  Idiosyncrasies  dominate  comparisons  in  the  historical  data.  As  such,  each 
recession-and-recovery episode would seem to call for its own tailor-made policy response. 
Third, to the extent that comparisons across recessions are informative, asset-price-bust recessions 
do  not  appear  to  be  necessarily  more  costly  than  other  recession  episodes.  Specifically,  at  a 
macroeconomic level, recessions that follow swings in asset prices are not necessarily longer, deeper, 
and associated with a greater fall in output and investment than other recessions. That said, particular 
industrial  segments  and  classes  of  investment,  such  as  the  high-tech  sector  in  the  recent 
U.S. episode, may suffer disproportionately during such recessions. Also, the health of the financial 
system, the strength of the banking sector, and the ability and willingness of policy to take appropriate 
countercyclical action seem to importantly influence the economic outcomes of an asset-price-bust. 
Which brings me to my last point: Over the long haul, preparation for a potential problem seems to be 
the  best  course  of  action.  Prudential  supervision  and  good  risk  management  in  banking,  and  the 
pursuit of fiscal prudence and price stability during booms, may ultimately serve as the best insurance 
for dealing with the inevitable occasional asset-price breaks observed in our modern economy. 
16 
 BIS Review 2/2005
