Charles C Soludo: Promoting effective and efficient customer service delivery - 
the role of the Central Bank of Nigeria branches 
Opening  address  by  Professor  Charles  C  Soludo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  at  the 
26th Annual Controllers’ Conference of the Central Bank of Nigeria, held at the Central Bank of Nigeria 
head office, Abuja, 30 March 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  our  branch  controllers  and  guests  to  Abuja  on  this  occasion  of  the 
26th Annual Controllers’ Conference. I wish to use this opportunity to congratulate the organisers of 
this unique conference which serves as a platform for interaction among the Branch Controllers and 
Currency Officers, and the Head office staff. 
More importantly, as the link between the Head Office, the banking and host communities, this forum 
affords you a golden opportunity to continually update your knowledge on the recent developments in 
the Bank and the economy, generally, as well as on the practical aspects of your assignments, so you 
can become better ambassadors of the Bank in your respective jurisdictions. 
The  theme  of  this  year’s  Conference,  Promoting  Effective  and  Efficient  Customer  Service 
Delivery: The Role of the CBN Branches, is auspicious in the light of the on-going re-engineering 
and restructuring programme in the Bank - the Project EAGLES. The acronym EAGLES, as you all 
know,  stands  for  Efficiency,  Accountability,  Goal  Orientation,  Leadership,  Effectiveness,  and  Staff 
Motivation and is a key component of the comprehensive reform programme of the Nigerian financial 
sector. A strong and an efficient CBN is critical for a stable and sound financial system. 
On  July  6,  2004,  I  unveiled  a  13-point  reform  agenda  for  the  banking  sector,  which  included  the 
recapitalization of the deposit money banks and their consolidation through mergers and acquisitions. 
The agenda is a preemptive and proactive measure to prevent a systemic crisis and collapse of the 
banking industry, and permanently stop the boom and burst cycles that have characterized the history 
of  the  industry.  More  fundamentally,  the  reforms  are  aimed  at  ensuring  a  sound,  responsive, 
competitive  and  transparent  banking  system,  appropriately  suited  to  the  demands  of  the  Nigerian 
economy and the challenges of globalization. 
I am pleased to note that so far the reform programme has received an overwhelming support from the 
operators, international community and other stakeholders. In our consolidation effort, 16 banks are 
already sure to make the new capital requirement compared to only 2 banks as at 6 July 2004. It is 
also  good  news  that  fresh  funds  are  flowing  into  Nigeria  in  response  to  the  emerging  investment 
opportunities in the Nigerian banking sector as a result of the consolidation exercise. Many MOUs for 
consolidation have been signed and progress on their implementation is steady. 
The CBN branches nationwide have a very prominent role to play both in the reform process and in 
fulfilling the Bank’s major challenge of being an efficient service provider to its customers. During this 
conference, you will be faced with the task of identifying possible areas of improvement in the quality 
of our service delivery. For this reason, I understand that some guest speakers have been invited to 
highlight  customers’  perception  of  our  services.  This  will  afford  us  the  opportunity  of  appreciating 
customers’ expectations as a basic guide to improving the quality of our services. 
Our  quest  for  excellence  in  service  delivery  could  be  measured  by  five  basic  principles  that  both 
private  and  public  sector  agencies  have  to  comply  with  to  be  able  to  deliver  effective  customer 
services, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The new CBN service delivery charter will emphasize these principles. 
Embracing change and persistently striving to improve on it; 
Continually asking the target customers what they want and then giving it to them; 
Harnessing the power of information; 
Establishing an enabling infrastructure; and 
Empowering, supporting and rewarding the personnel. 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
Staff redeployment to place round pegs in round holes; 
Full implementation of the IT programme; 
Operationalization of the new Economic Policy Department; 
Reform and restructuring of the Security Services Division; 
Reform of the Budget and Procurement Processes; 
Out-sourcing of some non-core functions; 
Restructuring of the training programme to ensure value for money; and 
Implementing a staff welfare package that ensures a motivated work force. 
Part of the change being introduced under Project EAGLES has been necessitated by the deficiencies 
in  the  Bank’s  old  structure  which  included  duplication  of  functions  and  non-optimal  span  of  control. 
Hence we have introduced a new structure in which our Departments have been reduced from 23 to 
17, with the aim of improving the efficiency of our service delivery. The activities of Project EAGLES 
are  continuing  and  have  entered  the  third  and  final  phase  which  involves  such  activities  as 
implementing  the  IT  programme,  reform  of  the  budget  and  procurement  processes  and  staff 
realignment. 
Our efforts to ensure efficiency in service delivery to customers are not limited to the internal activities 
of the Central Bank. The restructuring exercise at the Nigerian Security Printing and Minting (NSPM) 
Plc  -  the  Mint  will  be  of  interest  to  the  Branch  Controllers  and  Currency  Officers.  In  line  with  the 
Federal  Government’s  approval,  the  Central  Bank  has  taken  over  the  Mint  and  has  developed  a 
Business Plan to restructure and strengthen the company as a world class competitive firm. Our goal 
is  to  stop  importing  finished  banknotes  within  three  years  and  to  meet  the  banknote  and  security 
printing  requirements  of  the  Nigerian  economy  and  those  of  West  and  Central  Africa  in  the 
longer-term. 
Despite the milestones we have achieved on various aspects of our reform programme, there are still 
challenges ahead in several areas which include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The task of meeting these challenges is enormous. The Bank is currently facing budget constraints, 
arising from increasing costs, the financing of the Project EAGLES, the implementation of the Banking 
Sector  consolidation  programme,  and  the  take-over  and  restructuring  of  the  Mint,  all  in  the  face  of 
shrinking revenues - as monetary policy becomes efficient. But we shall strive to fulfill our mission and 
to keep to our promises. On the part of staff welfare, as I said in my 2004 end of year address, staff 
welfare remains our Number One priority and inspite of the dwindling resources we shall continue to 
meet our commitments to staff. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me note that the strategic position of the Currency and Branch Operations 
Department under the new structure derives from the fact that the branches are expected to serve as 
front offices for the other departments in the Bank, while the branch network is expected to serve as 
an effective delivery channel for banking services to the customers. To this end, Branch Controllers 
and Currency Officers must see themselves as the ambassadors of the Bank. 
Before I conclude, let me restate that, as the Bank’s representatives in your respective branches and 
offices, Management expects you to maintain high standards of professionalism and integrity in your 
conduct, while upholding the Bank’s values. We are concerned over the increasing rate of fraud in the 
Bank in recent times. While we are improving processes and procedures and strengthening internal 
controls, we need to closely monitor the activities of staff, to achieve zero tolerance for fraud, at each 
branch level and bank wide. For the avoidance of doubt, Management is firmly committed to stamping 
out corruption in the Bank and will take every necessary measure to protect the Bank’s assets. 
May  I  urge  you  all  to  participate  actively  in  this  very  important  Conference  in  order  to  derive  the 
maximum  benefits  from  it  which  you  will  find  useful  in  improving  the  quality  of  services  in  your 
respective branches and currency centres. On this note, I declare the 26th Annual Branch Controllers’ 
Conference open and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
