Lucas Papademos: The euro and economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the Forum des 
Idées Économiques, Sciences Po, Paris, 15 April 2005. 
 The euro and the single European monetary policy are now more than six years old. There are many 
issues that can be addressed concerning the consequences of the euro. In line with the focus of our 
session, I will concentrate on some key questions concerning the performance of the euro and its role 
in promoting growth. 
• 
• 
Has the euro performed well and met the expectations of the European public? 
Has the European Central Bank conducted the single monetary policy effectively and fulfilled 
its mandate? 
Has the overall performance of the euro area economy and of its individual Member States 
been satisfactory over the past six years? And, if not, what can be done about it? 
 The  performance  and  value  of  a  currency  must  fundamentally  be  judged  in  terms  of  its  purchasing 
power.  Consequently,  it  is  the  primary  objective  of  the  European  Central  Bank  to  safeguard  the 
purchasing power of the euro by maintaining price stability in the euro area – which we have defined 
as  maintaining  inflation  at  close  to  but  below  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  statistics  speak  for 
themselves. In the first six years (1999-2004) following the introduction of the euro, average annual 
inflation in the euro area was 2.0%. This is a remarkable accomplishment, particularly if we take into 
account  that  during  this  period  the  euro  area  economy  was  subject  to  a  large  number  of  adverse 
shocks  that  caused  inflation  to  rise  temporarily  above  2%  for  fairly  long  periods  of  time.  These 
inflationary  disturbances  included  oil  price  shocks,  increases  in  food  prices  resulting  from  livestock 
epidemics, indirect tax increases and the undesirable effects on prices from the cash changeover to 
the euro. In spite of these sizeable adverse shocks, today we live in an environment of low inflation. 
The  benefits  of  price  stability  are  fully  appreciated  by  the  European  public.  For  the  citizens  of  a 
number of EU countries, the environment of low inflation should represent a marked change: after all, 
in  the  ten  years preceding  the  introduction  of  the  euro (1989-1999),  average  annual  inflation  in  the 
12 countries today forming the euro area was 8%.  
What  is  more  significant  for  the  value  of  the  euro  and  the  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  single  monetary 
policy is that long-term inflation expectations clearly suggest that financial markets are confident that 
price stability will be maintained in the euro area over the long run. Similarly, from financial market 
indicators we can deduce that there is general trust in our ability to keep inflation low and in line with 
price  stability  over  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  I  admit  that  public  perceptions  of  current 
inflation (as opposed to expectations of future inflation) have deviated significantly from the inflation 
recorded in some countries over the past three years following the cash changeover to the euro. This 
has  been  a  cause  for  concern,  not  least  because  a  negative  attitude  towards  the  euro  could 
undermine the generally favourable expectations about future inflation. Fortunately, this gap between 
perceived and actual inflation, despite its puzzling persistence, has narrowed recently and should be 
eliminated soon. 
All in all, a high degree of price stability has been achieved in the euro area in line with the ECB’s 
mandate. But more than that, our stability-oriented monetary policy has acquired credibility and both 
short-term interest rates and long-term bond yields are at historically low levels in nominal and real 
terms. The prevailing favourable financing conditions, the low level of inflation and diminished inflation 
uncertainty continue to lend support to investment and have established an environment conducive to 
sustainable growth. As we all know, however, price stability and low interest rates define necessary 
but  not  sufficient  conditions  for  faster  growth.  Other  factors  shaping  an  economy’s  growth  potential 
and influencing the dynamics of aggregate demand play a crucial role in determining both growth and 
job creation. 
On the growth front, developments have been less positive. Output growth and employment creation 
in  the  euro  area  have  been  unsatisfactory  –  indeed  disappointing  when  compared  with  the  high 
expectations which many people had when the euro was launched. Countries outside the euro area – 
especially the United States – have evidently outperformed the euro area. In the six years since the 
introduction of the euro, the average rate of growth was 1.9% in the euro area and 3.0% in the United 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 1
States. Furthermore, in the ten years prior to the introduction of the euro (1989-1999), growth in the 
euro area on average lagged behind that in the United States by almost 1%. However, it should be 
noted that the introduction of the euro is not associated with the increase in this growth gap. 
Euro area averages naturally mask a variety of growth performances – outstanding and unsatisfactory 
– of individual countries within the single currency area. Ireland, Greece, Spain and Luxembourg have 
all recorded more than 3% growth on average since the introduction of the euro, while Germany, Italy 
and Portugal have grown barely 1.5% on average over  the same period. This type of dispersion of 
growth rates is a natural phenomenon in any large economic area, whether in the euro area or the 
United States. Let me stress that the impression that output growth divergences are widening across 
euro  area  countries  is  not  backed  by  facts.  On  the  contrary,  the  degree  of  dispersion  in  real  GDP 
growth  rates  across  the  12  euro  area  countries  declined  in  2004  (in  annual  average  terms)  to  a 
historically low level. In particular, dispersion, as measured by the unweighted standard deviation, fell 
to around 1.4% last year, while it had been fluctuating around 2% since the 1970s. 
What  is  behind  the  low  trend  growth  in  the  euro  area?  For  an  answer,  we  have  to  look  at  the 
determinants  of  potential  or  long-term  growth,  notably  the  rates  of  increase  of  population  and 
productivity, and the degree of labour utilisation in the economy. This latter variable is determined by 
the labour force participation rate, the unemployment rate and the average number of hours worked. 
On all these counts, Europe does not score well – especially compared to the United States. Europe’s 
population  has  been growing  by  a meagre 0.3%  per  year  over  the  past  decade;  the  United  States’ 
population by 1.3%. Our productivity growth rates lag behind those of the US by ½ to 1 percentage 
point (depending on the sector and period chosen). Only around 70% of Europeans of working age 
participate  in  the  labour  market  –  compared  to  over  80%  of  Americans.  Euro  area  unemployment 
stands  at  around  9%,  three  percentage  points  more  than  in  the  US.  And  those  who  do  work  have 
shorter working hours. Europeans work, on average, about 250 hours less per year than Americans. 
To argue that these facts simply reflect the preference of Europeans to enjoy more leisure rather than 
seek additional income is not sufficient. The causes are more complex. We should take a critical look 
at the way in which tax and benefit policies influence the incentives for companies to hire staff and for 
people to take up work.  
In addition to these structural factors, the current phase of low growth is undoubtedly also due to low 
confidence, both among businesses and among consumers. Of course, this is not true to the same 
extent  in  all  sectors  and  all  countries,  but  on  aggregate,  we  clearly  observe  a  problem  of  low 
confidence. Several factors have adversly influenced confidence in the past few years: large increases 
in commodity prices, notably oil prices, and geopolitical tensions; the pressures of global competition; 
uncertainty and the short-term impact of certain reforms to modernise the welfare state and prepare 
social security systems for population ageing; and – last, but by no means least – uncertainty about 
the current and future stance of fiscal policies in many euro area countries.  
If we can agree on this diagnosis of the reasons for low growth in Europe, the elements of a remedy 
are  already  emerging.  The  Lisbon  agenda  –  especially  after  its  recent  refinement  and  refocusing, 
which  the  ECB  strongly  supports  –  addresses  many  of  the  structural  weaknesses  of  the  euro  area 
economy. It is no coincidence that countries which score highest with regard to the achievement of the 
Lisbon  goals  are  also  the  ones  with  the  most  robust  growth  performances  over  recent  years.  The 
example of the Nordic countries shows how reforms of tax and benefit systems can encourage labour 
participation;  how  investment  in  education  and  training  and  how  greater  diffusion  of  advances  in 
information and communication technologies can spur productivity growth; and how structural reforms 
in labour and product markets – in a process of Schumpeterian “creative destruction” – can open up 
new avenues for growth. Robust growth in Europe is not a “mission impossible”. It can be done. And it 
can be done without abolishing the basic features of what we call the European social model. 
Can it be done inside monetary union? The single monetary policy, conducted for the euro area as a 
whole,  is  playing  its  part already  –  notably  by  providing  a  low  inflation  environment  with  favourable 
financing  conditions.  And,  of  course,  the  euro  has  eliminated,  once  and  for  all,  the  intra-euro  area 
exchange rate volatility. The revised fiscal framework of the Stability and Growth Pact – if implemented 
in  a  rigorous  and  responsible  fashion  –  still  has  the  capacity  to  guide  national  fiscal  policies  on  a 
sustainable  path,  thus  bolstering  confidence,  reducing  uncertainty  and  fostering  growth.  But  clearly, 
the onus is on national policies, especially structural policies to promote growth, competitiveness and 
employment. Thankfully, things are moving: throughout the euro area, we see governments embarking 
on structural reforms, some courageously, others somewhat more timidly. Some euro area countries – 
notably Germany, but also France, Austria, Belgium and Finland – have made significant progress in 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2005
improving competitiveness over the past few years. And competitiveness is a key determinant of long-
term growth. Of course, Europe needs more reform progress; but the situation is more differentiated 
and more promising than the black-and-white, rather gloomy picture often portrayed. 
The structural impediments to the euro area’s growth must be addressed by implementing appropriate 
structural measures. There are no alternative solutions and no “quick fixes”. The euro underlines the 
validity  of  this  proposition  as  well  as  the  need  for  systematic  and  determined  efforts  towards 
implementing the necessary reforms. As the euro area economy becomes more productive, flexible 
and competitive, its growth performance will improve, benefiting from both an enhanced capacity to 
produce as well as increased confidence that can boost investment and consumption. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 25/2005 
 3
