Jaime Caruana: Basel II and corporate governance issues 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the 2nd Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) Summit 2005: The Rise 
and  Effectiveness  of  Corporate  Governance  in  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Industry,  Doha, 
24 May 2005.  
 Introduction and overview 
I would like to thank His Excellency Governor Abdulla Khalid Al-Attiya and the Qatar Central Bank the 
hospitality and Professor Rifaat and the Islamic Financial Services Board for inviting me to speak this 
evening before such a distinguished gathering. It is a great honour for me to be here at what I am sure 
will be a most successful and rewarding Summit. I consider it a privilege to have the opportunity to 
share with you some thoughts on two timely and important topics: corporate governance and the Basel 
II capital framework.  
My contribution to this important conference comes with a degree of humility. Although I understand 
that some of the roots of Islamic finance can be traced back to my own country during the time it was 
known  as  al-Andalus,  I  cannot  claim  to  be  an  expert  in  Islamic  finance,  and  I  certainly  would  not 
presume to talk about the specificities of Islamic banking before such a knowledgeable audience.  
Suffice  it  to  say  that  we  all  know  that  there  are  differences  between  Islamic  banking  and  what  we 
normally refer to as “conventional” banking. However, I do think that we share some important broader 
perspectives,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  two  issues  I  will  address  today.  More  rigorous  risk 
management anchored in strong corporate governance, enhanced transparency and sound minimum 
capital requirements that reflect the risks that banks face are vital elements for any financial system to 
promote confidence and foster financial stability. On top of that, common standards in these areas can 
help to improve the integration of the international financial system.  
It  is  certainly  true  that  the  special  features  of  Islamic  banking  may  not  be  fully  addressed  by  the 
traditionally broad international standards developed by organisations such as the one I chair – the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. I believe that it would be neither appropriate nor possible 
for the Basel Committee to seek to fill such gaps. That is why I am very pleased to see organisations 
such  as  the  IFSB  addressing  issues  related  to  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  rapidly  growing 
market for Islamic financial services worldwide. The exposure drafts that you have issued with regard 
to risk management and capital adequacy for institutions offering Islamic financial services help to fill a 
very important niche, as will your forthcoming exposure draft on corporate governance, and your work 
on the supervisory review process and on transparency and market discipline.  
The  Basel  Committee  is  an  outward-looking  committee,  with  a  key  interest  in  relevant  matters  that 
reach beyond its own technical and geographical borders. I am personally committed to enhancing our 
co-operation  with  non-member  countries  and  with  organisations  that  have  related  interests.  In  this 
respect, I am confident that the fruitful dialogue that has already begun between the Basel Committee 
and the IFSB will continue to be successful and mutually rewarding in the future. 
My talk this evening will address several issues. First, I will talk about why I believe sound corporate 
governance plays such an important role in bank safety and soundness and financial system stability. 
Second,  I  will  share  some  thoughts  on  how  the  Basel  II  capital  framework  will  contribute  to  better 
corporate governance. Finally, I will share some of the work that the Basel Committee has underway 
with regard to bank corporate governance.  
Why does corporate governance matter for banks and bank supervisors? 
Before  I  talk  specifically  about  the  corporate  governance  of  banks,  I  would  like  to  discuss  more 
generally some of the weaknesses in corporate governance that have led to high-profile failures such 
as Enron and Parmalat over the past few years. While every situation is unique, and in some cases 
not all of the facts are known, many of the recent corporate governance breakdowns appear to have 
several factors in common: 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
      The  board of  directors  failed  to  understand  the  risks  that  the  firm  was  taking,  and  did not 
exercise appropriate oversight or questioning of senior managers’ and employees’ actions; 
Conflicts  of  interest  and  a  lack  of  independent  board  members  and  senior  executives 
resulted in decisions that benefited a few at the expense of the many; 
Internal controls were either weak or non-existent, or appeared to be adequate on paper but 
were not implemented in practice; 
Internal  and  external  audit  “fell  asleep  at  the  switch”  and  failed  to  detect  fraudulent 
behaviour, and in some cases even aided and abetted such behaviour; 
Transactions  and  organisational  structures  were  designed  to  reduce  transparency  and 
prevent  market  participants  and  regulators  from  gaining  a  genuine  picture  of  the  firm’s 
condition;  
And  perhaps  most  importantly,  the  corporate  culture  fostered  unethical  behaviour  and 
discouraged questions from being raised. 
Fortunately, none of the high-profile corporate scandals of recent years have brought down banks. I 
would like to think that strong, effective banking supervision has been very helpful in that regard and I 
also believe that a sound risk management culture has become increasingly present in the banking 
sector in recent decades. This does not mean that we can rest; banks are not immune from any of the 
factors that I have just described. Indeed, if we were to look closely at bank failures large and small 
over the years, I believe we would find that poor corporate governance lay at the heart of many of 
these failures.  
Why should we have higher expectations for the governance of banks than we have for other firms? 
Fundamentally,  because  banks  must  act  in  a  way  that  promotes  “confidence”  to  the  public  and  the 
markets in general and, more specifically, to their primary stakeholders. Banks play a crucial role in 
the  flow  of  capital  within  an  economy  and  are  charged  with  a  special  public  trust  to  safeguard 
customers’  wealth.  A  stable  and  healthy  banking  system  is  critical  to  the  long-term  growth  of  an 
economy.  
Banking supervisors have long recognised the importance of good governance; supervision can not 
function properly if sound corporate governance is not in place. Experience underscores the need to 
have  appropriate  levels  of  accountability  as  well  as  sufficient  checks  and  balances.  For  banking 
supervisors, although the range of topics that corporate governance may encompass is quite wide, the 
focus is mainly on those elements that relate to the manner in which the business and affairs of an 
organization are governed by its board and managers. This means the decision-making process within 
the bank, the respective responsibilities and accountabilities of the board and managers, the control 
functions that provide assurance to the monitoring processes and the structures that support all these 
functions. 
Good  corporate  governance  and  supervisory  actions  complement  one  another.  The  guidance, 
inspections  and  oversight  activities  of  supervisors  cannot  guarantee,  on  their  own,  the  prudent 
operation  and  financial  soundness  of  a  supervised  bank.  Banking  supervisors  must  rely  on  the 
competence,  skills  and  prudence  of  the  board  and  management.  Confidence  in  the  corporate 
governance processes at the bank will enhance the supervisor’s overall confidence that the bank is 
being  operated  prudently.  This  may  be  reflected  in  the  intensity  of  supervision  applied.  In  addition, 
supervisors may expect a bank’s governance structure to be proportionate to its size and complexity 
regardless of the relevant general legal requirements. 
From the perspective of a prudential supervisor, the basic elements of a good corporate governance 
framework could include the following: 
- 
The  primary  responsibility  for  the  conduct  of  the  bank’s  business  lies  with  its  board  and 
management. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive that a bank could carry out activities in the 
absence of strategic objectives or guiding corporate values. Therefore the responsibilities of 
the board and management would include, among other things, approving ethical standards, 
establishing  and  maintaining  strategic  objectives,  policies  and  procedures  as  well  as 
ensuring that the bank complies with the statutory and supervisory obligations. 
Persons filling key roles should be expected to have the necessary skills and experience to 
carry out their tasks appropriately. The supervisor has a role in assessing the qualifications 
and integrity of these key personnel through fit and proper tests. 
BIS Review 38/2005
 2 
   Depending  on  the  size  and  complexity  of  the  bank,  appropriate  structures  and  control 
mechanisms such as strong internal audit, external audit and the oversight function of the 
board (directly or through supporting committees such as audit committees, risk committees, 
compensation committees etc) support the effective operation of a supervised bank. 
Other elements, such as the appointment of independent board members who can exercise 
objective judgement, are usually recognised as good practice. 
Basel II and corporate governance 
Let me turn now to the Basel II capital framework. I am asked to speak about Basel II quite frequently, 
but while I am often requested to talk about the mechanics and the impact of the new framework, I am 
seldom asked about its corporate governance aspects. This is unfortunate because, in my view, Basel 
II is fundamentally about better risk management anchored in sound corporate governance. With that 
in  mind,  I  would  like  to  focus  now  on  three  areas  where  I  believe  Basel  II  will  contribute  to  more 
effective corporate governance. I will refer to these as the three C’s: controls, culture and clarity. 
Controls 
The first “C” is controls. A bank can use the most sophisticated measurement tools in the world, but if 
it  is  poorly  governed,  it  will  be  vulnerable  to  financial  and  operational  weaknesses.  The  Basel 
Committee recognised this when it developed the qualifications that banks must meet in order to adopt 
the most advanced approaches under the first pillar of Basel II. The first pillar aligns minimum capital 
requirements more closely with banks’ actual underlying risks. Qualifying banks may also rely partly on 
their  own  measures  of  those  risks,  which  will  help  to  create  economic  incentives  to  improve  those 
measures.  This  presumes,  of  course,  that  qualifying  banks  meet  rigorous  criteria  related  to  the 
governance  of  their  risk  management  frameworks.  While  much  attention  has  been  focused  on  the 
more  complex  quantitative  aspects  of  the  new  framework,  I  believe  the  most  important  qualifying 
criteria are those that address how the bank’s risk management framework is governed.  
Effective  risk  controls  are  essential  to  the  successful  implementation  of  the  new  capital  framework. 
Under Basel II, the board of directors is expected to establish the institution’s risk tolerances, policies, 
and code of conduct, and to ensure that a sufficiently strong risk control framework is in place. Senior 
management, in turn, is responsible for implementing the risk control framework set forth by the board. 
In addition, the framework sets out clear responsibilities for auditors and other quality control functions 
to ensure that a bank’s risk control framework is subject to effective independent review, oversight and 
validation.  The  board  needs  to  harness  the  work  of  the  auditors  as  an  independent  check  on  the 
information  received  from  management.  I  believe  that  this  emphasis  on  the  role  of  the  board  and 
senior management in developing and implementing an effective risk control environment will, with the 
help of independent audit and other control functions, result in better-managed banks. 
Culture 
The second “C” is culture. I believe that the increased responsibilities of the board of directors and 
senior  management  under  Basel  II  will  foster  a  culture  of  improved  risk  management.  This  notion 
underlies the second pillar of the new framework, which takes as its starting point that the board and 
senior management have an obligation to understand the bank’s risk profile and ensure that the bank 
holds sufficient capital against its risks. Supervisors, in turn, are responsible for reviewing the bank’s 
assessment to evaluate and determine whether that assessment seems reasonable.  
The key, in my view, is that risk awareness starts at the top of the organisation. The board and senior 
management cannot abdicate their responsibility to understand and manage the risks arising from the 
bank’s activities. I believe that this focus on sound risk management at the very top will help to set the 
tone throughout the bank that effective risk management is everyone’s job.  
Of course, this may also represent a cultural shift for supervisors. Basel II places a firm emphasis on 
taking a risk-based approach to supervision. As banks grow in complexity and sophistication, I believe 
that it will be necessary for supervisors to place a greater emphasis on understanding banks’ own risk 
assessments.  It  is  therefore  vital  that  we  complement  the  traditional  accounting-based  approach  to 
supervision with a greater emphasis on analysis of the risks affecting banks and the control systems 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 3
that banks have in place to mitigate such risks. This cultural shift may not be easy, but I believe it will 
be  beneficial  not  only  for  us  as  supervisors,  but  also  for  banks  and  for  the  stability  of  our  financial 
systems.  
Clarity 
The third “C” is clarity. I believe that Basel II will provide greater clarity regarding banks’ measurement 
and management of risk. This will be achieved first of all through the third pillar – market discipline – 
which  aims  at  ensuring  that  the  market  provides  an  additional  layer  of  oversight.  The  third  pillar  is 
intended  to  focus  the  board  and  senior  management  on  heightening  disclosure,  which  should 
strengthen incentives for prudent risk management. Greater transparency in banks’ financial reporting 
should  allow  majority  and  minority  shareholders,  depositors,  debt-holders,  and  other  market 
participants  to  evaluate  banks  and  reward  or  penalise  them  according  to  how  prudently  they  are 
managed.  This  should  provide  a  window  on  how  the  bank  is  governed,  and  should  serve  to  curb 
excessive risk-taking in advance. 
Basel II will enhance clarity in other ways as well. Not only will banks be expected to improve their 
external  transparency,  but  they  will  also  be  expected  to  operate  more  transparently  internally.  In 
particular, banks will be expected to ensure that the board of directors and senior management are 
sufficiently  well-informed  to  be  able  to  meaningfully  assess  the  bank’s  risk  profile.  This  will  place  a 
premium  on  effective  and  accurate  risk  reporting.  Likewise,  there  is  an  expectation  that  senior 
management  will  communicate  effectively  to  employees  their  responsibilities  with  regard  to  the 
effective management of risk.  
Finally,  Basel  II  will  enhance  clarity  by  promoting  international  co-operation  between  supervisors. 
International banking organisations have grown increasingly complex over the years, to the point that 
in some cases it can be very difficult for supervisors - and even for bank management - to have a clear 
understanding  of  their  global  risk  profiles.  This  highlights  the  need  for  effective  supervisory 
co-operation for such organisations. Effectively combining the necessary supervision at the local level 
in the host country with effective supervision at the consolidated level in the home country requires 
more thorough exchange of information and better knowledge of financial instruments and links within 
financial  groups.  This  will  heighten  supervisory  understanding  of  banks’  activities  and  will  promote 
consistency in the implementation of standards, a level playing field and the reduction of unnecessary 
regulatory burdens.  
Next steps 
While  I  have  focused  my  remarks  on  the  new  capital  framework,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that 
corporate  governance  is  much  broader  than  Basel  II.  With  this  in  mind,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
established a Working Group to review the Committee’s existing guidance on corporate governance 
for banks. 
This  guidance  was  issued  in  1999,  and  while  the  principles  contained  in  it  remain  relevant,  the 
Committee believes that this is an opportune time to review them. First, the OECD last year issued 
revised  principles  on  corporate  governance.  Since  the  Committee’s  1999  guidance  drew  upon  the 
original OECD principles, we felt that it would be appropriate to consider their revised principles as 
well from our prudential perspective. Second, in light of the recent high-profile corporate governance 
breakdowns that I highlighted at the beginning of my remarks, we felt that it was important to consider 
whether there were any lessons to be learned that would apply specifically to our guidance for banks. 
Finally, the Committee has asked the Working Group to consider whether it would be appropriate to 
develop guidance on what I call “know your structure” elements. 
While  it  is  too  soon  to  report  on  the  Working  Group’s  findings,  they  are  expected  to  make 
recommendations to the Basel Committee this summer. We hope to issue a draft of revised guidance 
on  corporate  governance for  public  consultation  in  late  summer or  early  fall.  The  IFSB  has  already 
expressed  an  interest  in  this  work,  and  I  certainly  encourage  everyone  here  to  review  the  draft 
guidance  when  it  is  released  and  to  send  us  your  comments.  We  would  like  the  guidance  to  be 
relevant  not  only  to  Basel  Committee  member  countries,  but  to  non-member  countries  as  well.  We 
would therefore value your feedback. 
As  we  take  our  work  forward  in  the  Basel  Committee,  and  as  the  IFSB  conducts  its  own  work  in 
preparing its exposure draft, I believe we would all benefit from keeping a sense of proportion. Clearly, 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2005
we cannot have the same expectations for the governance of a large, complex bank that we have for a 
much  smaller  bank.  When  the  Basel  Committee  issues  supervisory  guidance,  we  typically  say  that 
supervisors’  expectations  should  be  commensurate  with  the  size,  complexity  and  risk  profile  of  the 
institution. That applies equally here. My hope is that we can raise the bar for the governance of the 
banking industry as a whole, while concentrating our supervisory resources on the governance of the 
most complex and sophisticated institutions. 
Conclusion 
I realise that I am all that stands between you and a marvellous gala dinner, so I will keep my closing 
remarks  very  brief.  I  would  just  like  to  emphasise  that  sound  corporate  governance  should  be 
considered a key element of a bank’s ability to understand and manage its risks. As supervisors, we 
should direct our resources to helping banks improve their controls, culture and clarity in respect to 
risk management. In so doing, I believe that we will help achieve our objective of a stable and healthy 
banking system that contributes to the proper functioning of the economy.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 5
