Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz:  The  rise  and  effectiveness  of  corporate  governance  in  the 
Islamic financial services industry 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 2nd Islamic Financial 
Services Board (IFSB) Summit, Doha, 24 May 2005. 
 to 
for 
Islamic 
framework 
institutions  and 
"The  hallmark  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  lies  in  the  high  ethical  values  that  underpins  the 
governance and business operations of Islamic finance. As the pace of development of the industry 
accelerates and as the environment becomes increasingly more complex and challenging, securing a 
robust  and  resilient  financial  system  has  increased  the  demands  for  having  a  solid  governance 
structure for the Islamic financial institutions. The challenge is essentially to evolve strategies that will 
promote  the  adoption  of  strong  and  effective  corporate  governance  practices  that  also  facilitates 
innovation  and  that  supports  business  operations.  Central  to  this  common  vision  is  to  create  a 
comprehensive  governance 
formulate  appropriate 
implementation  strategies  that  will  be  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  dynamic  industry  while 
promoting confidence and stability in the Islamic financial system." 
It is my honour to be invited to speak before this distinguished audience at this summit organised by 
the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  on  the  rise  and  effectiveness  of  corporate  governance  in  the 
Islamic financial services industry. 
While the adoption of governance best practices is not an end in itself, it is an important supporting 
infrastructure  that  is  vital  to  achieving  high  performance  and  the  continued  advancement  of  the 
industry.  Strengthening  the  robustness  of  the  corporate  governance  framework  and  practices  has 
become  even  more  important  in  today's  environment  of  greater  uncertainty  and  heightened  risks. 
Indeed, it is timely that efforts are focused to strengthen the corporate governance in Islamic financial 
institutions given the wider range of contracts entered into by the Islamic financial institutions and their 
customers that inherent in Islamic finance. In particular, the efforts should include the formation of an 
appropriate governance structure of the institution and the requirement for full disclosure.  
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  five  key  areas  important  for  securing  an  enhanced  governance 
framework for the Islamic financial institutions that takes into account the role and responsibilities of 
the shareholders. My presentation will also touch on the experience and approach that Malaysia has 
adopted to secure a robust governance framework for the Islamic financial institutions.  
Firstly,  the  task  is  to  ensure  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  corporate  governance 
strategy  should  not  impose  a  regulatory  burden  to  the  business  objectives  and  the  growth 
potential. 
In  designing  and  implementing  corporate  governance  standards  and  core  principles  for  Islamic 
financial institutions, the challenge is to formulate a framework that does not only take into account the 
unique  characteristics  peculiar  to  Islamic  financial  business,  but  that  fosters  innovation  and 
competition thereby support the growth potential of the industry. Essentially, the design and strategies 
needs  to  secure  the  twin  objectives  of  achieving  continuous  business  performance  and  robust 
corporate accountability.  
As the level of innovation increases in a more liberalised and deregulated environment, a governance 
framework that is more principle-based rather than rule-based becomes relevant. The approach would 
thus  need  to  develop  the  broad  but  clear  guidance,  standards  and  core  principles  rather  than 
prescriptive rules and regulations. The process would involve identifying the risks and ensuring that 
the institutions have the capacity and mechanisms of internal controls and the systems to undertake 
and manage the recognized risks.  
While good governance is indispensable, the relevant principles needs to be applied in a manner that 
is in harmony with the nature of the different transactions peculiar to Islamic finance. In particular, the 
framework should endeavour to engender the support of all the stakeholders of the Islamic financial 
institutions. This entails having in place the systems that will ensure that the obligations to all the major 
stakeholders  -  the  customers,  depositors,  investors,  entrepreneurs,  owners  and  the  community  at 
large  -  are  met  with  integrity  and  with  adherence  to  the  rules  and  regulations.  Indeed,  in  an 
environment  where  businesses  needs  to  balance  between  the  interests  of  the  various stakeholders 
which  at  times  could  be  conflicting,  an  appropriate  governance  framework  for  active  checks  and 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
balances becomes particularly important. While the roles of shareholders and board of directors are 
certainly critical, it should not diminish the roles of the other stakeholders.  
Secondly, there must be robust corporate governance framework at the institution level with 
the shareholders and the board as key players. 
At the institution level, corporate governance is essentially about how the company is managed and 
controlled and the manner to ensure proper accountability for those in-charge. Central to the corporate 
governance  framework  is  thus  to  ensure  integrity,  strong  internal  controls  and  risk  management 
practices.  In  this  connection,  the  shareholders'  greatest  influence  is  in  the  appointment  of  both  the 
independent and non-independent directors; to ensure the selection of those who are able to set clear 
direction and drive for effective corporate governance at the institutional level. The shareholders have 
a role to ensure that the board comprises a good mix of competent persons with relevant experience 
to provide effective representation.  
The board of directors must be able to protect the long-term objectives of the institution and provide 
leadership for good governance by setting a clear corporate governance framework for the institution, 
and effectively monitoring its implementation. The institutional broad governance framework will serve 
as the focal point of reference for management and staff in relation to corporate governance. It is also 
a  manifestation  of  the  institution's  vision  and  strategy  to  achieve  good  governance  whereby 
shareholders  and  other  outside  stakeholders  are  able  to  evaluate  the  level  of  commitment  of  the 
institution towards enhancing good governance. 
Islam  strongly  advocates  all  forms  of  positive  governance.  The  design  of  the  framework  however, 
should  not  be  made  in  isolation  of  the  universal  values  expounded  in  the  existing  governance 
principles and standards that are consistent with Islamic principles. This framework must set out the 
functions of each component and level of governance in a manner to ensure accountability of each 
respective jurisdiction with appropriate division of powers to avoid possible conflict of interests. In this 
context, consideration may be given to four main ingredients important to the governance framework 
for Islamic financial institutions. 
(i) 
Firstly, to ensure that the guidance, standards and core principles are able to translate the 
values consistent with the injunctions of Shariah. The core values of honesty and integrity 
are key ingredients of the governance framework of the Islamic financial transactions with 
heavy  reliance  on  the  trust  relationship.  The  significance  of  these  core  values  is  clearly 
highlighted in the Qur'an, Sunnah and the "fiqh". The banking institutions, as user of public 
funds must act in good faith for the benefit of all stakeholders. If the relationship between the 
financier  and  entrepreneur  can  be  built  on  honesty,  efficiency  and  equity,  a  durable 
equilibrium can be established that will serve the mutual interest of both parties.  
Secondly,  the  governance  framework  needs  to  take  into  account  the  multi-faceted  role 
performed by the Islamic financial institutions and treat all the relevant stakeholders fairly, 
including minority shareholders and the investment account holders. It is an embodiment of 
the concept of justice in Islam as stated in Qur'an, which is nearest to righteousness (taqwa) 
in the Islamic faith.  
Thirdly,  that  the  Shariah  governance  framework  must  be  put  in  place  as  a  additional 
dimension and a distinct feature in the governance structure of Islamic financial institutions. 
This  is  crucial  in  instilling  public  confidence  on  the  purity  of  the  operations  of  the  Islamic 
financial institutions. The Shariah board or committee therefore represents another stratum 
in the governance structure. The Shariah Committee serves to ensure that the management 
of the Islamic banking institutions are in compliance with Islamic principles.  
Fourthly, the framework should promote greater transparency and higher level of disclosure 
to address information asymmetry of the different stakeholders in the different structures of 
the  transactions  in  Islamic  finance  thereby  facilitating  the  effective  functioning  of  market 
discipline.  This  is  critical  for  the  investment  account  holders  who  are  in  the  position  to 
influence  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  if  they  were  given  adequate  information  on  the 
investment  strategy  and  results,  as  well  as  the  applicable  rate  of  return.  The  disclosure 
would  also  allow  the  market  to  assign appropriate  risk premiums  to  respective  companies 
and thereby enforce effective market discipline.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  third  key  area  is  to  strengthen  existing  mechanisms  to  translate  Islamic  values  into 
business operations and governance. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
With  the  broad  governance  framework  in  place,  the  Islamic  financial  institution  needs  to  have 
adequate  mechanisms  for  effective  implementation  of  the  framework.  This  includes  the  systems  of 
internal  controls,  internal  and  external  audit,  risk  management,  transparency  and  disclosure,  and  a 
strong compliance culture. It also includes having in place the nominating and remuneration committee 
to ensure the right persons for the job are appointed and that the reward or penalty are commensurate 
with  the  accountability  and  performance.  Indeed  the  prophet  refers  to  this  in  the  words,  "whoever 
employs  a  person  out  of  favouritism  and  there  is  someone  who  is  better  than  that  person,  he  has 
committed breach of trust with God, His prophet and all Muslims".  
The risk management committee needs to review the risks peculiar to Islamic finance and consider the 
means by which they should be managed. Expertise needs to be developed to address the audit for 
the Shariah risk. The audit committee therefore needs to examine not only the risks associated with 
banking operations, but also complementing the Shariah Committee in ensuring full compliance with 
the  Shariah  principles.  The  role  of  the  Shariah  committee  may  also  be  expanded  beyond  product 
approval, in particular to strengthen the governance of the Islamic financial institutions by ensuring for 
each new product, proper disclosure is made and the rights of the customers and the responsibilities 
of the Islamic banking institutions are clearly provided.  
Fourthly,  the  role  of  the  regulator  in  strengthening  the  standards  and  best  practices  in 
inculcating good governance. 
The government and regulator has an important role in putting in place an enabling environment that 
supports the development of a strong governance structure and that provides for enforcement. 
In  Malaysia,  corporate  governance  reform  is  a  priority  agenda.  Malaysia  has  adopted  a  hybrid 
approach towards governance reform that includes legal reform, self-regulation as well as measures to 
encourage  market-based  regulation.  The  approach  balances  between  prudential  regulation,  market 
discipline and shareholders surveillance. Malaysia has proceeded on the basis that there are aspects 
of  corporate  governance  where  statutory  regulation  is  effective  and  necessary  and  in  others  where 
self-regulation is more appropriate. Building the necessary legal and institutional framework to support 
the development of good corporate governance practices within the capital and financial markets is 
therefore an important part of the process. 
Among the various measures initiated includes the law that provides the statutory framework to protect 
the  interest  of  the  depositors,  customers  and  shareholders  as  well  as  the  prudential  framework  to 
promote  financial  stability.  This  includes  the  legal  provisions  prescribing  the  maximum  permissible 
shareholding limit to avoid concentration of ownership. There is also a restriction on extension of credit 
to related parties to avoid conflict of interest, as well as a limit on the lending to single customer. Other 
measures include the issuance of specific guidelines on the role and responsibilities of directors and 
the  creation  of  various  board  committees.  Greater  emphasis  is  also  accorded  to  the  role  of 
independent  directors,  minimum  qualifications  of  such  directors  and  their  compensation  to  ensure 
sufficient independence to act in the best interest of the institution.  
In the area of Shariah governance, guidelines have been issued on the governance structure of the 
Shariah  Committee  in  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  guidelines  define  the  role  and 
responsibilities of the Shariah Committee, which extends beyond endorsement of Shariah-compliant 
products  to  also  ensure  that  the  operations  of  the  Islamic  banking  institution  complies with  Shariah 
requirements at all times. The guidelines also prescribe the fit and proper criteria for members of the 
committee, and places emphasis on the independence of the committee to report directly to the Board 
and  to  accord  to  the  Board  the  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  Shariah  Committee  can  effectively 
discharge  its  duties.  In  addition,  members  of  the  Shariah  Committee  may  not  sit  on  the  Shariah 
Committee  of  other  Islamic  banking  institutions  as  well  as  on  the  Shariah  Advisory  Council  of  the 
Central Bank so as to preserve the confidentiality and avoid potential conflict of interests. 
To promote greater financial transparency and disclosure and to safeguard the interests of investment 
depositors, guidelines have also been issued on the model financial statement of the Islamic banks. In 
this connection, Islamic banking institutions are required to provide disclosure of information, among 
others, on the segregation of income and expenses from the categories of instruments including the 
investment  of  unrestricted  investment  deposits,  restricted  investment  deposits  and  investment  of 
shareholder's funds. Islamic banking institutions are also required to disclose information on the profit 
equalization reserves. 
In  addition  to  disclosure  requirements  in  the  financial  statement,  a  standard  framework  for  the 
calculation of the rate of return for Islamic banking operations has been introduced. The framework 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
requires  Islamic  banks  to  clearly  segregate  the  income  and  expenses  of  the  Islamic  banking 
operations based on the management of funds, on a restricted and unrestricted basis. The framework 
provides  the  basis  for  calculation  of  dividends  to  the  investment  depositors  to  reflect  the  average 
actual net rate of return of each deposit based on their respective tenures. An accurate calculation of 
dividends is essential to ensure that the investment depositors receive their fair share of investment 
returns. In addition, the framework allows the provision of profit under the profit equalization reserve 
mechanism for the purpose of smoothing the fluctuations in the rate of profit.  
Finally, amplifying the role of other standard setting bodies. 
As Islamic finance expands, there are common areas where collective efforts by the Islamic financial 
industry,  including  the  domestic  and  international  standard  setting  bodies  can  bring  benefits  to  the 
overall financial system. 
In this regard, bankers associations have an important role in spearheading initiatives to promote high 
standards  of  ethical  code  of  market  conduct  to  meet  consumers'  rising  expectations  and  demands. 
Bankers  associations  can  play  an  important  complementary  role  to  the  efforts  of  the  regulatory 
authorities' in promoting a more progressive, dynamic and resilient banking system. For the Islamic 
financial services industry, there are several areas of common interest that the industry associations 
can contribute to strengthen corporate governance  
In  the  international  scene,  AAOIFI  has  made  contributions  towards  improved  quality  of  financial 
statements and reporting methodology of the Islamic institutions via issuing accounting and auditing 
standards  for  Islamic  financial  institutions.  Standards  and  code  of  ethics  have  also  been  issued  to 
govern the conduct of the accountant and auditors of the Islamic institutions. Undoubtedly, the efforts 
by  AAOIFI  has  assisted  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  transparency  and  corporate  governance  of  the 
Islamic financial institutions in the international environment. 
Needless to say that the role of Islamic Financial Services Board is crucial in enhancing the level of 
transparency  and  quality  of  corporate  governance  of  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  through  the  promulgation  of  the  international  prudential  standards  on 
corporate  governance  that  are  consistent  with  Shariah  principles  will  have  a  prominent  role  in 
promoting prudent, transparent and robust development of Islamic financial services.  
Conclusion 
Good  governance  is,  essentially  participatory,  transparent  and  accountable.  These  elements  are 
embedded in Islam and therefore an integral part of the governance framework of the Islamic financial 
institutions.  Consequentially,  effective  Islamic  governance  framework  requires  involvement  of  all 
stakeholders  -  the  government,  the  industry  associations,  the  shareholders,  the  directors,  the 
management and other persons relevant to the business such as auditors, accountants, lawyers and 
Shariah advisors - to responsibly complement each other in providing checks and balances, and in 
strengthening  the  corporate  governance  practices.  At  the  international  level,  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board and other standard setting bodies have an important role to harmonise the practices 
and complete the framework by setting the broad governance framework for international application. 
It  is  with  this  integrated  and  cumulative  approach,  insyaAllah,  that  strong  and  effective  corporate 
governance framework will be successfully implemented. Each one of us regardless of our position, as 
regulators or bankers, is accountable. Let me conclude with reference to the saying of the Prophet, 
"Each one of you is a guardian, and each guardian is accountable to everything under his care".  
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
