Alan Greenspan: The tax system 
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  President’s  Advisory  Panel  on  Federal  Tax  Reform,  Washington,  DC, 
3 March 2005.  
 The  President  has  assembled  a  very  able  panel  to  address  an  issue  that  is  both  important  and 
exceptionally challenging.  
The U.S. economy is the world's most dynamic and flexible, and the federal government's system for 
raising revenue must not hinder the processes generating that economic success. However, since the 
exemplary  1986  reform,  the  tax  code  has  drifted  back  to  be  overly  complicated  and  burdened  by 
higher marginal rates and by many special provisions that have undesirably narrowed the tax base. 
Changes since the 1986 act have been largely incremental without the appropriate all-encompassing 
context that broad reform brings to the table. It is perhaps inevitable that, every couple of decades, 
drift needs to be addressed and reversed. 
I believe some useful lessons can be learned by examining earlier systematic reforms of the tax code, 
such as those of 1954, 1969, and 1986. Among those reforms, the 1986 effort is widely regarded as 
having been the most successful of the post-war era. This success was achieved, in large measure, I 
believe, because the reform hewed to an explicit set of principles. I am not suggesting that today's 
reform should follow the specifics of the 1986 reform. Both the economic and fiscal conditions, as well 
as the existing state of the tax system, have changed in important ways since that time, and some 
aspects of the framework that worked well in 1986 may be inappropriate today. Nevertheless, I believe 
that a number of the principles underlying that reform are still applicable. 
A defining feature of the 1986 reform was the broadening of the tax base and the lowering of tax rates, 
and it is widely believed that these changes enhanced economic efficiency. High tax rates (whether 
the base is income or consumption) exacerbate the distortions that taxes invariably create. Moreover, 
distortions arise when similar activities are subject to different tax treatments. Such distortions reduce 
economic efficiency as households and businesses respond to the tax code rather than to underlying 
economic fundamentals. Lowering tax rates by broadening the tax base generally will reduce the costs 
of such distortions, which are approximately proportional to the square of the tax rate. Over the years, 
economists  have  disagreed  about  the  size  of  the  efficiency  gains  that  might  be  achieved  from  a 
broader base and lower rates, but there can be little doubt regarding their positive effect. 
The 1986 reform also strove to achieve a measure of comity in the tax code, by treating taxpayers in 
similar  circumstances  in  a  roughly  comparable  manner  and  by  maintaining  progressivity  in  the  tax 
system.  In  addition,  the  1986  reform  broadly  applied  the  constraints  of  revenue  and  distributional 
neutrality,  which  appear  to  have  facilitated  bipartisan  coalition  building.  Setting  rough  distributional 
neutrality as a rule of the game limited the number of losers created and likely made sacrifices in the 
name of efficiency easier for different groups of taxpayers who knew that losses would be relatively 
limited. 
Of  course,  public  views  about  the  fairness  of  proposed  changes  to  the  tax  code  will  surely  play  a 
significant role in the current debate, and these views will be driven by perceptions of the fairness of 
the  current  tax  system.  The  standards  by  which  the  public  judges  fairness  are  deeply  rooted  in 
judgments of whether, and which, incomes are the consequence of individual effort. The contours of 
economic policy since the nation's founding have closely followed changing standards of fairness over 
time. 
Simplification  of  an  overly  complex  structure  was  another  important  accomplishment  of  the  1986 
reform.  Unfortunately,  tax  code  drift  since  1986  has  evolved  to  a  point  where  taxpayers  are  again 
confronted with great complexity. Indeed, an individual taxpayer may have difficulty even knowing his 
or  her  marginal  tax  rate  because  of  the  overlapping  web  of  deductions  and  exemptions  and  the 
provisions  that  attempt  to  limit  those  deductions  and  exemptions.  And  many  taxpayers  are  now 
required  to  compute  their  liability  under  two  systems  -  the  regular  income  tax  and  the  alternative 
minimum tax. Such challenges also affect lower-income households, who face the complexities of the 
Earned Income Tax Credit. A simpler tax code would reduce the considerable resources devoted to 
BIS Review 14/2005 
 1
complying  with  current  tax  laws,  and  the  freed-up  resources  could  be  used  for  more  productive 
purposes. Thus, greater simplicity would, in and of itself, engender a better use of resources. 
A  principle  that  I  believe  is  important  now  -  but  appears  not  to  have  weighed  so  heavily  on  those 
involved in the earlier reforms - is predictability in the tax code. By this I mean creating a tax system in 
which  households  and  businesses  can  look  into  the  future  and  have  some  reasonable  degree  of 
certainty  about  the  future tax  implications  of decisions  made  today.  Just as price  stability  facilitates 
economic decisionmaking by limiting the potential distortions from unanticipated changes in the price 
level,  some  semblance  of  predictability  in  the  tax  code  also  would  facilitate  better  forward-looking 
economic decisionmaking by households and businesses. 
Given the expertise on this panel and the ultimate responsibility of the Congress and the President for 
the tax system, I would not presume to suggest the best specific path for reforming the tax system. 
However, past experience suggests that as the panel's work gets under way, one of the first decisions 
that you will confront is the choice of tax base; possibilities include a comprehensive income tax, a 
consumption tax, or some combination of the two, as is done in many other countries. As you know, 
many  economists  believe  that  a  consumption  tax  would  be  best  from  the  perspective  of  promoting 
economic  growth  -  particularly  if  one  were  designing  a  tax  system  from  scratch  -  because  a 
consumption tax is likely to encourage saving and capital formation. However, getting from the current 
tax system to a consumption tax raises a challenging set of transition issues. 
In 1986, tax reformers considered a consumption tax base and, despite the arguments in favor of such 
a system, they decided to enhance the comprehensiveness of the income tax system then in place. 
Circumstances  are  different  today,  and  the  right  choice  will  require  assessing  anew  the  tradeoffs 
between complexity, fairness, and economic growth. 
The  choice  of  the  tax  base  and  other  provisions  of  the  code  must  also  be  taken  in  light  of  coming 
demographic changes. I believe that, as the baby boom generation begins to retire in a few years, it 
will  become  increasingly  important  for  the  nation  to  boost  resources  available  in  the  future  through 
greater national saving and enhanced incentives for participation in the labor force. The tax system 
has the potential to contribute importantly to those goals, and, at a minimum, tax reform should not 
hinder the achievement of those objectives. 
Finally, fundamental, thoroughgoing tax reform will require tradeoffs among competing objectives and 
will create both winners and losers. In the past, these difficult choices were facilitated by bipartisan 
cooperation.  In  the  1954  reform,  congressional  support  was  bipartisan,  and  President  Eisenhower 
signed  the  legislation.  In  the  1969  reform,  efforts  were  started  under  President  Johnson  but  were 
completed  during  the  Nixon  Administration.  Similarly,  in  1986,  President  Reagan  worked  with 
Democratic congressional leaders to see reform through. 
I  am  confident  that  this  panel  can  lay  the  groundwork  for  another  historic  reform  and  can  get  this 
process started off on the right foot. Thank you for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you 
today. I look forward to the results of your deliberations. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2005
