Sir K Dwight Venner: Is the OECS economic union a viable option for St Kitts 
and Nevis in the context of globalisation and the advent of the CSME? 
Text of the 3rd lecture in the Public Education Programme by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the University of the West Indies, St Kitts, 10 March 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
We meet in what could only be described as a defining moment for St Kitts and Nevis and the rest of 
the  OECS  in  particular,  and  the  CARICOM  in  general,  as  we  seek  to  respond  to  the  fundamental 
changes  which  are  taking  place  in  the  international  system  on  one  hand,  and  the  domestic 
circumstances which confront us on the other. 
It is of vital importance that all members of our community, the government, the private sector, trade 
unions, civil society and the public at large understand the changes that are occurring, the choices we 
have to make, and the consequences of these choices. This would involve the carrying out of research 
and  the  gathering  of  information  on  these  issues  and  the  wide  dissemination  of  and  discussion  on 
them. 
Each sector and each country will have to define and elaborate on their general and specific interests, 
and be prepared to enter into discussions and negotiations with other parties to come up with common 
compromise, and strategic positions which will lead to progress for all. 
To  get  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  situation  we  must  start,  so  to  speak,  from  where  we  sit  by 
examining  our  particular  and,  if  you  like,  peculiar  situation  in  the  most  objective  way  possible.  This 
means  that  we  must  set up  an  objective  model  devoid  of  party  politics,  subjective  impressions  and 
historical prejudices. 
We must then carefully examine the regional and international environment in which we exist. Finally, 
we must very carefully and objectively examine the options we have both domestically and between 
various kinds of external associations. 
St  Kitts  and  Nevis  is  probably  one  of  the  smaller  states  in  the  international  community  with  a 
population of 41,830, and a physical size of 104 square miles. It has a Gross Domestic Product of 
EC$984.4 m and per capita income of EC$17,577. The balance of trade shows exports of EC$161.5 
m and imports of EC$383.4 m, giving rise to a deficit of EC$221.9 m. This is ameliorated somewhat by 
the inflow of tariff receipts, direct foreign investment and remittances. 
For us in the OECS, it is always interesting to compare our basic statistics among ourselves, and with 
other small, medium-sized and large countries. Another interesting factor has been the comparison of 
our basic resource endowments with our expectations. This poses a particular dilemma for us in the 
Caribbean because of our system of liberal democracy and our geographical position in the Western 
Hemisphere. Being in the Western Hemisphere, our choice of a standard of living is more aligned with 
that of North America and not Sub-Saharan Africa or Bangladesh. Our liberal democratic systems lead 
to governments having to make very generous gestures to remain in power, as opposition parties raise 
the bar with new promises in order to unseat them. 
A  certain  dynamic  is  then  unleashed  which  could  and  has  in  many  cases  led  to  a  certain  level  of 
instability  in  the  public  finances  and  the  economy.  I  now  speak  in  a  generic  way  about  all  OECS 
economies of which St Kitts and Nevis is very representative. The structural issues of small size lead 
to a concentration of resource use, high unit cost and diseconomies of scale, high levels of risk and 
low  negotiating  capabilities  with  third  parties or  groups  of countries.  The  point  can  be  illustrated  by 
using a number of very real examples. However, one which is most revealing, is an analysis of the 
population in relation to the capacity to supply critical services for itself. If you take the total population 
and subtract all of those who are under seventeen (17) and over (60) you will arrive at the potential 
labour force. Further subtractions can be made for the sick and those who are incarcerated. There is 
usually  a  certain  level  of  unemployment  and  in  some  cases  substantial  underemployment.  Having 
arrived at a proxy for the active labour force, one then has to evaluate the education and skill levels of 
that group. 
The numbers we arrive at from a population total of 42,000 in St Kitts and Nevis and even 150,000, as 
is the case in St Lucia is very small. This labour force is responsible for the total output of the country. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
The country is able to enjoy a certain lifestyle based on what it produces. The conclusion from this 
analysis  is  that  the  smaller  the  population,  the  more  highly  skilled  it  needs  to  be,  as  well  as 
technologically advanced in order to have very high levels of output. 
Since the domestic market is so small, then most output has to be exported. The structure of our trade 
patterns  ends  up  being  extremely  skewed  with  exports  being  highly  concentrated  in  one  or  two 
sectors, and imports being very widely spread over a very large range of consumption, intermediate 
and  capital  goods.  Being  export  competitive,  therefore,  is  vital  to  the  existence  of  such  small 
economies.  Cost  factors,  however,  loom  large  because  of  economies  of  scale  and  scope.  The  tax 
base  of  small  countries  is  by  definition  small,  and  the  citizens  of  small  countries  have  to  pay,  on 
average,  higher  taxes  than  larger  countries,  which  can  spread  the  taxes  over  a  larger  number  of 
people. The level of efficiency in the use of resources in small countries must therefore be higher in 
small  countries  in  order  for  their  productive  sectors  to  be  competitive.  The  cost  of  infrastructure  is 
reflected in higher debt servicing and therefore higher taxes. If one assumes that the private sector 
naturally  has  to  carry  higher  tax  burdens  than  individual  citizens,  then  this  is  then  reflected  in  their 
costs and in their competitiveness. 
This brings me to one of the two fundamental points I would like to make on this occasion. It is simply 
this, the government can only provide services which are paid for by its citizens, that is, the tax payers. 
When the government provides a service it can proceed along several paths. Firstly, it can charge the 
full cost recovery, that is if the service cost $40 to provide, then that will be the fee. Secondly, it can 
outsource the service to be provided by a private firm. In this case, the full fee will also have to be paid 
unless  the  government  provides  a  subsidy.  Thirdly,  the  government  can  provide  the  service  free  of 
charge. 
In the cases of the subsidy and no charge, the question can then be asked, who pays? The simple 
answer to that is, the taxpayer. There is no free lunch. The dynamics of this issue resides in the fact 
that whenever the public service receives an increase in salaries, the cost of the service increases. 
A corresponding factor, of course, is the cost effective delivery of this service in order to support the 
competitiveness of the economy. Governments have found themselves by default, and because of the 
pressures of the multiparty competitive political system, taking on much more than they can afford to. 
This is even more possible given the vulnerability of our economies to natural disaster, hurricanes, and 
income volatility. Physical and social safety nets are very costly as the insurance cost when spread 
over  small  populations  is  very  high.  This  springs  from  two  factors.  Firstly,  in  a  very  small  physical 
space any external shock will affect the whole system. Hurricanes will devastate the whole island and 
economic activities are so concentrated that they will be completely destroyed. Also, in a mono-crop or 
mono-activity  economy,  any  change  in  external  arrangements  such  as  the  removal  of  trade 
preferences, as in the case of sugar and bananas will have a significant impact. 
The  picture  we  have  portrayed  of  a  small  country,  St  Kitts  and  Nevis,  if  you  like,  is  one  of  great 
vulnerability  to  outside  shocks,  leading  to  a  concentration  of  economic  activities,  high  unit  costs  of 
operation, and a population dynamic which makes it difficult to provide management for both the public 
and private sectors, and makes the provision of government services a very high-cost venture. 
What are the external circumstances faced by St Kitts and Nevis and the other small countries in the 
OECS. The general name for these circumstances is Globalisation. Globalisation is not a particularly 
new phenomena as certainly, in the late 19th century and up until the First World War, there was a 
significant  amount  of  movement  of  not  only  goods  and  capital  but  also  people  throughout  the 
international system. This came to an abrupt halt in 1913 and this movement of goods and capital did 
not  resume  until  the  1950s.  Major  technological  changes  in  means  of  communication  such  as 
containerisation and the use of large ships and aircrafts to transport both goods and passengers, and 
the increasing use of computers and telecommunications to transmit both information and specifically 
finance across countries, led to a fundamental change in the nature of globalisation. 
The  flow  of  finance  across  borders  has  been  simply  stupendous.  In  the  area  of  foreign  exchange 
trading, this currently amounts to over a trillion and a half dollars a day. The speed and the magnitude 
of  these  and  other  flows  of  commercial  bank  lendings,  portfolio  purchases,  and  direct  foreign 
investment have increased and improved the allocation of resources on a global basis. However, there 
has been a very significant downside from increased volatility and the many financial crises, in both 
developed and emerging markets. 
There has been a very significant lessening of barriers to trade in goods through the reduction and 
removal  of  both  tariffs  and  quotas.  The  rise  of  the  multinational  corporation  and  the  increasing 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
concentration of production through mergers and acquisitions in such critical sectors as banking and 
finance, defense and aerospace, oil, mineral production, telecommunications and commodities, such 
as forestry, is now a feature of the global economy. 
The spread of brands such as Coca Cola, Toyota, McDonalds, Sony, and Microsoft, all over the globe, 
in a very sublime way, is how much of the world sees globalisation, that is, from the consumers point 
of view. The wherewithal to buy these goods at locations all over the world is depicted by American 
Express, Visa and Mastercard. The vehicle for delivering goods quickly are represented by FEDEX 
and DHL. 
The  production  side  is  represented  by  the  increasing  importance  of  production  and  supply  chains 
which farm out the production of various components of a commodity to locations which produce at 
lowest cost and highest quality. The NIKE brand, for example, has pioneered this kind of operation. 
Given  the  increasing  openness  and  interdependence  of  the  global  economy,  there  is  a  constant 
striving  for  improved  efficiency,  competitiveness  and  market  share  by  the  formation  of  larger  and 
larger entities at the firm or enterprise level, at particular locations in countries, and through groupings 
of countries. 
With respect to firms and enterprises, a large number of firms, in terms of their gross sales, are larger 
than individual countries when comparison is make with the GDP of those countries. In many countries 
there  are  large  conurbations  where  production  is  concentrated.  Such  locations  are  found  in  Tokyo, 
Sao Paulo, New York City, Mexico City, Shanghai, Bombay, Los Angeles, Buenos Aires, Seoul and 
Rio de Janeiro. 
With respect to countries, there is an increasing tendency for finance capital to move to large countries 
or groupings of countries. By way of size, the largest economies in the world are the United States, 
Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, France and China. China with its population of one billion and 
an economy which is growing between 9 and 10 per cent per annum is now drawing both finance and 
resources  from  the rest  of  the world at  such  a  rate that  it  is  having  a  marked  impact  on  the  global 
economy. 
As trade regimes become more liberalised in both goods and services, competition between firms and 
countries  will  increase.  This  is  already  being  responded  to  by  cross-border  alliances  between  firms 
and an increasing number of bilateral and regional trading arrangements between countries. 
The European Union is the premier regional arrangement which now comprises twenty-five countries 
and has endeavoured, through integration, to maintain its bargaining power in trade matters in relation 
to the USA. In Asia, there are a number of cross country trade arrangements some of which involve 
only regional countries, and others which have the USA and other Pacific nations as participants. In 
Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  and  in  Africa,  regional  groupings  are  seen  as  one  strategy  of 
managing the process of globalisation. 
There are specific issues, which affect our countries in this new era. They are – 
• 
The erosion of trade preferences through the implementation of new trade regimes, WTO, 
FTAA, EFA, CSME; 
The adoption of new standards and codes adapted by international institutions which have 
had an effect on our embryonic off-shore financial sector; 
The impact of terrorism which could have an effect on our main foreign exchange earner, 
tourism; 
The  impact  on  the  price  of  oil  of  the  demands  by  China  and  India,  and  the  turmoil  in  the 
Middle East; 
The  performance  of  the  US  and  international  economies,  and  their  impact  on  the  local 
economy; 
The impact of high interest rates and currency movements of the US dollar vis-à-vis other 
major currencies on our domestic economies. 
     In the light of these global circumstances, both general and specific, what are the options facing St 
Kitts and Nevis and by extension the other OECS countries in this defining movement. There are five 
options or choices facing us – 
• 
To operate in splendid isolation; 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
 To open up completely to the international economy; 
To be absorbed into a large hemispheric country; 
To raise the level of participation in the OECS to that of a full economic union with all that 
this option implies in terms of shared sovereignty; 
To be an integral part of the CSME as a single unit. 
• 
These  options  include  two  extreme  and  polar  positions,  that  is,  splendid  isolation  and  complete 
openness. The option of being absorbed into a large hemispheric country, such as, the United States, 
Canada or Venezuela may or may not be a practical option given the preferences which both parties 
have. The two regional choices can be complementary depending on the choice of sequence. The first 
option  which  is  put  forward  to  indicate  an  extreme  choice  presumes  that  St  Kitts  and  Nevis  would 
match  its  resources  with  its  wants  and  not  depend  on  the  rest  of  the  world  for  finance,  goods  or 
services. The illustrations we presented, particularly with respect to exports and imports would indicate 
that this is not a viable option. 
The other polar extreme complete openness would or could result in the flooding of the St Kitts and 
Nevis market by goods, services and labour from outside in a way that would apply an extreme shock 
to the polity, the economy and the society. While globalisation would tend to lead in that direction, it is 
clear  that  even  major  economies  like  the  USA  which  are  much  more  capable  of  withstanding  such 
shocks, are not exactly rushing to establish such an open regime. 
In the case of absorption into a large country – USA, Canada or Venezuela – even if the population of 
St Kitts and Nevis were in full support of this option, the countries listed, I suspect, would have serious 
misgivings in the context of the geopolitical repercussions of such an arrangement. 
We  next  come  to  the  CSME  which  involves  the  removal  of  substantial  restrictions  between  the 
countries  of  the  CARICOM  in  the  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  labour  across  regional 
borders. The critical question then relates to St Kitts and Nevis’ participation either as a single entity or 
a member of a consolidated OECS Economic Union bloc. 
Let  me  address  the  issue  in  this  way.  All  matters  involving  economic  exchanges  in  this  new 
dispensation,  whether  it  is  globalisation  or  the  CSME  require  economic  and  negotiating  capacity. 
Economic capacity can be defined in terms of large domestic markets, a high level of domestic output, 
and  good  economic  policies  and  management.  Negotiating  capacity  requires  a  skilled  cadre  of 
political,  public  service  and  business  actors  who  have  clearly  defined  goals  and  principles  and  are 
supported by a societal consensus on these goals and principles. 
If one puts the argument in this way, then large countries do have an advantage over smaller ones in 
terms of economic capacity with respect to large markets and potentially large domestic output. Small 
countries may redress some of this disadvantage by having good economic policies and management 
practices,  as  well  as  negotiating  capacity.  St  Kitts  and  Nevis  and  the  other  OECS  countries  would 
seem to be severely disadvantaged in most of these areas making their participation in the CSME and 
other arrangements such as the FTAA, a very challenging proposition, and their ability to respond to 
globalisation, a matter of grave concern. 
Again, I say, this is a defining moment for us in St Kitts and Nevis and the other members of the OECS 
as we seek to identify and define our interests first of all, and then decide on the strategies that we 
must undertake to achieve these objectives. 
With respect to the CARICOM and the CSME, the group of countries constituting the OECS is a net 
importer  of  both  goods  and  services,  and  has  to  export  both  commodities  and  services  to  third 
countries in order to acquire foreign exchange and incomes to buy such imports. Unfortunately, unlike 
the EU, there is no compensating mechanism for redistribution to support the development efforts of 
the OECS countries, and to balance the trade inequalities in the region. 
This  is  a  very  serious  problem  and  could  lead  to  much  resentment  in  the  countries  of  the  OECS, 
particularly  if  there  is  no  freedom of  movement  of  labour  to allow  for  some  sort  of  adjustment.  The 
argument which is being advanced is quite simple. The best option for St Kitts and Nevis and the other 
countries  of  the  OECS  is  to  access  the  CSME  as  a  unified  bloc  so  that  they  can  advance  their 
interests through enhanced economic and negotiating capacity. 
The associated argument is that the CSME’s success depends on the prior or parallel establishment of 
a consolidated and coherent OECS entity. Both historical and contemporary circumstances combine to 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2005
support  these  arguments.  The  fragmentation  of  the  Caribbean  region  into  separate  sovereignties 
following  the  demise  of  the  West  Indies  Federation  led  to  the  smallest  states,  the  OECS  having  to 
delay their independence and then to establish sub-regional arrangements, which were given concrete 
expression in the Treaty of Basseterre (1981). 
There has been an apparent conceptual approach in the OECS which, given their very small size, is 
characterized  by  a  very  conscious  effort  to  support  regional  initiatives.  This  is  quite  different  in  the 
larger  countries  which  always  seem  to  think  they  have  other  options.  The  Treaty  of  Basseterre 
embraces  the  ethos of  this sentiment,  and a serious reading of the  Treaty  is  very  illustrative  of  the 
intentions and means by which the countries are expected to advance the welfare of their peoples. 
The Preamble, as well as Annex A, which is the Agreement establishing the East Caribbean Common 
Market, speak volumes regarding the intent and method of implementation.  
First, the Preamble, which states clearly the affirmation to achieve economic and social development 
for their peoples as enunciated in the Agreement establishing the Eastern Caribbean Common Market. 
It offers a strategic approach to critical issues as set out in the following: 
“ … Inspired by a common determination to strengthen the links between themselves by uniting their 
efforts  and  resources  and  establishing  and  strengthening  common  institutions  which  could  serve  to 
increase their bargaining power as regards third countries or groups of countries;…” 
It  finally  expresses  a  fundamental  resolve  in  the  phrase  “  …  Determined  to  satisfy  the  legitimate 
aspirations of their peoples for development and progress; …” 
It is important to note, contrary to some misconceptions, that the OECS Treaty is not antagonistic to 
wider regional movements, and sought to incorporate them or actively solicit their cooperation. 
Article 2 (4) states “Any other States or territories in the Caribbean region may apply to become Full or 
Associate  Members  and  shall  be  admitted  as  such  by  a  unanimous  decision  of  the  Authority.  The 
nature  and  extent  of  the  rights  and  obligations  of  Associate  Members  shall  be  determined  by  the 
Authority.” 
This  clause  applies  to  any  Caribbean  state,  which  could  include  Barbados,  Trinidad  and  Tobago, 
Guyana and Jamaica. It is not a discriminatory clause. 
Let us speculate that the current OECS members decided collectively to undergo a radical adjustment 
and transformation process and achieved a 10 per cent per annum real compounded growth rate over 
the next five years, while the CSME and other regional arrangements made no progress. Would this 
dazzling growth performance influence Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago to apply for membership 
in the OECS, or to have some closer arrangement on a bilateral basis? 
This  shocking  speculation  is  made  simply  to  assert  that  there  may  be,  other  things  being  equal,  a 
potential  growth  dynamic  within  a  collective  OECS  Economic  Union,  which  could  accelerate  the 
current rate of economic growth and transformation of the individual economies. This may place the 
OECS and the rest of CARICOM in a much stronger economic position. 
The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the  ECCU  has  achieved  some  basic  economic  objectives  which  can 
provide a platform for growth and development. In the monetary sphere they have achieved a stable 
currency,  low  inflation,  and  a  safe  and  sound  banking  system.  A  programme  of  money  and  capital 
market development is now seeking to put in place institutions and markets to create a single financial 
space. 
The  issue  of  economic  union  is  now  being  addressed  and  this  will  be  a  fundamental  advancement 
when placed in conjunction with the single financial space. Economic Union is at the upper levels in 
the hierarchy of integration arrangements. The literature sets the following levels in this hierarchy: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The  OECS  countries have  virtually  free  movement of  goods,  and  virtually  free  movement of  capital 
through  the  ECSE  and  the  RGSM,  a  common  currency  and  central  bank,  which  implies  the 
A Free Trade Area where goods are not subject to restrictions between member countries; 
A Customs Union in which the members apply a common external tariff to third countries; 
A Common Market in which there is the free movement of the factors of production; 
Economic Union in which there is the coordination of economic policies; 
Full Political Union which could either be a Unitary State or a Federation. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 5
coordination  of  monetary  policy.  The  status  of  the  OECS,  therefore,  lies  somewhere  between  a 
Common Market and an Economic Union. 
The  situation,  therefore,  is  that  if  the  impediments  to  the  creation  of  the  single  financial  space  are 
removed,  and  freedom  of  movement  of  labour  is  legislated,  then  the  OECS  countries  would  have 
created  a  new  economic  entity  with  command  over  more  natural  resources,  and  having  a  larger 
collective  market  size.  Coordination  and  peer  pressure  would  result  in  better  policies,  other  things 
being  equal.  Negotiating  capacity  would  be  increased  and  the  attraction  of  both  private  capital  and 
loans on much better terms would be real possibilities. 
The concept of such a new entity would require a notion of a domain which had distinctive qualities. 
The objectives set by the OECS Heads of Government in 2002 of growth, 6 percent; unemployment of 
less than 6 per cent; poverty of less than 6 per cent; the maintenance and improvement of the Human 
Development Indices and economic transformation could be placed in the context of individual targets 
by each country. 
The economic union as an identifiable entity could then establish the range of policy instruments that 
would facilitate the achievement of these objectives. These would span the areas of monetary, fiscal, 
trade, international economic relations, income, structural, social and environmental. All these 
policies require coordination with each other in order to be effective. New political arrangements will be 
required in the economic union and single financial space for the realisation of our economic goals. 
Economic  transformation  is  the  major  objective,  and  this  will  require  at  both  the  country  and  union 
level, a convergence of policies. At both levels, an improved allocation of resources will be essential 
for increased output. 
The establishment of an Economic Union, and the creation of a single financial space create a viable 
option for St Kitts and Nevis, and the other countries of the OECS. The enlargement of the economic 
space, which adds significantly to output and domestic market size, and locks in the convergence and 
coordination  of  policies,  will  provide  a  better  platform  for  economic  transformation  than  the  current 
circumstances permit. 
The trajectory that one could see unfolding would be the consolidation of the tourism industry as the 
lead  sector  across  the  economic  union  with  multidestination  tourism  being  a  critical  element  of  the 
tourism strategy. The tourism sector would create linkages across the economic union with agriculture, 
light  manufacturing  and  handicrafts  being  the  major  beneficiaries.  Information  and  communication 
technology would be a critical element of the strategy both as a supporter of other industries and a 
dynamic sector in its own right. 
Finance will be the critical innovative sector as we proceed with our programme of money and capital 
market  development.  The  Eastern  Caribbean  Securities  Exchange  is  slated  to  be  the  cutting  edge 
instrument  for  placing  the  economic  and  currency  union  in  the  forefront  of  the  drive  for  sustained 
economic growth. It is now the de facto regional exchange with the objective being to move from the 
currency union, into the CARICOM and then into the international community. 
The Exchange is now attracting significant interest in the wider region and beyond even before the 
economic union and single financial space have been established. The prospects would, therefore, be 
quite promising when the supporting arrangements are put in place. 
The OECS Economic Union would be the most critical institution to increase the promise of the CSME. 
The  OECS  would  serve  as  the  pilot  for  successful  integration  arrangements  and  would  solve  what 
economists  refer  to  as  the  large  number  problem  in  the  CARICOM.  That  is,  fifteen  states  would 
become eight, and the new OECS bloc would be large enough to command some leverage over the 
process.  The  Trinidad  and  Tobago  manufacturing  sector  exports  60  per  cent  of  its  products  to  the 
OECS as a whole, which provides substantial employment in that country. The OECS would be in a 
position to negotiate reciprocal arrangements with Trinidad and Tobago. 
Also, in negotiating with third countries, a consolidated OECS would increase the bargaining power of 
the CARICOM, as well as its capacity to draw resources from the rest of the world. 
In conclusion, it would be fair to say that the joint and collaborative arrangements we have committed 
to, have been successful and enhanced our prospects for stability and development. The time is now 
appropriate  for  another  leap  of  faith  to  safeguard  the  future  development  of  our  countries.  OECS 
Economic Union is probably the only viable option that we have at this time, as we advance 
towards the CSME. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2005
