Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic activity in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
As we have just announced in our press release, the Swiss National Bank is leaving the target range 
for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.25-1.25%. It intends to keep the rate in the middle of the 
target range at around 0.75% for the time being. 
The  fourth  quarter  of  2004  and  the  first  quarter  of  2005  saw  a  stagnation  of  economic  activity  in 
Switzerland, with the high price of oil as well as the depreciation of the dollar in the final quarter of 
2004  acting  as  brakes.  These  factors  also  held  back  economic  activity  in  Europe,  as  had  been 
expected, thus further weakening the Swiss economy. Despite the sluggish development in the first 
quarter of 2005, the SNB still expects the economy to recover during the course of the year, with an 
increase  in  momentum  in  the  second  half.  This  notwithstanding,  the  pace  of  expansion  for  2005  is 
likely to slow further. The SNB thus projects a growth rate of around 1%, as compared with 1.5% at 
the  last  assessment.  Its  expectations  with  regard  to  inflation  in  2005  remain  unchanged  from  the 
March  assessment,  so  that  average  annual  inflation  for  the  year  is  likely  to  amount  to  1%.  On  the 
assumption  that  the  three-month  Libor  remains  unchanged  at  0.75%,  annual  inflation  is  forecast  to 
stand at 0.5% in 2006 and reach 1.4% in 2007. Inflation prospects for the medium term now look more 
positive  than  they  did  at  the  March  assessment.  A  correction  to  the  expansionary  monetary  policy 
pursued by the SNB for a long time now will be necessary if the economic outlook improves. Should 
the Swiss franc appreciate rapidly, the Swiss National Bank will respond appropriately. 
What  were  the  most  important  factors  that  led  to  our  decision  to  leave  the  three-month  Libor  rate 
unchanged? Before answering this question, I would like to briefly outline the situation we are facing. I 
will begin by presenting the economic environment, and then go on to describe the monetary situation. 
As far as economic activity is concerned, we have revised our evaluation downwards since the last 
monetary  policy  assessment.  In  the  final  quarter  of  2004,  the  Swiss  economy  slipped  slightly, 
accompanying  a  rise  in  the  price  of  oil  and  a  decline  in  the  dollar  in  the  period  from  October  to 
December. Both of these factors also had an unfavourable impact on the European economy. 
Contrary to the expectations expressed at our last monetary policy assessment, economic activity in 
Switzerland  remained  restrained  in  the  first  quarter.  Despite  a  slight  increase  in  domestic  demand, 
GDP stagnated compared with the previous quarter. This disappointing result was mainly attributable 
to  export  developments.  Companies  were  faced  with  slack  demand  and  consequently  limited  their 
volume of investment. This affected employment, and the resulting uncertain labour market situation 
had a dampening impact on private consumer spending which rose at a below-average rate. The real 
estate sector, by contrast, benefited from the continuation of favourable financing conditions. 
Oil prices rose again at the beginning of the year, continuing to act as a brake on the world economy, 
and  the  situation  remained  particularly  gloomy  in  Europe.  Given  these  developments,  it  is  most 
unlikely that the 1.5% growth for 2005 forecast in the last monetary policy assessment will be attained. 
However, signs of an improvement in the Swiss economy became evident in the first quarter of the 
year, with exports picking up in April and May. We expect this trend to be confirmed in the months to 
come, and now forecast real GDP growth of about 1% for the year 2005 as a whole. This delay in the 
recovery of the economy will have a dampening effect on price developments in the year 2006. 
Now  I  would  like  to  outline  my  assessment  of  monetary  developments,  which  remain  more  or  less 
unchanged  with  respect  to  the  assessment  presented  in  March.  The  three-month  Libor  rate  has 
remained at a low level for a long time now: it has been below one percent for almost three years, 
since July 2002. Real rates of interest for three month maturities have been negative for two years. 
Given the unusually low level of interest rates, the willingness to invest in liquid assets remains high 
and, according to our estimates, the money overhang persists. However, the moderate growth in the 
M3 monetary aggregate indicates that this situation has not changed since the last monetary policy 
assessment.  Thus,  the  monetary  analysis  shows  that  we  can  continue  pursuing  our  expansionary 
monetary policy for the time being, without incurring additional risks. 
Since the first quarter of 2003, the year-on-year growth rate for mortgage loans has exceeded 5%. 
Mortgage loans to households slowed slightly at the end of 2004, but since then their rate of growth 
has accelerated to a level higher than that recorded in recent years. Mortgage loans to companies, 
which had declined over the past five years, have also risen again since the beginning of the year. 
Prices continue to increase in the real estate market, a development to which, in our view, the low 
mortgage  rates  have  contributed.  Well  aware  that  our  monetary  policy  is  still  expansionary,  we  are 
keeping a close eye on developments in the real estate sector. 
In  view  of  the  above-mentioned  developments,  we  have  decided  to  leave  the  target  range  for  the 
three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.25-1.25%. What were the most important factors that led to this 
decision?  There  were  three  of  them.  First  of  all,  we  needed  to  downgrade  our  expectations  with 
respect to the development of the economy. However, there are no signs of any cyclical downturn and 
the economy continues to recover, even if this recovery is somewhat delayed and muted. Second, the 
lacklustre economic activity is being accompanied by an improvement in the medium-term outlook for 
inflation. This means that an increase in the Libor target range appears less urgent. Third, the level of 
uncertainty has risen. The economic outlook in Europe is more difficult to assess than it was in March. 
Although the price of oil declined in April and May, it rose again significantly in June, and high prices in 
the oil market could persist for some time to come. In addition, the decline in the level of long-term 
interest rates is not very consistent with a recovery in the economy. 
I will now briefly outline our new forecast for inflation. The graph depicts the current and the previous 
forecasts.  The  dashed  red  curve  represents  the  new  forecast,  which  covers  the  period  from  the 
second quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2008. The dash-dotted green curve shows the forecast 
presented in the last monetary policy assessment. Both forecasts are based on the assumption of a 
three-month Libor rate of 0.75%. 
The line representing the new inflation forecast begins slightly above the previous forecast, dropping 
significantly  below  it  from  next  year  onwards.  The  decline  in  inflation  rates  this  year  is  due  to  a 
stabilisation in the price of oil. The lower level of inflation next year is attributable to weaker growth in 
economic activity. In 2007, inflation will rise rapidly because of the high level of utilisation of resources 
and the high level of liquidity. This means that, should the three-month Libor rate remain unchanged at 
0.75%,  inflation  would  reach  2.4%  by  the  end  of  the  forecasting  horizon.  This  would  be  above  the 
range which the SNB equates with price stability. 
The forecast shows that the current level of interest rates cannot be maintained once the economic 
situation  normalises.  Since  monetary  policy  has  been  expansionary  for  a  long  time  now,  there  is  a 
greater  threat  of  inflation  in  the  future.  If  the  economic  outlook  continues  to  improve,  it  will  be 
necessary to make adjustments to monetary policy. 
With  our  decision  to  leave  the  three-month  Libor  unchanged,  we  are  adhering  to  our  previous 
monetary  policy  course  for  the  time  being.  We  continue  to  support  the  economy,  using  the  leeway 
available to us. This policy should guarantee longer-term price stability. As mentioned before, the SNB 
will respond appropriately if the Swiss franc appreciates rapidly, and is keeping all its options open for 
this eventuality, as it has done in the past. 
Observed inflation June 2005 
  
  
Inflation forecast on March 2005 with Libor at 0.75% and of June 2005 with Libor at 0.75% 
Inflation forecast of June 2005 (53 kb) 
