Axel A Weber: Let us face up to the risks! 
Concluding  remarks  by  Dr  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Seventh 
Bundesbank Spring Conference, Berlin, 28 May 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Delivering the concluding remarks at a conference which has had such outstanding presentations and 
participants implies a certain risk for me.  
The risk I take is considerable, in particular since the conference has more than met my expectations. 
Therefore, let me start by thanking everyone involved. 
Let’s talk about risks   
1. 
At  the  start  of  our  conference,  my  colleague  Hermann  Remsperger  cited  the  famous  words  of 
Chairman Greenspan that uncertainty is the defining characteristic of the monetary policy landscape.1
This characterization is particularly adequate that it is worth repeating. 
In the same speech, the Fed Chairman also emphasised that  
“monetary  policy  in  the  last  two  decades  has  been  operating  in  an  environment 
particularly conducive to the pursuit of price stability.” 
Indeed, the degree of price stability achieved in industrialised countries as well as in emerging markets 
seems to be unparalleled in recent history.  
Without signalling complacency, I would like to give at least some credit for that achievement to central 
banks. 
And  at  the  same  time  the  volatility  of  output  in  industrialised  countries  has  declined  noticeably.2 
However, it is unclear whether or to what extend monetary policy deserves some credit in this respect. 
Rather the case is less clear cut as it is for the recent moderation of inflation.  
Notwithstanding this qualification and against the background of declining inflation and output volatility 
we  must  address  the  question,  why  central  banks  talk  so  much  about  risk.3  Why  do  we  organize 
international conferences about macroeconomic risk and policy responses?  
Are  the risks  faced by  central  banks more severe than  those  facing other  policymakers  or  those  in 
private  business?  Or,  did  macroeconomic  risk  on  other  fields  recently  rise  and  as  a  result  entail  a 
possible poorer performance in the future?  
To my mind, there are three reasons why to emphasise risks in monetary policy: 
• 
Firstly, the uncertainties regarding the different channels of the transmission process and its 
possibly  long  and  varying  time  lags.  In  this  respect  it  is  very  important  to  understand  the 
functioning of financial markets, including how the private sector perceives risk. 
Secondly, monetary policy implies collective risks that cannot be insured. Private risk taking, 
on the other side may be hedged and does not necessarily represent a collective burden. 
And thirdly, the credibility of monetary policy requires transparency about the risks involved.4 
                                                        
1   See Greenspan, Alan (2004), Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy, remarks at the meetings of the American Economic 
Association, San Diego, California, January 3, 2004. 
2   Stock,  James  H.  und  Mark  W.  Watson  (2003),  Has  the  Business  Cycle  changed?  Evidence  and  Explanations,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas, Jackson Hole Symposium. 
3   As  the  Fed  Chairman  in  his  cited  speech  did  I  will  not  explicitly  differentiate  between  uncertainty  in  the  definition  of 
“Knightian uncercainty” and “risk”. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
I believe that markets will trust central banks more, if they openly address the risk they face and the 
uncertainty under which they operate. 
Above all, prudent policy requires being cautious and to pondering the risks ahead. As Confucius put 
it: 
“When people feel safe, danger will arise.”5
In addition, there is ample evidence that the monetary policy landscape has changed to an extent that 
warrants even more intensive research into risks although monetary policy performance has not been 
too bad over the past decade. 
The major change I should like to refer to is the increasing role of financial markets.  
On the one hand, broader and more liquid financial markets improve the ability to diversify risks and 
lead to more robust financial institutions. On the other hand, in well integrated financial markets the 
possibility of contagion and spill-over effects grows and potentially makes the financial system more 
crisis-prone. 
It  therefore  comes  as  no  surprise  that  most  of  the  papers  presented  at  this  conference  dealt  with 
issues relating to financial markets.  
Progress in macroeconomic modelling and open questions 
2. 
Macroeconomic  modelling  of  the  real  economy  -    though  far  from  perfect  –  has  made  substantial 
progress over the past few decades. 
The main reason for this may be the long history of research in an agreed paradigm using less than a 
handful of different approaches.  
For instance, as Governor Donald Kohn has pointed out last week, the basic framework for analysing 
inflation used by the Fed has remained fundamentally unchanged over the past 35 years. He said 
“That  basic  framework  is  essentially  the  expectations-augmented  Phillips  curve 
introduced by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps in the late 1960s.”6
Of course, there has been a lively debate and substantial theoretical and empirical progress leading  
from the neoclassical synthesis in the spirit of Paul A. Samuelson and John R. Hicks in the late 1960s 
to the new classical theory focusing on real business cycles and, more recently, to the new Keynesian 
framework, which put nominal rigidities and market imperfections centre stage. 
However,  since  these  debates  more  or  less  concentrated  on  the  shortcomings  of  the  original 
synthesis, it did not really fundamentally leave the old paradigm. 
The basic macroeconomic framework of inflation determination has its analogue in the prominence of 
monetary policy rules. In that context it is argued that monetary policy can roughly be tracked by so 
called “simple feedback policies” such as the “Taylor rule”. Some central banks appear to follow those 
rules.7  
Some macroeconomists even claim that solely relying on those “simple feedback policies” might be 
sufficient  if  not  superior.  The  latter  statement  draws  on  the  fact  that  such  simple  rules  entail  lower 
information requirements than complex rules. 
However, the plausible tracking of observed monetary policy by a monetary policy reaction function 
does not  imply that the monetary policy strategy is reducible to a simple rule. For instance, even if a 
                                                                                                                                                                      
4   Mervyn King emphasized that argument vividly. See King, Mervyn (2004), What Fates Impose: Facing Up To Uncercainty, 
The Eight British Academy Annual Lecture, December 1, 2004. 
5   Eigene Übersetzung von: „Gefahr entsteht, wenn der Mensch sich seiner Position sicher fühlt.“ 
6   Kohn, Donald L. (2005), Modelling Inflation: A Policymaker’s Perspective, Speech to the International Research Forum on 
Monetary Policy Conferences in Frankfurt am Main, May 20, 2005. 
7   See Bernanke, Ben S. (2004), The Logic of Monetary Policy, Speech before the National Economists Club, Washington, 
D.C., December 2, 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
central  bank  has  no  output  goal,  it  is  likely  to  react  to  variations  in  the  output  gap  as  a  possible 
determinant of future inflation. 
Moreover,  “simple  feedback  policies”  are  not  necessarily  only  backward-looking.  They  can  also 
incorporate forward-looking elements.8 Indeed, they must to some extent be forward-looking. Hence, 
forward-looking approaches or forecast-based policies are and should be relevant to central banks. 
In this context let me stress two aspects which have been discussed at this conference: Our limited 
knowledge about the expectation formation process and the problem of limited information and limited 
credibility in financial markets. 
I should like to discuss expectation formation first. The traditional assumption of rational expectation 
formation aims at bringing intellectual discipline into our thinking rather than being intended to be an 
adequate  description  of  the  real  world.  We  know  that  simplification  is  advisable  under  certain 
circumstances, but more realistic models for expectation formation may be useful in other respects.  
Several papers at this conference pay tribute to this fact. Le me just mention Monika Piazzesi's paper. 
Modifying the assumptions about the expectations formation process or introducing model uncertainty 
has  important  consequences  for  economic  policy  -  and  monetary  policy  in  particular  -  as  has  been 
highlighted several times at this conference. In this respect I should like to mention the contributions 
by Lars Hansen as well as by Lars Svensson and Noah Williams. Both, “robust control” or “distribution 
forecast targeting” methods are designed to deal with model uncertainty. 
A second, and often related topic, is our still very incomplete knowledge of how financial markets work 
and how they deal with the problem of limited information. Several papers at this conference illustrate 
the role of collateral and the problems we are confronted with if this instrument is not available. Let me 
mention as one example the paper by Larry Christiano and his co authors. This paper points out the 
fundamental role which collateral plays in an integrated world and concludes that "having collateral or 
having not" not only makes a big difference for the creditors and debtors but also for monetary policy. 
However collateral might play different roles in different financial systems. John Moore`s paper is very 
informative in this respect. It is in my view also interesting because it improves our understanding of 
the linkage between developments in the financial system and in the real economy.  
Chris  Sims  in  his  paper  on  "  rational  inattention  "  makes  another  point:  our  limited  ability  to  collect 
information may have far reaching consequences for our models. 
Modelling financial system behaviour 
3.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
Macro-modelling of financial market developments, let alone financial stability has by most measures 
less progressed than general macroeconomic modelling. 
At least four reasons for that are obvious: 
• 
Firstly, financial integration on a regional as well as on a global scale mostly followed real 
integration (trade induced financial flows).  
Secondly,  the  role  of  expectations  and  psychological  aspects  seems  to  be  much  more 
pronounced on financial markets. Neither is very easy to capture analytically or to quantify. 
Thirdly, the financial system became much more complex in a short period of time as a result 
of a number of significant structural changes. 
Finally, proper modelling of financial markets in a general equilibrium context has to confront 
the issues of incomplete markets and heterogeneous agents in a much more direct way than 
most of the traditional macro models do. 
                                                         
8   See Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galí und Mark Gertler (1998), Monetary policy rules in practice: Some international evidence, 
European Economic Review, vol. 42, issue 6, pp. 1033 – 1067; and Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galí und Mark Gertler (2000), 
Macroeconomic policy rules and macroeconomic stability: Evidence and some theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 
115, issue 4, pp. 147 - 180. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
My colleague Svein Gjedrem has put that simply: 
“The instruments have become more intricate,  
the activities more diversified and  
the risks more mobile.”9
Some of the underlying fundamental difficulties in understanding and modelling financial markets have 
been addressed by several economists at this conference. 
The fundamental change of the financial system has been the topic of the paper presented by Kiyotaki 
and Moore. They highlight the aspect of financial deepening and provide a thorough analysis. Their 
deduction  might  be  helpful  to  comprehend  the  implications  of  financial  developments  for  the  real 
economy as well as for central banking. 
Another problem is to define and measure risk. Volatility of financial market prices is a key issue in this 
respect. However, Yacine Ait-Sahalia and his co-authors alluded to the difficulties one is confronted 
with  when  trying  to  measure  risk  in  a  high-frequency  environment.  But  they  not  only  point  put  the 
difficulties, they also provide tools for overcoming some of these problems. 
Their paper about high frequency volatility estimation with dependent microstructure noise may supply 
a valuable tool for estimating volatility – a key variable for risk analysis. 
In this context it is worth mentioning an important dogma shift that has occurred in financial market 
research. Efficiency in financial markets is no longer undisputed. Recent empirical research detects 
more and more “anomalies”. John Campbell highlighted a new one: Shares of enterprises at risk of 
going  bankrupt  have  a  particular  low  return.  For  central-banks  who  are  also  involved  in  banking 
supervision  and  guaranteeing  financial  stability  it  is  important  to  devote  some  resources  to  further 
analysing this issue. 
Another well known anomaly is the so called equity premium puzzle. Narayana Kocherlakota makes a 
new  attempt  to  shed  some  more  light  on  this  issue.  His  paper  puts  incomplete  markets,  or  more 
precisely the fact that individuals are not able to ensure themselves (entirely) against idiosyncratic risk 
at the core of the argument. Other papers, using incomplete-markets, have already tried to tackle this 
puzzle. The distinguishing feature of his paper is the fact that the allocation of risk across households 
is assumed to be socially optimal. This has implications for the interpretation of high returns in equity 
markets.  
All these new findings may help us to make progress in understanding financial markets and in finding 
a better theoretical framework to discuss financial stability.  
In this context, let me briefly reflect on whether or not 
financial  stability  should  be  an  explicit  central  bank  objective  in  line  with  its  other  objectives.  The 
additional objective of financial stability is explicitly enshrined in many central bank charters. However, 
the question of how policymakers are to weigh the various objectives against each other is one that so 
far remains unsettled.10  
An undisputed case is the monetary policy reaction to financial instabilities that are significant enough 
to  cause  estimated  good  price  inflation  to  deviate  significantly  from  target.  In  this  case  no  conflict 
arises. 
There also seems to be agreement on the rapid and resolute use of monetary policy in the case of 
extreme events which could threaten financial stability.11
                                                      
9   See  Gjedem,  Svein  (2005),  The  macroprudential  approach  to  financial  stability,  Keynote  address  at  the  conference 
“Monetary Policy and Financial Stability” hosted by the Oesterrreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, May 12, 2005; published: 
BIS Review 34//2005, p. 15. 
10   See Ferguson, Roger W. (2002), Should Financial Stability Be an Explicit Central Bank Objective? Paper presented to an 
International Monetary Fund conference on Challenges to Central Banking from Globalized Financial Markets, Washington, 
D.C., September 17, 2002. 
11   See  Gjedem,  Svein  (2005),  The  macroprudential  approach  to  financial  stability,  Keynote  address  at  the  conference 
“Monetary Policy and Financial Stability” hosted by the Oesterrreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, May 12, 2005; published: 
BIS Review 34//2005, p. 19. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2005
However, other cases are conceivable. Think about evolving financial imbalances over a long period of 
time. How can and how should central banks react?  
The debate on “asset prices and monetary policy” remains open. In his dinner speech yesterday Vice 
Chairman Roger W. Ferguson discussed that issue. 
Taking this one step further, there is the question of how to react in a financial crisis. As Lawrence 
Christiano et al have demonstrated, we need to construct more realistic general equilibrium models in 
the context of financial turbulence. 
I have already referred to two key elements these models should entail: Heterogeneous agents and 
incomplete markets. Charles Godheart recently added a third aspect: 12
• 
modelling  default  properly,  which  one  might  subsume  under  the  heterogeneity  issue  with 
regard to customers differing in certain aspects.  
Let  me  just  mention  that  certain  aspects  of  all  three  characteristics  have  been  topics  at  our 
conference. 
Conclusion  
4.  
There is no contradiction between the reasonable performance of central banks in recent decades and 
the impression that they face formidable risks and uncertainties. 
However,  we  are  in  a  good  shape  to  face  up  to  them.  Our  knowledge  about  the  economy  is 
permanently increasing. Risk analysis and risk management have improved significantly. 
Additionally, a lot of work is being done to further improve our understanding. This conference may 
serve  as  a  proof  of  that.  The  fact  that  some  questions  have  been  left  unanswered  provides  an 
opportunity for another conference on this and similar topics.  
I have very much enjoyed listening and talking to you. And I would like to thank all of you. In saying 
that, I include not only those giving the papers, but also the discussants and participants, who have 
contributed to the success of the conference. 
Special  thanks  go  to  our  conference  staff  and  to  the  organisers,  Harald  Uhlig  from  Humboldt 
University, and Heinz Herrmann, from the Bundesbank. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I hope that all of you will take more from this conference than just papers. Networking, cooperation 
and a fruitful  exchange of views are extremely valuable for our common task.  
We are facing challenging risks.  
Let’s cooperate and jointly face them! 
                                                      
12   See  Goodhart,  C.A.E.  (2004),  Some  new  directions  for  financial  stability?  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  The  Per 
Jacobson Lecture, June 27, 2004, p. 9. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 5
