Lucas Papademos: The political economy of the reformed Stability and Growth 
Pact - implications for fiscal and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference 
“The ECB and its watchers VII”, Frankfurt, 3 June 2005. 
 Introduction 
I would like to start with two propositions and two observations about the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The first proposition is that in a monetary union, which is characterised by a single monetary policy 
and decentralised national fiscal policies, there is a need for a fiscal policy framework that ensures that 
excessive  budget  deficits  are  avoided  over  the  medium  term  and  that  national  fiscal  policies  are 
effectively  coordinated  to  that  end.  The  second  proposition  is  that  the  best  means  to  achieve  the 
necessary coordination is a rules-based framework which fosters transparency, consistency and equal 
treatment across countries in fulfilling their commitment to avoid excessive deficits and attain sound 
budgetary positions. I believe we can all agree about the validity of these two propositions. 
The  two  observations  concern  the  experience  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  over  the  past  six 
years. The first is that the SGP did not succeed in preventing the occurrence of excessive deficits in 
several euro area countries – though I am convinced that those countries’ budgetary positions would 
have  been  worse  if  the  Pact  did  not  exist.  The  second  observation  is  that  the  Pact’s  rules  and 
procedures for the correction of excessive deficits proved inadequate to guide fiscal policies towards a 
prompt  and  steady  reduction  of  deficits  and  the  achievement  of  a  balanced  budgetary  position. 
Consequently,  there  was  a  need  to  strengthen  the  Pact’s  preventive  arm  and  to  improve  the 
implementation  of  the  excessive  deficit  procedure. This was  the  view of  the ECB  in  the  light  of  the 
experience  of  the  past  few  years  and  not  on  the  basis  of  theoretical  arguments  concerning  the 
features and modalities of the Pact. I will not address the reasons for the ineffective functioning of the 
Pact in the past, though I believe that a correct diagnosis of the cause of observed failures would be 
useful in assessing the prospects for success of the reformed framework. I will directly focus on four 
key  topics  concerning  the  implications  for  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  of  the  agreed  changes  to  the 
original framework. 
Consequences for fiscal sustainability and stabilisation 
I.  
First,  what  are  the  likely  consequences  of  the  recent  changes  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  for 
fiscal sustainability and for fiscal stabilisation policy? The general answer is that it is too early to judge 
the implications of the recent reform of the SGP for the sustainability of public finances and for the 
stabilisation role of fiscal policy in Europe. Ultimately, it is the implementation of the revised rules that 
will provide the definite answer. The outlook for fiscal policies in many countries (as reflected in plans 
and forecasts), the excessive deficit procedure’s loss of some “teeth” and the unchanged incentives 
for  compliance  and  strict  implementation  suggest  that  one  should  be  sceptical.  At  the  same  time, 
governments  have  unanimously  stressed  their  commitment  to  sound  fiscal  policies.  What  can  we 
really expect as a result of the agreed reform of the Pact? 
In  trying  to  assess  the  possible  implications  of  the  changes,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish  between  the 
SGP’s preventive and corrective arms. It is also useful to recall the lessons from past experience and 
from political economy regarding the main characteristics of good fiscal rules. To be meaningful and 
effective,  fiscal  rules  should  be  based  on  a  sound economic  rationale  and  be  sufficiently  flexible  to 
allow for appropriate policy responses. But good fiscal rules should also be sufficiently simple, clear 
and enforceable. 
Seen from this perspective, some of the changes introduced into the preventive arm strengthen the 
economic underpinnings of the SGP and address certain past criticisms of the rules. These changes 
include: (i) country-specific medium-term objectives that take into account potential growth and debt 
levels;  (ii)  the  benchmark  of  a  0.5%  annual  adjustment  with  more  consolidation  in  good  times  but 
possibly less in bad times; (iii) the definition of the medium-term objectives and the adjustment path in 
cyclically adjusted terms; and (iv) the netting of temporary measures. By allowing broader economic 
conditions and specific budgetary positions to be taken into account to a greater extent than in the 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
past, such changes have the potential to strengthen fiscal coordination and surveillance, and thereby 
also the contribution of the SGP to fiscal sustainability and stabilisation. 
But this potential strengthening of the preventive arm and the associated benefits will only materialise 
if  these  changes  are  accompanied  by  a  renewed  political  commitment  to  enforcing  the  rules. 
Moreover,  a  downside  risk  is  that  these  changes  might  make  the  rules  more  complicated  and  less 
transparent.  In  particular,  problems  of  definition  and  measurement  (e.g.  estimating  potential  output 
and  measuring  the  costs  and  benefits  of  structural  reforms)  could  make  surveillance  and 
implementation difficult. 
A  potential  weakness  in  the  Pact’s  preventive  arm  is  a  bias  towards  negative  output  gaps  or  “bad 
times” (that would require less adjustment), coupled with the provision that medium-term objectives do 
not necessarily have to be reached within the horizon of a country’s stability programme. 
In  sum,  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Pact,  as  recently  revised,  provides  a  useful  framework  for 
surveillance and benchmarking of sound fiscal policies and the reform might strengthen the pertinent 
provisions. However, if it is implemented in a minimalist fashion, the required adjustment and fiscal 
policy  paths  may  not  be  consistent  with  determined  consolidation,  sufficient  safety  margins  and 
adequate debt reduction. 
As regards the corrective arm, it should be recalled that the original SGP aimed to strike a balance 
between the quasi-automatic application of the excessive deficit procedure and the inherent room for 
discretion in the procedures and in the role of the ECOFIN Council. This combination of automaticity 
and discretion was intended to deter (and, if necessary, ensure the prompt correction of) excessive 
deficits. And this, in the opinion of the ECB, would anchor expectations of fiscal discipline in EMU. 
The reform of the SGP’s corrective arm makes decisions on the existence of excessive deficits and on 
the setting of deadlines for correcting them less automatic and more explicitly conditional on discretion 
in  the  assessments  of  the  underlying  economic  and  budgetary  situations.  The  reform  even  relaxes 
certain rules. For example, the softening of the exceptional circumstances clauses and the list of other 
relevant factors are indicative of the increased discretion and potential relaxation of fiscal discipline. It 
can, of course, be argued that this enhanced flexibility in assessing the existence and correction of 
deficits by itself does not impose a looser application of the procedure compared with what was done 
in the recent past. Yet it can facilitate a more lax implementation, which could imply higher and more 
protracted deficits for a member country and the euro area as a whole. This is a cause for serious 
concern. 
Implications for the interaction of fiscal and monetary policy 
II. 
The second set of questions I would like to address is as follows: what are the implications of the SGP 
reform for the interaction of fiscal and monetary policy? And what role should the European Central 
Bank play in this context? Given the impact of fiscal policies on key macroeconomic variables, it goes 
without  saying  that  fiscal  policies  can  have  significant  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  the 
danger  that  unfettered  fiscal  policies  could  create  tensions  in  EMU  and  undermine  macroeconomic 
stability, in general, and monetary policy, in particular, is the raison d’être for the SGP. At the same 
time, there can be no mechanical reaction of monetary policy to fiscal policies or to changes in the 
fiscal framework. Unsound fiscal policy, which results in excessive and persistent budgetary deficits, is 
one source of risks to price stability that has to be assessed in the formulation of monetary policy. 
From the perspective of monetary policy, what matters most are the effects that the changes to the 
Stability and Growth Pact might ultimately have on the behaviour of the fiscal authorities and on the 
expectations  of  markets  and  the  public  in  this  regard.  These  effects  cannot  be  prejudged  a  priori, 
independently of experience. 
What role should the ECB play in this context? The ECB has always maintained that the interaction 
between the single monetary policy and national fiscal policies in EMU needs to be based on a clear 
allocation of responsibilities, with each party (institution or authority) being responsible for achieving its 
objectives and delivering on its own mandate. The role of the ECB is determined, first and foremost, 
by its mandated primary objective to maintain price stability in the euro area. The public and financial 
markets must rest assured that the ECB will successfully carry out its mandate. Correspondingly, the 
ECB expects and calls on the Member States, the Commission and the ECOFIN Council to deliver 
sound fiscal policies in line with their respective responsibilities. This requires that they implement the 
reformed rules of the Pact rigorously and consistently. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
Beyond  this,  the  ECB  naturally  shares  its  analysis  and  assessment  of  the  economic  situation, 
including its assessment of fiscal policies, with the fiscal authorities in bodies such as the Eurogroup 
and the Economic and Financial Committee. In so doing, the ECB has a duty to be frank in presenting 
its views. 
The ECB has an additional role to play in the context of its communication policy. It has to explain and 
support the need for rules-based fiscal policies in EMU since this is essential for ensuring long-term 
price stability and sustainable growth. This is why, in recent months, the ECB has consistently argued 
that the SGP provides an appropriate framework for fiscal policies in EMU, even if its implementation 
could  and  should  be  improved  in  certain  respects.  And  this  is  why  the  ECB  has  considered  it 
necessary to express its concern about some aspects of the recent reform and to stress the need for a 
rigorous  implementation  of  the  new  framework.  At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  fully  respects  the 
prerogatives and responsibilities of Member States, the Commission and the ECOFIN Council in the 
fiscal domain. 
Potential effects on interest rates 
III. 
My third topic concerns the potential effects on interest rates: How will interest rates be affected by the 
SGP  reform  in  the  long  run?  And what  is  the  markets’  assessment?  Identifying  the  impact of  fiscal 
policies on interest rates is a complex task and research conducted in this area in recent years has not 
resulted in unambiguous conclusions. In addition to seeking to isolate the effects of fiscal policies from 
other influences (e.g. growth, inflation, exchange rate expectations), a particular difficulty lies in trying 
to identify when exactly “fiscal policy events” become “news”. 
The  recent  agreement  on  the  SGP  reform  provides  a  good  example  of  this  problem.  The 
announcement  and  publication  of  the  ECOFIN  agreement  on  20  March  did  not  give  rise  to  an 
immediate, significant reaction in government bond markets. This could suggest that markets were not 
particularly concerned by the changes. Such a conclusion, however, would ignore another fact: that 
the nature of the reforms had already become apparent gradually over a period of months before the 
final agreement was signed. Thus, it is likely that, by the time the ECOFIN Council had reached its 
agreement, the market’s view of the changes had already been factored into interest rates. 
Nevertheless, a number of studies have provided increasing evidence that interest rate spreads reflect 
a differentiation of fiscal policies across countries. Recent reactions by rating agencies also point to 
renewed emphasis on this issue. Whether these reactions are sufficiently strong is a different matter. It 
has been argued that the EU fiscal framework in the past might have contributed to high confidence in 
the sustainability of fiscal policies and thus to low spreads. 
Financial markets, monetary policy and fiscal discipline 
IV.  
The final question I would like to touch upon is this: how could financial markets help encourage fiscal 
discipline?  In  principle,  well-functioning  financial  markets  should  reward  fiscal  prudence  and  punish 
unsustainable fiscal policies. It is one of the conundrums of modern-day political economy that, except 
at times of financial crises, this does not appear to be the case to any great extent. 
One issue that arises in this context is the extent to which institutional features of financial markets 
influence such reactions. In the EMU context, the “no bail-out” clause of the Treaty should encourage 
financial markets to distinguish between more and less risky sovereign issues. But other institutional 
features  may  work  in  the  opposite  direction.  Among  these  features  the  favourable  treatment  of 
government  debt  under  the  new  Basel  rules  as  well  as  regulations  which  require  pension  funds  to 
invest a large share of their portfolios in “safe” assets may buttress demand for government paper, 
putting downward pressure on bond yields. There may, perhaps, be scope for institutional designs that 
encourage more market discipline. But modifying rules and institutions so as to achieve objectives that 
fall outside their primary goals may not be appropriate. 
In  this  context,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  ECB’s  collateral  policy  could  encourage  market 
reactions to fiscal policies, for example, by imposing haircuts for bonds issued by governments that fail 
to comply with the SGP. While perhaps seeming appealing at first glance, such an initiative does not 
seem very convincing when scrutinised more closely. The purpose of the ECB’s collateral policy is to 
ensure sufficient availability of collateral to allow a smooth implementation of monetary policy and to 
protect the Eurosystem in its financial operations. Using the framework for alternative purposes would 
be  contrary  to  the  ECB’s  mandate.  Secondly,  debt  used  by  the  ECB  as  collateral  is  valued  daily 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 3
according to market prices. Thus a negative market assessment of a given asset means that more of 
that  asset  is  required  as  collateral  against  a  given  amount  of  central  bank  financing.  So  it  is 
unconvincing to claim that the ECB’s collateral policy is biased against financial market discipline. 
Concluding remarks 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  three  points.  The  consequences  of  the  reformed  Pact  for 
fiscal  sustainability  and  stabilisation  will  depend  upon  its  implementation.  A  rigorous  and  consistent 
implementation,  in  line  with  the  renewed  political  commitment  to  the  fiscal  framework,  is  crucial  for 
sound public finances in the euro area. The credibility of the reformed Pact will be tested in the coming 
months  as  the  budgetary  positions  of  countries  with  excessive  deficits  will  be  assessed  by  the 
Commission and the Council. This test should be passed successfully not only because it is important 
for the credibility of the fiscal framework but also in order to ensure the compatibility of fiscal policies 
with  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  the  anchoring of  expectations  of  fiscal  discipline  and  the 
establishment of macroeconomic conditions conducive to sustainable growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2005
