Ewart S Williams: Some thoughts on a new regulatory regime for credit unions 
Feature address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the 
Thirty-First Annual General Meeting of the Eastern Credit Union, St Joseph, 18 March 2005. 
 I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Board of the Eastern Credit Union for inviting me to 
address you on the occasion of your Thirty First Annual General Meeting. I am pleased that 2004 was 
a  very  successful  year  and  that  you  have  very  good  news  for  your  membership  when  you  meet 
tomorrow notwithstanding the low interest rate environment encouraged by Central Bank policy. I am 
convinced that competition brings out the best in all of us and Eastern Credit Union is an excellent 
example. 
I understand that with us this evening, in addition to Eastern Credit Union members, are stakeholders 
as  well  as  officials  of  the  national  credit  union  leadership.  Accordingly,  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to talk a bit about some issues that have been the subject of much public debate in recent 
months having to do with the prudential supervision of credit unions. 
My point of departure will be the Government’s stated position to work towards a “single” regulator for 
the financial system as a whole and the announced decision to bring some credit unions under the 
regulatory authority of the Central Bank. I will try  to touch on some of the problems involved in the 
approach and give some thoughts on an appropriate regulatory model for the Credit Union movement. 
Obviously I am not making official pronouncements here since the choice of regulatory regime is not 
the call of the Central Bank but of the Government. 
But first permit me to recognize the tremendous contribution that the Eastern Credit Union has made 
to the people of Trinidad and Tobago. 
I was pleasantly surprised to read about the origins of the Eastern Credit Union. I grew up in San Juan 
and I did not realize that Eastern started in my backyard ….out of the Bermudez Biscuit Factory and 
the Aranguez Estates. From these modest beginnings in 1973, you now cover the East- West corridor 
and have expanded to San Fernando and more recently to Tobago. I understand that plans are afoot 
to expand to central Trinidad. 
Your  accomplishments  have  been  impressive  indeed  and  the  Eastern  Credit  Union  is  now  a  major 
player  in  our  local  financial  system.  The statistics  that  I  have  seen  have  you moving  from an  initial 
membership of twenty-two, and a share capital of $1 million in 1978, to a current membership of some 
(103,000) and a resource base of about $600 million. In terms of assets, Eastern ranks as the third 
largest financial cooperative in Trinidad and Tobago. 
But  your  influence  in  the  cooperative  credit  union  movement  has  been  greater  than  could  be 
measured by your financials, as impressive as these are. 
Eastern’s  main  contribution  has  been as  an  innovator;  stretching  the  boundaries of  the  cooperative 
movement, in an effort to better serve its membership. Eastern was the first to move away from the 
traditional model of share savings and consumer credit to provide a range of product offerings more 
associated with commercial banks. 
Eastern’s innovative loan programmes have helped its members construct homes, create and sustain 
small businesses, purchase land, and pay for advanced level education. 
Among credit unions, Eastern has been a pioneer in the introduction of certificates of deposits, loan 
protection and life savings programmes, and an ATM service. 
Reading through the pages of your various annual reports, I was struck not so much by how many of 
your members you helped to build homes, to buy cars, to start small businesses (and I am not saying 
that these are not important achievements). What struck me more, as I could read between the lines, 
was a certain passion for the fundamental principles of pooling, co-operation and mutual support. 
I could see this passion and pride in the many references to La Joya, this jewel of a facility that so 
aptly represents your trail-blazing success. I could see this passion for community and mutual support 
in your education awards; the credit union management courses; the efforts to get youth involved in 
the movement; and to get members to assist in reducing loan delinquency. I could see the passion for 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
the co-operative spirit in your alliances with other credit unions to pursue joint activities, and in your 
strategic partnerships with credit unions in Barbados, Jamaica and Grenada. 
That  you  could  be  true  to  your  cooperative  ideals  even  while  you  expand  your  range  of  financial 
services; strengthen your business infrastructure to better compete with the rest of the financial sector; 
all  this,  while  striving  to  adhere  to  acceptable  prudential  and  governance  standards;  that  you  can 
accomplish all these things simultaneously, speaks volumes for the commitment of your management 
and staff, your current Board of Directors and indeed the entire leadership and membership that built 
this institution over the last thirty years. 
I  am  sure  that  there  are  a  few  other  credit  unions  which  have  evolved  in  ways  broadly  similar  to 
Eastern and which can boast of their own successes. And I congratulate them all and I urge them to 
continue  their  efforts  to  keep  the  credit  union  spirit  alive,  as  they  continue  to  face  the  challenges 
emanating from globalization and financial liberalisation and a more secular approach to community. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, you know better than I, the tumultuous change that the credit union movement 
has undergone over the past three decades. The movement saw a period of very rapid growth in the 
decade to the mid-1980s; this was followed by stagnation up to around the mid-1990s: since then, with 
the aid of some government support by way of tax credits, the movement has blossomed once more. 
To  survive,  the  credit  union  movement  has  had  to  adapt,  and  this  is  reflected  in  the  considerable 
consolidation  that  has  taken  place  from  around  400  credit  unions  in  the  early  1980s  to  about 
130 today. Total credit union assets have increased sharply in recent years and are estimated at about 
$4  billion  currently.  The  recent  growth  has,  however,  been  very  lopsided  and  has  led  to  much 
concentration. 
According to data available for 2003, the six largest credit unions with assets ranging from $200 million 
to $800 million, account for about one-half of total credit union assets and the largest 17 credit unions 
account for three-quarters of the industry’s assets. 
The smaller institutions raise resources from shares and savings deposits and make small loans for 
consumer purposes; these are essentially run as co-operative societies and are based on principles of 
volunteerism. In the case of the large credit unions, we have a new paradigm involving products and 
services more readily associated with the commercial banks. 
These larger credit unions, now offer certificates of deposits, make mortgage and commercial loans, 
provide credit and debit cards to be used in automatic teller machines and also provide cambio and 
travel agency services. 
The expansion of the credit union sector over the last thirty-five years has taken place in the absence 
of an appropriate legislative framework. As you know, the present legislation, covering the credit union 
movement  {The  Co-operative  Society  Act}  dates  back  to  1971  and  does  not  adequately  address 
prudential issues. In an attempt to fill this gap, the Co-operative Credit Union League, over the past 
few  years,  has  been  promoting  a  system  of  prudential  management  based  on  adherence  to  the 
“PEARLS” system, which provides guidelines for capital adequacy, liquidity and non-performing loans. 
The League’s efforts have had mixed results. The preliminary data that I have been able to muster 
suggests: 
(i) 
that about 40 percent of the operating unions maintain a liquidity ratio below the 10 percent 
suggested in the PEARLS system; 
that non-performing loans in the industry average between 20 and 25 percent. If we calculate 
this  uniformly  and  according  to  internationally  accepted  standards,  it  is  likely  to  be  much 
higher (the commercial banks have a delinquency ratio of 3 percent); 
about  40  percent  of  operating  credit  unions  maintain  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  under 
10 percent (which is the recommended minimum ratio). 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The  need  for  the  stricter  regulation  of  credit  unions  was  recognised  several  years  ago.  Indeed  the 
1993 Task Force Report recommended amendments to the Co-operative Act: 
(i) 
to provide for the regulation and supervision of credit unions by a new supervisory agency 
responsible to the Minister of Finance; 
to give the regulator power to make regulations with respect to prudential criteria for credit 
unions; 
BIS Review 28/2005
(ii) 
2 
 (iii) 
to  grant  full  enforcement  powers  which  should  include  the  removal  of  directors  and  the 
suspension of a license to operate. 
Later in 1996, an IDB project implemented with participation of the Credit Union League, initiated a 
review  of  the  regulatory  framework  and  established  the  Credit  Union  Supervisory  Unit  within  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  with  responsibility  for  the  development  and  implementation  of  a  system  of 
surveillance for credit unions. For various reasons this has not worked out as envisaged. 
From my vantage point, the case for stricter credit union supervision is compelling. It is based on the 
amount  of  resources  now  being  intermediated  and  the  business  models  of  the  larger  credit  unions 
which encompass more complex and riskier operations. These factors require that greater attention be 
paid to risk-management by the unions themselves and that there be a formal supervisory framework 
for credit unions to protect members’ savings and to help maintain the integrity of the financial system. 
And remember that we are talking about an estimated 500,000 credit union members (about one-third 
of the population) and largely lower and middle income people. 
Some people have argued for self regulation to be done by an organization such as the Cooperative 
Credit  Union  League.  The  fact  is,  however,  that  self  regulation  has  never  worked  on  a  sustainable 
basis anywhere because it is usually effective only with those who are inclined to obey the rules – not 
for those that need it most. And, I can assure you that there are credit unions, both large and small, 
that are not operating in accordance with sound prudential principles. 
The  case  for  formal  regulation  also  has  to  do  with  the  sustainability  of  the  movement  and  with 
enlightened self-interest. 
The financial environment is changing very rapidly – more so now than at any period in our history, 
because of the proliferation of modern information technology. The credit union movement will have to 
continue  changing  with  the  times  to  meet  its  members’  needs,  to  fend  off  competition  from  other 
financial service providers and to remain relevant. The sustainability of the movement will require 
that  credit  unions  get  into  increasingly  riskier  activities  to  survive  and  thrive.  In  these 
circumstances, formal, rigorous supervision will become more critical and more urgent. 
I  should  add  that  it  is  in  everybody’s  self-interest  to  have  effective  formal  regulation  since  poor 
financial practices by one or two credit unions could undermine confidence in the entire movement and 
could conceivably have contagion effects on the entire financial system. 
I must concede that formal arrangements for the prudential regulation of credit unions are a relatively 
recent phenomenon. We, in Trinidad and Tobago, are not alone in lacking adequate credit union 
legislation. In fact, data published by the World Council of Credit Unions (WCCU) indicate that only 
about  one-third  of  104  member  countries  surveyed,  have  credit  union-specific  legislation.  In  most 
developing countries credit unions continue to be regulated under Cooperative Societies legislation. 
The United Kingdom brought credit unions under the authority of the Financial Services Authority (the 
regulator for the commercial banks) only in 2002. 
In  Jamaica,  legislation  shifting  the  regulation  of  credit  unions  to  the  Bank  of  Jamaica  (the  Central 
Bank) was passed in 2004 but the operating details are still being worked out. 
In Barbados, starting last year the five largest credit unions accounting for 80 percent of total credit 
union assets are supervised jointly by the Central Bank and the Registrar of Credit Unions. 
Recently,  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Government  announced  the  intention  to  amend  the  Financial 
Institutions  Act  to  bring  large  credit  unions  under  the  regulatory  control  of  the  Central  Bank.  The 
rationale was that that these institutions were essentially conducting business of a “banking nature” 
and should be regulated as banks, while the other credit unions involved in more traditional activities 
would continue to be supervised elsewhere. 
Having  examined  the  FIA,  it  may  indeed  be  more  complicated  than  originally  envisaged  to 
adapt this piece of legislation to the credit unions. Our research shows that legislation intended for 
commercial banks is generally inappropriate for credit unions, whose purpose is to provide cooperative 
financial services to members who are their depositors, their borrowers and their owners. 
Credit  unions  are  different  from  commercial  banks  because  of  a  number  of  essential  features, 
including:  
- 
- 
their democratic control by members; 
their ownership structure through share contributions; 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 3
their member savings contributions; 
the nature of credit union capital; 
the fact that their surplus is returned to members; 
- 
- 
- 
Because  of  these  differences,  credit  unions  have  been  most  successful  where  they  operate  under 
specific credit union legislation. 
The part of the Government’s proposal that prompted the strongest reaction was the proposal to split 
credit union supervision between two regulators, based on institution size. It is difficult to disagree with 
the Credit Union League (and many of you credit union leaders) that splitting regulation between two 
regulators runs the risk of fragmenting the movement and stunting its development. 
There was a similar situation recently in Britain. When credit union supervision was transferred from 
the Registry of Friendly Societies to the newly created FSA, there was considerable concern that small 
credit  unions  would  not  survive  under  the  more  robust  regulatory  regime.  The  FSA  responded 
pragmatically by adopting a two-tier system which perhaps may fit our circumstances. 
It is my view that some kind of two-tier system is an appropriate regulatory approach for credit unions 
in Trinidad and Tobago. In line with the views of the credit union movement, perhaps it makes sense 
that all credit unions should be regulated by a single regulator – the Government has assigned the role 
to the Central Bank. In these circumstances, the two-track regulatory regime should be based not 
specifically on size but on the overall level of risk associated with the particular credit union. In 
essence, the proposal is for a regulatory regime for credit unions which is essentially riskbased. 
And what’s the rationale? 
Clearly there are different levels of risk attached to different types of activity that credit unions carry on. 
The  regime  could  be  designed  to  take  account  of  these  different  levels  of  risk.  It  will  need  to  be 
sufficiently  flexible  to  accommodate  the  position  of  small  credit  unions  while  at  the  same  time 
responding effectively to the situation of large ones. The larger credit unions are likely to engage in a 
wider range of activities, many similar to those provided by the commercial banks. This will expose 
them to greater risk and a higher level of supervision. If smaller credit unions are engaging in risky 
activities, they should also be subject to the more robust supervisory framework. 
I said earlier that the Co-operative Societies Act was not a prudential tool and that the FIA was not 
suited  to  the  credit  unions.  It  is  my  view  that  the  draft  Credit  Union  Supervisory  Bill  which  was 
prepared  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (under  the  IDB  project)  may  be  a  useful  starting  point  for  new 
credit union legislation. I noticed from its website that the Credit Union League had an opportunity to 
comment on the draft bill and had many concerns. I understand this and I agree that the current draft 
needs  much  work  to  be  workable;  but  it’s  a  good  starting  point.  For  one  thing,  the  regulatory 
responsibility will need to be shifted from a proposed Regulatory Authority to the Central Bank. 
Without getting into details, it is my view that appropriate credit union legislation will need to address 
the following areas, particularly with respect to the higher-risk (let’s call it, Class A credit unions): 
(i) 
It  would  need  to  define  the  classes  of  business  in  which  credit  unions  could  operate  and 
perhaps require that credit unions receive approval from the regulator before entering new 
classes of business. 
It would need to give the regulator authority to examine the business and affairs of a Credit 
Union at least once every 18 months to ensure compliance, and to certify that it is in a sound 
financial state. 
As in the case of institutions under the FIA and the Insurance Act, the legislation will need to 
provide for on-site supervision in which the risk management and governance systems (the 
higher risk) of credit unions will be assessed. 
The Act will need to specify prudential criteria on capital requirements, liquidity, investments, 
and lending limits, as well as reporting requirements. These prudential criteria and reporting 
requirements,  could  also,  in  principle,  be  tailored  to  meet  the  two-tiered  risk-based 
categories in which the credit unions fall. 
It  would  need  to  give  the  regulator  enforcement  powers  to  compel  compliance  with  the 
legislation.  These  powers  could range  from  “close monitoring”,  to  removal of  officials,  and 
suspension  of  the  credit  union’s  charter.  The  regulator  will  need  to  have  these  powers  so 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2005
that  problem  and/or  insolvent  credit  unions  could  be  managed  and  closed,  if  needed,  to 
protect members’ deposits and the integrity of the credit union system. 
If  we  are  to  take  a  more  holistic  approach  to  strengthening  the  credit  union  movement,  in  order  to 
support the new regulatory framework, we would also need to look at the developmental aspects of 
the movement, including the supporting mechanisms. Thus, for instance, and perhaps over time, we 
would need to give some thought to a strong effective Stabilisation Fund – my understanding is that 
there are currently two such institutions (the Credit Union Stabilisation Cooperative Society and the 
Central  Finance  Co-operative  Society).  I  would  imagine  that  there  is  need  for  a  strong  institution 
capable of providing liquidity and investment support as well as training and various forms of technical 
assistance to individual credit unions. 
Moreover,  in  order  to  help  the  credit  unions  compete  on  broadly  similar  terms  as  the  banks,  for 
instance, one may also need to give thought to a deposit insurance and a complaints mechanism 
for  the  credit  unions,  similar  to  the  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  and  the  Financial  Services 
Ombudsman Scheme. 
These  are  just  some  preliminary  thoughts  which  would  need  to  be  developed  in  greater  detail  and 
refined. 
I am aware that there is ongoing work to strengthen the present Co-operatives Act. This is important 
and  the  new  provisions  should  be  complementary  and  not  overlap  with  any  new  credit  union 
legislation. 
To provide credibility to this regulatory approach there would need to be a process of intense dialogue 
between  all  the  stakeholders  –  the  Ministries  of  Finance  and  Labour  and  Co-operatives;  the  credit 
union  movement;  the  Credit  Union  Co-operative  League;  and  the  Central  Bank.  The  role  of  the 
Ministry of Labour vis-à-vis the credit unions in particular and the co-operative movement in general 
will  need  to  be  clearly  defined.  It  is  my  view  that  the  Ministry  could  still  have  an  important 
developmental  role.  There  would  also  need  to  be  a  role  for  the  Credit  Union  League  in  helping  to 
prepare its membership for the new regulatory environment. 
I hope that these ideas contribute something to the ongoing debate about how to preserve the ideals 
of the credit union movement, help the movement adapt to and thrive in the rapidly changing financial 
environment,  whilst  we  administer  effective  supervision  to  maintain  a  strong  and  robust  financial 
system. 
I also want to underscore, contrary to the views that have been expressed in the media, the Central 
Bank recognizes the important contribution that credit unions have made to our society. The Central 
Bank  also  expects  the  credit  union  movement  to  continue  to  play  a  critical  role  in  our  diversified 
financial  sector.  We  feel  strongly,  however,  that  to  achieve  this,  more  robust  regulation  and 
supervision are urgently needed. 
Let  me  end  by  again  thanking  the  Eastern  Credit  Union  for  inviting  me.  I  trust  that  with  your 
commitment and team spirit you will continue to lead the way to positive change. 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 5
