William L Rutledge: Basel II - risk management and financial stability 
Remarks by Mr William L Rutledge, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey’s International Conference on Financial Stability 
and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, 17 May 2005.  
 Let  me  begin  by  commending  the  organizers  for  pulling  together  such  a  timely  and  important 
conference - Basel II promises to be a watershed event in global financial stability, and giving a full 
airing  of  the  issues  associated  with  its  introduction  is  particularly  important  as  we  draw  closer  to 
implementation.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  participate  in  the  discussion  of  those  issues  -  the 
views I offer will naturally be my own rather than necessarily those of the Federal Reserve.  
The Federal Reserve has major roles both as a bank supervisor, and, more broadly as a central bank, 
for fostering financial stability. Basel II has direct and significant implications for these several roles; it 
will clearly be an integral part of our supervisory approach going forward, and its emphasis on strong 
risk management practices also supports our broader financial stability mandate. 
My comments will set to the side calibration issues and focus particularly on what I believe are two 
major ways in which the basic structure and operational requirements of Basel II should enhance the 
stability of the financial system.  
The first is that the new Accord should provide an improved and more comparable way to look at risk-
taking across organizations. Accordingly, it will allow market participants, supervisors, and the banks 
themselves  to  be  more  effective  in  detecting  changes  in  risk  levels,  and  to  better  assess  the 
appropriateness of particular capital levels supporting such risks.  
A second major contribution of Basel II to financial stability is that the preparations for, and the final 
implementation  of  the  Accord,  will  result  in  increased  resources  applied  to  improving  bank  risk 
management  practices.  This  should  result  in  pricing  becoming  more  reflective  of  risk,  and  in  better 
capital  allocation  across  firms,  borrowers  and  industries.  Basel  II  has,  without  question,  already  led 
financial  institutions  to  deepen  and  accelerate  their  efforts  to  improve  the  evaluation,  quantification 
and disclosure of risk. 
These  beneficial  effects  will  not  just  happen,  but  rather  will  require  major  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
private and public sectors. Moreover, there are also possible negative effects of Basel II to evaluate 
and factor in to our approaches - a topic that I will also touch on briefly. 
Limitations of Basel I and current supervisory approach 
In thinking about the effects of Basel II, it is useful to step back and look at the current supervisory and 
regulatory framework - taking into account the Capital Accord currently in effect and how it is used in 
our supervisory processes.  
The original Basel Capital Accord was itself a landmark event, revolutionary in providing a common 
capital  assessment  approach,  now  used  by  over  100  countries.  However,  it  has  obvious  limitations 
that have become more significant over time. It has become less and less reflective of the risks of our 
largest organizations, and, accordingly, has become less and less integral to our ongoing supervision 
of them.  
Basel  I,  as  we  all  know,  includes  such  shortcomings  as:  a)  its  failure  to  recognize  differing  credit 
quality within the same general asset type; b) its varying the capital charge with the credit exposure’s 
legal  form,  such  as  whether  it  is  on  or  off  balance  sheet;  and  c)  its  simplistic  approach  to  risk 
transference and credit risk mitigation. 
More generally, Basel I was not structured to keep pace with the rapid rate of financial innovation that 
we have seen in internationally active banks. It clearly has created incentives for capital arbitrage, with 
banks  able  to  structure  transactions  with  the  primary  goal  of  minimizing  regulatory  requirements 
without a commensurate reduction in risk. Similarly, it has resulted in distortions in bank activity, by 
creating a tax on certain activities while understating the risk for others. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
These have combined to make the regulatory capital metric less informative to investors, supervisors 
and counterparties, and have eroded the principle of adequate risk-based capitalization that the Basel 
Accord was designed to promote.  
I should emphasize that the weaknesses of the current regulatory capital framework are much more 
relevant to the supervision of the largest and most sophisticated banks than they are generally across 
the industry. For the vast majority of the thousands of U.S. banks, the existing regime largely works. In 
recognition of this, among other considerations, we expect that in the U.S. most banks will stay on 
Basel I while the largest and internationally active banks will adopt the advanced Basel II approaches. 
We are considering some simple adjustments to Basel I to ensure that the framework is up to date and 
that there is competitive equity with Basel II adopters.  
In any event, the lack of risk sensitivity and incentives for arbitrage have made Basel I less relevant in 
our supervision of the largest banks - it is a benchmark requirement to be met, but not, in practice, a 
critical discriminating factor as we judge their financial condition.  
As  supervisors,  we  have  focused  increasingly  on  assessing  the  rigor  and  effectiveness  of  each 
organization’s risk management and control systems. We have looked to understand the risk appetite 
of each firm, and then assess how well it is able to measure and manage the resulting degree of risk 
taking.  
A key recent part of the supervisory effort has been to encourage the development of banks’ internal 
economic capital models - models that link risk taking to capital and that look to compare risk taking, 
and the returns on risk, across business lines, regions and products.  
But  the  current  stage  of  development  of  economic  capital  modeling  -  the  differences  in  model 
construction, assumptions and coverage - limit our ability to make comparisons of the results across 
institutions.  More  generally,  economic  capital  models  clearly  remain  in  an  early  evolutionary  stage, 
most particularly regarding operational risk. Their early stage of development can also be seen in the 
relative paucity of disclosed economic capital estimates by banking firms. Only very recently have we 
begun  to  see  that  some  bankers  have  sufficient  confidence  in  the  quality  of  their  economic  capital 
estimates, even of credit risk, to disclose them publicly. 
Basel II: Effects on comparability 
This brings me to Basel II. The new Accord links risk taking to capital adequacy in a meaningful and 
consistent way. Its systematic quantification of risk will give market participants new tools for viewing 
banks’ capital positions - providing a strong basis for making comparisons across institutions and over 
time. While relying to a considerable extent on a firm’s internal systems for generating credit risk and 
operational  risk capital  charges  under the  more  advanced  approaches,  the  new  Accord  establishes 
strong preconditions for firms to meet in using those methodologies. In doing so, it also puts a strong 
measure  of  responsibility  on  the  supervisors  to  ensure  that  each  firm  is  in  fact  adhering  to  those 
requirements  -  we  cannot  simply  accept  the  legitimacy  of  such  an  important  element  of  financial 
condition as capital adequacy without extensive and critical reviews of the processes that generate the 
numbers.  
With these elements in place, comparability should be greatly enhanced. Moreover, unlike Basel I, the 
new Accord allows for the evolution of bank practice over time by building on the core elements of a 
bank’s internal methodologies - methodologies that are expected to continue to improve, particularly 
with supervisory and market encouragement.  
Basel II: Risk management improvements 
The second, and perhaps more significant, benefit I mentioned is the encouragement to improvements 
in  bank  risk  management  practices.  Basel  II  has  always  had  this  objective  in  mind  in  addition  to 
creating a stronger, more risk sensitive measure of bank capital. We are clearly already seeing this 
objective being realized. 
Basel II builds on risk measurement concepts that have emerged in the industry, although clearly the 
application  of  these  leading  practices  varies  within  and  across  firms.  There  has  been  enormous 
progress as banks commit to programs that will bring their systems and practices into alignment with 
the standards articulated in Basel II. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
As I have emphasized, a major focus of our supervisory activities has been on ensuring that banks are 
actively engaged in advancing the linkage of quantified risk-taking to capital, as this is at the heart of 
both sound banking and Basel II. Let me offer some specific examples, beginning with credit risk and 
then turning to operational risk.  
An example can certainly be seen in the management of retail exposures. Over the last decade, as the 
geographic  dispersion  and  size  of  lending  portfolios  grew  at  large  banks,  and  amid  intense 
competition,  reliance  solely  on  expert  judgment  in  the  evaluation  of  the  risks  of  retail  exposures 
became  less  and  less  plausible.  Banks  developed,  and  continue  to  enhance  sophisticated  scoring 
systems  to  better  express  the  likelihood  of  repayment  of  individual  borrowers,  and  have  grown 
increasingly sophisticated in their ability to segment exposures by characteristics that provide a fine 
classification of the risk of a homogenous pool of borrowers.  
Basel II allows banks to build off of these practices, bringing regulatory capital requirements into much 
closer alignment with internal economic capital estimates. Importantly however, this occurs only when 
banks use those models for risk management purposes - ensuring their continuing effectiveness.  
A key element of Basel II is that it establishes rigorous standards for data collection and the systematic 
use  of  the  information  collected.  The  greatest  challenge  for  the  industry,  and  the  greatest  potential 
long-run  benefit,  involves  the  collection  and  categorization  of  accurate,  detailed  information  on 
borrower  and  exposure  characteristics  and  exposure  performance.  This 
involves  significant 
investments  in  technology,  and  for  some  firms  the  revamping  of  historical  underwriting  practices. 
Enhancements to technological infrastructure and MIS, combined with detailed, granular data will, over 
time, prove a powerful combination allowing firms to better price exposures and manage risk.  
The emphasis in the new Accord on improved data standards should not be interpreted solely as a 
requirement  to  determine  regulatory  capital  requirements,  but  rather  as  a  foundation  for  risk 
management practices that will strengthen the value of the banking franchise. 
In  addition  to  building  on  the  current  state  of  risk  management  practices,  Basel  II  also  promotes 
continued improvements in those practices. As I emphasized a moment ago, bank supervisors now 
are  heavily  focused  on  critically  assessing  risk  management  and  control  systems  -  where  we  find 
shortcomings,  we  constantly  urge  banks 
improvements.  Those 
shortcomings can reflect individual firm failings, in which case, we press the individual firms to bring 
their approaches up to the evolving best practices of well managed competitors. But the shortcomings 
can  also  reflect  more systematic problems  across  the  industry -  necessitating  supervisory efforts to 
move  the  industry  ahead  more  broadly  to  improve  its  standards.  Clearly,  both  through  the  micro-
judgments for individual firms and through the issuance of broader public guidance to address cross-
industry concerns, the supervisory process is critical in ensuring improvements in risk management practices. 
Basel  II  can  materially  reinforce  these  efforts  by  setting  strong  qualification  standards  and  capital 
incentives  for  firms  to  measure  risk  more  accurately.  Historically,  the  supervisory  method  for 
evaluating credit risk at banks in the U.S. focused on the identification of individual commercial loans 
that  were  already  troubled.  Bank  supervision  added  value  by  assuring  counterparties  and  market 
participants  that  banking  entities  had  clean  and  accurate  balance  sheets  by  forcing  the  timely 
recognition of losses.  
More recently, in response to the development of rating systems, the supervisory effort has shifted to 
the  evaluation  of  the  credit  risk  management  process,  and  specifically  the  quality  of  each  bank’s 
internal credit rating system. As supervisors we are no longer solely concerned with whether a bank 
has properly rated a troubled credit. Rather, we are now focused on the extent to which the bank can 
properly  distinguish  between  loans  across  the  spectrum  of  credit  quality  through  its  ratings,  and 
whether these ratings are adjusted on a timely basis according to changes in a borrower’s performance. 
With  Basel  II,  there  are  requirements  for  a  meaningful  differentiation  of  risk,  for  credit  ratings  with 
integrity, and for a warehouse of data to support the ratings (and requirements to ensure that historical 
data horizons cover appropriate economic downturn conditions). Moreover, banks will be required to 
test their rating system’s performance, resulting in more accurate ratings and capital assessments. In 
addition,  through  Pillar  II,  banks  will  be  required  to  benchmark  the  results  of  their  Pillar  I  credit 
assessments through rigorous stress testing.  
Basel II also sets rigorous standards for the recognition of credit risk mitigation, ensuring that firms 
have sound internal procedures for assessing the legal certainty of such mitigation, that they include 
the effects of netting and collateral and that they factor into their calculations mismatches in maturity 
between hedging and hedged instruments, as well as other forms of basis risk.  
to  make  risk  management 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
The more recently issued Basel/IOSCO consultative document further raises the bar when it comes to 
recognizing  the  effects  of  double  default  in  credit  risk,  modeling  counterparty  credit  risk  in  an 
integrated  manner  that  recognizes  portfolio  effects  and  improving  the  modeling  of  market  risk, 
particularly as it relates to the growing exposure to credit-like risks within the trading book. 
Basel II already has had a particularly strong impact in improving the way the industry assesses its 
exposure  to  operational  risk.  Before  the  issuance  of  the  Advanced  Measurement  Approach,  many 
firms did not consider operational risk to be a discipline in its own right, as they did market and credit 
risk.  Operational  risk  tended  to  be  managed  in  a  decentralized  manner  at  the  level  of  individual 
business lines and it was largely based on qualitative considerations. For many firms, operational risk 
really was focused on managing back-office operations and processes.  
With the introduction of the AMA, supervisors introduced a much more comprehensive framework for 
how firms should go about measuring and managing operational risk. Firms are required to have a 
much more comprehensive definition of what constitutes operational risk, including not only processing 
errors, but also business disruptions, legal and compliance risks and fraud, whether from internal or 
external sources. As with market and credit risk, firms are expected to supplement the management of 
operational risk at the business line level, with an independent operational risk management function 
that  is  responsible  for  establishing  firmwide  policies  for  measuring  and  managing  operational  risk. 
Finally, firms are required to bring together quantitative elements, such as internal and external loss 
data,  with  qualitative  elements,  such  as  control  self  assessments  and  scenarios,  to  arrive  at  a 
reasoned assessment of their exposure to operational risk losses across the firm.  
Internal rating systems, credit risk mitigation and operational risk measurement are merely a few of the 
examples of how Basel II has already spurred improvements in bank risk management and how final 
implementation will bring further discipline to risk management practice. 
Supervisors also will have to make judgments about the effectiveness of the models and associated 
procedures that banks intend to use for regulatory capital purposes. A key element in making such 
judgments is the so-called “use test” which requires that banks’ regulatory capital models build on the 
models  that  they  use  for  internal  risk  management  purposes.  This  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
supervisors to have confidence in the integrity of banks’ regulatory capital models.  
Additionally,  Pillars  II  and  III  give  added  impetus  to  comprehensive  improvements  in  bank 
management practice. Under Pillar II, supervisors will assess the integrity of banks’ internal economic 
capital models - focusing on aspects that are not well-captured in the Pillar I framework, such as the 
firm’s correlation assumptions within and across portfolios and the rigor of its stress testing programs. 
Finally,  under  Pillar  III,  supervisors  will  seek  to  ensure  that  accurate  information  about  risks  will  be 
disclosed by banking organizations.  
Areas of possible concern with Basel II 
Procyclicality 
While I have emphasized the various benefits of Basel II for effective supervision and the preservation 
of financial stability, there clearly are some possible downsides of the new approach. Concerns have 
been  raised  that  the  adoption  of  the  new  Accord  will  have  some  destabilizing  effects  on  the 
international financial system, and emerging market economies in particular. Chief among these is the 
concern that Basel II will amplify procyclicality as Basel II adopters severely tighten credit standards in 
response to rising capital requirements in the event of deterioration of credit conditions.  
We do expect that minimum capital requirements will rise and fall in response to changes in the risk of 
a  bank’s  activities,  just  as  the  internal  economic  capital  models  currently  used  by  banks  reflect 
changing  risk  exposure  by  changing  capital  levels.  By  itself,  this  will  mean  that,  even  with  some 
changes  the  Basel  Committee  made  over  the  years  to  lessen  the  effect,  some  procyclicality  still 
remains.  
However, the procyclicality debate should include not only whether capital requirements will rise and 
fall  with  economic  cycles,  but  also  whether  the  new  requirements  provide  useful  signals  to  banks, 
supervisors,  and  market  participants  that  will  lead  them  to  take appropriate  action  in  response  to  a 
changing economic environment. 
With more gradations in the Basel II framework, banks, supervisors and the marketplace will have an 
early  warning  signal  when  credit  quality  deteriorates  and  when  it  improves.  A  more  risk  sensitive 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
measure  should  give  bank  managers  accurate  signals  to  adjust  lending  policies  in  a  more  gradual 
manner early in cycles, dampening severe contractions or expansions in lending.  
With  its  emphasis  on  planning  and  risk  analysis,  the  new  Accord  will  require  banks  (and  their 
supervisors and rating agencies) to think more systematically about the level of capital needed during 
upturns in order to weather downturns.  
Herding behavior 
Another concern that some have raised is that the uniformity imposed by Basel II in calculating capital 
requirements  will  result  in  homogeneous  assessments  of  risk,  which  in  turn  will  amplify  herding 
behavior in the market place. The new Accord does set requirements for bank risk management by 
requiring certain types of inputs, and it does set the correlation factors for asset types, but it does not 
mandate that all banks must have the same assessment of their inputs. Individual banks will still have 
different  methodologies  for  arriving  at  the  inputs  based  on  their  reasoned  assessment  of  risk,  and 
banks’  estimates  will  clearly  vary  according  to  their  business  strategies  and  the  nature  of  their 
portfolios.  
Concerns that Basel II will be destabilizing for emerging markets 
Another  charge  leveled  at  Basel  II  is  that  increased  capital  requirements  for  lending  to  emerging 
market economies will cause banks to reduce credit extensions. Here I think it is particularly important 
to consider the current reality of banks’ decision-making processes. Internationally active banks are 
not currently making lending decisions primarily on the basis of Basel I capital requirements - rather, 
they are using their internal risk ratings systems and economic capital models for pricing and lending 
decisions.  These  internal  models  and  capital  requirements  are  far  more  constraining  than  Basel  I 
requirements. 
Therefore, when we try to gauge the impact that Basel II will have on emerging market lending, the 
pertinent comparison is not with Basel I, but with the internal risk ratings and economic capital systems 
that internationally active banks now use. As such, we do not expect major changes in international 
lending as a result of Basel II requirements. 
Additionally, Basel II will bring stabilizing benefits to emerging markets that are often overlooked. The 
sharp distinction in capital charges for longer-term lending versus short-term loans under Basel I has 
created some distorted incentives, particularly with regard to emerging market lending. The new rules 
will  remove  these  incentives  for  short-term  lending  -  a  form  of  lending  that  can  be  especially 
destabilizing to emerging markets during financial stress.  
The adoption of Basel II internationally will have the benefit of spreading stronger risk management 
practices to all countries, including emerging market nations. This is not to say that Basel II is the right 
answer  for  all  banks  or  all  countries  at  this  time,  but  rather  that  all  countries  should  work  to  adopt 
various  of  its  underlying  principles  in  assessing  banks’ risk  management systems  and  in  promoting 
transparency and disclosure. Investors and rating agencies would then have a better understanding of 
the  risk  profile  of  emerging  market  banks,  which  could  result  in  a  reduction  of  the  risk  premium 
currently applied to some emerging market lending. 
Conclusion 
In wrapping up, I would emphasize that implementation of Basel II should help supervisors and market 
participants  better  detect  increases  in  risk  in  individual  institutions  and  across  the  financial  system 
through  a  more  risk  sensitive  capital  measure.  Basel  II  also  promises  to  reinforce  and  accelerate 
improvements  in  bank  risk  management  globally,  as  well  as  promote  future  innovations  through  its 
reliance on banks’ internal methodologies. How well these improvements unfold will depend critically 
on the actions of supervisors in integrating the new regulatory capital requirements with their overall 
supervisory and regulatory approach.  
Thank you very much.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
