Ardian  Fullani:  A  short  overview  on  the  latest  Albanian  banking  system 
achievements 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the EBRD 2005 Annual Meeting and 
Business Forum, Belgrade, 22 May 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to participate in this prestigious event of the EBRD Annual Meeting and Business 
Forum. For this purpose, I would like to thank the organisers of this meeting who provided us such an 
opportunity to present our achievements and ambitions for the future.  
Allow me first to  tackle an important issue, which within the context of  this meeting, I believe, is of 
paramount importance. I mean by that the regional co-operation, an initiative that has been completely 
supported by the European Central Bank. We have already taken the first steps in this regard through 
establishing  bilateral  relationships  in  banking  supervision  with  National  Bank  of  Macedonia,  Central 
Bank of Montenegro and Banking and Payment Authority of Kosovo. Meanwhile, we are in the process 
of negotiating with National Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, National Bank of Serbia etc... I estimate 
that regional co-operation is an important forerunner of the integration process of the region with the 
rest of Europe; therefore I will not stop working to encourage a regional co-operation of high standards 
among the financial systems of Balkan countries.  
I hope that you share the same opinion with me, because only in this way, our region will be more 
credible  and  efficient  to  have  its  European  dream.  On  the  other  hand,  a  developed  and  financially 
integrated  region  will  be  more  attractive  for  foreign  strategic  investors,  opening  up  the  path  toward 
regional development projects, particularly infrastructure ones where region’s banks might be directed 
in financing and investment. 
Further  on  I  would  like  to  give  to  you  a  short  overview  on  the  latest  Albanian  banking  system 
achievements. After many years of difficult transition, in this late spring of 2005 the banking system is 
growing on a stable basis. 
Dear participants, 
I  would  like  to  ensure  you  that  recently  there  are  many  qualitative  developments  of  the  Albanian 
banking  system.  I  use  the  opportunity  of  this  event  to  express  that  positive  assessments  on  the 
banking  system  have  been  given  also  in  the  report  prepared  by  the  World  Bank  and  International 
Monetary  Fund  after  the  completion  of  their  assessment  made  on  the  Albanian  financial  system 
(FSAP-Financial System Assessment Program). Of course, this is good news.  
Conclusions  of  FSAP,  of  this  important  international  passport,  are  an  indication  of  our  earliest 
conclusions that the Albanian financial system is characterized by a supervised and effective banking 
system.  Regardless  of  what  I  mentioned  above,  sincerely  feeling  myself  as  a  part  of  the  banking 
system  I  would  envisage  that  it  needs  better  and  faster  motivation  to  reach  higher  contemporary 
standards in all the aspects of the banking activity.  
The  banking  system  has  experienced  remarkable  developments  recently.  After  the  licensing  of 
Popular Bank, with Albanian capital, the number of banks increased from 15 to 16, and a preliminary 
license is granted to Union Bank (Albanian capital), which is expected to raise the number of banks to 
17 over 2005. The system assets have further increased by 14 percent while there was an increase of 
banking products and an expansion of their network after the successful privatisation of the Savings 
Bank from Reiffeissen Bank, Austria. During this year there will be sold the public shares of both the 
Italian Albanian Bank and United Bank of Albania, which will lead to an increase of effectiveness and 
banking competition, paving the way to the processes of selling, merging and acquisitions towards a 
new consolidation of the banking system. 
The lending activity increased by 38 percent where one can distinguish inter alia the significant growth 
of medium-term and long-term loans compared to short-term loans.  
The  map  of  coverage  of  the  country  with  the  banking  system  has  further  expanded,  including  new 
areas  ever  covered  before.  At  the  end  of  2004,  the  total  number  of  branches  reached  88,  or  11 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
branches more that the end of the previous year, while the number of agencies recorded for the first 
time a full three-digit number, 100 and the number of the employed people increased by 26 percent.  
The high increase of the number of branches relative to agencies shows that banks are not interested 
only in providing the service of collecting deposits but also in providing other products like crediting to 
the  economy.  These  developments,  besides  their  positive  contribution  in  enhancing  the  financial 
intermediation speak for a better perception of the investing potential from banks, in Albania. 
An  outstanding  development  is  mainly  related  to  the  client  service,  which  is  accompanied  through 
electronic  terminals  by  the  increasing  number  of  electronic  cards  in  circulation.  Banks  offer  already 
debit and credit cards in co-operation with international companies such as Visa and MasterCard. Six 
banks provide the ATM service and the number of ATMs reached 108 by the end of February 2005.  
The banking system results to have a profit level, which has been increasing to Lek 5.1 billion. Return 
on equity (ROE) was estimated at 21 percent while credit quality is only 4.2 percent, from 4.6 percent 
in the previous year.  
These positive developments on the banking system were accompanied by a sound macroeconomic 
environment. For several years the economy is growing at 6 percent while inflation was kept under 
control within the two-to-four percent targeted range of the Bank of Albania. The fiscal consolidation 
has  been  on  track  while  current  trade  deficit  has  been  financed  mainly  by  remittances  and  foreign 
direct  investment  inflows.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  providing  this 
macroeconomic environment. Since early 2003, we cut several times the core interest rate bringing it 
at its minimum historical level, 5 percent. In taking any monetary policy decisions we had considered 
the further invigoration of economic activity, keeping always an eye on inflationary developments and 
financial stability as well.  
As I would like to often mention in the IMF premises, Albania is considered as a successful story. The 
Board  of  directors  have  recently  declared  that  Albania  is  enough  mature  to  sign  a  new  three-year 
agreement by the end of this year. The new arrangement will be a more flexible one leading Albania to 
a better access in the international financial market.  
Of  course,  what  I  mentioned  above  was  just  a  brief  resumé  regarding  the  current  situation  of  the 
banking system and the overall economic performance. There is no doubt that Albania’s attractiveness 
has  further  enhanced,  and  partially  this  reflects  also  the  increase  of  confidence  in  the  Albanian 
banking system. 
Using  the opportunity  of  this  very  prestigious  forum,  I  would  like to  share  my voice with  that  of  the 
Albanian  representatives  present  in  this  panel,  expressing  that  my  country  is  more  open,  more 
consolidated, ready to absorb more ambitious projects and, of course, global projects.  
I wish you successful and fruitful proceedings of this meeting.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
