Sunil Mendis: Central bank governance and how such governance is related to 
strategic planning in central banks  
Opening remarks by Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 3rd SEACEN 
EXCO Seminar and Meeting, Colombo, 28-29 January 2005. 
 Deputy Governors and Heads of Delegations of SEACEN member and observer countries, Mr Gavin 
Bingham,  Head  of  International  Liaison  of  BIS,  Dr  Subarjo  Joyosumarto,  Executive  Director  of  the 
SEACEN Centre, distinguished invitees, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  inaugurate  the  3rd  SEACEN  EXCO  Meeting  and  Special  Seminar  to 
mark the Meeting. As a founder member of SEACEN, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is honoured and 
delighted to host these two events in Colombo, Sri Lanka. On behalf of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 
I extend a warm welcome to all the delegates from the SEACEN member and observer countries, our 
special  guests,  and  of  course,  the  officials  of  the  SEACEN  Centre.  The  gathering  of  several 
distinguished Central Bankers today demonstrates the emphasis and importance placed by them on 
the need for co-operating with each other to resolve issues of mutual interest. 
We host these two events just a month after the deadly ‘Tsunami’ hit some of our countries causing 
unprecedented and unimaginable destructions to the life and property. We are still recovering from this 
severe blow. Tsunami, indeed, brought all of us even closer. Our thoughts and prayers are with those 
who lost their beloved ones, property and suffered injuries. As monetary authorities in these countries, 
we have greater challenges before us in rebuilding our nations. I hope we could effectively face these 
challenges with active cooperation of all central banks in the region. 
We live in an era of rapid globalisation. Enriched by vast advances in information and communication 
technology, the process has facilitated the free flow of trade and investments across the borders. This 
has also posed burgeoning management challenges to central banks in the form of how to plan for the 
future  in  a  scenario  of  multiples  of  objectives  and  targets  entrusted  to  them.  In  order  to  overcome 
these  challenges,  the  central  banks  world  over,  are  called  upon  to  review  their  objectives  and 
restructure  their  activities.  Such  review  processes  encompass  re-examining  legal  frameworks, 
accounting practices and policies, organisational structures including the change in the composition of 
Boards, supervisory and human resources standards, to mention but a few of the new tasks. Having 
realised this need, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka recast its objectives in December 2002 into two core 
objectives,  namely,  economic  and  price  stability  and  financial  system  stability  with  a  view  to 
encouraging and promoting the development of the productive resources of Sri Lanka. The change 
has enabled the Central Bank to free itself from multiple objectives for pursuing its core objectives. 
The  theme  of  this  seminar  is  Central  Bank  Governance  and  how  such  governance  is  related  to 
strategic planning in central banks. These issues are not a novelty in a private sector organisation. 
This is because private organisations operating under competitive market conditions should review the 
existing strategies and adopt new ones for survival and success. Central banks being organisations 
created  and  powered  by  statutes  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  adopt  such  strategies  in  their 
medium  to  long  term  planning.  However,  changes  in  the  world  and  especially,  the  changes  in  the 
complexities in financial systems, have forced central banks to be mindful of the need for moving into 
strategic planning as a major management device. In this sense, the theme of the seminar is topical, 
opportune and timely. 
As we all central bankers know, the conduct of monetary policy and attaining financial system stability 
are  the  primary  tasks  of  a  central  bank.  Hence,  the  strategic  plan  of  a  central  bank  should  be 
formulated  in  such  a  way  that  it  strategically  links  its  goals,  objectives  and  action  plans  to  these 
primary tasks. Like any other corporate entity, the central bank also has a mission of achieving a long 
term objective, that is, macro economic development through maintaining price stability and ensuring 
the financial system stability. In this context, strategic planning plays a very important role in assisting 
the central banks to effectively and efficiently utilise the limited resources at their disposal to achieve 
such objectives and accomplish the given tasks. However, the successful implementation of strategic 
plan  will  mainly  depend  on  the  legal  framework  governing  a  central  bank,  which  provides  for  its 
   1/2 
independence, accountability and transparency. Indeed, in recent times, especially in the aftermath of 
Asian crisis in late 1990s, we have seen several countries amending the laws governing their central 
banks. Such amendments have given them greater independence in the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  current  world  trends  have  required  the  central  banks  to  be  transparent  and  accountable.  This 
would be attained by ensuring a greater disclosure policy on their decisions. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  today’s  Seminar  will  lead  to  a  healthy  discussion  and  exchange  of  views  on 
comparative  policies  among  SEACEN  member  central  banks  and  monetary  authorities  in  selected 
areas  of  corporate  governance.  The  first  session  will  cover  strategic  planning  process  for  central 
banks, for which a background paper has been prepared in consultation with the SEACEN Centre. I 
hope  the  paper  will  be  a  useful  document  to  initiate  fruitful  discussion  on  the  issue  of  strategic 
planning  for  central  banks.  In  addition,  Mr  Gavin  Bingham,  Head  of  International  Liaison,  Bank  for 
International Settlement, will present an overview of current issues and practices relating to this topic. I 
am confident that the participants would contribute with their country specific experiences on Central 
Bank  Governance  and  specifically  on  their  experiences  with  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
Strategic Plans in the respective central banks.  
The second session will cover selected Central Bank Governance issues and will serve as a follow-up 
to  the  SEACEN-BIS  Seminar  on  Central  Bank  Governance  conducted  in  Langkawi,  Malaysia  in 
February  2004.  The  discussion  will  specifically  focus  on  aspects  of  central  bank  boards  as  well  as 
lessons and conclusions drawn from the February Seminar. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have no doubt that deliberations of this Seminar will be of great benefit to all 
of us. I also hope your journey to Sri Lanka will give you a chance to see a little of our country and 
meet our people. We have arranged for you to see some places of interest in Sri Lanka. 
Let me conclude by wishing you a productive Seminar and pleasant stay in Sri Lanka. 
Thank you.  
 
    2/2 
