V Leeladhar: Challenges in banking security  
Inaugural speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banking 
Security Conference - 2005, arranged by the Indian Banks’ Association, Mumbai, 22 June 2005. 
 Fellow Participants and Colleagues, 
It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst, as we commence this workshop on Banking Security. I 
am particularly happy to be here to address a group of involved persons who are the harbingers of 
change - so to say - in the use of technology in Banking. 
Banking  as  a  business  involves  the  management  of  risks.  While  much  has  been  said  about  the 
financial risks, the risks arising out of the large scale implementation of technology is of recent origin, 
with  banks  having  taken  to  large  scale  use  of  technology  for  their  normal  day-to-day  business. 
Security  in  banks  has  thus  assumed  significant  proportions,  comprising  both  physical  aspects  in 
addition to those relating to Information, Information Systems and Information Technology, all of which 
have an impact on the reputational risk of a financial organisation. 
In a world where geographical barriers are losing significance and the death of distances is already a 
reality,  it  is  but  essential  that  security  be  given  prime  importance in  a  transnational scenario where 
large sums of money are at stake. While the challenges related to physical security are those which 
can be confronted with relative ease, the position is much more complicated in respect of IT security. It 
is  widely  accepted  that  security  is  as  effective  as  the  weakest  link  in  a  chain.  And,  in  the  case  of 
banking, the weakest link, in my view, does not relate to the components of technology (which do have 
an implication although), but on the person who is part of the information supply chain, and is typically 
the insider in the bank itself. This reminds me of an interesting or rather disturbing question one of the 
top police officials asked of the bankers in a security conference. “Are you keeping a track of some 
sort of the officials who left the organization ? Are you at least aware where they are now ?” There was 
complete silence around the table. He went on to clarify that most of the financial crimes had insider 
links.  This  is  supported  by  studies  carried  out  by  international  organisations.  These  studies  have 
indicated that a substantial portion of the breach of security in financial institutions have occurred on 
account  of,  or  have  been  triggered  with  the  aid  of  internal  exposures  or  internal  controls  being 
compromised.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  security  requirements  of  the  banking  sector  need  to  be 
assigned high levels of priority. 
Information Security is something which is best experienced than explained. All of us have at some 
point of time experienced the flow of information to persons others than to the intended users - even in 
a nonelectronic traditional environment. With networking and access to information being available at 
rates much larger than before, Information Security is an activity which provides some comfort to both 
the policy makers and the users of data. 
The largest set of functions in the banking sector which has benefited from the advances in IT relate to 
payment systems since quick, safe and efficient transfer of funds across the length and breadth of the 
country is the requirement of the day. Security in Payment Systems cannot be addressed in isolation. 
It requires the integration of work processes, communication linkages and integrated delivery systems 
and  should  focus  on  stability,  efficiency  and  risk  control.  Yet  another  prime  aspect  of  concern  in  a 
good security policy is the role that the human beings have in a secure computerised environment. 
It would be advisable to build security features at the application level in respect of banking oriented 
products, because of the critical nature of financial data transfer. The financial messages should have 
the under noted features: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The receipt of the message at the intended destination 
The content of the message should be the same as the transmitted one 
The Sender of information should be able to verify its receipt by the recipient 
The Recipient of the message could verify that the sender is indeed the person 
Information in transit should not be observed, altered or extracted 
Any attempt to tamper with the data in transit will need to be revealed 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
Non-repudiation 
• 
These  features  boil  down  essentially  to  authentication  (to  verify  the  identity  of  the  sender  of  the 
message to the intended recipient to prevent spoofing or impersonation), authorisation (to control the 
access to specific resources for unauthorised persons), confidentiality (to maintain the secrecy of the 
content of transmission between the authorised parties), integrity (to ensure that no changes/errors 
are  introduced  in  the  messages  during  transmission)  and  nonrepudiation  (to  ensure  that  an  entity 
cannot later deny the origin and receipt and contents of the communication). 
I must add here that in a recent case of a co-operative bank, the entire operations, maintenance and 
management  of  the  computer  systems  were  totally  in  the  hands  of  the  firm  which  supplied  the 
computer  software  and  this  led  to  a  fraud  and  loss  for  the  bank.  Such  cases  cause  reason  for 
substantial concern. While the aspects relating to physical security leave a lot to be desired with even 
the most basic security requirements not being in place (like access for unauthorised personnel even 
to sensitive Cash holding areas), the security features in the computer systems are not fully fool proof 
in some banks. 
There are at present a number of security standards available for different financial applications; most 
of  them  are  internationally  accepted  and  part  of  the  ISO  standards.  These  international  standards 
should be examined and adopted keeping in view the requirements of the Indian banking industry. 
Banks  need  to  put  in  place  measures  which  conform  to  there  is  policies  and  ensure  the  regular, 
periodical audit. 
An important issue is relating to the security levels of use within the various operating departments in 
the  banks.  The  common  level  of  entry  is  the  use  of  validation  of  authorised  access  (in  the  form  of 
authorised  User-Ids)  to  be  further  authenticated  by  correctness  of  passwords  keyed  in  by  the 
authorised users. Passwords often become ‘passed’ words in our context with no change at all in the 
passwords since passwords tend to be rather fixed for long periods of time. It is absolutely essential 
that passwords lapse after certain periods of time - generally not exceeding a month at the latest. 
Authorisation of users is another activity that needs to be closely regulated and monitored. One of the 
basic requirements for implementation of security and monitoring thereof at the various departments is 
the  need  for  system  administrators.  Most  of  our  offices  and  departments  have  the  system 
administration function clubbed to the normal operational functions assigned to a particular officer. The 
proliferation  of  networks  within  an  office  also  acts  as  a  negative  factor  in  implementation  of  strict 
security features. Further, rights assigned need to be changed upon change of functions assigned to 
the operative staff and that updation, including those related to staff who retire have to be looked into. 
There is an imperative need to imbibe a culture of security among all operative functionaries - whether 
officers  or  other  staff  and  cutting  across  administrative  gradings.  Access  to  databases  in  computer 
systems and to the data contained therein have to be strictly restricted and not available to any but 
those  authorised  to  make  any  changes  in  case  of  an  eventuality  for  resolving  a  software  lock  / 
malfunction which is a conscious decision by the authorised personnel taken in conjunction with the 
head of the office concerned. 
Change  Management  is  another  aspect  that  needs  to  be  viewed  from  the  security  angle.  Software 
(and at times hardware too), undergoes frequent updation and version control and levels of software in 
use across offices is an issue which needs to be examined in its totality for practicable implementation 
at all offices / departments. 
I  am  sure  that  most  of  the  newer  software  programmes  would  have  all  the  essential  and  desirable 
features as mandatory part of their architecture. The software that are currently in use would have to 
be scrutinised from the point of view of conformity to the minimum security requirements that I had 
dwelt upon. 
As  leaders  who  would  be  using  technology  as  a  cutting  edge  towards  excellence  in  services,  you 
would all agree that these key requirements of security are required to be addressed in the sessions of 
today. It is gratifying to note the initiative taken by IBA in organizing such seminars and conferences 
which facilitate transfer of knowledge. I am sure that the deliberations of the day would be enriching to 
all the delegates. 
I wish the Conference all success. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
