Toshihiko Fukui: Incentive mechanisms for economic policy makers  
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  12th  International 
Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 30 May 2005. 
 Introduction  
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  
I am very pleased to address the 12th international conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary 
and Economic Studies.  
On behalf of my colleagues at the Bank of Japan, I welcome participants from all over the world.  
Over  the  last  twenty-four  years,  we  were  fortunate  to  have  the  best  minds  from  the  academia  and 
central banks come together at previous Conferences to discuss current issues in central banking.  
I would like to thank everyone who has been involved, because the positive reviews we received are 
reflections of all the commitments in time and efforts of the people attending the Conferences.  
From  this  year,  the  Institute  will  hold  the  Conference  every  year,  not  every  other  year.  This  should 
enable us to cover a wider range of monetary and economic issues in a more timely manner.  
The  new  annual  Conference  format  should  offer  more  opportunities  for  candid  exchanges  of  views 
between central bankers and scholars.  
I hope that you would extend to us your continued support for our future Conferences.  
Theme of this year's conference  
This year, we discuss how to design incentive mechanisms for economic policy makers.  
Institutions and the incentive mechanisms they engender collectively influence economic performance. 
Some institutions create incentives to induce efficient behavior, and others do not.  
Take two of the broadest of institutions, a market economy and a centrally planned economy.  
In a market economy, the market price signals any excess demand or supply, and creates incentives 
for producers. When the market price is higher than the equilibrium price, a producer has an incentive 
to  increase  his  or  her  production  and  increase  sales.  On  the  other  hand,  a  producer  also  has  an 
incentive to cut back on his or her production when the market price is lower than the equilibrium price. 
Meanwhile, increased supply will let the market price fall and vice versa, until the market is cleared at 
the equilibrium price. Such an incentive mechanism achieves efficient resource allocation in a market 
economy.  
In a centrally planned economy, the track record of central planning agencies is dismal. They generally 
failed to structure incentives for a producer to autonomously respond to excess demand and excess 
supply. At the same time, central planning agencies themselves lacked proper incentives to identify 
changes  in  demand,  and  consequently,  often  failed  to  instruct  producers  to  produce  according  to 
changes in demand. Efficient resource allocation was not achieved.  
It  is  no  wonder  then  that  centrally  planned  economies  collapsed  around  the  world  by  the  1990's. 
Institutions and their incentive mechanisms play a key role in determining economic performance.  
Failure of incentive mechanisms in a market economy  
The  market  price  is  not  the  only  source  of  incentives  in  a  market  economy.  Some  incentive 
mechanisms, however, fail to induce efficient behavior.  
For example, incentives influenced the course taken by Japanese banks in dealing with the problem of 
non-performing loans. Until the late 1990's, the Japanese regulatory and institutional environment did 
not  motivate  banks  to  take  prompt  actions  that  would  have  prevented  their  balance  sheets  from 
deteriorating further. For example, the latitude banks had in the disclosure of non-performing assets 
enabled banks to withhold information, perfectly legally, on the full extent of their problems.  
As a result, market discipline could only play a limited role. At the same time, measures available to 
regulators and supervisors were rather limited.  
A  bigger  stick  would  surely  have  helped  the  authorities  to  persuade  banks  to  take  more  decisive 
actions.  
Finally, in the late 1990's and early 2000's, various policy measures were introduced to better align the 
incentives  of  banks.  They  included  the  introduction  of  more  precise  standards  for  disclosure  and 
prompt  corrective  actions  by  the  FSA.  The  functions  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  were 
strengthened  as  well.  The  Bank  of  Japan  encouraged  Japanese  banks  to  make  an  appropriate 
evaluation of their loans by using discounted cash flow method.  
These measures finally generated proper incentives for Japanese banks to put their houses in order. 
The recent removal of the blanket guarantee of deposits was a symbolic event in this regard.  
This  example  suggests  that  incentive  mechanisms  could  affect  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
The central bank has a vested interest in the design of such incentive mechanisms.  
Incentive mechanisms for a central bank  
Central banks are not free from incentives created by their institutional settings.  
For example, in the past, governments in the industrialized economies tended to regard that there was 
a trade-off between high growth and moderate inflation. This created an environment where central 
banks would acquiesce inflation resulting from above-potential economic growth. The stagflation in the 
1970's could be regarded as a consequence of such misguided institutional incentives.  
Fortunately, we have learned from history. From the late 1980's onwards, there seems to be a growing 
recognition  among  governments  in  the  industrialized  economies  that  central  banks  should  aim  for 
price stability, which is a precondition for governments to achieve sustainable growth.  
Accordingly, many central banks today are conducting monetary policy under a more favorable mix of 
incentives. The key ingredients are independence from the government and accountability in decision 
making.  
The  specific  mandate  for  price  stability  varies  from  a  central  bank  to  a  central  bank.  Some  central 
banks are required to hit specific numerical targets, and others do not.  
An  example  of  a  rather  specific  target  is  the  policy  target  agreement  2002  between  the  Minister  of 
Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. The agreement says that "the policy 
target shall be to keep future CPI inflation outcomes between 1 per cent and 3 per cent on average 
over the medium term."  
Another example, which is less specific, can be found in Article 2 of the Bank of Japan Law. It says: 
"Currency and monetary control shall be aimed at, through the pursuit of price stability, contributing to 
the sound development of the national economy."  
From  my  point  of  view,  and  I  believe  my  central  bank  colleagues  would  agree,  the  most  important 
outcome is not hitting a specific numerical target. The achievement of price stability today in terms of a 
particular  price  index  does  not  always  guarantee  sustainable  growth  in  the  future.  It  is,  therefore, 
important to design and put in place an institutional setting that would create incentives for a central 
bank to pursue a price path consistent with sustainable growth.  
Incentive mechanisms for a monetary policy committee  
Incentives  matter  to  central  banks,  not  only  at  the  level  of  macroeconomic  targets,  but  also  at  the 
micro-level of day-to-day decision making. In other words, if the people decide that delegating price 
stability to the central bank leads to the achievement of price stability, how should the central bank 
make its decisions?  
In the growing number of cases, including the Bank of Japan, committees formulate monetary policy. 
Though there is an old saying that a camel is a horse designed by a committee, I feel that there are 
advantages  in  monetary  policy  by  committees.  At  a  minimum,  it  enables  a  thorough  discussion  of 
issues reflecting the diverse background of committee members. On the other hand, the very fact that 
a monetary policy committee consists of different people with different opinions could create conflicting 
incentives within the committee.  
The  chair  of  the  monetary  policy  committee  that  consists  of  different  people  with  different  opinions 
must, therefore, take care in aligning the incentives of members and hopefully arrive at a consensus. I 
remember, in a recent publication, Professor Alan Blinder describing Chairman Greenspan as leading 
the  FOMC  "with  a  velvet  glove,  not  with  an  iron  fist."  This  shows  the  delicate  task  of  the  chair  in 
dealing with diverse if not diverging incentives.  
As to myself, I keep a few points in mind as chair of the Board of the Bank of Japan. First, I welcome 
counter arguments or minority opinions, which contribute to a better decision in the end. Secondly, I 
refrain from actions that might result in undue influences over the discussions.  
If  I  might  give  you  a  glimpse  of  the  inner  workings  of  the  Board,  instead  of  making  an  opening 
statement, I always ask other members to identify issues and express their opinions.  
Final words  
Designing institutions and policies that incorporate appropriate incentive mechanisms plays a crucial 
role  in  determining  the  economic  performance  of  an  economy.  Policy  makers,  including  the  central 
bank governor, still have a lot to learn in this respect.  
Through  the  next  two  days,  I  am  looking  forward  to  hearing  from  experts  in  this  field,  from  both 
academic  circles  and  central  banks,  their  analyses  and  views  on  the  designs  of  various  incentive 
mechanisms in various institutions.  
It  would  be  our  utmost  pleasure  if  every  one  of  you  could  take  home  some  insights  from  these 
discussions.  
Thank you very much.  
