Rachel Lomax: Why monetary stability matters to Merseyside  
Speech  by  Ms  Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  launch  of  the 
Merseyside Economic Review 2005, the Mersey Partnership, Liverpool, 24 February 2005. 
 It is a great pleasure to be back in Merseyside, as the guest of the Mersey Partnership. It’s always 
inspiring to be in a city that has a great future as well as a glorious past – and I’m not referring to Will 
Alsop’s SuperCity of the North. When I was last in Liverpool everyone was on tenterhooks waiting to 
hear the outcome of the European Capital of Culture. Congratulations on a spectacular result. By all 
accounts you’re set to be European Capital of shopping too when the new Grosvenor development 
opens in the Paradise area of the city. 
This  is  my  first  visit  as  a  member  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC).  Of 
course, the Bank and Liverpool go back a very long way. Liverpool was a village when the Bank was 
founded. By the time we opened our first branches around the country, that village had grown into a 
major port, the gateway to the workshop of the world. So it was natural that the branch the Bank built 
in Castle Street in around 1850 was one of its grandest, the work of Charles Cockerell. We still have 
agents in the City – Neil Ashbridge and John Young. And only three years ago the Bank’s Court held 
its annual out-of-London meeting in Liverpool’s imposing Town Hall. 
I  am  particularly  pleased  to  launch  this,  the  third  edition  of  the  Merseyside  Economic  Review.  The 
Partnership  had  its  origins  in  a  Daily  Post  campaign  over  a  decade  ago  (‘who  speaks  for 
Merseyside?’).  It  broke  new  ground  then  and  it  has  been  breaking  new  ground  ever  since.  The 
Economic Review was the first of its kind for any UK City Region. And the Partnership’s report on ‘the 
Gender Agenda: Women in the Merseyside economy’ is another first. 
The value of the Partnership’s approach is clear. Economic regeneration is a highly complex long term 
business which has to bring together many different bodies and initiatives – at local, regional, national, 
European  and  even  international  levels.  It’s  only  too  easy  to  lose  sight  of  the  big  picture.  But 
successful partnership rests on shared goals and clear expectations. 
This Review charts the way: it sets out in clear and simple terms what the Partnership is seeking to 
achieve and it assesses progress against measurable objectives. It has the credibility that comes from 
being grounded in serious analysis of the issues confronting Merseyside. And it has benefited from the 
advice of an independent panel of distinguished experts. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  performance  of  monetary  policy  has  benefited  greatly  from  setting  clear 
objectives  and  measuring  progress  in  a  transparent  and  open  way.  The  UK  first  adopted  specific 
targets  for  inflation  over  a  decade  ago,  and  at  the  same  time  the  Bank  launched  a  new  quarterly 
Inflation  Report  to  share  its  thinking  about  the  economic  prospect.  In  1997,  that  approach  was 
developed,  and  its  credibility  significantly  enhanced,  when  Gordon  Brown  gave  responsibility  for 
setting interest rates to an independent Monetary Policy Committee, consisting of outside experts as 
well as Bank of England officials. 
By any past standards, the period since 1992 has seen a quite remarkable degree of stability, with low 
and  stable  inflation  and  a  record  period  of  sustained  positive  output  growth  and  steadily  improving 
employment. Better monetary policy is not the whole story; but it can share some of the credit for that 
success. 
How does monetary stability like this benefit an area like Merseyside?  
The Bank of England’s job is to control inflationary pressure in the country as a whole. What we do is 
set  interest  rates  to  keep  the  total  demand  in  the  economy  in  line  with  the  economy’s  productive 
capacity. We don’t – and can’t – favour any section of the economy, or the country. 
Merseyside  is  a  region  facing  deep  seated  economic  and  social  challenges,  stemming  from  the 
decline in its traditional industries. In recent decades, many well paid jobs have gone for ever, and in 
the  new world,  earning  good  money  has required  a very  different  set of  skills.  That kind  of  change 
wasn’t  just  a  challenge  to  individuals  and  their  families;  it  threatened  the  viability  of  whole 
communities. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 1
Low inflation is not in itself a solution to problems like this. But it is a pre condition for solving them. 
Merseyside  had  bad  luck  to  be  confronted  with  more  economic  change  in  the  second  half  of  the 
twentieth  century  than  most  people  could  cope  with  at  the  time.  Liverpool  never  lost  its  sense  of 
humour, though there were times when it came close to losing its way. Sadly, you can’t laugh your 
way out of economic decline. 
High inflation and economic instability fostered the wrong climate for taking the long term decisions 
that  were  needed  to  give  Merseyside  a  new  future.  The  levels  of  economic  inactivity  and  social 
deprivation that you are still grappling with today are in part legacies of the 1970s and 1980s, when 
the sharp ups and downs in inflation, interest rates and national output made it much harder to adapt 
to structural economic change at the regional level. 
But more recent success in delivering low inflation and economic stability has created a much better 
climate  for  you  to  succeed.  Economic  regeneration  can’t  get  off  the  ground  without  inspired  local 
leadership,  and  committed  local  partnerships.  But  even  with  them,  it  is  a  long  haul  to  make  the 
investments  in  infrastructure  that  modern  businesses  expect.  And  so  called  soft  investments  –  in 
people, skills, and communities – are even more of a challenge. 
Low inflation and low nominal interest rates matter to you because they provide a sound foundation for 
just this kind of long term planning. And business needs a climate of stability if it is to commit to the 
investment  that’s  needed  to  revitalise  an  area.  We  know  that  it  is  entirely  possible  to  transform  old 
urban areas – there are plenty of inspiring examples from London Docklands to Berlin and Baltimore, 
and if Liverpudlians ever doubted it, nowadays they need go no further than Albert Dock. But it takes 
long term commitment. 
The key findings in today’s Merseyside Economic Review provide convincing evidence that Liverpool 
has turned the corner– with faster growth in the core city than any other English city and jobs growth 
more  than  double  the  national  average.  Manufacturing  remains  important  and  there  is  still  a  strong 
automotive  supply  industry,  which  is  high  tech  these  days,  but  the  real  growth  sectors  are  tourism, 
leisure and modern services. Increasingly, for those who acquire the right skills, the jobs are there – a 
picture that fits with a national labour market where unemployment is now as low as it has been in 
three decades. 
How confident can you be that we will continue to deliver the stability that is our contribution to your 
future success? 
Our latest Inflation Report, published last week, paints a favourable picture for the next few years, with 
continuing steady growth and low inflation. If you trust the MPC to do its job, you might feel reasonably 
safe in basing your decisions on that outlook. But those of us on the Committee can’t afford to take it 
for granted. So you may be reassured to hear that we spend most of our time worrying about the risks 
that could throw the UK economy off course; and arguing about how to respond appropriately. 
So what are the main risks facing us now? 
Last year saw the fastest growth in world output in three decades. We expect growth this year to be 
less spectacular but still robust. But while the US and China are still expanding strongly, growth has 
showed  signs  of  faltering  in  Japan  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  our  major  overseas  market,  the  euro 
area, and especially Germany. We think this weakness is likely to prove temporary, but we could be 
disappointed. 
Unbalanced growth creates strains. The US has a large current account deficit, which is mirrored by 
surpluses  in  the  other  major  trading  blocks.  The  risk  is  that  a  better  balance  will  only  come  about 
through sharp adjustments in exchange rates and a marked increase in US savings, which may cause 
a slowdown in global activity. 
Closer to home, there is uncertainty about the near term momentum of household spending, by far the 
largest influence on domestic demand. While it is difficult to be confident about the path of retail sales 
since the autumn, there is little evidence of much underlying buoyancy. Retail sales are not the whole 
story, and our central view is that any weakness in consumer spending is likely to be temporary. But 
we could easily be wrong. 
The other key uncertainty concerns the speed with which inflation will pick up. Consumer price inflation 
remains below the Government’s 2% target but there are good reasons to expect it to rise over the 
next few years. Input cost inflation has risen sharply, and import prices are not falling as much as they 
were. We think there is very little slack in the economy. The labour market is certainly tight. But the 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2005
growth in labour costs has been surprisingly muted, and some cost pressures have been absorbed by 
lower profit margins. How long can this last? 
At present we think inflation is likely to rise above target sometime next year, though we judge the 
risks to be somewhat on the downside. But it’s a difficult call, and our judgement about the balance of 
risks will be influenced by the way the data shape up in the coming months. 
The MPC faces a familiar dilemma, torn between the importance of well grounded analysis and the 
need to act promptly. On the one hand, there is a case for waiting for more evidence on the issues that 
underlie these risks – as there almost always is; on the other hand, since interest rates take a year or 
more to affect the economy, we need to be pre emptive, to head off trouble at the pass so to speak, 
even at the risk of sometimes taking the wrong decision. 
If we get it right – and a lot of effort goes into ensuring that we do – the outcome of our short term 
deliberations should be a degree of monetary stability that will create the right climate for you to take 
the long term decisions on which your economic success depends. 
BIS Review 11/2005 
 3
