Ardian Fullani: Brief presentation on accounting developments in Albania 
Greeting  address  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  First  Congress  of 
Accountants and Financiers, Tirana, 10 January 2005. 
 Dear friends and colleges, greetings to you all! 
Honestly  I  feel  well  being  invited  to  take  part  in  the  first  event  of  such  magnitude  of  Albanian 
accountants. Moreover, I feel well being among lots of my colleges and friends, noticing also many 
newcomers among you.  
Along  the  past  years,  we  have  frequently  had  the  chance  to  debate  about  issues  on  accounting 
evidences. Along the planned economy collapse at end of 80’s and along two or three first years of the 
subsequent  decade,  besides  other  things,  created  a  kind  of  stagnation  even  in  terms  of  financial 
accounting. The large economic transformation, rapid emergence of private enterprises, new concept 
of  asset  management  and  public  enterprises,  yet-unconsolidated  state,  lack  of  international 
experiences  and  numerous  other  causes  created  a  confusion,  which,  I  think,  in  spite  of  the  years 
passing by,  continues to accompany us even nowadays.  
From my present position, I feel well to emphasize that banking business was among the first one to 
invest and was rapidly updated to international practices of this direction. Therefore, the accounting 
balance  sheets  and  financial  statements  of  these  institutions  are  almost  unified  in  advanced 
international  patterns,  making  their  accountability,  transparency  and  reliability  gain  contemporary 
magnitude.   
On  the  other  hand,  various  decision-making  circles,  groups  of  economic  opinion,  national  or 
international  monitoring  institutions  have  the  idea  that  current  accounting  evidence  in  various 
segments of economy leaves much to be desired. Furthermore, frequently it serves as a leverage to 
materialize the endeavors for fiscal evasion, why not even for other illegal activities.  
I  understand  that,  above  all,  we  have  to  do  with  an  ethical  professional  problem,  an  intentional 
deformation which creates the premises to keep alive and increase informal economy endlessly.  
I think that today’s initiative is a positive development of major size, which above all will serve for a 
better  evaluation  of  the  accountant’s  figure.  We  should  all  accept  now,  without  exception  that  for  a 
higher responsibility and ethics of accounting expert, investment is needed. It is true that more support 
is  needed  to  accounting  expert  and  also  more  investments  are  needed  in  terms  of  training  and 
qualification.  
More attention should be shown to introduction of new up-dated literature on accounting and financial 
analysis techniques in general.   
I am convinced that investment in knowledge on accounting experts will bring about a fast and safe 
return of your role in economy.  
To sum up this brief presentation, I take advantage of the opportunity to appeal that it’s the time now 
to  have  a  unified  standard  of  accounting  evidence  in  economy,  completely  in  compliance  with 
International Financial Reports Standard (IFRS). Our financial statements should be accurate, fair, and 
easily comparable. Our accounting balance sheets should reflect genuinely the accounting position at 
end of the accounting period.  
It would be much easier for the banking system to set up its lending policies if the balance sheets and 
financial reports were true, standardized and publicly known. Also, the equity market, we have largely 
dwelt with, would have a real development stage.  A business may be capitalized only when it is fair 
and open, implying ethics and professionalism on your side.  
You  should  think  that  your  product  constitutes  basic  documents  from  which  the  much  desired 
statistical  information  will  spring  to  make  further  generalizations  and  nourish  the  country’s 
macroeconomic statistics.  
On  the  other  hand,  fair  balance  sheets  would  better  assist  relevant  authorities  to  control  the 
information, evasion and undeserved profits.  
I strongly believe that you will take more advantage out of this. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
Therefore, I do not hesitate to once more congratulate you on this initiative and ensure that you will 
always find an open window of communication and mutual cooperation at the Bank of Albania.  
Finally,  I  would  suggest  to  all  of  you  that  have  chosen  this  fair  profession  to  make  the  slogan  “fair 
authenticity” as your own. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
