Toshihiko Fukui: 100th anniversary of the Bank of Japan’s presence in New 
York 
Remarks  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  reception  for  the 
100th anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Representative  Office  in  New  York,  New  York,  6  January 
2005. 
 Distinguished guests, Chairman Greenspan, President Geithner, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to tonight’s event commemorating the 100th anniversary of the 
Bank of Japan’s presence in New York. 
Beginning of the Bank of Japan’s New York office 
In  1905,  exactly  one  hundred  years  ago,  the  Bank  opened  its  office  here  in  New  York.  Its  original 
mission was to oversee the business related to government debt issuance. At that time, Japan was 
engaged in warfare against Russia. 
Baron  Korekiyo  Takahashi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  at  the  time,  was  asked  to  raise  the 
necessary  funds  -  10  million  pounds,  between  three  to  four  percent  of  Japan’s  GDP  at  the  time  - 
abroad. He first went to London, then the largest financial market in the world. Since Japan was only a 
small emerging nation at that time, it comes as no surprise that Baron Takahashi could only raise half 
the necessary funds there. Fortunately, he came across a prominent American banker, head of Kuhn, 
Loeb & Co., who agreed to underwrite the remaining half. 
Baron Takahashi, who later became Governor of the Bank of Japan and eventually Prime Minister of 
Japan, wrote in his autobiography that he was utterly surprised by the fact that this American banker 
literally made the decision overnight. Even in those days, it appears, U.S. bankers had boldness and 
decisiveness when it came to completing a deal. 
Around the time the deal was struck, the yield spreads of the Imperial Japanese government debt over 
the  British  Consol,  a  measure  of  risk  premium  against  the  benchmark  of  the  era,  peaked  around 
300 basis points. It tightened to around 150 basis points one and a half year later. 
When  the  first  official  of  our  New  York  office  arrived  in  1905,  he  must  have  had  a  strong  brew  of 
cultural shock. For example, back in Tokyo street cars barely started to move on the ground; whereas 
in  New  York,  subway  service  was  already  in  its  second  year of  operation.  Also,  I’m  certain  that  he 
wasted no time in attending a Yankee game, whose history in New York started just two years earlier. 
The  year  1905  was  roughly  half  a  century  after  the  establishment  of  formal  diplomatic  relationship 
between the United States and Japan, and by then the number of Japanese citizens in New York had 
started to pick up. In fact, this place where we are all gathered tonight, the Nippon Club - which stands 
for Japan Club - will also be celebrating its 100th anniversary this year. 
Benefits from the presence in New York 
The New York market has continued to grow over the years. Time and again, Japan has benefited 
from financial activities in this market. Debt issuance following the Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923 is 
one such instance. When the deal was arranged, the Governor of the Bank at the time, Junnosuke 
Inoue, played an important role. It is interesting to note that his first hand knowledge of the New York 
market as well as the bonds he formed with U.S. bankers during his tenure as general manager of our 
New York office proved to be quite valuable for future endeavors. 
Equally  significant  has  been  the  fact  that,  over  the  years,  we  have  had  the  pleasure  of  engaging 
ourselves  in  countless  discussions  with  such  eminent  figures  as  market  participants,  distinguished 
scholars,  and  especially  the  esteemed  Federal  Reserve  officials,  on  topics  ranging  from  monetary 
policy to financial market developments. 
On  December  1913,  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  was  enacted,  and  the  following  year,  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  came  into  existence.  Through  the  discussions  with  the  Fed,  we  have 
7developed  common  understandings,  such  as:  the  importance  of  price  stability  for  sustainable 
economic growth; the importance of a sound financial system as well as liquid and well functioning 
financial markets. 
Today, the primary responsibility of the New York office is to develop a channel for a candid dialogue 
with respectable people widely in the region it covers, that is, both North and South America, but the 
crucial  part  is  of  course  the  United  States,  above  all,  Federal  Reserve  officials  and  banking 
communities  here.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  New  York  office  has  been  very  successful  in 
creating a bond of trust between us. 
This strong partnership has helped us weather a storm at times of difficulties. At times of no difficulties, 
too, our New York office gave essential inputs to discussions in Tokyo, thereby enabling us to learn a 
lot about not only the U.S. economy but also economic and financial developments in the world. 
Let  me  emphasize  that  our  New  York  office  is  performing  a  very  important  role  within  the  Bank  of 
Japan.  That  is  not  just  my  personal  view,  but  the  entire  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  appreciates  the 
contribution made by the New York office. 
Looking ahead 
Before  I  conclude,  allow  me  to  briefly  touch  upon  the  current  economic  situation  in  Japan.  The 
fundamentals of Japan’s economy have visibly improved during the past few years, although we have 
seen a temporary pause in growth in the first half of FY 2004. Considerable progress has been made 
in dealing with structural elements such as excessive capital stock, debt, and labor in the corporate 
sector,  and  the  vulnerability  in  the  financial  system,  all  of  which  have  delayed  the  recovery  of  the 
Japanese economy. 
Japan, it seems to me, is once again well poised to contribute positively to the world economy. Against 
this  backdrop,  the  economic  and  financial  ties  between  the  United  States  and  Japan  remain  as 
important as ever. 
On  behalf  of  all  the  current  and  past  colleagues  of  mine  at  the  Bank,  I  would  like  to  express  my 
deepest gratitude for the unconditional support that has been extended to us over the years. I have no 
doubt that the coming decades will be no less rewarding than these 100 years have been. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2005
