Lars Heikensten: The IMF - mandate, means and governance in a changing world 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Joint  IMF-Bundesbank 
Symposium “The IMF in a changing world”, Frankfurt, 8 June 2005. 
 The question posed to this panel is "The IMF – a panacea for every illness?".  That it is being asked at 
all indicates that confidence in the IMF is strong today. I agree with those that have great confidence in 
the  IMF.  Nevertheless,  my  answer  to  the  question  is  no:  The  IMF  is  not  –  and  should  not  be  -  a 
panacea for every illness. Allow me to raise a number of issues against this background. 
Focus on the core functions 
The IMF has a unique mandate – to promote global macroeconomic and financial stability. This is the 
fundamental basis of sound economic performance. The IMF’s mission is certainly not less significant 
today than it was before. 
It was no coincidence that when the IMF was founded, in Bretton Woods in 1944, it was accompanied 
by  the  creation  of  the  World  Bank  and  (later)  the  WTO  –  with  explicit  areas  of  responsibility.  It  is 
important to adhere to these in order for each of the organisations to be able to work effectively and 
efficiently. A stable economic development is the basis of other international organisations' work. So it 
is vital that the IMF continues to focus on its core functions – and to do it well. 
The IMF's objective and instruments 
The IMF's mandate is still valid in the main – in spite of the enormous changes that have taken place 
in the international financial system since the IMF was created. We still need an organisation with the 
task to foster trade, employment and growth by promoting international monetary cooperation as well 
as macroeconomic and financial stability. 
On the other hand, there is always reason to consider whether the Fund’s instruments to reach this 
overall objective should be modified. The IMF’s main instruments today are surveillance, lending and 
technical assistance. Allow me to say something about each of these. 
Surveillance 
The IMF's key instrument for reaching its overall objective should be its preventive activities, which are 
primarily carried out within the scope of its surveillance function. The IMF's primarily role is not to treat 
illnesses but to prevent them from breaking out. 
Much can be done to bolster the IMF's surveillance function, both as regards individual countries but 
also, to an increasing extent, by way of a stronger regional and global focus. This change in emphasis 
can,  among  other  things,  be  motivated  by  the  fact  that  globalisation  and  increased  integration  has 
resulted in a situation where more and more countries’ national policies give rise to externalities. A 
strong ‘multilateral’ surveillance function could contribute, more clearly than today, to creating a broad 
international discussion of global imbalances, incorrectly valued exchange rates, etc., which generate 
risks to stability both in individual countries and in the international financial system as a whole. 
In this context, it is crucial that the member countries accept and support the role that has been given 
to  the  IMF,  including  taking  seriously  its  advice  and  recommendations.  We  are  often  more  keen  to 
underline  the  importance  of  the  IMF's  surveillance  function  for  other  countries  than  we  are  to  be 
guided by the IMF's analyses of our own countries. This is not beneficial for the IMF’s credibility. 
Lending 
Even though the Fund’s surveillance is effective it is likely that there will sometimes be a need for IMF 
financing in the future as well. This holds for poor countries with very limited or no access to private 
capital markets, but also for emerging market economies that have access to private capital markets. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to  differentiate  between  IMF  lending  to  address  'traditional'  current 
account crises and capital account crises, although this distinction is sometimes hard to do in practice. 
In the event of a traditional current account crisis, many countries today can obtain loans in private 
capital markets. This is a result of the increasing liberalisation of the international capital market over 
several decades. The IMF’s role in situations such as this has thus become less important, although 
probably not done away with entirely. Catalytic financing from the IMF, which is provided in connection 
with  economic  policy  programs  designed  to  address  the  underlying  account  problems,  may  still  be 
important for resolving crises. The situation is worse when it comes to capital account crises. These 
often stem from sensitivity to fast swings in capital flows, and break out when economic policy lacks 
credibility. They can also be caused by a combination of domestic problems and contagion from other 
countries  that  are  considered  to  be  in  similar  economic  situations.  At  the  same  time  as  the  free 
movement  of  capital  increases  the  potential  welfare  effects  of  globalisation,  it  entails  risks  that  can 
only be managed through disciplined economic policy. IMF financing for capital account crises should 
principally aim to quickly restore confidence in the affected countries’ economic policies. The intention 
should be that the loans be paid back to the IMF after a relatively short period of time. 
When a serious crisis is at hand, it is hard to say no to a loan request. At the same time, it is important 
to  counter  tendencies  towards  moral  hazard,  which  in  the  longer  term  could  result  in  both  riskier 
economic policies and irresponsible lending from private creditors. 
This  is  a  genuinely  difficult  issue.  There  are  no  easy  solutions.  The  Nordic-Baltic  constituency  has 
argued that the use of the IMF's loan instrument must be based on unambiguous, predictable rules. 
And that the rules be applied. This has not always been the case, e.g. as regards certain decisions 
concerning  exceptional  access,  i.e.  where  the  IMF  has  granted  substantial  loans  without  requiring 
sufficient conditionality. In a number of instances the result has been a longer-term dependence on 
loans and in several cases recurrent crises as well. 
We  should  now,  when  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in  the  world  is  relatively  calm,  take  the 
opportunity to simplify and clarify the rules further, particularly as regards their application. When the 
next financial crisis occurs it may be too late. 
Another aspect of the Fund's function in crisis management is its role when countries are forced to 
suspend  payments.  It  is  possible  to  further  strengthen  the  instruments  available  today  –  Collective 
Action Clauses as well as Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring – in order to 
ensure a transparent and predictable debt restructuring process for borrowers and lenders. 
These instruments lay the main responsibility for agreeing on debt renegotiation terms on the borrower 
countries and creditors. The Fund’s most important function in such circumstances is to provide the 
parties with the best possible information about the economic situation so as to facilitate agreement. 
The Fund should also try to contribute to ensuring that economic policies in the debtor country make it 
possible  in  the  longer  run  to  restore  balance  and  to  reduce  the  country’s  debt  to  a  level  that  is 
sustainable in the long term. The Fund itself may have to provide some financing to achieve this, but 
when it comes to countries in highly vulnerable positions Fund financing can only play a limited role. 
It  will  not  always  be  possible  to  bring  about  a  sustainable  debt  level  in  this  way  without  drawn-out 
negotiations and considerable economic costs. To make these kind of situations more predictable, and 
also  more  easy  to  resolve,  it  would  be  desirable  to  strengthen  the  existing  framework  with  a  final 
objective to have comprehensive framework for the restructuring of sovereign debt. 
Technical assistance 
The IMF has unique competence through its ability to combine scientific knowledge and institutional 
skills with longstanding experience of work in individual countries. This competence often applies to 
'narrow' areas that a particular country (normally) only seldom requires help with. This includes advice 
and support regarding how to build up a functioning supervisory authority or how to manage a banking 
crisis. It is crucial to make the utmost use of this competence. 
The IMF has untapped potential 
What I have said so far, that the Fund’s mandate and main instruments for achieving it are essentially 
appropriate,  is  hardly  controversial.  Most  people  agree  on  this  in  theory.  In  practice,  however,  it  is 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
more  difficult.  When  it  comes  to  the  crunch,  we  member  countries  do  not  always  allow  the  IMF  to 
effectively carry out the functions that we have given it a mandate to perform. 
In my opinion, the IMF could play a more important role than it does today. But that is not principally 
due to its mandate and instruments as such but because we as members do not allow it to fulfil its 
potential. 
Wherein lies the untapped potential? In which of the IMF's main fields could the organisation play an 
even stronger part? 
The problems are not a consequence of shortcomings in the borrowing instruments. I do not see any 
immediate  need  for  new  types  of  lending  instruments,  such  as  non-borrowing  programs  or  a 
reintroduction of Contingency Credit Lines. There are already surveillance methods in place to deal 
with  such  situations,  and  today's  borrowing  instruments  are  sufficiently  flexible  to  meet  the  existing 
requirements (and demand). 
Nor  do  I  believe  that  the  problems  to  any  great  extent  are  due  to  incorrect  analysis  or  erroneous 
assessments, even though the situations faced by the Fund are often difficult and the advice given has 
been open to question from time to time. Nonetheless, there are a number of things that can be done 
in this area. 
Shortcomings still exist, as I mentioned earlier, as regards the Fund's participation in crisis resolution. 
There is scope for further development of those instruments that exist today. The reason why this has 
not happened is because some countries oppose it for political reasons. This brings me into the role 
that “political considerations” play for the IMF to work well. 
In  my  view,  the  central  problems  of  the  IMF  are  often  political  in  nature.  These  problems  exist  at 
several different levels: 
• 
Individual  countries  are  sometimes  for  political  reasons  not  willing  to  take  the  sometimes 
bitter  medicine  prescribed  by  the  IMF’s  staff  and  Executive  Board  and  engage  in  serious 
dialogue. Neither is it unusual, if they do swallow the medicine, that the countries blame any 
side-effects on the IMF whether they were a result of the medicine or not; that the ownership 
– to use IMF vocabulary – is weak. At the same time, there may also be scope for the IMF 
itself to become better at operating in an environment where strong political considerations 
are present. 
Nor  are  groups  of  countries  always  willing  at  IMF  meetings  to  raise  questions  of  crucial 
importance to the world economy as a whole. Larger countries do not want to run the risk of 
coming under the spotlight. As a result, the big industrial countries normally prefer to discuss 
imbalances and exchange rates in a narrower circle, if at all. 
Also  when  dealing  with  financial  crises,  political  considerations  are  constantly  present. 
Everyone that follows IMF’s work in this area the last 10-15 years, has been able to see that 
geopolitical considerations sometimes play an important role when defining the conditionality 
– with mixed results. 
  What can be done to strengthen the IMF? 
There is every reason to approach this question with humility. Many people have reflected on it and 
plenty of suggestions have been put forward in the debate. Since the crucial problems are political, 
they are also likely to require political solutions. 
In  recent  years,  the  discussion  has  focused  on  matters  to  do  with  quota,  voice  and  representation 
(QVR).  Many  countries  consider  themselves  to  be  underrepresented  under  the  current  structure. 
Almost  without  exception,  countries  favour  criteria  for  representation  that  boost  their  own  influence. 
This is normal when these kind of issues are discussed, but makes progress difficult. In the eyes of 
many it is Europe that is overrepresented. But it is enough to read the book ‘An Uncertain World', by 
the former US Secretary of the Treasury Robert Rubin, to realise that it is not Europe that has the real 
power - it is the United States that essentially calls the shots. This simple example illustrates that there 
is a big difference between the formal and actual power. 
Personally, I come to a number of different conclusions from this discussion. The world has changed 
since the fall of communism and as a consequence of the positive development in a large number of 
emerging  markets.  That  gives  cause  to  modify  countries’  formal  influence  in  the  IMF  by  updating 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
quotas to better reflect recent changes in world economy. Such changes should be implemented step 
by step, and with as broad support as possible. 
Some argues that the criteria used for determining countries’ influence should be modified. I am not 
convinced that this is the right way to move forward. There is much symbolism in this issue, which 
makes it a difficult one. For obvious reasons, it is also difficult to find criteria that balances the need for 
both borrowing countries and creditors to get reasonable influence, and, at the same time assures that 
the organisation functions well. The world is changing quickly and it is only a couple of years since 
several of the big emerging markets, which now according to a GDP criterion should be given greater 
influence, were in need of support from the very countries that today by the same criterion would have 
to scale back their role. We do not know what the situation will be in five or ten years. Maybe, there 
are reasons to aim for more regional representation? A very difficult question – which I do not think 
can  be  ignored  –  is  if  the  level  of  “democracy”  or “governance”  in  individual  countries’  should  be  a 
factor when determining countries influence in the IMF. Whatever the answer to this question is, it will 
have potential consequences for the legitimacy of the organisation. 
Finally, we should not be led to believe that a changed representation per se, resolves the problems of 
the IMF. There are a number of other things that could, and should, be done that may even play a 
more important role. 
Allow  me  to  indicate  a  number  of  areas  where  more  could  be  done,  and  where  the  prospect  of 
progress  is  probably  higher  than  in  the  QVR-field.  I  myself  have  positive  experiences  of  a  similar 
gradual process of reform within the framework of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 
1. 
Much has been done to increase transparency in various ways at the IMF. Greater openness 
is probably the most important way to develop the organisation’s analysis and surveillance 
activities. In a longer perspective, openness can also be vital to create a political pressure for 
change in individual countries. In the same way, openness with regard to current imbalances 
lends support to change in different countries and for considerations in the financial markets. 
I  myself  would  very  much  like  to  see  more  transparent  application  and  assignment 
procedures  for  posts  at  all  levels  within  the  IMF.  The  best  candidate  should  get  the  job 
regardless of the applicant’s country of origin. 
For the IMF to have enough weight, it is necessary that the key issues for the world economy 
really are discussed at the IMF’s table and not at others. Those who wishes to strengthen 
the IMF – and are serious about it – could therefore not  create new forums outside the IMF 
with  a  view  to  discussing  matters  that  fall  within  the  IMF’s  mandate.  If  this  is  done,  the 
organisation will, in practice, be undermined. 
One way of reducing the need for creating new fora, and, at the same time, in a pragmatic 
way  approach  issues  of  representation,  would  be  to  work  more  actively  in  the  Executive 
Board  with  various  (small)  committees/subcommittees  (similar  to  those  in  many  national 
parliaments and in the Executive Board at the World Bank). For example, there could be a 
committee  for  global  exchange  rate  issues,  in  which  the  large  currency  blocs  are 
represented; another committee focused on poverty issues, where poor countries and major 
donor countries have a high representation; and a committee for crisis resolution, in which 
creditors  have  a  strong  position,  etc.  Reforms  in  this  direction  could  also  increase  the 
efficiency of the Executive Board. It could also imply that a small increase in the number of 
chairs would be manageable. The problem that a number of countries would end up outside 
some of the discussions, should not be exaggerated particularly if the consequence of total 
changes is that IMF gets a more central role in the international discussion than today. To 
the extent that the problem remain, it should be possible to manage through a high degree of 
openness. 
The role of the Executive Board should be stronger and more clearly defined in relation to 
the IMF’s management. The current principle whereby the IMF’s managing director is both 
chairman  of  the  Board  and  responsible  for  executing  the  Board’s  decisions  is  open  to 
question. With a more clear division of responsibilities, the IMF management could be more 
effective and, in practice, possibly stronger. It is also vital that the Board is represented at a 
high enough level with full confidence from the capital level in order for the Board to be able 
to become an effective arena for central policy discussions. 
The  IMFC  could  be  reinforced.  The  IMFC  Deputies  group  could  also  be  strengthened  by 
convening  also  in  between  the  annual  and  the  spring  meetings.  It  is  important  that  all 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2005
6. 
countries participate at a high level (today, many countries participate with their Executive 
Directors). One likely reason that the BIS functions more smoothly, a part from the fact the 
issues discussed are of a less political nature, is that those who take the decisions on the 
domestic front are the same people that meet in Basel. 
Overhaul  the  IMF's  internal  organisation.  As  multilateral  surveillance  becomes  more 
important,  the  country  departments  should  work  (even)  closer  with  the  departments  that 
possess knowledge of institutions and institution building. It is also reasonable that the IMF’s 
current  resource  base,  which  primarily  consists  of  economists,  be  broadened  with  people 
that  have  a  financial  background  and  practical  experience  of  policy  work  and  institution 
building in their own countries. 
Concluding remarks 
To sum up: 
• 
• 
   The IMF’s overall objective is still valid; 
The  IMF’s  instruments  for  reaching  this  objective  –  surveillance,  lending  and  technical 
assistance – are, in general, functional and effective, in theory; 
In practice, however, many of the IMF’s member countries do not allow the Fund to play the 
role that it could have. The IMF has untapped potential, not least in the area of surveillance; 
The untapped potential is closely related to political issues. Many countries do not seriously 
consider the recommendations given to them by the IMF and/or blame the Fund for its own 
problems. Other countries want to avoid that the consequences of their own policy actions, 
for the rest of the world, are discussed within the IMF or prefer to discuss them elsewhere. 
To increase the legitimacy of the IMF, there are reasons to consider the formal governance 
issues, (i.e. the QVR-issues). A consensus has to be built, step by step, on how to deal with 
this. However, to increase the efficiency of  the Fund, a number of other reforms could be 
implemented  that  are  as  important  as  the  QVR-issue.  In  these  areas  it  is  possible  start 
moving forward at once. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 5
