Eiríkur Guðnason: Central bank collections in a small society 
Speech  by  Mr  Eiríkur  Guðnason,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the  European 
Association for Banking History (EABH), Lisbon, 15 December 2004. 
 I would like to begin by pointing out that my talk will deal with central bank collections not only in a 
small society, but also in a young bank. The Central Bank of Iceland is only 43 years old. Even so, its 
collection activities have gained recognition in Iceland, however they might stand up to an international 
comparison.  
The Central Bank of Iceland maintains three collections: its archives, library and numismatic museum. 
They are partly housed in the Bank’s headquarters in the centre of Reykjavík, and partly in separate 
premises in another area of the city, which is almost entirely devoted to the collections. In the Bank’s 
organisation chart the three collections have until recently belonged to a single department under joint 
management, but have now been restructured as I shall mention later.  
The history of banking in Iceland dates back less than 120 years. Iceland’s first commercial bank, the 
state-owned Landsbanki Íslands (or the National Bank of Iceland), was established in 1886 while the 
country was still under Danish rule, although by that time it had just gained fiscal autonomy. In the 
second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century  Iceland  achieved  full 
sovereignty and independence in successive stages, culminating in the establishment of the Republic 
60 years ago, in 1944. The process towards independence was more peaceful and civilised in Iceland 
than has generally been the case elsewhere. When the Republic was declared, Iceland’s population 
was only 130 thousand, while today it has grown to almost 300 thousand – although that could still be 
the size of one suburb in many other countries!  
Over this period, the institutional infrastructure of a modern society was gradually built up in Iceland. 
Domestic central banking activities began in the 1920s and were assigned to Landsbanki, which was 
also the largest commercial bank at that time. In 1961 the Central Bank was established as a separate 
institution. 
Archives  
When this milestone was reached, the Central Bank was assigned the role of storing the archives held 
by its predecessor. This means that the Central Bank’s archives in effect cover a period three times 
longer than the Bank’s own history. Reflecting this fact, the Bank’s other collections have always had a 
somewhat wider scope than meeting its own immediate needs.  
The Central Bank’s archives preserve more than the 120-year history of banking in Iceland, because 
they  also  include  records  from  various  public  sector  funds  that  have  been  under  the  Bank’s 
administration or leadership over the years – together with documentation from the Bank Inspectorate, 
which operated as a unit within the Central Bank until 1998.  
In addition, the archives contain the personalia of several leading figures from the history of Icelandic 
banking. Some of this material is owned by other institutions but the Bank has undertaken to preserve 
it in suitable form, catalogue it and make it available to academic researchers. This material includes 
some of the documents that are most frequently used by visitors. 
The Bank’s paper document archive currently occupies 2,300 metres of shelf space. Like everywhere 
else, its growth is slowing down with the increasing prominence of electronic documents. Sometimes it 
is difficult to say who plays the greater role in record management these days – the archivists or the 
computer technicians.  
One emphasis in the Bank’s archiving is to be able to trace every matter from the moment it arises, 
and examine and keep track of it until it has been fully dealt with and the documents concerning it are 
stored  for  preservation.  This  is  mandatory  under  Icelandic  law.  To  fulfil  this  legal  requirement,  the 
Bank uses an electronic record management system and centralised archiving. In other words, all mail 
is opened and recorded in the system at the archive unit, which also sets rules about how employees 
should record documents created within the Bank.  
BIS Review 15/2005 
 1
The  archives  have  four  roles:  to  promote  innovation,  keep  up  to  date  with  new  techniques  and 
formulate rules for document storage; to supervise the use of the Bank’s record management system; 
to provide instruction with training courses and user manuals; and to handle preservation of the Bank’s 
paper documents.  
The archives’ remit extends beyond the preservation of documents and access to them. The unit also 
cultivates  the  form  and  appearance  of  the  Bank’s  own  documents,  to  ensure  a  respectable, 
harmonised and  pleasant  look  for  them.  On  one  level,  human contact  depends  upon  maintaining  a 
consistent character – in our daily business, our appearance or the form of what we produce, including 
documents. So the appearance of its documents is in the Bank’s direct interest. The archives’ role in 
designing a smooth appearance for documents, harmonised fonts and font sizes, column width and 
other factors that affect their readability, should not be underestimated. Some of the archives’ tasks 
have been to produce a style manual, design templates and promote their use.  
Although  the  most  important  aspects  of  an  institution’s  history  will  always  be  embodied  in  physical 
documents,  there  is  an  increasing  awareness  that  history  cannot  be  recorded  in  texts  and  figures 
alone.  Photography  has  long  been  such  a  prominent  historical  resource  that  it  must  be  addressed 
alongside  text  documents.  Accordingly,  the  archives’  mission  of  collecting  and  preserving  visual 
documentation  has  recently  been  given  a  sharper  focus.  A  catalogue  system  has  been  set  up  for 
storing  photographic  images  in  digital  format.  The  same  applies  to  video  and  audio  recordings 
concerning  the  history  of  the  Bank.  A  project  is  also  being  discussed  and  prepared  for  taping 
documentary interviews with selected employees of the Bank – mostly older and retired staff – about 
their experience.  
The  Central  Bank’s  archiving  activities  are  overseen  by  the  National  Archives.  In  the  National 
Archives’  view  the  documents  at  the  Central  Bank  are  well  preserved  and  it  does  not  seek  to  take 
them into its own safekeeping.  
It  is  impossible  to  set  absolute  rules  about  the  Central  Bank  archives’  user  services.  Among  other 
things, they are shaped by the provisions of the current Information Act and the confidentiality required 
of an institution of this kind. It also tends to be difficult to assess requests by users and how likely they 
are  to  honour  the  conditions  imposed  about  the  use  and  handling  of  sensitive  source  material.  We 
have not yet insisted on reading a work based on our archive material before it is published – as is the 
case in some places.  
Throughout the Central Bank’s forty-year history, the archives have been linked with library services in 
the organisation chart. The rationale was that for most of this time, paper documents were involved in 
both cases. Library cataloguing is in many ways simpler and more accessible than archive registration, 
if the formal features of the material allow this to be done (author, title, title page). As a result, various 
material has tended to be catalogued in the library that, somewhere else, would have been archived. 
The  grounds  for  doing  so  have  changed  with  the  declining  scope  of  paper  documents  and 
corresponding  increase  in  electronic  documents.  The  special  administrative  features  of  electronic 
record management are the main reason that the archives have now been separated from the Bank’s 
other collections and incorporated into the Operations Department.  
Library  
The Central Bank Library is another storage place for resources. From an early stage it was assigned 
a  joint  purpose  which  probably  makes  it  unusual  in  the  central  bank  library  world.  One  purpose  is 
acquisitions  connected  with  the  Bank’s  day-to-day  activities:  printed  books  and  journals,  as  well  as 
electronic  materials.  Experts  at  the  Bank  are  consulted  about  which  publications  are  selected.  Its 
second purpose is as a preservation library for books on the economy, business, social issues, history 
and  natural  resources  of  Iceland.  The  Central  Bank  Library  now  has  an  extensive  and  valuable 
collection of books on these topics. The term “preservation library” means that measures are taken to 
ensure that the collection is permanently preserved for future generations. This is done both by storing 
the material in suitable bindings, et cetera, and sparing it from the wear and tear that could threaten its 
preservation.  
Some of you might be wondering whether this should not be a task for the National Library, one of 
whose main roles is to make exhaustive collections on national subjects and ensure their preservation. 
This is a large and complex task, and its complete success can never be certain. To fulfil it, national 
libraries rely primarily on the legal deposit laws that have been passed in most countries to facilitate 
the complete collection of material from domestic printing works. Legislation of this kind was relatively 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2005
easy to implement while the reproduction of material from books was confined to the printing industry 
and public photocopying services. In recent decades we have seen radical changes in the production 
of  research  literature  as  numerous  institutions  have  been  equipped  with  various  types  of  printing 
facilities.  A  considerable  part  of  this  product  goes  through  the  closed  channels  of  interchange  gifts 
between research people and related institutions. This makes a national library’s goals for collection 
very hard to achieve. It is more difficult now to haul in a national collection. Therefore, we have found 
that  institutional  libraries  will  become  increasingly  important  for  the  completion  of  the  national 
collection.  The  Central  Bank  Library  belongs  to  this  group.  Obviously,  specialist  libraries  that  have 
been  successful  in  their  fields  can  quite  often  supplement  the  National  Library.  This  refers  to 
institutions that deal with social and economic issues, domestic resources and the cultural heritage. All 
these institutions either produce or receive large amounts of specialist material which constitutes part 
of the national collection but to varying degrees slips through the mesh of legal deposit.  
This  is  the  philosophy  behind  the  second  role  which  has  been  given  to  the  Central  Bank  Library  – 
along  with  the  fact  that  the  Bank  has  managed  to  keep  it  fairly  well  appointed.  Inspired  by  this 
philosophy, a decade ago the Central Bank made an agreement with the National Library under which 
its preservation section is regarded as part of the national collection. The National Library is granted 
special access to this collection and can regard it as a reserve.  
The agreement with the National Library is an original effort to ensure the preservation of documentary 
resources. Just how seriously the Central Bank Library takes this task is shown by the fact that for 
many years it has employed a bookbinder who handles various aspects of preserving its collection. 
Such  a  facility  at  an  institutional  library  has  been  brought  to  the  public’s  attention  and  often  had 
positive consequences. Certainly the availability of this service means that more people who need to 
rid themselves of good library material want to have it preserved at the Central Bank. In this way the 
library has acquired an assortment of material, even whole subjects.  
One of the largest and most noteworthy collections at the Central Bank Library consists of Icelandic 
newspapers and political papers. Besides its size, it is also better preserved than any other collection 
of such material in Iceland – newspapers suffer some of the worst wear and tear of all resources in 
open libraries.  
Another  noteworthy  special  collection  is  Islandica  extranea  –  foreign  works  on  Iceland.  This  is  built 
around a private collection that the Bank acquired by several decades ago and has maintained. 
The Central Bank Library has acquired an excellent collection of old maps, which is currently roughly 
as  large  as  the  National  Library’s  own  map  collection.  Maps  from  the  Bank’s  collection  have  often 
been exhibited in public, sometimes as the main exhibit. The National Library has set up an impressive 
website devoted to Icelandic maps with information about their history and context and digital images 
of every old map in its collection. As part of their cooperation, at the request of the National Library the 
Bank’s map collection has been included on the website to complement it (www.bok.hi.is/kort). 
It  is  not  the  Central  Bank’s  absolute  intention  to  preserve  all  its  special  collections  under  its  own 
auspices  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Thus  it  has  been  decided  to  deposit  certain  materials  in  the 
National Library to form special collections there.  
The Bank Library is first and foremost an institutional library and is therefore not prepared to serve the 
public in general, although all reasonable requests from external users are dealt with positively. It is 
made  easier  to  use  by  being  linked  up  with  the  National  Library  and  a  number  of  others  with  an 
electronic union catalogue. The catalogue is accessible worldwide over the Internet (www.gegnir.is) 
and is a good gateway to our holdings. Inclusion in the catalogue draws attention to the Central Bank 
Library and gives scholars easy access to resources not found elsewhere. The Central Bank Library 
now accounts for around 24 thousand entries in the union catalogue. Within our facilities we can offer 
both isolated study rooms and less private areas for our guests, mostly academic people. A number of 
important historical works have been written by authors who have been given research facilities at the 
library.  
Access to the preservation section of the library is based on the principle that the material is not put at 
greater risk than would be considered acceptable at a national library. Two risks should be mentioned 
in particular: the valuable newspaper collection and demand for photocopying, for example from the 
collection of commemorative editions. Our sort of library must avoid offering ordinary guests cheaper 
photocopying  services  than  more  open  libraries.  Such  a  situation  must  not  cause  demand  to  be 
channelled  towards  the  library’s  services.  We  have  therefore  set  a  rule  that  for  any  request  for 
photocopying of more than six pages, the same fee is charged as at ordinary libraries. 
BIS Review 15/2005 
 3
By  far  the  greatest  expense  item  in  library  operations  is subscriptions,  which  now  account  for  four-
fifths  of  its  funding  for  acquisitions.  A  larger  share  of  this  funding  is  now  allocated  to  electronic 
document access, both through contributions to shared subscriptions and independently. Such access 
is increasingly used by individual employees at their workstations, rather than being centralised.  
Numismatic Museum 
I  have  mainly  dwelt  here  on  archives  and  library  collections.  Archiving  and  library  services  for  the 
Bank’s  day-to-day  needs  are  the  core  operations  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  collections. 
Peripheral activities are the preservation library and special collections, and a third unit, which I shall 
now discuss briefly: the numismatic collection. 
The Central Bank began cooperating with the National Museum of Iceland at an early stage to set up 
a  numismatic  collection  focusing  on  the  currency  of  Iceland  and  its  main  trading  partner  countries. 
Under this project, the National Museum has deposited all its numismatic material into a separate joint 
collection, which the Central Bank operates on behalf of both bodies and meets the costs for.  
For almost twenty years, the numismatic collection has been open to the public in a 125 square-metre 
exhibition  room  presenting  the  history  of  Iceland’s  currency  and  other  numismatic  material.  The 
exhibition has suffered from the narrow and specialised appeal of numismatics, and also from the fact 
that the Bank’s collection premises are not ideally located for this purpose. For this reason, plans have 
been proposed for arranging a different type of exhibition which would highlight the mechanisms of the 
economy in a wider context, and even current economic and monetary issues. The exhibition of notes 
and  coin  would  then  form  one  part  of  a  larger  exhibition.  It  is  aimed  to  mount  the  exhibition  in  the 
Central Bank’s main premises.  
For obvious reasons, limited attention has been paid to numismatics in Iceland. The collection unit has 
published a few works on numismatic topics, including a history of the Icelandic currency.  
Just as the Bank’s library has been included in an electronic union catalogue, the collection of notes 
and  coin  is  now  being  incorporated  into  a  similar  catalogue  of  all  museum  resources  in  Iceland 
(www.sarpur.is). The National Museum has a similar leadership role to the National Library’s role in 
the electronic union catalogue of books. It is even more natural for the Central Bank to participate in 
this project because the National Museum is the joint owner of the numismatic collection.  
From  all  the  above  it  is  obvious  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  collection  activities  extend  well 
beyond simply meeting the Bank’s own practical needs. It takes into account the wider perspective of 
the collection community and the social role of such activities. Likewise, the Central Bank strives to 
work  in  close  contact  with  main  national  collections,  the  National  Archives,  National  Library  and 
National Museum. Cultivating these relations is a fundamental part of the Bank’s collection activities, 
because we consider this a particularly important task in a small society. We try to ensure that we do 
not compete with national collections, but can provide as much assistance as the framework of the 
Bank’s  activities  allows.  The  Central  Bank  feels  it  can  rightly  claim  that  it  has  succeeded  in 
safeguarding cultural resources that otherwise would most probably not be under public ownership. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2005
