Jaime Caruana: Reform of the international standard for bank capital 
Notes for the testimony by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
European Parliament, Brussels, 18 January 2005. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I am honoured to appear before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs today to discuss 
the  reform  of  the  international  standard  for  bank  capital.  In  past  years,  members  of  the  European 
Parliament have kindly welcomed Bill McDonough, the prior Chairman of the Basel Committee, as well 
as other Basel Committee representatives. 
I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the debate and to support your 
important work in considering the proposed directive on capital adequacy requirements for banks and 
investment firms. These hearings are extremely valuable and represent a vital stage in the European 
legislative process, where the European Parliament has a crucial role. 
I will be speaking today in my capacity as Chair of the Basel Committee. But I hope you will allow me 
to digress on one or two occasions to supplement my remarks with my perspectives as Governor of 
the  Banco  de  España.  The  Banco  de  España  is  a  central  bank  and  banking  supervisory  authority 
within  the  European  Union;  it  will  therefore  be  a  direct  subject  of  the  legislation  that  is  enacted  on 
capital adequacy. This legislation will not only affect the banks that we supervise, but also our own 
supervisory  system  and  the  tools  we  use  to  carry  out  our  responsibilities,  so  I  hope  my  additional 
perspectives will be useful. 
The publication of Basel II in June 2004 was a milestone which marked the culmination of a worldwide 
and unprecedented effort spanning more than five years. It involved extensive and open discussions 
among  bankers,  central  bankers,  bank  supervisors,  market  observers,  and  the  public.  The  Basel 
Committee published three proposals for public comment. It conducted several impact studies and it 
engaged in extensive discussions with interested parties. 
I  believe  that  this  broad  and  often  highly  technical  dialogue  was  of  mutual  benefit  as  a  learning 
process. It contributed greatly to the thorough examination of banks’ risk management practices. This 
was  necessary  in  order  to  find  ways  to  harness  recent  advances  in  these  practices  to  promote 
financial  stability.  It  also  allowed  us  to  take  into  account  concerns  and  suggestions  and  to  make  a 
considerable number of changes that have significantly improved the framework. Let me mention, for 
example, improvements made in important areas such as SMEs, procyclicality, complexity, recognition 
of collateral, and the treatment of securitisation, etc. Likewise, the global nature of the consultations 
led to changes which increased the relevancy of the new framework to all kinds of banks, something 
that is important for the European market. 
As a result of the dialogue, we were able to design a solid, comprehensive and balanced new capital 
framework. Basel II represents a significant step towards achieving a more risk-sensitive supervisory 
approach.  It  will  enhance  banks’  safety  and  soundness,  thereby  strengthening  the  stability  of  the 
financial system as a whole and ensuring that it can better serve as a source for credit and growth for 
the economy. I believe that the framework should be adopted as soon as possible, according to the 
proposed implementation date, to realise the benefits of a stronger and more stable financial system in 
a global competitive world. 
I like to think of the new capital framework as an opportunity. An opportunity to ensure that regulation 
and  supervision  takes  a  forward-looking  approach  to  capital  and  risk  management,  that  it  remains 
up-to-date with sound practices in the industry and that our supervisory framework motivates sound 
capitalisation, responsible risk-taking, transparency and prudent behaviour. 
It  also  represents  an  unparalleled  opportunity  for  banks  to  improve  their  capital  strategies  and  risk 
management systems. And finally, it provides supervisors with an opportunity to improve their dialogue 
with the industry and to enhance co-operation among banking supervisors across jurisdictions. This 
last point is crucial to achieving effective and consistent implementation and it is an area in which I 
strongly believe that the European Union is in a unique position to lead the way. As I will comment 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 1
later, I believe that the EU can make faster and more tangible progress in this area than is currently 
possible on a wider international basis. 
In  my  intervention  this  afternoon,  I  would  like  to  offer  first  some  views  on  why  the  new  capital 
framework  is  necessary.  I  would  then  like  to  address  two  topics:  firstly,  co-operation  among 
supervisors; and secondly, the work that must continue to maintain the relevancy of the framework. 
2. 
The benefits of Basel II. Why the new framework is the one we need. 
Forward-looking approach to capital and risk management 
As I mentioned before, the new capital framework takes a forward-looking approach to capital and risk 
management that will remain up-to-date with sound practices in the industry. 
In the sixteen years since the 1988 Accord was adopted, the tools for measuring and managing risk 
have evolved in ways that its architects could not have anticipated. Improvements in technology and 
telecommunications,  the  explosive  growth  in  the  markets  for  securitised  assets  and  for  credit 
derivatives,  and  the  emergence  of  new  disciplines  in  risk  management  -  such  as  operational  risk 
management - have changed the ways that banks measure and manage their risks. 
As  risk  management  practices  become  more  sophisticated,  the  static  and  very  simple  rules  of  the 
1988 Accord are becoming less relevant to the most sophisticated and complex banking businesses. 
Therefore, in the mid-1990s, the Basel Committee agreed that it was time to develop a new framework 
for capital. Our goal was to develop a new approach that would be more sensitive to the actual risks 
that banks take on and that would ensure a level playing field for banks that compete globally. 
Rather than simply resetting the quantitative standards, we sought a framework that would be better 
able  to  evolve  with,  and  indeed  encourage,  future  improvements  in  the  measurement  and 
management of risk, and one that would be well-anchored on a solid corporate governance structure 
and a sound risk culture. On a grand scale, we sought a capital framework that would promote greater 
financial stability, a public good that benefits consumers, businesses and banks alike. 
Comprehensive approach 
The new capital framework is much more comprehensive than the 1988 Accord for many reasons: it 
applies to a wider scope of entities within banking groups; it offers a menu of different alternatives to fit 
different  circumstances;  it  encompasses  additional  risks,  in  particular  operational  risk;  it  widens  the 
recognition  of  credit  risk  mitigation  techniques;  it  sets  out  a  thorough  framework  for  securitisation 
transactions; and, most importantly, it is based on three mutually reinforcing pillars. 
As  you  may  know,  the  first  pillar  refines  the  measures  of  minimum  capital  requirements.  It  aligns 
capital  charges  more  closely  and  comprehensively  to  the  actual  economic  risks  a  bank  faces,  and 
creates explicit incentives for banks to improve their internal measures and approaches to risk. 
Let me just add that this better alignment of capital to risk is a principle that we supervisors hold dear. 
It can sometimes be tempting to vary the capital rules in favour of particular sectors, but in my view 
this divorces capital requirements from risk, which ultimately benefits no one. It does not stimulate a 
culture  of  appropriate  risk  management,  may  lead  to  an  inefficient  allocation  of  resources  in  the 
economy and does not, therefore, promote stability. 
“Pillar 2” reminds bank managers that ultimately they are responsible for the adequate capitalisation of 
their  institutions,  and  creates  an  incentive  for  banks  to  conduct  their  internal  reviews  carefully  and 
responsibly, on the basis of a well-defined strategy. 
Finally, “Pillar 3” recognises that markets can serve as an ally to official supervision when participants 
have access to sufficient and timely information on a bank’s risk profile. 
Together,  the  three  pillars  are  intended  to  complement  each  other  and  promote  a  more  flexible, 
forward-looking  and  comprehensive  approach  to  capital  supervision.  Elements  of  all  three  pillars 
certainly  already  exist  in  the  supervisory  systems  of  leading  economies:  but  Basel  II  represents  a 
concerted effort to apply those pillars more consistently across countries within a common framework. 
That, in turn, will help to reduce the burden on internationally active banks and promote a more level 
playing field for global competitors. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2005
While Basel II is a large step forward for safety and soundness standards, in many ways it is building 
on the advances that banks have long been developing on their own. We believe that it is important to 
recognise those advances so that supervision remains relevant to banking activities today. Likewise, 
adopting Basel II now will maintain banks’ momentum in innovating and in strengthening their products 
and  processes  so  that  they  can  better  serve  as  sources  of  credit  and  growth  to  businesses  and 
consumers tomorrow. 
Incentive-based approach 
It is clear then that Basel II is about much more than just setting better quantitative minimum capital 
requirements.  It  is  about  establishing  incentive-based  approaches  to  risk  and  capital  adequacy 
management, within the framework of the three mutually supporting pillars. 
On a micro level, the new approach will promote better risk management, adequate capitalization and 
transparency. On a macro level, it will contribute to financial stability and the resilience of the banking 
system. Let me expand a little on the latter point. 
I am convinced that when banks have the right incentives to manage their risks appropriately, to hold 
sufficient capital and to improve transparency, the banking system will become more resilient, more 
stable and better able to serve as a source for credit and growth. Those characteristics matter greatly 
to the livelihood of our citizens, to the outlook for commerce and business, and more generally to the 
health of our economy as a whole. 
In order to reinforce its relevance as a macro standard, the new framework incorporates a number of 
elements such as the requirement to use longer time horizons in the design of internal rating systems 
and  in  the  average  calculations  of  key  variables,  and  also  the  need  to  carry  out  stress  tests  and 
conduct calculations in downturn conditions. All these elements will ensure that bank managers are 
conscious  of  how  risk-drivers  change  through  the  cycle  and  in  stress  conditions,  and  that  they 
incorporate these elements into their decision-taking processes and capital strategies. 
Let me move now to the work under way to implement the new framework. I’d like to highlight two 
areas in this respect. 
Catalytic role in promoting supervisory co-ordination and convergence 
3. 
The  effective  implementation  of  Basel  II  will  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  the  ability  of  “home 
supervisors” and “host supervisors” of internationally active banks to co-operate efficiently. 
Certainly  one  of  the  goals  for  any  international  framework  is  to  foster  a  more  level  playing  field  for 
internationally  active  competitors.  The Basel Committee  wishes  to  ensure  that  competition between 
internationally active banks is driven by each bank’s individual strengths, rather than by differences in 
each country’s rules. 
Basel II is intended to promote a more level playing field for internationally active banks. Yet Basel II 
cannot and should not be expected to create perfect harmonisation across all jurisdictions. Differences 
in legal systems, market practices and business environments in each country make it an extremely 
difficult task - and, indeed, an impossible one - to even out all distinctions across all borders. 
Our goal should instead be to facilitate the application of minimum standards and to work together, 
across borders, to promote a more consistent implementation and application of the new framework. 
This  enhanced  co-operation  is  a  process  that  will  promote  consistency  and  convergence  of 
supervisory practices. It will help to avoid redundant and unco-ordinated approval and validation work, 
thereby reducing the implementation burden on banks, and conserving supervisory resources. 
In this regard, the Committee’s Accord Implementation Group continues to encourage practical work 
among  supervisors  on  applying  Basel  II  effectively  and  efficiently  to  internationally  active  banking 
organisations. The AIG is currently working with supervisors of different areas of the world to conduct 
a number of “real case” studies to gain better insight into the practicalities of co-operation between 
home and host supervisors. 
In this context, if you will permit me, I would like to speak from my perspective as a European banking 
supervisor,  and  pick  up  on  the  statement  I  made  at  the  beginning  of  my  intervention.  As  I  said,  I 
believe that Europe is in a unique position to lead the way in the cross-border implementation of the 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 3
new framework and to make faster and more tangible progress than is currently possible on a wider 
international basis. I think we need to seize this opportunity with both hands, because it will not just 
benefit us in the EU, contributing to the fulfilment of the Lisbon objectives, but, I believe, will also have 
a positive impact beyond our borders. 
We  have  two  major  advantages  in  this  respect.  Firstly,  the  division  of  supervisory  responsibilities 
between  our  countries  is  embedded  in  our  common  single  market  legislation  in  the  banking  field, 
founded  on  harmonisation  and  mutual  recognition.  And  with  particular  reference  to  the  new  capital 
framework,  the  Commission  has chosen  to  address key  elements  of supervisory cooperation  within 
the proposed directive, and has adopted an approach that strikes me, as a European supervisor, as a 
step in the right direction. 
Secondly, from a practical perspective, the work already done by the Committee of European Banking 
Supervisors  -  CEBS  -  is  very  encouraging.  This  committee,  directly  charged  with  promoting 
co-operation and convergence of supervisory practices, has a key role to play in the implementation of 
the  new  capital  framework  in  Europe,  for  example  in  finding  practical  ways  to  apply  the  provisions 
which  provide  for  an  enhanced  role  for  the  consolidating  supervisor,  and  on  model  approval 
processes.  And  it  is  already  producing  tangible  results  -  for  example  in  designing  a  framework  for 
public disclosures by supervisors on Basel II, and preparing a common framework for institutions to 
report their solvency ratios.  
For these reasons, I believe that we as supervisors can go further than others may be able to go in our 
efforts to ensure consistent implementation of the new capital framework and effective supervision on 
a cross-border basis. We can deliver results on a number of fronts, including the specific initiatives I 
have  just  mentioned.  I  think  that  by  making  rapid  and  real  progress,  we  can  also  promote  greater 
convergence beyond the EU, as others may find our experiences of benefit to the wider search for 
greater international consistency in the implementation of Basel II. 
4. 
Ongoing work in the Basel Committee to ensure that the new framework functions as 
intended 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  ongoing  work  in  the  Basel  Committee  to  ensure  that  the  new  framework 
functions as intended. I would like to report on the current status of two initiatives that were announced 
by the Basel Committee some time ago: the treatment of “double default” and trading book issues; and 
the work to re-confirm that the new framework meets our objective to broadly maintain the aggregate 
level of capital requirements, while also providing incentives to adopt the more advanced risk-sensitive 
approaches. 
Before I turn to the detail, let me say that neither initiative is expected to lead to significant changes in 
Basel  II’s  overall  structure.  However,  the  Committee  has  always  said  that  Basel  II  should  be 
sufficiently dynamic to allow for evolution. 
As I have already stressed, we must ensure that Basel II serves the needs of the banking sector into 
the  twenty-first  century.  In  this  regard,  the  Basel  Committee  has  pledged  to  monitor  industry 
developments  and  to  continue  its  public  dialogue  on  emerging  issues  that  are  relevant  to  capital 
supervision. 
The Basel Committee has already begun to honour this promise, in two areas especially. One topic 
that  we  are  discussing  with  the  industry  is  the  treatment  of  “double  default.”  Some  industry 
representatives  believe  that  Basel  II  takes  an  overly  conservative  approach  to  the  risk  of  loss 
associated with exposures covered by guarantees: they suggest that the risk of both a borrower and a 
guarantor  defaulting  on  the  same  exposure  is  lower  than  the  risk  of  just  one  party  defaulting.  The 
Committee believes that the new framework should recognise some double default effects, and we are 
currently considering all of the implications of doing so, including those associated with measuring the 
effects. 
Another  topic  we  are  discussing  with  the  industry  concerns  the  treatment  of  certain  trading-related 
issues under Basel II. In the view of some industry representatives, neither the existing market risk 
capital rules nor Basel II go far enough in recognising advances in the measurement and management 
of risks arising from trading activities. We are evaluating these matters. 
Our work on double default and trading book matters is making good progress. We are consequently 
confident that we will issue papers for public discussion on these topics by early April this year so that 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2005
we can finalise the rules during the summer, with a view to allowing their implementation at the same 
time as the rest of the new framework. 
As Chairman of the Basel Committee, I would of course like to see consistent implementation of these 
changes  on  an  international  basis,  both  in  terms  of  content  and  timing.  Also  from  a  European 
perspective, I believe that the EU should seek to implement the trading book changes at the same 
time as other major countries.  
Moving  now  to  the  second  initiative,  the  Basel  Committee  has  long  intended  to  conduct  work  to 
re-confirm  that  the  new  framework  meets  our  objective  to  broadly  maintain  the  aggregate  level  of 
capital  requirements,  while  keeping  incentives  to  adopt  the  more  advanced  approaches  that  are 
offered. 
In order to establish a common data set on which to base this review, the Committee has decided to 
begin a recalibration exercise in autumn this year, some months earlier than anticipated. 
As  I  said  earlier,  I  don’t  believe  that  this  will  imply  a  significant  change  to  the  framework.  We  are 
already satisfied that the new capital framework clearly differentiates the degree of risk in particular 
transactions on a relative basis. What we need to confirm is that the absolute requirements are right 
and that the appropriate incentive structure is maintained. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In my testimony today, I have sought to outline the reasons why Basel II matters so much and how it 
will support the continued safety and soundness of the banking system. When we motivate banks to 
improve their understanding and approaches to risk, I believe that banks will become less sensitive to 
the ups and downs of the business cycle, better able to weather periods of distress and better able to 
serve as a source of credit and growth to the economy. 
While we have completed a vast amount of work in developing the international standards, we cannot 
rest yet. The ultimate success of Basel II still demands a high level of dedication and energy from all of 
us.  I  commend  and  thank  the  members  of  the  European  Parliament  for  their  contributions  to  the 
international discussions on Basel II and for their hard work in European discussions on the Capital 
Adequacy Directive. I know that you will give the directive careful consideration, taking account of the 
global environment in which European banks are operating. I would like to pledge any assistance that 
members  of  the  European  Parliament  believe  may  be  necessary  and  I  would  be  honoured  to 
participate in future parliamentary discussions on Basel II and the Directive. 
The  considerable  efforts  that  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council,  the  Commission  and  the 
Committee of  European  Banking  Supervisors  have already  demonstrated  give  me  great  confidence 
that  we  will  achieve  our  goals.  Our  citizens,  businesses  and  banks  deserve  nothing  less  than  the 
promise and benefits of greater financial stability and more sustainable economic growth. 
BIS Review 3/2005 
 5
