David Dodge: Financial system efficiency - getting the regulatory 
framework right 
Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Toronto CFA Society, 
Toronto, 22 September 2005. 
 I am happy to have the opportunity today to follow up on a speech I gave here in Toronto last 
December. In that speech, I talked about the need for Canada to improve its financial system 
efficiency. Today, I want to focus my remarks on how regulation can, and must, contribute to 
that  important  goal.  When  I  talk  about  an  efficient  financial  system,  I  mean  a  system  that 
helps  to  allocate  scarce  economic  resources  to  the  most  productive  uses.  By  making  our 
financial  system  more  efficient,  we  can  help  generate  sustained  economic  growth  and 
prosperity. 
 
The Bank of Canada has been contributing to the goal of an efficient financial system in a 
number  of  ways.  The  Bank's  monetary  policy  aims  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable.  By  doing  so,  we  enhance  Canadians'  confidence  in  the  value  of  their  money, 
thus  reducing  the  need  for  people  to  spend  resources  either  anticipating  or  coping  with 
inflation.  We  also  contribute  to  efficiency  through  our  role as  overseer  of  major  payments, 
securities, and foreign exchange clearing and settlement systems, and by providing liquidity 
in  times  of  financial  stress.  By  reducing  risks  to  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system, we increase certainty about the robustness of the system, thus supporting efficiency. 
Our semi-annual Financial System Review promotes awareness of financial system issues, 
looks at developments and trends in the system, and addresses issues that affect its safety, 
soundness,  and  efficiency.  As  well,  the  Bank  works  actively  with  market  participants  and 
regulators  to  develop  and  promote  an  efficient  financial  system.  And  we  conduct  research 
that helps inform the decisions of policy-makers in terms of promoting this goal.  
Today, what I want to talk about is how policy-makers can support efficiency by getting the 
regulatory framework right. I will start with some brief remarks about regulation in general. I'll 
then discuss how our regulatory framework can support financial system efficiency, and how 
we can best make sure that our framework is an effective one. I'll conclude with a look at 
some current issues in financial system regulation and the various ways in which the Bank is 
involved in them. 
How regulation can promote financial system efficiency 
Let me start with a basic premise. For any market economy to operate efficiently and achieve 
an optimal allocation of resources, there needs to be a solid legal and regulatory framework. 
Basic legal concepts, such as property rights, the rule of law, and the honouring of contracts, 
must be in place in order for market forces to work and to generate wealth. 
Once  this  is  done,  policy-makers  have  a  number  of  overlapping  motivations  for  further 
regulation.  I'll  spend  much  of  my  time  today  talking  about  the  promotion  of  efficiency.  But 
regulators also act to improve the safety and stability of the financial system, and to protect 
investors and savers.  
Let me set out three principles that policy-makers should apply in deciding when regulation is 
appropriate. First, regulation is appropriate to correct a market failure or, to put it in economic 
jargon, to deal with "externalities." The second principle is that regulation must be effective. 
Even when a market failure is recognized, regulators should act only if there is a reasonable 
chance that they will actually address the failure in question. The third principle is that the 
   1/5 
benefits of a particular regulation must be greater than the costs it imposes. In trying to solve 
one problem, regulators must avoid causing even greater problems. 
With  these  principles  in  mind,  let  me  now  describe  three  ways  in  which  regulators  can 
enhance the efficiency of the financial system. The first is to promote competition in domestic 
and international markets. Competition unleashes the forces that drive financial institutions 
and  markets  to  become  more  innovative  and  efficient.  That  doesn't  mean  that  regulators 
should  "just  get  out  of  the  way."  Appropriate  regulation  can  enhance  competition.  For 
example,  an  important  goal  of  the  Competition  Bureau  is  to  prevent  firms  from  unfairly 
restricting competition.  
Canada  became  a  world  leader  in  promoting  competition  in  financial  markets  when  it 
adopted  many  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Porter  Commission  of  the  1960s.  At  a  time 
when policy-makers worldwide favoured extensive government controls on economic activity, 
particularly within the financial system, Porter broke new ground by coming out strongly in 
favour of enhancing efficiency through the promotion of competition and freer markets.  
Competition is enhanced by expanding the scope of a given market. One way to do this is to 
have our markets and institutions compete with those in other countries and to have foreign 
enterprises  compete  in  our  markets.  Therefore,  regulation  needs  to  take  international 
considerations and developments into account. I'll have more to say on this point in a few 
minutes. For now, the point I want to stress is that competition leads to greater efficiency. 
A second way that good financial system regulation can promote efficiency is by working to 
correct "information asymmetries" that sometimes occur, and that can lead to market failures 
and  a  suboptimal  allocation  of  funds.  Most  often,  these  failures  arise  when  there  are 
significant  differences  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of  relevant  information  available  to  market 
participants.  
Regulation should be designed so that investors are able to adequately gauge the risks and 
potential  returns  of  an  investment.  To  be  clear,  I'm  not  saying  that  the  goal  of  regulation 
should be full disclosure of all information. Rather, the aim should be to reduce information 
asymmetries to the point that the benefits of disclosure still outweigh the costs of compliance. 
In that way, regulation can lead to a more efficient financial system. 
The  third  way  that  financial  system  regulation  can  support  efficiency  is  to  promote  overall 
financial stability, which essentially means limiting systemic risk. The idea that regulation can 
support  efficiency  at  the  same  time  as  it  promotes  stability  may  strike  some  as 
counterintuitive. But these objectives are not mutually exclusive. If the regulation is carried 
out in the right way, enhancing stability can lead to increased efficiency through the saving of 
resources that would otherwise be dedicated to guarding against systemic risk. 
Let  me  elaborate.  I  noted  earlier  that  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  supports  efficiency  by 
increasing certainty about the future value of money. This reduces the need for Canadians to 
spend resources on activities intended to protect them from inflation. Similarly, enhancing the 
safety  of  the  financial  system  reduces  the  need  for  Canadians  to  unnecessarily  spend 
resources to guard against the risk of a financial crisis. 
Policy-makers  are  more  likely  to  successfully  promote  both  stability  and  efficiency  if  they 
bring  market  players  into  the  picture  when  addressing  a  particular  issue.  Canada's  Large 
Value  Transfer  System  (LVTS)  provides  a  good  example  of  how  systemic  risk  can  be 
mitigated in the most efficient way. The LVTS processes Canada's large-value or time-critical 
payments. It gives participants the certainty that once a payment has been processed, the 
transaction will settle on the same day, regardless of what might later happen to any of the 
participants. This certainty enhances efficiency on its own. But, in addition, the design of the 
LVTS minimizes the amount of collateral that each institution needs to pledge to the system, 
compared  with  the  gross  settlement  systems  used  in  other  countries.  This  reduction  in 
collateral frees up resources that can then be put to more efficient uses elsewhere. 
   2/5 
Building an effective framework 
That's a look at three ways in which a sound regulatory framework can improve the efficiency 
of  the  financial  system—by  promoting  competition,  by  reducing  information  asymmetries 
where practical, and by reducing systemic risk. But to further our goal of improving efficiency, 
it  is  also  important  that  our  regulatory  framework  be  effective.  What  makes  a  framework 
effective? I would highlight three factors. 
First,  our  regulations  should  provide  incentives  that  encourage  markets  to  reinforce  and 
reward  the  right  behaviour.  These  incentives  should  be  sufficient  to  motivate  market 
participants without the constant intervention of regulators or the imposition of detailed rules 
that dictate to firms not just what must be done, but how it must be done. The right incentives 
can  help  regulators  achieve  their  goals  without  imposing  process  costs  that  outweigh  the 
benefits of the regulation. 
Second,  to  achieve  an  effective  regulatory  framework,  we  need  to  take  international 
developments  into  account.  Countries  can  gain  a  comparative  advantage  by  developing  a 
superior regulatory framework. For our financial markets and institutions to be internationally 
competitive, our regulatory framework needs to be—and needs to be seen to be—as good 
as, if not better, than that of other countries. 
But at the same time, Canadian rules and their application should be tailored to our domestic 
needs and should reflect domestic realities. This tension between domestic and international 
considerations leads to some challenges for Canadian policy-makers. A case in point is the 
Sarbanes-Oxley  law.  Canadian  policy-makers  embrace  the  general  principles  behind  this 
legislation in terms of promoting good governance and financial practices. But the extreme 
level  of  detail  in  the  application  of  its  rules,  as  well  as  its  focus  on  process  instead  of 
outcomes, creates costs for many of our firms that likely exceed the benefits to the system. 
Large Canadian corporations that want access to U.S. capital markets have no choice—they 
must  follow  both  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  Sarbanes-Oxley.  But  Canadian  regulators  are 
right to take a made-in-Canada approach that accommodates the needs of Canadian issuers 
and investors. 
Let me be clear. The goal is not to mimic U.S. regulations, despite that market's size and 
proximity. The principles behind our regulations must be as good as, or better than, those of 
other  countries.  But  we  must  apply  those  principles  in  a  way  that  develops  a  comparative 
advantage for our firms and our markets. 
Finally, and very importantly, an effective regulatory framework is one where the rules are 
enforced and are perceived to be enforced. Even the most coherent and efficient regulatory 
framework  won't  be  effective  unless  it  is  followed.  Participants  must  be  appropriately 
monitored.  And  when  the  rules  are  broken,  offenders  must  be  prosecuted,  and  adequate 
penalties  must  be  strictly  applied.  A  framework  with  strong  monitoring,  prosecution,  and 
application of penalties provides the incentives for firms to follow the rules, and this adds to 
the  framework's  credibility.  When  everyone  is  playing  by  the  rules—and  everyone  is 
confident that others have the incentives to do the same—then markets operate with greater 
efficiency.  
I've said before that regulation should be designed to enhance confidence and support trust 
in markets and institutions. Let me talk about one issue as an example. Canadian-listed firms 
can sometimes have a lower market valuation than similar firms listed in the United States. 
Why?  Bank  of  Canada research  has  pointed  to  concerns  about  governance  as  a  possible 
cause. And one of the main concerns appears to be a perception that Canadian enforcement 
of  insider-trading  laws  is  not  as  strong  as  it  could  be.  We  are  continuing  our  research  to 
better understand the root of this perception. 
The key point here is that to improve the effectiveness of our regulatory framework, investors 
must  have  confidence  that  they  will  be  treated  fairly.  To  repeat:  we  must  have,  and  be 
perceived to have, proper enforcement in Canada.  
   3/5 
Current issues in financial system regulation 
That's a look at how a sound regulatory framework can improve the efficiency of the financial 
system. Now let's turn to some current issues, a number of which the Bank of Canada has 
some involvement in. 
The Bank has been active in terms of research and commentary on developments aimed at 
improving efficiency. We have worked alongside the private sector to improve the safety and 
efficiency of clearing, payment, and settlement systems. For example, we've recently worked 
with  various  groups  to  make  sure  that  participants  are  continuing  to  pursue  more  robust 
business-continuity  plans,  especially  from  a  system-wide  perspective.  By  increasing  the 
degree  of  certainty  that  critical  systems  will  be  operational  in  times  of  disruption,  the 
development  of  appropriate  business-continuity  plans  can  improve  the  overall  efficiency  of 
the financial system. 
With respect to fixed-income markets, the Bank is also playing a role in helping to develop 
regulations  regarding  transparency  and  alternative  trading  systems.  We  are  promoting 
innovations such as electronic trading systems, because they provide opportunities to reduce 
transactions costs and increase transparency to appropriate levels. This will increase liquidity 
and lead to better-functioning markets. And through our research, our commentary, and, in 
some  cases,  our  direct  involvement,  we  contribute  to  the  design  of  rules  and  codes  of 
conduct that improve the functioning of both fixed-income and foreign exchange markets. 
Of course, one ongoing issue in the financial system is the question of consolidation among 
financial  institutions.  In my  speech  here  in  Toronto  last  December,  I  noted  that  Canada  is 
facing  a  difficult  policy  challenge  as  we  try  to  keep  up  with  other  countries  that  have 
enthusiastically adopted the competition-based regulatory philosophy espoused by the Porter 
Commission. We need to strive for a policy framework that continues to provide incentives 
for  innovation  and  efficiency  by  encouraging  competition.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to 
consider  how  to  allow  our  financial  institutions  the  scope  to  improve  efficiency  through 
economies of scale.  
Recent  research  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  that  examined  economies  of  scale  in  banking 
concluded that there could be untapped efficiency gains for Canadian financial institutions. 
The benefits from these efficiency gains could flow across the economy, through lower-cost 
business and retail lending. But there are other relevant public policy questions here as well, 
including foreign ownership and concerns about the concentration of market power among 
very  few  players.  Striking  a  balance  between  these  interests  is  not  a  simple  task.  But  in 
terms of competition, we should keep in mind that the level of competition can be maintained 
or enhanced by new entrants in the marketplace or by the threat of new entrants.  
Another  issue  that  is  being  hotly  debated  relates  to  the  ideal  structure  for  securities 
regulators in Canada. What I said about this issue last year remains true today. Efficiency 
dictates  that  Canada  should  have  uniform  securities  laws  and  regulations  based  on 
principles that apply to everyone. 
But the question is how to apply these rules in a tiered way to take into account the differing 
needs of issuers. For example, one tier could apply to large, complex firms that want access 
to  international  capital  markets.  Rules  for  these  firms  would  be  similar  to  those  that  are 
applied in New York or London. At the other end of the spectrum, another tier could apply to 
small, speculative resource firms that have historically relied on Canadian equity markets for 
financing. A third tier in the middle could apply to the bulk of Canadian "mid-cap" firms, which 
choose to access only Canadian capital markets, and which very often are smaller and less 
complex than U.S. "mid-cap" firms. 
These different tiers of firms exist in all major provincial jurisdictions. And investors in every 
jurisdiction have similar needs. So the key point is that, while the application of rules needs 
to take into account the size and complexity of firms, there is no need for different rules to be 
applied based on the province or territory of the issuer or investor. 
   4/5 
Conclusion 
In closing, let me say that I hope you've found my comments to be topical. Many important 
decisions  about  our  regulatory  framework  are  currently  being  considered,  and  these  will 
profoundly affect the Canadian economy. In making those decisions, it is very important that 
policy-makers keep in mind the goal of efficiency. They can support this goal by promoting 
competition, by correcting market imperfections where practical, and by promoting financial 
stability through reduced systemic risk. 
But  it  is  even  more  important  to  remember  why  the  goal  of  efficiency  must  be  followed. 
Ultimately, policy-makers must strive to provide the best possible environment for achieving 
optimal  allocation  of  economic  resources.  This  is  how  policy-makers  and  regulators  of  the 
financial  system  can  best  serve  the  public  and  contribute  to  sustainable  economic  growth 
and prosperity in Canada. 
 
   5/5 
