Jürgen Stark: The changing global economic structure - a view from Europe 
Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the American Council on 
Germany, New York, 14 April 2005. 
 It is both a pleasure and an honour to speak to you here today. My remarks will focus on the changing 
global economic structure. 
What  has  changed  since  the  early  1990s?  An  increasing  proportion  of  economic  activity  is  market-
determined.  Within  a  period  of  only  15  years,  major  centrally  planned  economies  have  turned  into 
market  economies  and  several  previously  strongly  regulated  emerging  market  economies  have 
implemented radical reforms. 
All  of 
this  has  stimulated  very  strong  and  ongoing  growth  dynamics.  Consolidated  and 
internationalised  competitive  conditions  have  ensued  from  this  process,  thus  continuously  placing 
adjustment  requirements  on  all  economies.  This  challenge  is  being  accompanied  in  many, 
predominantly advanced economies by demographic changes which require additional efforts. 
I 
Under realistic assumptions the US, but in particular also Asia, will remain the centres of gravity of the 
global economy in the next years. However, without changes in the conduct of economic policy this 
would  also  mean  that  the  existing  global  current  account  imbalances  would  become  even  more 
pronounced.  This  could  result  in  an  increasing  risk  of  sudden  exchange  rate  and  financial  markets 
movements.  Moreover,  enormous  challenges  add  to  the  vulnerabilities  connected  with  the  current 
global  imbalances.  The  changes  in  the  global  economic  structures  in  the  wake  of  globalisation  are 
particularly important: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Production processes can be regionally fragmented to a greater extent than ever before. 
The number of tradable goods has risen sharply - many services have become tradable. 
The financial markets are closely integrated on a global scale. 
Economic  policies,  but  also  tax  systems  and  regulations,  are  competing  with  one  another 
internationally for capital investment and savings. 
The  number  of  countries  affected  by  today’s  globalisation  processes  is  far  larger  than  the  number 
involved  in  earlier  phases.  This  applies  particularly  to  the  involvement  of  emerging  markets  and 
developing countries in the global economic integration processes. The shares which these countries 
have  in  the  world’s  goods  markets,  direct  investment  flows  and  portfolio  inflows  have  expanded 
considerably. 
II 
The increasing integration of above all large emerging economies into the global economy means that 
the  volume  of  world  trade  and  global  growth  prospects  will  continue  to  rise.  The  so-called  BRIC 
countries - Brazil, Russia, India and China - are arousing particular interest in this respect, with the two 
large Asian countries - China and India - assuming a prominent role. 
While  China  has  established  itself  as  the  intra-Asian  platform  for  the  production  of  labour-intensive 
goods - especially for the US - India’s strategy is based on the export of services. However: China and 
India import a considerable volume of goods from other, in particular, Asian countries and record only 
small current account deficits. 
What  obviously  differentiates  India  and  China  from other  Asian emerging  economies,  but  also  from 
Brazil  and  Russia,  is  their  sheer  size.  Both  countries  combine  a  population  of  roughly  2½  billion, 
representing more than a third of the world’s population. The global economy is therefore confronted 
with  an  adjustment  process  of  a  special  type  and  magnitude  that  is  significantly  larger  than  those 
witnessed in the past. The growing range of goods and services from China and India, produced and 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
supplied at low cost, will lead to significant changes in global production patterns, trade and relative 
prices. 
The continuous shift in the global economy’s centre of gravity towards Asia with its enormous labour 
reserves also means that the employment prospects for low-skilled workers but increasingly also for 
highly skilled employees in the industrial nations will continue to deteriorate. On the other hand, the 
development  of  the  as  yet  inadequate  infrastructure  in  these  countries  and  their  rising  demand  for 
high-quality industrial goods will offer the industrial countries tremendous export opportunities. 
If  the  countries  which  today  are  at  the  leading  edge  of  the  global  value-added  chain  maintain  their 
advantages in the development and production of technology-intensive goods and services, they can 
but  profit  from  the  low-cost  products  from  Asia.  It  is  not  absolute  but  comparative  cost  advantages 
which decide the pecking order of economies and regions in the context of the international division of 
labour. 
This adjustment process to the changes in the world economy will vary from country to country and 
may  result  in  economic  and  political  tensions  between  the  trading  partners  in  these  countries. 
Integration  of  the  large  emerging  market  economies  involves  the  risk  of  increasing  protectionism. 
Countries which see themselves as losers in the globalisation process will resort to short-term isolation 
measures that endangers both the progress already made and further progress in the global division 
of labour. 
III 
The shift in the global economic focus towards East and South-East Asia also raises the question of 
economic  cooperation  within  Asia  and  its  possible  political  implications  -  including  the  shift  in  the 
balance of power. 
One has to bear in mind that rising regionalism is a global phenomenon because countries - big and 
small  alike  -  have  used  this  to  respond  to  global  challenges  and  developments.  They  integrate 
because they do not want to lose out in the global competition for export markets and foreign direct 
investments. And because of the dynamics in multilateral trade negotiations, small nations resort to 
regionalism  to  enhance  their  bargaining  leverage  and  to  gain  some  degree  of  international  political 
influence. 
In previous years East-Asian countries, in particular the ASEAN member states, have intensified their 
cooperation. As a whole, the ASEAN region comprises a market of no less than 500 million people, 
which  is  a  sizeable  entity  also  for  foreign  investors.  In  addition,  these  countries  have  distinguished 
themselves as investment locations with attractive business conditions. 
In  spite  of  the  dynamic  developments  in  Asian  economic  cooperation  integration  along  EU  lines  is 
rather  improbable.  This  is  due  partly  to  the  diverging  levels  of  economic  performance.  Another 
important aspect is the lack of strong political institutions in Asia. 
In fact, the various regional organisations in Asia are much less institutionalised than those in the EU. 
Their  chosen  mode  of  interaction  is  intergovernmental.  The  established  bodies  have  nothing  more 
than an advisory function. 
However, there is good reason to assume that regional integration will deepen in Asia. This leads to 
the interesting question: Who will be the main driving force of this process? 
IV 
What has to be done in the respective regions to cope with the challenges posed by globalisation? A 
high degree of adaptability will be needed. 
The  US,  with  its  flexible  economy,  comparatively  favourable  demographics  and  high  degree  of 
penetration  of  the  economy  with  information  and  communications  technology  has  every  chance  of 
successfully overcoming the challenges described. However, the US current account deficit is a clear 
indication that there is a need for structural adjustment, too. The necessity to finance net around 5½% 
of  US  GDP  externally  in  2004,  has  made  the  United  States  the  biggest  “debtor”  in  the  world.  This 
credit-financed  “overconsumption”  cannot  be  sustained  in  the  long  term,  not  even  by  the  US.  A 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
gradual adjustment process, which includes not only exchange rate changes and internal adjustment 
but also higher growth rates outside the US, would be desirable. 
A crucial requirement if the US current account deficit is to be reduced is that the US national savings 
must increase. The IMF, the US Federal Reserve and also the G7 are therefore emphatically calling 
for a consolidation of government budgets. 
Despite  the  progress  that  Japan  has  made  in  removing  structural  rigidities,  there  is  still  a  need  for 
reform if it wants to restrengthen its economic role in the region. Structural rigidities in the domestic 
market  and,  in  particular,  the  age  structure  of  the  Japanese  population  are  restricting  its  economic 
potential. This is also a reason why the OECD estimates Japan’s annual potential growth at only just 
over 1%. The situation is compounded by the precarious state of public finances with the government 
debt level at almost 170% of GDP. 
In the case of the emerging economies in East Asia, what matters is not the adjustment of existing 
structures,  but  rather  the  creation  of  new  ones.  The  Asian  countries  must  overcome  the  prevailing 
bilateralism to be able to benefit from the international division of labour more than has been the case 
thus far. This includes establishing an institutional framework for their regional cooperation. 
China’s  political  and  economic  development  will  depend  largely  on  how  the  country  deals  with  its 
growing internal imbalances, for example, the tensions between urban and rural areas to name just 
one. In China, the most pressing reform project is the creation of a well-functioning financial system 
able  to  channel  national  savings  towards  efficient  uses  and  as  an  important  step  towards  more 
exchange rate flexibility. Furthermore, it is necessary to create a social security system for which the 
state-owned enterprises have hitherto been responsible as well as a framework for a market-oriented 
fiscal and monetary policy. 
V 
In Europe the process of structural reforms has to continue. Europe has problems. The most pressing 
problems  include  high  unemployment,  a  lack  of  economic  flexibility  and  an  ageing  population. 
However, one  should not overlook  the fact  that  more  than  10  million  jobs  have  been  created  since 
1997. That is two million more than in the US. There has also been a maturing awareness of the need 
for  reform.  Reforms  have  now  been  introduced  in  the  labour  markets  and  social  security  systems. 
Following the accession of 10 new members to the European Union last year, we now have a large 
single market which unites the purchasing power of 450 million citizens. 
However, in view of its possibilities, the euro area’s growth potential is low. The OECD estimates it to 
be about 2% per year; by comparison, the US growth potential is estimated at over 3%. These growth 
differentials are to a large extent attributable to different rates of population growth. 
Even  so,  I  am  optimistic.  With  increasingly  flexible  economies,  greater  efforts  in  R  +  D,  greater 
willingness  to  be  innovative  and  for  longer  working  hours,  Europe  is  on  the  way  to  becoming  an 
economically  more  dynamic  region  over  time.  Not  to  forget:  The  EU  is  an  extraordinary  success  in 
terms  of  stabilising  the  continent  politically.  Despite  occasional  setbacks,  integration  has  made 
continuous advances and has culminated in a single currency. 
VI 
Today, globalisation is by some argued to be much of a triadisation. The process of integration is at its 
most intense among the three regions that contain most of the world’s developed market economies: 
North  America,  Western  Europe  and  East  Asia.  But  we  should  also  not  forget  South  America  and 
Africa. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  US  and  the  EU  continue  to  be  the  “traditional”  driving  forces  of  the  global 
economy, accounting for more than half of global trade and investment. 
At the same time, the most dynamic growth region is non-Japan Asia. 
With  globalised  markets  and  increasing  competition,  the  integration  of  large  emerging  markets  are 
giving rise to structural adjustments in the global economy. 
Forces  of  globalisation  and  competitive  markets  are  driving  Americans,  Europeans  and  Asians 
together, not apart. This represents a major challenge since geo-economics and geopolitics are deeply 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
intertwined. To rise to this challenge, a sound international framework must be in place in which all 
parties involved commit themselves to a multilateral approach. We must not allow the integration of 
large emerging markets into the global economy to lead to increased protectionism. Its consequences 
would  have  to  be  borne  by  all  parties  involved.  Instead,  we  must  foster  the  willingness  to  make 
adjustments, as the necessity to do so is evident in all of the world’s large economic regions. 
VII 
This  brings  me  to  my  concluding  remarks  in  raising  questions  to  which  we  might  not  have  the 
appropriate answers yet. 
1. 
With  the  appearance  of  new  economic  players  on  the  international  scene  the  global 
economic structure is changing. The global economic relevance of Japan, Europe and the 
US  might  be  affected.  What  might  be  the  impact  on  the  regional  and  global  balance  of 
power? 
One important aspect in this context are the huge internal imbalances in the leading Asian 
emerging economies. These imbalances may absorb much of the political capacities in order 
to contain potential regional and social tensions and conflicts. 
Thus,  the  US  is  most  likely  -  if  not  for  sure  -  to  remain  the  only  economic,  political  and 
military power! However, it is desirable that the US in its political choice remains open for 
international  cooperation  and  multilateralism.  Isolationism  and  unilateralism  should  not  be 
real political options. 
What  is  most  likely  to  change  globally  are  alliances  and  relationships.  New  alliances  and 
altering relationships might affect the global role of individual countries. 
What about Europe? Europe has the potential to become internationally more relevant again, 
economically  and  politically.  Since  the  early  1990s  Europe  has  primarily  dealt  with  its 
domestic problems in a rather inwardlooking attitude: 
– 
the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall,  the  fall  of  the  Iron  curtain and  the  political  and  economic 
transformation process of the former communist states in central and eastern Europe 
1989/90; 
the preparation for EMU in the second half of the nineties; 
enlargement by 10 new member states in 2004; 
the structural reform process starting at the end of the nineties. 
– 
– 
– 
The  future  international  role  of  the  EU  will  depend  on  the  speed  and  the  results  of  the 
adjustment and reform process. To deepen political integration and to have a vision about 
Europe’s future role are key. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
 4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
