Ishrat Husain: Financing human development in Pakistan  
Speech by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Pakistan Development 
Forum, Islamabad, 25 April 2005. 
 Pakistan has committed to achieve its MDGs by 2015 through a variety of interventions e.g. Real per 
capita  income  growth,  expansion  of  schooling  particularly  for  the  female  population,  increasing 
pupil-teacher  ratio,  improving  sanitation  access,  increased  immunization  coverage,  improving 
nutritional status of the children, providing electricity to the villages. Empirical studies assessing the 
progress  made  so  far  indicate  that  growth  of  real  consumption  expenditure  per  capita  and  large 
targeted  intervention  in  child  survival,  malnutrition  and  schooling  over  and  above  the  more  general 
intervention could take Pakistan closer to achieving these goals. Failing this, it will be quite difficult to 
attain any of the MDGs. Financial assistance to poor families conditional on their making investment in 
their children’s human capital can bring about the desired results in improving child schooling, health 
and nutritional out comes. 
Conceptually, the economists think in terms of production function i.e. a set of inputs are deployed to 
produce one Unit of output. In case of MDGs the inputs such as teachers, doctors and para medical 
staff, generation transmission and distribution of water and collection of waste and garbage, supply of 
immunization  shots  etc.  produce  expansion  of  school,  improved  access  to  health,  nutrition,  water 
supply  and  sanitation,  immunization  coverage  etc.  Some  of  these  inputs  are  additive  while  other 
interact with each other in a positive way making the output greater than the sum of all the inputs e.g. 
provision of inputs for potable water supply and sanitation interact with inputs for heath in a way that 
the outcomes of improved access to health, water and sanitation are positively correlated. Therefore 
instead of thinking independently of financing for education, financing for health, financing for water 
supply  and  sanitation  we  should  think  in  terms  of  financing  MDGs  and  include  all  expenditures  on 
inputs that are deployed for achieving the outputs or outcomes embedded in the MDGs. 
Institutionally, federal government ministries, provincial departments, district government departments 
are all organized vertically and do not conform to the conceptual issue that I have outlined. Thus there 
is  a  disconnect  between  optimally  efficient  utilization  of  financing  and  the  actual  delivery  of  these 
programs. The other issue is that we have to design the correct measure to capture expenditures on 
human  development.  So  far  we  have  focused  on  a  partial  measure  i.e.  public  expenditures  -  the 
amounts allocated out of the budgets of Federal or Provincial Governments. As a matter of fact there 
are  three  types  of  expenditures  that  are  incurred.  First  is  the  public  expenditure,  second  is  the 
expenditures by private and nongovernmental sectors who provide schooling or health services and 
finally is the expenditures incurred by the households themselves in form of tuition fees, text books, 
purchase of medicines, vaccines etc. When all three types of expenditures are taken together we get a 
complete picture of the expenditures on inputs used for achieving MDGs. 
In  addition  to  MDGs  Pakistan  has  developed  the  Poverty  Reduction  Strategy  (PRSP)  and  more 
recently an ambitious medium term development framework (MTDF) to catch up in the other areas of 
human development such as secondary, vocational and technical training, higher education, science 
and technology teacher training, curative health services etc. Too much preoccupation and the swing 
of pendulum towards an exclusive focus on primary education and basic health services create its own 
distortions  and  disequilibria.  Teachers  at  the  primary  level  exhibit  poor  quality  and  performance 
despite many attempts at teacher’s training because their graduate and postgraduate education has 
been sub-optimal. Universities are producing hundreds of thousands of graduates every year who are 
not all suited for ready absorption in labor market while economy is starving from a lack of technical 
skills. We have aspirations to become an active player in the globalized economy but capacity has to 
be  developed  in  our  science  and  technology  institutions  to  generate  the  products,  innovations  and 
processes that will improve the productivity. The linkage between industry and universities is almost 
non-existent at present and has to be nurtured. 
The  main  argument  of  this  paper  is  that  while  the  donor  emphasis  and  Pakistan’s  commitment  to 
achieve  MDGs  are  well  placed  and  should  be  fully  implemented  a  more  holistic  approach  towards 
human resource development that caters both to the economic and social objectives of the country 
has to be adopted. The internalization of externalities, spillovers and linkages within the whole human 
development  initiative  would  create  efficiency  and  result  in  cost  savings  and  thus  reduced  overall 
financing needs. 
Second,  “All  hands  on  the  deck”  covering  the  Federal,  Provincial  and  local  governments,  private 
sector,  external  donors,  communities,  not-forprofit 
institutions,  civil  society  organizations, 
philanthropies and charities should be assigned roles in a more cohesive and integrated manner. The 
waste, duplication, overlapping can be avoided and optimal use of physical facilities and infrastructure 
by multiple players and pooling of resources across institutions rather than maintaining separate silos 
encouraged under the current arrangements of program delivery. 
Third, the excessive focus on public budgetary allocations on education and health has neglected the 
tremendous  expenditures,  being  made  by  the  households  themselves  in  spending  on  schooling, 
health care, water and sanitation and also the efforts being made by other providers of these services 
in  non-governmental  sector.  Attention  should  be  shifted  from  the  level  of  public  expenditures  or  its 
share in GDP to the productivity of these expenditures. These stereotype and meaningless indicators 
with which the countries are flogged for lack of their commitment are not very helpful. 
Fourth, it is my contention that we should distinguish between financing and provisioning. While the 
Government should be responsible for financing primary and to a large extent secondary education 
and basic health services particularly preventive it should have, however, no exclusivity or monopoly in 
providing these services. For the poor quintiles the access to quality services can be improved if the 
Government  provides  scholarships,  stipends,  per  capita  grants  and  financial  assistance  to  the 
non-governmental  or  quasi-governmental  institutions  in  a  transparent  and  targeted  manner.  The 
Government  is  already  providing  several  incentives  to  these  providers  in  the  context  of  its 
Public-Private partnership program which needs further strengthening in operational terms. 
To illustrate this point education and health in Pakistan has been blessed recently with the entry or 
private sector, not-for-profit organizations, semi or quasi-governmental bodies (Annex I for a tentative 
list).  The  National  Commission  on  Human  Development,  the  National  or  Provincial  Educational 
Foundations, Rural Support Programs, Fauji Foundation, Private foundations, charitable hospitals and 
clinics  are  taking  an  increasing  burden  of  provisioning  every  day.  There  is  no  reason  that  the 
Government cannot  use some  of  these  quality  institutions  for  financing  the  services  targeted  at  the 
poor.  So  a  competitive  business  model  in  which  all  service  providers  irrespective  of  their  affiliation 
meeting  the  set  criteria  can  provide  the  education,  health  or  other  services  to  the  poor  households 
needs to be implemented. 
If the above holistic framework encompassing the concept, measurement, financing, provisioning of 
Human Development is agreed upon and a consensus is reached then the issue of financing human 
resource development becomes less pressing. 
Financing human development 
Table-I 
2005-2010 
 
Basic and College education 
Health, Nutrition and Populate 
Water and Sanitation 
Skilled based literary, technology education 
Higher education, S&T 
Total 
Annual 
Public 
103
107
150
70
223
653
Private 
50
300
1050
37
70
1507
Total 
153 
407 
1200 
107 
293 
2160 
130
300
430 
  
 
The total financing requirements for human development as identified in the MTDF and estimated on 
the  basis  of  household  expenditures  amount  to  Rs.2160  billion  over  2005-2010  period  or  Rs.430 
billion annually. Of this, public expenditure is Rs.130 billion or slightly over or US$2 billion annually or 
less  than  one  third  of  the  total  expenditure  on  human  development,  while  private  expenditure  is 
Rs.300 billion or $ 5 billion annually. Private expenditure is dominated by household expenditure on 
water and sanitation, and health and to a lesser degree education. Non-household private expenditure 
would  be  about  Rs.30-60  billion  annually  mainly  provided  by  philanthropic,  charitable  institutions, 
individual and corporate donations and endowments. 
In the last year 2003-04 the total public expenditure on education and health alone was Rs.112 billion. 
Thus the proposed target of Rs.130 billion is not unrealistic and can be easily achieved if the domestic 
and donor assistance are available. 
Conclusion: 
Pakistan’s  public  expenditures  on  human  development  are  low  by  international  standards  and  are 
approximately  4  percent  of  GDP.  But  total  public  and  private  expenditures  amount  to  more  than 
8 percent of GDP i.e. twice what the public sector spends. But this number is hardly recognized or 
mentioned  in  the  popular  discourse.  Households  themselves  spend  at  least  4percent  on  health, 
education, water supply and sanitation. 
Donors have to agree on an integrated plan of human resource development that will meet the MDGs 
as well as the objectives set out in the MDTF. They should then channel their resources on the basis 
of certain criteria i.e. cost effectiveness, efficiency in the resource use, targeting the poor households, 
quality  of  service  etc.  Competition  for  these  resources  among  the  various  providers  of  services  will 
give them a better bang for the buck. For primary education and basic health services it is proposed 
that the 30 most deprived districts of Pakistan (Annex II) where the majority of the population live at 
the poverty or fringes of poverty and have the weakest social indicators should be chosen for grants in 
aid, scholarships, stipends, and other financial assistance. This will spur into action these providers of 
services who are at present reluctant to extend their outreach to these poor districts because of higher 
set  up  and  operating  costs.  The  assistance  to  them  should  be  linked  to  the  outcomes  such  as  net 
enrolment ratios, drop out rates, immunization etc. 
In my view the approach outlined in the above paper has a much better chance of achieving both the 
MDGs as well as the objectives set out in the PRSP and the MDTF. 
 
Annex-I 
Major service providers in the non-governmental sector. 
National Commission on Human Development 
1.  
Beaconhouse School System 
2.  
CARE 
3.  
Bahria Foundation 
4.  
Shaheen Foundation 
5. 
The Citizens Foundation (TCF) 
6.  
Fauji Foundation 
7.  
Sindh Education Foundation (SEF) 
8.  
9.  
Bunyad Foundation 
10.   Al-Sahiffa Hospital 
11.   Rural Support Programs (RSPs) 
12.   Punjab Education Foundation (PEF) 
13.   Agha Khan Education Service (AKES) 
14.   Agha Khan Health Service (SKHS) 
15.   Edhi Welfare Services 
16.   Shaukat Khanum Trust 
17.   National Education Foundation (NEF) 
18.   Overseas Pakistanis Foundation (OPF) 
19.   Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS) 
20.   Frontier Education Foundation (FEF) 
21.   Community Learning/Literacy Centers 
22.   Pakistan Centre for Philanthropy (PCP) 
23.   Marie – Adelaide Trust 
24.   Layton Rahamtullah Trust 
25.  
26.   G.I.K. Institute 
27.   Agha Khan University 
28.   FAST 
29.   Shaikh Zaid Hospital, Lahore 
30.   Al-Shifa Trust 
Infaq Foundation 
Annex-II 
30 most deprived districts in Pakistan 
Jhal Magsi  
(Based on overall Deprivation Index published by Haroon Jamal et al in Pakistan Development Review 
Summer 2003) 
100   Musakhel  
99   Kohistan  
98   Kharan  
97   Kohlu  
96   Awaran  
95   Zhob  
94  
93   Panjgur 
92   Khuzdar 
91   Shangla 
90   Batagram  
89   Dera Bugti  
88   Barkhan  
87   Nasirabad  
86   Killa Saifullah  
85   Killal Abdullah 
84   Tharparkar 
83   Bolan 
82   Rajanpur 
81 
Upper Dir 
80   Mastung 
79   Chagai 
78   Thatta 
77  
76   Badin 
75  
74  
73   Muzaffargadh 
72   D.G. Khan 
71   Kalat 
Jafarabad 
Loralai 
Lasbela 
 Provincial breakdown 
Balochistan   
 
NWFP  
Sindh  
 
 
Punjab  
 20/26 
4/24 
3/16 
3/34 
