V Leeladhar: Emerging challenges before the Indian banks - the road ahead  
First Annual Dena Bank Foundation Day address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve 
Bank of India, to commemorate its founder, the Late Pranlal Devkaran Nanjee, Mumbai, 26 May 2005.  
 It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  be  invited  to  commence  the  Dena  Bank  Foundation  Day  Lecture  Series. 
Today, as we remember the founders, we essentially pay homage to their vision and drive that led to 
the establishment of the Dena Bank. Shri Pranlalbhai Nanjee, inspired by his late father Shri Devkaran 
Nanjee’s  dream  to  start  a  bank  and  play  a  seminal  role  in  the  development  of  the  Indian  banking 
industry, started the Devkaran Nanjee Banking Company in January 1938, about three years after the 
Reserve Bank was established. It was then incorporated as a private limited company under the Indian 
Companies’ Act on 26 May 1938. In a span of twenty five years, the bank grew in size and stature to 
rank amongst the top 14 banks in India and was converted into a public limited company and renamed 
as Dena Bank Limited in December 1966. It was nationalized in July 1969 along with 13 other banks 
in the first phase of bank nationalization in India. Today, as the bank is gearing itself to enter the fast 
changing, turbulent and uncertain environment that characterises the banking terrain, we trust it will 
pick up the momentum of its first twenty five years.  
Founding days are always very special. They are one of the few ‘possessions’ which are owned by 
each and every one of the institution’s fraternity alike. It is not only a day to feel proud, it is a day to 
reflect,  a  day  to  share,  and  a  day  to  celebrate.  It  is  also  an  opportunity  to  re-emphasise  what  the 
institution stands for, to renew its symbols, its imagery and its values. These symbols and imagery not 
only  help  project  its  corporate  culture  and  identity,  but  they  also  constitute  an  integral  part  of  the 
institutions’  brand  building  exercise.  Founding  days  constitute  one  of  the  few  opportunities  for 
collective sharing in an institution. The coming together and the camaraderie that this day evokes is 
perhaps the appropriate moment to reinstate an emotive content into the work place.  
The emotive content, team building, the ownership in work, how to inspire, how to draw out from the 
staff the very best, are perhaps new issues in the boardroom agenda in the world of Indian banking. 
Strategy  sessions  are  increasingly  focusing  on  the  ways  of  unleashing  the  tremendous  power  of 
emotions  that  has  been  hidden  in  organizations  and  using  it  in  a  constructive  manner  to  energise 
people and to maximise motivation. The desired outcome is to get individuals cognitively, physically, 
affectively and personally engaged in their work in the pursuit of institutional excellence. The common 
theme underlying these perspectives is that leaders may persuade with logic but they motivate through 
emotion  and  that  a  strong  motivation  and  psychological  involvement  is  not  possible  without  an 
emotional attachment to the work or the work context. What has brought about this change? For a few 
decades preceding the onset of banking and financial sector reforms in India, banking operated in an 
environment that was heavily regulated and had a certain security of expectations built into it. Banks, 
the institutions which evoked notions of ‘fortune, probity and prudence’, charted their way slowly but 
surely, secure in the belief that the regulatory environment protected their margins, their territories and 
their branch network. This also posed sufficient barriers to entry and protected them against too much 
competition  and  a  relationship  based  on  the  loyalty  contract  bound  their  customers  irrevocably  to 
them.  This  environment  of  complacent  certainties  has  now  changed  bringing  with  it  profound 
implications for the manner in which banks operate, their responses to customer needs, their agility, 
the  never-ending  quest  towards  efficiency  and  the  continuous  search  for  ever  newer  pastures  – 
‘hunting  for  cheese’  and  the  more  serious  concern  for  the  need  to  continuously  reassess  and 
reposition themselves in their business plans.  
The  last  decade  has  witnessed  major  changes  in  the  financial  sector:  New  banks,  new  financial 
institutions,  new  instruments,  new  windows,  and  new  opportunities  and,  along  with  all  this,  new 
challenges.  While  deregulation  has  opened  up  new  vistas  for  banks  to  augment  revenues,  it  has 
entailed  greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks.  Cross-border  flows  and  entry  of  new 
products,  particularly  derivative  instruments,  have  impacted  significantly  on  the  domestic  banking 
sector, forcing banks to adjust the product mix, as also to effect rapid changes in their processes and 
operations  in  order  to  remain  competitive  in  the  globalised  environment.  These  developments  have 
facilitated  greater  choice  for  consumers,  who  have  become  more  discerning  and  demanding 
compelling  banks  to  offer  a  broader  range  of  products  through  diverse  distribution  channels.  The 
traditional face of banks as mere financial intermediaries has since altered and risk management has 
emerged as their defining attribute. 
It is clear that we are at the beginning of this new phase in the Indian banking. The recent measures 
announced by the Government and the Reserve Bank of India for opening up India’s banking sector to 
international  investors  will  further  increase  the  pressure  of  competition.  At  the  same  time  there  is 
renewed  emphasis  by  the  Government  on  the  social  sector  together  with  thrust  on  rural  and 
agricultural lending. Caught between the competitive pressure, both domestic and external, and the 
politics of development, banks will have to be on their toes, become even more efficient in managing 
funds and in meeting the needs and demands of customers. 
Economic outlook and banking sector’s performance 
During  the  last  couple  of  years,  global  growth  has  been  above  the  forecast  in  almost  every  region 
stimulated by strong monetary and fiscal measures. The domestic economic outlook is also bright with 
the real GDP growth rate surpassing 8% last year and estimated to be around 7% in the current year. 
Industrial performance also improved considerably with a strong manufacturing growth for the second 
consecutive year. Inflation rate has been under control, barring some hiccup for a short period. 
Aided by a good macro economic environment, banks’ bottom line has improved significantly over the 
last  three  years.  However,  let  us  not  forget  that  a  major  contributor  to  the  windfall  gains  has  been 
treasury profits fuelled by a secular decline in interest rates during the three years period from 2001 to 
2004 and consequent profit booking on sale of government securities. From the current year, with the 
hardening  of  interest  rates,  this  trading  component  of  profits  is  no  longer  going  to  shore  up  banks’ 
profitability. On the contrary, most banks have been required to provide for the decline in the market 
value of their investments portfolio. Thankfully, one offsetting factor has been the strong pick up in the 
credit  off-take  due  to  buoyant  demand  in  the  economy  and  revival  of  industrial  activity,  which  have 
resulted in substantial increase in banks’ core interest income. 
Globalisation – a challenge as well as an opportunity 
Currently, the most important factor shaping the world is globalisation. The benefits of globalisation 
have been well documented and are being increasingly recognised. Integration of domestic markets 
with  international  financial  markets  has  been  facilitated  by  tremendous  advancement  in  information 
and  communications  technology.  But,  such  an  environment  has  also  meant  that  a  problem  in  one 
country  can  sometimes  adversely  impact  one  or  more  countries  instantaneously,  even  if  they  are 
fundamentally strong.  
There is a growing realisation that the ability of countries to conduct business across national borders 
and the ability to cope with the possible downside risks would depend, inter alia, on the soundness of 
the  financial  system.  This  has  consequently  meant  the  adoption  of  a  strong  and  transparent, 
prudential, regulatory, supervisory, technological and institutional framework in the financial sector on 
par  with  international  best  practices.  All  this  necessitates  a  transformation:  a  transformation  in  the 
mindset,  a  transformation  in  the  business  processes  and  finally,  a  transformation  in  knowledge 
management. This process is not a one shot affair; it needs to be appropriately phased in the least 
disruptive manner.  
High capital inflows: not an unmixed blessing 
As you all know, liquidity position in the financial sector has been quite comfortable in the recent times. 
The buoyant capital market coupled with an appreciating rupee vis-à-vis US dollar has been attracting 
large  foreign  institutional  inflows  during  the  last  two  years.  While  we  have  an  all  time  high  foreign 
exchange reserves of more than $140 billion, high capital inflows pose a big challenge to monetary 
and  exchange  rate  management.  In  this  context,  operationalisation  of  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme 
(MSS)  has  given  an  additional  instrument  for  liquidity  and  monetary  management.  To  sum  up  the 
challenge,  I  would  like  to  quote  a  statement  of  Dr.  Y.  V.  Reddy,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
which he made at the annual meeting of Bank for International Settlement (BIS) on June 28, 2004. 
And I quote, “…..Special defences need to be put in place for ensuring financial stability in the case of 
countries  like  India  that  are  faced  with  the  prospect  of  volatile  capital  flows.  The  issues  relating  to 
cross-border  supervision  of  financial  intermediaries  in  the  context  of  greater  capital  flows  are  just 
emerging and need to be addressed.” 
Interest rate risk for Indian banks – profits under pressure  
The rapid and relatively substantial rise in rupee interest rates in recent months has brought into focus 
the market risk faced by Indian banks. Your own bank’s current years profits have been badly affected 
due to increased provisioning requirement on the investment portfolio. Your fourth quarter results have 
shown massive losses due to Mark to Market (MTM) losses on your G-Sec portfolio. The story is not 
much  different  for  most  of  the  public  sector  banks.  The  benchmark  10-year  yield  on  government 
securities has risen from 5.2% in May last year to around 7.2% at this point. The spike in interest rates 
has  affected  the  trading  profits  of  banks.  We  in  Reserve  Bank  have  been  regularly  carrying  out 
quantitative  impact  studies  of  rising  yields  on  banks’  economic  value.  While,  financial  media,  and 
some  academic  circles  have  been  portraying  an  overly  alarming  and  pessimistic  picture  regarding 
banks’ potential interest rate risk, our analyses reveal that gradually increasing interest rate regime is 
unlike  to  erode  banks’  equity,  given  the  likely  increase  in  net  interest  income  (NII),  some  residual 
unrealized gain on the portfolio (though, I must confess, most of it has evaporated), and the recent 
forbearance  by  RBI  permitting  banks  to  hold  a  larger  proportion  of  securities  under  the  ‘held  to 
maturity’ (HTM) category that need not be marked to market. Of course, as I cited your own bank’s 
example, banks had to take a one time hit before shifting the securities from trading to banking book. 
Different banks, however, vary in their levels of vulnerability, with some new private banks being less 
susceptible to market risk compared with most old private banks and some government banks. In the 
medium  term,  however,  most  banks  are  likely  to  need  to  increase  their  equity  to  meet  growing 
regulatory capital allocation for market risk. 
Technology is the key 
The decade of 90s has witnessed a sea change in the way banking is done in India. Technology has 
made tremendous impact in banking. Anywhere banking and anytime banking have become a reality. 
This has thrown new challenges in the banking sector and new issues have started cropping up which 
is  going  to  pose  certain  problems  in  the  near  future.  The  new  entrants  in  the  banking  are  with 
computer  background.  However,  over  a  period  of  time  they  would  acquire  banking  experience. 
Whereas the middle and senior level people have rich banking experience but their computer literacy 
is  at  a  low  level.  Therefore,  they  feel  the  handicap  in  this  regard  since  technology  has  become  an 
indispensable tool in banking. 
Foreign banks and the new private sector banks have embraced technology right from the inception of 
their operations and therefore, they have adapted themselves to the changes in the technology easily. 
Whereas the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and the old private sector banks (barring a very few of them) 
have  not  been  able  to  keep  pace  with  these  developments.  In  this  regard,  one  can  cite  historical, 
political  and  other  factors  like  work  culture  and  working  relations  (which  are  mainly  governed  by 
bipartite  settlements  between  the  managements  and  the  staff  members)  as  the  main  constraints. 
Added to these woes, the PSBs were also saddled with some nonviable and loss making branches, 
thanks to the social banking concept thrust upon them by the regulatory authorities in 1960s. 
Basel II accord, capital and market discipline 
The most prominent on our minds in the context of banking these days, perhaps, are the implications 
arising out of the Basel II accord. Two deserve special mention – one relates to capital and the other 
to market discipline. Where capital is concerned, the prescriptions have ushered in a transition from 
the traditional regulatory and market measures of capital adequacy to an evaluation of whether a bank 
has  found  the  most  efficient  use  of  its  capital  to  support  its  new  business  mix,  i.e.,  from  capital 
adequacy to capital efficiency. In this transition, how effectively capital is used will determine returns 
on equity and a consequent enhancement of shareholder value. In effect, future plans may, therefore, 
include  the  fluid  use  of  capital,  an  approach  that  has  been  called  the  "just-in-time  balance  sheet" 
management, in which capital flows quickly to its most efficient use. This transition in how capital is 
used and how much capital is needed will become a significant factor in return-on-equity strategy for 
years ahead and banks’ strategic plans may be required to execute this kind of approach.  
The accord also has, as an underlying principle, the reliance on the market to assess the riskiness of 
banks.  This  translates  into  an  increased  focus  on  transparency  and  market  disclosure,  critical 
information describing the risk profile, capital structure and capital adequacy. Besides making banks 
more accountable and responsive to better-informed investors, these processes enable banks to strike 
the right balance between risks and rewards and to improve the access to markets. Improvements in 
market discipline also call for greater coordination between banks and regulators.  
India  has  been  a  participant  in  the  international  initiatives  to  ensure  improved  processes  of  market 
discipline that are being worked out in several fora, such as, the multilateral organisations, the BIS, the 
Financial Stability Forum, and the Core Principles Liaison Group. Concurrent efforts are underway to 
refine  and  upgrade  financial  information  monitoring  and  flow,  data  dissemination  and  data 
warehousing. Banks are currently required to disclose in their balance sheets information on maturity 
profiles of assets and liabilities, lending to sensitive sectors, movements in NPAs, besides providing 
information on capital, provisions, shareholdings of the government, value of investments in India and 
abroad, and other operating and profitability indicators. Financial institutions are also required to meet 
these disclosure norms. Banks also have to disclose their total investments made in equity shares, 
units of mutual funds, bonds and debentures, and aggregate advances against shares in their notes to 
balance sheets.  
The critical regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India to prepare the banking sector for 
these  changes  are  :  (i)  the  Reserve  Bank’s  endeavour  to  ensure  that  the  banks  have  suitable  risk 
management  framework  oriented  towards  their  requirements  dictated  by  the  size  and  complexity  of 
business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expected level of capital; (ii) The introduction of 
Risk  Based  Supervision  (RBS)  in  23  banks  on  a  pilot  basis;  (iii)  the  drive  to  encourage  banks  to 
formalize  their  capital  adequacy  assessment  process  (CAAP)  in  alignment  with  their  business  plan 
and performance budgeting system; (iv) Ensuring better disclosure so as to have greater transparency 
in the financial position and risk profile of banks and (v) finally, the Reserve Bank at its end is in the 
process  of  building  capacity  to  ensure  it  can  vet  models  for  banks  who  will  be  adopting  the  IRB  / 
Advanced Measurement approaches. 
As banks have two years lead-time to prepare themselves for Basel II, they are encouraged to focus 
on capacity building and undertake impact analyses. On the basis of the impact studies, banks would 
be required to put in place appropriate strategies and plans for raising fresh capital or augment capital 
through  internal  resources.  Banks  may  also  need  to  redefine  their  business  strategy  with  a  view  to 
altering their profile of risk exposures or adopt a combination of both these approaches to meet the 
capital requirement.    
Organizations all over are rushing to implement the latest ideas on management, sometimes to the 
point  of  overuse.  Most  of  these  ideas  are  about  doing  things  better,  about  improving  operational 
effectiveness. If everybody however is competing on the same set of variables, then the standard gets 
higher but no one gets ahead. And getting ahead – then staying ahead - is the basis of strategy and 
creating  a  competitive  advantage.  Strategy  is  about  setting  yourself  apart  from  the  competition.  Its 
therefore not just a matter of being better at what you do, its rather a matter of being different at what 
you  do.  The  major  challenge  now  for  banks  as  well  as  any  other  organisation  is  therefore  how  to 
develop  their  social  architecture  that  generates  intellectual  capital  as  the  quintessential  driver  of 
change. Developing the individual or human capacity is an integral element of building capacity and, in 
fact, capacity building initiatives are now increasingly becoming almost an index of institutional quality. 
Capacity building would in the days to come not only influence the structure of institutions, it would 
also determine how they are run.  
Taking the banking industry to the heights of excellence, especially in the face of the afore-detailed 
emerging realities, will require a combination of new technologies, better processes of credit and risk 
appraisal, treasury management, product diversification, internal control and external regulations and, 
not  the  least,  human  resources.  Standing  as  we  do  at  this  critical  juncture,  I  trust  innovative, 
illuminating ideas, fresh insights and alternative ways of thinking about the competitive yet cooperative 
combat  that  the  world  of  banking  and  finance  is  readying  itself  for  will  mark Dena  Bank’s  business 
strategies and institutional development plans and will give you the emotive content to carry forth Shri 
Nanjee’s legacy of financial entrepreneurship and set the lead to position your institution not just as a 
national but as a global player. I wish you every success in your all future endeavours. 
Thank You. 
