Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Press  briefing  on  the  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review  - 
June 2005 
Opening remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Press 
briefing on the ECB Financial Stability Review - June 2005, Frankfurt am Main, 31 May 2005. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  welcome  to  this  press  briefing  on  the  publication  of  the  ECB’s  June  2005 
Financial Stability Review. 
Let  me  start  by  saying  that  in  publishing  this  Financial  Stability  Review,  the  second  of  its  kind,  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  is  enhancing  the  way  in  which  it  addresses  its  financial  stability 
mandate  by  issuing  a  public  report  on  a  semi-annual  basis.  Under  Article  105  (5),  the  Treaty 
establishing the European Union assigned to the Eurosystem the task of contributing “to the smooth 
conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit 
institutions  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system”.  In  this  vein,  the  issuing  of  this  review,  which 
represents the common view of the Governing Council of the ECB, and is now published half-yearly in 
June and December, is to promote awareness in the financial industry and among the public at large 
of issues that are relevant for preserving and enhancing the stability of the euro area financial system. 
By providing an overview of sources of risk and vulnerability to financial stability, the review also seeks 
to help preventing financial tensions.  
Many  of  the  national  central  banks  that  make  up  the  Eurosystem  are  also  addressing  their  own 
financial stability mandates by periodically issuing public reports on the functioning of, and sources of 
risk facing, their own financial systems. By providing a unique pan-euro area perspective on financial 
stability issues, the ECB Review aims at complementing the analyses contained within these reports.  
As  I  have  said  on  the  occasion  of  the  publication  of  the  ECB’s  first  Financial  Stability  Review  last 
December, central banks have a strong and natural interest in the safeguarding of financial stability. 
This  is  in  particular  because  financial  institutions,  notably  banks,  are  issuers  of  by  far  the  largest 
component  of  the  money  stock.  It  is  equally  because  a  stable  financial  system  is  needed  for  an 
effective transmission of monetary policy and for the smooth operation of payment systems. A robust 
financial  system  is  therefore  needed  to  ensure  that  the  single  monetary  policy  can  deliver  on  the 
primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area. Finally, but not least, the health of the 
financial system is inextricably intertwined with the performance of the economy and its resilience to 
shocks. These are the reasons why the ECB and the Eurosystem have an important stake in financial 
stability in the euro area.  
Complex to define, financial stability is not only of the essence in avoiding financial crises but also in 
paving the way for the best financial environment in normal times. It is a condition where the financial 
system is capable of performing well in normal times all of its normal tasks and where it is expected to 
do  so  for  the  foreseeable  future.  From  this  viewpoint,  financial  system  stability  requires  that  the 
principal components of the system – i.e. financial institutions, markets and infrastructures – are jointly 
capable  of  absorbing  smoothly  a  full  array  of  adverse  disturbances.  It  requires  that  the  financial 
system  is  facilitating  an  efficient  reallocation  of  financial  resources  from  savers  to  investors,  that 
financial  risk  is  being  assessed  and  priced  accurately  and  that  risks  are  being  efficiently  managed. 
Financial stability also has an important forward-looking dimension. For instance, inefficiencies in the 
allocation  of  capital  or  shortcomings  in  the  pricing  of  risk  can,  by  laying  the  foundations  for  future 
vulnerabilities, compromise future financial system stability and therefore economic stability.  
Three steps are needed to produce a comprehensive picture of the stability of the financial system. 
The first entails forming an assessment of the individual and collective robustness of the institutions, 
markets and infrastructures that make up the financial system. The second involves an identification of 
the main sources of risk and vulnerability that could pose challenges for financial system stability in the 
future. The third and final step is an appraisal of the ability of the financial system to cope with crisis, 
should  these  risks  materialise.  The  overall  assessment  will  determine  whether  remedial  action  is 
needed. 
It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  financial  stability  analysis  is  very  different  from  the  analysis  that 
underpins our monetary policy assessment. Financial stability analysis has a focus on calling attention 
to potential sources of risk and vulnerability to the functioning of the financial system and it does not 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
aim at identifying the main – or most likely - future scenario for the euro area economy. It neither aims 
at identifying the full balance of risks surrounding this main scenario as is the principal focus in the 
monetary  policy  assessment  and  decision-making  process.  Rather  it  entails  the  highlighting  of 
potential and plausible sources of negative events, even if these are remote and very unlikely.  
As was the case with the preparation of the December 2004 Financial Stability Review, the analysis 
contained in this review was prepared with the close involvement of, and contribution by, the Banking 
Supervision Committee (BSC). The BSC is a forum for cooperation among the national central banks 
and supervisory authorities of the EU and the ECB. The collaboration with the BSC has meant that the 
review draws upon a very broad knowledge-base and the analysis contained within it blends together 
the macro perspectives of central bankers with the micro perspectives of supervisors.  
Over the past seven years the driving force behind the development of financial stability analysis at the 
ECB,  both  at  the  conceptual  and  practical  level,  has  been  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa.  As  you  are 
aware, today is also Mr. Padoa-Schioppa’s last working day at the ECB. I would therefore like to take 
this opportunity to express in the name of the ECB my deep gratitude for the work he has undertaken 
as  a  founding  member  of  the  Executive  Board  and  of  the  Governing  Council,  as  well  as  for  the 
inspiration he has provided for the work of many of the committees and working groups that together 
form the flesh and blood of the Eurosystem. In this vein, the financial stability analysis, in particular, is 
an area that, I am sure, will continue to be shaped by the guidance provided by Mr Padoa-Schioppa.  
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  Mr  Padoa-Schioppa,  who  will  present  to  you  the  main  findings  of  the 
analysis in the June Financial Stability Review. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
