Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Expanding ASEAN-EU economic links - the role of the euro 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Euro Conference - 
“Expanding ASEAN-EU Economic Links - The Role of the Euro", Kuala Lumpur, 14 July 2005. 
 Your Excellency Ambassador Thierry Rommel, Head of the EU Commission Delegation in Malaysia,  
Your Excellencies, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning. It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the "Euro Conference: Expanding ASEAN-
EU Economic Links -- The Role of the Euro".  
Bank Negara Malaysia is indeed honoured to co-host this event and would like to especially thank the 
European  Commission  for  the  opportunity.  The  purpose  of  this  Conference  is  to  bring  together 
recognised  experts  to  discuss  the  important  issues  affecting  economic,  monetary  and  financial 
interests in ASEAN and the EU. I believe that the exchange of ideas and views over the next two days 
would contribute towards an increased understanding of the developments and issues important to our 
respective regions. Our agenda is for the further strengthening of the close ASEAN-EU partnership 
that offers mutually reinforcing benefits to both regions. It is our hope that this Conference would serve 
as a catalyst to promote greater appreciation of the potential for an expanded ASEAN-EU economic 
relationship  -  a  relationship  in  which  trade  and  investment  flows  between  our  regions  can  be 
enhanced.  
The ASEAN-EU partnership has developed steadily over time through a number of well-established 
forums.  This  has  taken  place  in  a  global  environment  in  which  the  world  economies  and  financial 
systems  are  increasingly  becoming  more  integrated.  As  a  result,  it  can  be  expected  that  there  is 
increased interdependence, events that take place in one part of the world will have implications on 
other parts of the world. This is likely to be more pronounced in the ASEAN economies and financial 
systems,  given  their  openness  and  their  high  degree  of  integration  with  the  global  economy  and 
international financial system. As the ASEAN and the EU continues to evolve as strategic partners, 
new opportunities can also be realized. An enhanced relationship will also contribute towards more 
effective  management  of  the  new  challenges  in  the  ever-changing  global  environment.  Indeed,  this 
Conference takes place at an important time when it becomes even more constructive and meaningful 
for our two regions to strengthen our associations, our inter-linkages and our relationships.  
Learning from the experiences of the EU 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The unification of Europe on many fronts is a major structural enhancement to the global economic 
and financial landscape. It is very likely however, that in view of our diversity and different structures 
and stages of development, the route for the integration process will be significantly different. It can be 
stated with certainty however, that integration will nevertheless occur. Indeed, the process has already 
commenced  and  it  is  likely  to  gain  momentum  as  we  advance  forward.  The  motivation  being  the 
greater stability it brings and the increased growth potential it generates.  
The European experience offers valuable insights in synchronising and pacing the integration process 
in the ASEAN region. The European path to integration -- based on trade integration, with the removal 
of restrictions on the movements of goods and all factors of production at the early stages, followed by 
increased  monetary  and  financial  linkages  at  the  subsequent  stages  -  presents  ASEAN  with  an 
important reference point in our own monetary and financial integration efforts, in particular, in relation 
to the trade and investment liberalisation initiatives to facilitate greater regional economic integration.  
   1/2 
Tremendous opportunities in ASEAN for the EU 
There is certainly much that ASEAN can learn from the EU experience. The EU is now the world's 
largest single market and with the introduction of the Euro. The EU has become the ASEAN's third 
largest trading partner. Of its total trade, the trade of the ASEAN 5 (that is, of Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines,  Thailand  and  Singapore  as  a  group)  with  the  EU  accounted  for  12.4%  in  2004. 
Meanwhile,  the  EU's  trade  with  the  ASEAN  5  accounts  for  4.5%  of  the  EU's  total  trade.  Against  a 
backdrop of sustained growth and macroeconomic and financial stability in ASEAN, there is significant 
potential  for  expanding  the  trading  and  investment  links  between  our  two  regions.  Focusing  on  the 
areas of complementarities would maximize the mutual benefits to be gained from the strengthened 
relationship.  
The  ASEAN  Vision  Statement  is  "to  create  a  stable,  prosperous  and  highly  competitive  ASEAN 
economic  region  in  which  there  is  a  free-flow  of  goods,  services  and  investments,  a  freer  flow  of 
capital,  equitable  economic  development  and  reduced  poverty  and  socio-economic  disparities"  by 
2020. The ASEAN economies have for more than a decade now experienced growth that is above the 
global average. While this growth momentum was interrupted during the Asian currency crisis in 1997 
and 1998, the ASEAN economies demonstrated their resilience to resume its strong growth within a 
short period of a year for many of the affected countries. Opportunities are fast emerging in our region 
reinforced  by  the  more  intensified  regional  integration  that  is  taking  place.  In  ASEAN,  efforts  are 
already  being  accelerated  in  the  implementation  of  trade  and  investment  action  plans  under  the 
ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area  (or  AFTA,  for  trade  in  goods),  the  ASEAN  Framework  Agreement  on 
Services  (or  AFAS,  for  trade  in  services)  and  the  ASEAN  Investment  Area  (or  AIA,  for  investment 
liberalisation).  
The  initiatives  to  enhance  trade  and  investment  flows  to  ASEAN  have  also  been  accompanied  by 
efforts  to  strengthen  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  ASEAN  countries  have  also  reinforced 
efforts in regional financial co-operation, including in the surveillance processes. These has brought 
together policy makers from the ASEAN ministries of finance and central banks to constantly engage 
in discussions on regional and global economic developments which have implications on the ASEAN 
region. In April this year, the ASEAN countries also doubled the size of its regional financing facility, 
the ASEAN Swap Arrangement (ASA), from US$1 to US$2 billion. The ASA is a further initiative to 
maintain  regional  economic  and  financial  stability  through  a  mechanism  that  provides  short-term 
liquidity support to member countries facing temporary balance of payments difficulties. 
Strengthened strategic partnership as a natural way forward 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As we advance forward, both the EU and ASEAN through the rebalancing of global growth have the 
potential to contribute towards alleviating the imbalances in the global landscape.  
The process of increased inter-linkages between our two regions has already begun. As a pre-cursor 
to  the  establishment  of  a  Free  Trade  Agreement  (FTA),  our  regions  have  embarked  on  the  Trans-
Regional European Union-ASEAN Trade Initiative in 2003. Work is also already underway to expand 
trade  and  investment  flows  through  closer  ASEAN-EU  co-operation  in  trade,  investment  and 
regulatory issues, among others. 
While barriers between our regions will continue to be lowered under a future FTA, it is also important 
to maintain coherence between liberalisation and economic stability. New areas in specific sectors of 
mutual  interest  that  would  complement  the  path  to  greater  growth  for  both  regions  need  to  be 
explored. This would contribute towards reinforcing the sustainability and effectiveness of the ASEAN-
EU partnership and, thereby, increase the potential to contribute to global economic stability.  
Allow me to conclude my remarks here. Thank you for your participation in this Euro Conference. I 
hope  the  sessions  ahead  will  challenge  your  thinking  and  present  you  with  many  new  ideas  and 
perspectives on the prospects of an expanded ASEAN-EU relationship. 
   2/2 
