Svein Gjedrem: Price stability is not self-generating 
Opening address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
conference on historical monetary statistics hosted by Norges Bank, Bogstad gård, Oslo, June 2005.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
We can learn from the past, so that we are better equipped to make the right choices in the future.  
This  is  the  second  conference  on  historical  monetary  statistics  hosted  by  Norges  Bank.  The 
conference was arranged for the first time last year, when we presented a book on historical monetary 
statistics.  The  Bank’s objective  has  been  to  obtain  data  that  can  be  used  in  research  in two  of  the 
Bank’s  core  areas,  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Our  statistics  are  compiled  in  close 
cooperation  with  academic  institutions,  primarily  the  Norwegian  School  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration. Later today, Professor Ola. H. Grytten will be presenting historical wage statistics from 
1730 up to 2004.  
Historical research can be used to shed light on economic relationships and perhaps reveal patterns. 
The  next  reasonable  step  would  seem  to  be  to  search  for  the  answer  to  the  question  “what  is  the 
norm?”  
What is the norm? 
An  examination  of  500  years  of  price  history  in  Norway  is  of  particular  interest  to  monetary  policy. 
History shows that price stability is the norm, and that high inflation is a phenomenon associated with 
war, times of famine and the 1970s and 1980s. Executive Director Jan F. Qvigstad will give a more 
detailed  presentation  of  the  characteristic  features  of  periods  in  price  history  that  do  not  follow  the 
norm – periods of high inflation and strong deflation.  
Once a norm has been established, the next question might be: What would the future look like if we 
make  projections  on  the  basis  of  what  we  know  from  history?  Two  variables  of  special  interest  for 
economists  are  GDP  and  consumer  prices.  One  way  to  make  a  projection  is  to  extend  trends  in 
historical  developments.  If  economists  in  1905  had  had  access  to  today’s  statistical  concepts  and 
techniques, they might also have performed exercises such as this. Let us imagine that they did just 
that, and that they wanted the answer to the following question: What will be the level of prices and 
real  income  in  Norway  when  the  country’s  citizens  commemorate  the  dissolution  of  the  union  with 
Sweden in 2005?  
From  our  position  in  the  present,  we  can  say  with  some  certainty  that  they  would  have  been 
considerably off the mark. Looking back, it is also easy to understand why.  
In 1905, prices had remained approximately unchanged for several decades. The krone’s precursor, 
the speciedaler, and then the krone itself had been pegged to silver and gold standards since 1842. 
These systems provided a fixed nominal anchor for the economy and for prices. This was also the 
case for several of our trading partners. From 1875, Norway was also a member of the Scandinavian 
currency union. A more detailed description will be provided by Professor Lars Jonung.  
Economists of the time could not, based on historical evidence, predict that national and international 
monetary  systems  would  be  facing  substantial  disturbances  that  would  push  up  the  price  level 
considerably  and  lead  to  extensive  instability.  With  the  First  World  War,  the  gold  standard  was 
suspended and the money supply and price level rose sharply. The deflationary policy of the 1920s 
brought the price level down, but probably also contributed to instability. The price level rose again 
during  the  Second  World  War,  when  the  occupying  powers  used  the  printing  press  to  finance  a 
substantial portion of their expenditure. The economic policy of the 1970s and 1980s contributed to 
high inflation.  
So, how well would economists in 1905 have predicted the Norwegian level of real income in 2005?  
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
They would have been off the mark here too. They were not in a position to predict that the growth rate 
in the Norwegian and global economies would rise as a result of considerable technological progress, 
restructuring and higher productivity.  
On the other hand, they could to some extent have predicted our current industry structure based on 
their  economic  history.  From  1865  to  1900,  primary  industries’  share  of  total  GDP  fell  from  about 
34 per cent  to  22  per  cent.  In  the  same  period, manufacturing, other  goods production  and  service 
industries accounted for an increasing share of total GDP. In 1900, about 24 per cent of GDP was 
generated by manufacturing and other goods production.  
If the economists of the time had projected developments in these three industries, they would have 
estimated that primary industries’ share of total GDP would fall to below 5 per cent. Manufacturing and 
other goods production would increase its share to 30 per cent and service industries to 66 per cent.  
Value-added in primary industries fell somewhat more than economists in 1905 would have projected 
and  service  industries  increased  somewhat  less.  They  would  have  been  less  accurate  in  their 
projections  for  developments  in  manufacturing.  Although  manufacturing’s  share  of  total  GDP 
increased up to the beginning of the 1950s, growth in private and public services gradually bypassed 
manufacturing, and the petroleum sector held an increasingly important position from the 1970s. The 
expansion of the petroleum sector and the use of petroleum revenues contributed to maintaining high 
growth in Norway, while other countries experienced a slowdown.  
Are there lessons to be learned from the pitfalls of projecting or trend-extending economic variables?  
Lessons to learn 
First, one lesson to learn is that it very difficult to predict developments in the real economy. If we were 
to extend the historical growth trend today to predict the future level of income, we would probably also 
be considerably wide of the mark. Today, we know nothing about the technological innovations that 
might appear in the future. But we do know that there will be new processes and products and that the 
industry  structure  will  change  in  directions  that  cannot  be  foreseen  now.  Nor  can  we  exclude  the 
possibility  that  Norway  may  enter  a  lengthy  period  of  stagnation,  for  example  when  the  petroleum 
sector is scaled back.  
Another lesson is that price stability is not self-generating. In the event of substantial disturbances and 
an unsuccessful economic policy, the economy may lose its nominal anchor. As a result, inflation may 
accelerate or be too low or negative, and production may become very unstable.  
As the country’s central bank, we take our work to safeguard price stability very seriously and we will 
continue to work towards this end. We set the key rate from month to month while keeping in mind the 
three-year horizon, but the objective is to generate confidence in stability in the value of the krone in 
the long term. Those of us who are still alive at the turn of the next century, will see if we achieved this 
objective.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
