Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial services policy 2005-2010 - the ECB’s view 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at an exchange of views 
on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010, European Commission, Brussels, 18 July 2005. 
 Introduction 
I would like to thank the European Commission for the invitation to participate in this important event. I 
am sure that all discussions today on the Commission’s Green Paper on Financial Services Policy in 
2005-2010 will be highly beneficial for finalizing its thoughts on the matter, which will be reflected in 
the White Paper to be issued by the end of this year.  
The definition of the main priorities for financial services policy in the years to come is an important 
milestone in the pursuit of further financial integration. Although it should be recognized that financial 
integration  in  the  EU  has  proceeded  apace  in  recent  years,  in  particular  as  a  consequence  of  the 
introduction of the euro, further progress still needs to be made. 
While  the  objective  of  financial  integration  is  inherent  in  the  achievement  of  the  Single  Market,  it  is 
currently also extremely important in the context of the Lisbon reforms. Financial integration is a key 
factor in the development and modernisation of the financial system which, in turn, can lead to greater 
productivity and competitiveness, a more efficient allocation of capital and the potential for greater and 
more  sustainable  non-inflationary  growth.  For  example,  an  empirical  study  by  London  Economics1 
estimated  additional  growth  resulting  from  financial  integration  of  the  European  bond  and  equity 
markets to be 1.1% over a decade or so.  
Let me give you the views of the ECB on the proposals put forward by the Commission, noting that the 
Eurosystem is preparing a contribution on this subject, which will be issued shortly. I should underline 
that the interest of the Eurosystem in the pursuit of financial integration is closely related to the tasks 
which  have been  given  to it  by  the  Treaty,  including  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  the 
promotion of smooth payment and settlement systems and the contribution to financial stability.  
I will start with some general considerations and then turn to some specific areas, notably financial 
regulation, financial supervision, and financial stability.  
General considerations 
Speaking generally, let me express broad support for the key policy orientations set out in the Green 
Paper.  Over  the  next  five  years,  financial  services  policy  should  aim  primarily  at  consolidating  and 
simplifying existing Community legislation, while ensuring that the measures adopted thus far under 
the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) are effectively and consistently implemented and enforced 
at  the  national  level.  Behind  this  broad  orientation  lies  the  shared  notion  that  the  main  efforts  to 
remove  residual  legal  and  regulatory  obstacles  to  the  free  provision  of  financial  services  in  the  EU 
have been achieved with the FSAP. Therefore the adoption of new Community legislative initiatives 
should be evidence-based.  
The  role  of  public  intervention  in  regulating  the  EU  financial  sector  remains  important.  First, 
developments  in  financial  markets  will  always  pose  challenges  to  the  existing  regulatory  framework 
that have to be considered. Second, the consistent and correct implementation of FSAP measures at 
the  national  level  remains  a  challenging  task  for  all  authorities  involved,  notably  the  Commission, 
national governments and supervisory authorities. Third, the importance of the work of consolidating 
and  simplifying  the  existing  EU  regulatory  framework  proposed  by  the  Commission  should  not  be 
underestimated.  Indeed,  this  work  represents  a  window  of  opportunity  for  rationalizing  the  existing 
                                                      
1   London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to 
the European Commission. 
   1/4 
rules  applicable  to  financial  institutions,  especially  those  operating  on  a  cross-border  basis.  It  also 
involves  the  pursuit  of  synergies  among  the  several  EU  public  policies  applicable  to  the  financial 
sector, notably financial services, consumer and competition policies.  
If this process is successful, responsibility for promoting financial integration will then chiefly lie with 
financial institutions themselves, which should exploit the framework promoted by public authorities to 
expand their activity across borders. In this context, I would emphasise that this is also dependent on 
the ability of the financial industry to coordinate its members effectively whenever common initiatives 
are needed. This applies for instance in the areas of payment and securities clearing and settlement 
systems, where common infrastructures benefit cross-border transactions. In this field there is also a 
specific  role  for  public  authorities,  notably  to  serve  as  catalysts  for  coordination  among  market 
participants, thus facilitating the emergence of market-led initiatives. One example is the role played 
by the Eurosystem in the promotion of the Single Euro Payments Area – SEPA – project, where the 
ECB, together with the European Commission, strongly supports the integration of retail payments.  
Financial regulation 
Turning to the area of financial regulation, let me highlight three aspects. 
First, there is a need to proceed with the adoption of the remaining measures envisaged in the FSAP 
in  order  to  complete  the  regulatory  framework.  In  this  respect,  from  the  ECB’s  perspective,  the 
planned legislative work in the field of securities clearing and settlement is very important. An efficient 
securities clearing and settlement infrastructure is of fundamental importance for the integration and 
efficiency of financial markets. Therefore, the ECB supports the Commission’s intention to put forward 
a proposal for a directive on securities clearing and settlement for two reasons: a directive will help 
remove  residual  barriers  –  as  identified  by  the  “Giovannini  Group”  –  to  efficient  EU  clearing  and 
settlement  arrangements  and  will  also  provide  a  legal  basis  for  securities  clearing  and  settlement 
systems. In this context, the work which has been conducted jointly by the ESCB and the Committee 
of European Securities Regulators (CESR) in setting standards on clearing and settlement systems 
can assist the competent authorities in their oversight and supervisory activities in this field.  
Second, with regard to possible new legislative initiatives at the Community level, we agree with the 
principle – put forward by the Commission – that stronger efforts should be made ex-ante to better 
evaluate  their  possible  costs  and  benefits.  As  to  the  areas  where  such  efforts  could  potentially  be 
made,  those  identified  by  the  Commission,  notably  retail  financial  services  and  asset  management, 
certainly  warrant  reflection  and  attention.  In  the  area  of  retail  financial  services,  the  suggested 
combination of targeted regulatory action and more active application of competition policy could be 
the  way  forward.  As  regards  asset  management,  one  of  the  main  issues  seems  to  be  whether 
regulatory treatment at the EU level targeted specifically at the category of hedge funds is needed. 
Whereas I think it is legitimate to reflect on the pros and cons of possible regulation, I strongly believe 
that any regulatory response, if it proves necessary, should be taken in a coordinated manner at the 
international  level  (with  particular  attention  to  the  transatlantic  level),  given  the  global  nature  of  the 
hedge fund industry.  
Third, the envisaged process of consolidation of existing legislation represents an opportunity not only 
for rationalization but also to promote a truly common set of rules for financial institutions, especially 
those operating on a cross-border basis. This principle seems to be contained in the Commission’s 
proposal to launch a feasibility study on whether the relevant rules at the national and the European 
levels could be structured as a “financial services rulebook”. I support this concept: a financial services 
rulebook may constitute a significant contribution to reducing complexity and possible inconsistencies 
in  the  overall  regulatory  framework  for  the  single  financial  market  as  well  as  possible  legal 
uncertainties. 
More  generally,  I  believe  that  the  Lamfalussy  framework  contains  all  the  elements  needed  to 
effectively pursue the objectives set out by the Commission in the area of financial regulation.  
Financial supervision 
Turning to the area of financial supervision, the ECB shares the “evolutionary” approach proposed by 
the Commission which is based on: (i) the definition of and agreement on policy objectives; (ii) the full 
exploitation of the current institutional framework; and (iii) the notion that the creation of new structures 
should only be considered if the current set-up is deemed unable to fulfil such objectives.  
   2/4 
Concerning  policy  objectives,  there  is  broad  agreement  that  financial  supervision  should  have  two 
main aims. The first is to facilitate the development of cross-border finance, both in terms of financial 
institutions (cross-border consolidation) and products and services. There is clearly potential for this 
development. Let me mention a few figures with regard to the banking sector. The number of credit 
institutions  in  the  euro area  declined  from  around  12,000  in  1985  to  9,500  in  1995  and  to  6,400  in 
2004, which is mainly attributable to mergers and acquisitions (M&As). These operations have mainly 
taken place between institutions based in the same country: between 1985 and 2005, cross-border 
transactions accounted for less than 20% in terms of number and value of all M&A deals in the euro 
area  and  in  the  EU.  Cross-border  transactions  are  however  increasing:  since  the  setting  up  of  the 
euro, between1999 and the start of 2005, cross-border M&A operations accounted for about 30% of 
all deals in terms of numbers and 24% in terms of value. 
The  second  objective  is  to  maintain  the  effectiveness  of  supervisory  standards  and  action  as  the 
financial markets become more and more integrated.  
The current institutional set-up, and in particular the Lamfalussy framework, provide the appropriate 
infrastructure for achieving these broad policy objectives, if it is used to the maximum extent possible. 
This entails pursuing two operational goals. The first is the achievement of supervisory convergence 
by the Level 3 committees which should deliver consistent supervisory action on a cross-border basis. 
Eventually, the success of the Committee of Banking Supervisors (CEBS), CESR and the Committee 
of European Insurance and Occupational Pension Supervisors (CEIOPS) will be measured mainly on 
the  basis  of  their  ability  to  deliver  effectively  on  the  issue  of  supervisory  convergence.  Looking  at 
CEBS – the committee most involved so far in the area of supervisory convergence, whereas CESR 
and  CEIOPS  have  focussed  more  on  their  advisory  role  for  draft  Community  legislation  –  the 
experience thus far is encouraging. Based on the number of consultation papers released by CEBS 
reflecting  agreement  among  banking  supervisors  on  a  number  of  issues  (e.g.  validation  of  banks’ 
internal  approaches,  Pillar  II  principles  and  supervisory  reporting),  one  cannot  fail  to  note  that 
substantive progress is being made. Of course, a major challenge in this field remains compliance by 
individual supervisors with the non-binding deliberations of the Level 3 committees. Transparency of 
implementation  measures  by  supervisory  authorities  is  expected  to  play  an  important  role  in  this 
respect.  
The second operational goal is the deepening of the cooperation between home and host authorities 
for  the  supervision  of  financial  groups  operating  across  borders.  This  is  an  essential  step  for 
reconciling within the existing framework the interests of supervisory authorities and of the industry. 
Cross-border cooperation among supervisors should become so smooth and effective in practice as to 
be perceived by the industry as unified action. In the banking sector, the work being undertaken by 
CEBS  in  this  area  to  develop  a  robust  model  for  coordination  and  cooperation  to  be  used  by  all 
supervisory  authorities  provides  an  important  contribution.  In  addition  to  a  cooperation  framework, 
willingness on the part of supervisors to cooperate effectively on an ongoing basis is also important. 
Lack of progress on this front would fuel demands for a revision of the current institutional set-up as 
implicit in the notion of “lead supervisor” advocated by part of the banking industry. 
The review of the Lamfalussy approach due by the end of 2007 should represent the opportunity to 
form a comprehensive judgement about the effectiveness of progress made in the supervisory field 
and the possible way forward. 
Let  me  add  on  the  subject  of  supervision  that  the  ECB  fully  supports  the  planned  review  by  the 
Commission  of  the  current  regime  for  liquidity  supervision,  which  represents  an  exception  to  the 
general  principle  of  home  country  control  as  the  host  authority  is  responsible  for  the  liquidity 
supervision of a foreign branch. Developments in financial markets, such as centralisation of liquidity 
management  by  banks  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  call  perhaps  for  reconsideration  of  host 
country responsibility for liquidity supervision. The ECB intends to contribute to this work, given the 
interest of central banks in liquidity matters.  
Financial stability  
I now turn finally to the area of financial stability. This remains one of the main objectives of financial 
services policy at the EU level. The interaction between financial integration and financial stability is a 
complex  one  and  thus  warrants  close  attention.  Financial  integration  can  provide  the  necessary 
conditions for a smoother absorption of shocks by financial institutions and offers them more options 
for managing and diversifying their risks. On the other hand, particular attention has to be given to the 
   3/4 
profound challenges to financial stability due to the structural transformation of the financial system, 
including intensified cross-border links. Therefore, effective arrangements for financial stability need to 
be maintained. 
I would say that significant progress has been achieved in this field over the years, particularly as a 
result  of  the  activities  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  as  well  as  the  work  of  the 
Eurosystem, with support from the ESCB Banking Supervision Committee (BSC). I would just mention 
in this respect the EFC recommendations in the area of financial stability and crisis management and 
the  agreements,  in  the  form  of  multilateral  memoranda  of  understanding,  on  cooperation  in  crisis 
situations among the central banks, banking supervisors and ministries of finance. Looking ahead, I 
see  three  areas  where  public  action  could  focus:  financial  stability  assessment,  management  of 
financial stress, and deposit insurance.  
First, as regards the assessment of the financial stability of the EU, the current set-up based on the 
EFC Financial Stability Table, mirroring the Financial Stability Forum, is certainly useful. The periodic 
discussions in the Table allow views to be formed at the EU level of the main areas of vulnerability for 
the  financial  system  and  the  strength  of  its  resilience  to  potential  shocks.  The  ECB  contributes  to 
these  discussions  by  providing  the  outcome  of  its  euro  area-wide  financial  stability  monitoring, 
conducted  with  the  support  of  the  BSC  and  reflected  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review  which,  since 
December 2004 has been made available to the public at large. Although the monitoring of economic 
risks  is  well  developed  in  this  context,  there  is  room  for  enhancing  the  analysis  of  risks  of  a  more 
structural nature and having a cross-sector dimension. To that end, closer collaboration between the 
Level 3 committees and the BSC is desirable.  
Second,  as  regards  management  of  financial  crises,  further  clarification  of  the  arrangements  for 
effective cooperation among the relevant authorities is a major priority. For instance, the BSC and the 
CEBS are jointly developing proposals for further enhancing cooperation between central banks and 
banking supervisors, particularly in terms of identifying best practices for handling financial crises and 
building  up  operational  network  mechanisms.  Furthermore,  the  Green  Paper  refers  to  emergency 
liquidity assistance (ELA) as an area where a review would be undertaken by all the relevant parties. I 
would like to note that the provision of ELA is a central bank function and an agreement exists within 
the Eurosystem on how this facility operates in the euro area. It is my perception that there are no 
specific issues relating to the provision of ELA which need to be addressed at the EU level.  
Third, as regards deposit insurance, which is an important component of the financial safety net, the 
ECB supports the initiative of the Commission to review the existing Deposit Guarantee Directive to 
ascertain whether greater convergence of national schemes is desirable from the perspective of both 
financial integration and financial stability. The main areas of this review appear to be the reduction of 
national differences, which may become particularly relevant in the case of cross-border banking, and 
the pursuit of formal cooperation between the different national schemes. 
Let me conclude by underlining once again the broad support for the key orientations put forward in 
the Green Paper and by thanking the Commission for its close and transparent cooperation with all 
interested parties during the process.  
 
   4/4 
