Eva Srejber: The divorce between macro financial stability and micro 
supervisory responsibility - are we now in for a more stable life? 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 33rd Economics 
Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austrian National Bank), Vienna, 13 May 2005. 
 Introduction 
I hope I won’t disappoint our kind hosts who asked me to deliver this address but I have a confession 
to  make  –  in  Sweden,  macro  financial  stability  and  supervision  are  not  divorced.  They  have  never 
been married. Indeed, it is only quite recently that the Riksbank and the FSA (Financial Supervisory 
Authority) have started to acknowledge – operationally in their respective policy frameworks – the link 
between macro financial stability and micro supervisory issues.  
Whether we just got divorced or are soon to get married, the relationship between financial stability 
and supervision is highly relevant. I will structure this address in the following way. First, I will give a 
brief description of how the relationship between supervision and financial stability has developed in 
Sweden.  Then,  I  will  move  on  to  the  financial  sector  developments  that  now  challenge  the  ways 
supervisors and central banks have been working. The process of internationalisation, in general, and 
cross-border integration, in the EU, will force both supervisors and national central banks to focus on 
their  core  tasks  and  to  a  certain  degree  invent  new  ways  to  perform  those  tasks.  Finally,  I  will 
comment more specifically on some of these challenges, and in connection to that also discuss some 
of the proposed alternative ways of responding to these challenges. 
The Swedish case 
Before the banking crisis in the early 1990s, the cooperation between the Riksbank and the Swedish 
FSA  (then  the  Banking  Inspection)  was  limited  to  high-level  contacts.  In  their  day-to-day  activities, 
however, the two authorities worked in different silos – the Riksbank with monetary and exchange rate 
policy and the FSA with regulating and supervising financial institutions. The crisis made it very clear 
to the Swedish authorities that there is a strong link between soundness of financial institutions and 
macro  financial  stability,  and  hence a  need  for  close  cooperation  between  the  FSA  and  the  central 
bank. 
This  economic  link  is  mirrored  by  a  parallel  link  spanning  at  least  three  aspects  of  regulatory 
involvement  in  the  financial  sector  –  crisis  prevention,  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution.  In 
Sweden, these aspects of regulatory involvement are shared between the supervisor, the central bank 
and the Ministry of Finance.  
In crisis prevention, the supervisor has the tools for regulating and supervising the institutions, while 
the central bank might play a supporting role through monitoring the stability of the system and the 
links to the real economy. In crisis management, the supervisor lacks the financial resources to back 
any intervention, while the central bank has the power to act as a lender of last resort. In other words, 
the likelihood that the central bank will have to provide liquidity support to a financial institution is partly 
determined by the quality of supervision. At the same time, the central bank may very well need the 
supervisor’s  analytical  or  informational  support  to  be  able  to  decide  on  whether  or  not  and  how  to 
intervene. Finally, in crisis resolution, even if the Ministry of Finance takes the lead, it is likely to rely 
extensively on the supervisor and the central bank for advice and execution.  
If  we  agree  that  there  is  a  link  between  the  soundness  of  institutions  and  financial  stability,  then 
supervisors  must  be  interested  in  crisis  management  and  resolution  and  central  banks  must  be 
interested in certain aspects of supervision. 
In the last decade, at least in Sweden, the macro and micro perspective have grown gradually closer. 
Indeed, the Swedish FSA now has an explicit interest in the stability of the system, while the Riksbank 
has  taken  a  greater  interest  in  the  stability  of  single  institutions,  if  they  are  judged  as  systemically 
relevant.  We  have  regular  contacts  to  share  information  and  assessments  and  coordinate  policy.  If 
before,  the  relationship  between  the  two  authorities  might  have  been  described  as  polite  but 
uninterested, it is now a mix of curiosity, some competition and frequent flirting.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
The times they are a-changin’ 
This could have been the happy end of our story but recently there have appeared challenges to this 
set-up. All over the globe, the financial markets are becoming more integrated and financial institutions 
as well as financial infrastructure companies are consolidating domestically as well as cross-border. 
The  challenge  touches  all  the  aspects  of  regulatory  involvement  –  crisis  prevention,  crisis 
management and crisis resolution. 
Cross-border integration of financial markets… 
In the EU, the process of cross-border integration has been actively promoted by the creation of the 
euro and the ongoing harmonisation of regulation and supervision – in the last years epitomised by the 
Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). Admittedly, financial markets integration in the EU has so far 
been a mixed picture.  
Until now, integration has mostly taken place in wholesale markets, such as the money market and the 
bond  markets.  Many  investment  banking  segments  such  as  capital  raising  and  mergers  and 
acquisitions (M&A) for large corporates are also dominated by global giants. In contrast, retail financial 
services  are  still  to  a  very  large  extent  controlled  by  domestic  players,  at  least  in  the  old  member 
states. 
… and institutions… 
My guess is that we still have only seen the beginning of cross-border integration. Banking integration 
will  probably  not  primarily  take  place  through  direct  cross-border  provision  of  services  but  through 
cross-border  bank  M&A.  Integration  of  ownership  will  result  in  integration  of  lending/funding, 
organisation, products and services.  
According  to  a  study  by  the  ECB,  43  banks  and  banking  groups  are  active  in  more  than  three  EU 
countries.1  Only some years ago, cross-border banking M&A in the EU was only taking place between 
small  countries  or  vis-à-vis  the  new  member  states  –  Austrian  banks’  expansion  into  some  Central 
European  countries  is  a  good  example  of  this  phenomenon.  Now  this  is  changing.  Today  French, 
Spanish, German and UK banks are all trying to build European platforms. For instance, as you all 
know, Spanish Grupo Santander now owns the fifth biggest UK bank, and Barclays of UK owns the 
sixth largest private sector bank in Spain. And this spring, we are all witnessing the takeover battles, 
started by foreign bids, for two Italian banks.  
…is good news for the economy but raises challenges to supervisors and central banks 
At  the  Riksbank,  we  welcome  this  development.  We  believe  financial  market  integration  is  strongly 
positive  for  economic  efficiency  and  hence  for  growth  and  welfare  in  the  EU.  But  we  admit  that 
integration presents some complex and multifaceted challenges to us as authorities.  
At  the  outset,  integration  is  obviously  hindered  by  differences  in  language,  business  culture  and 
national laws and regulations. But once it happens, integration tends to follow the logic of business, 
not the “logic” of country border or national law. For instance, for financial groups which are expanding 
cross-border a part of the synergies is derived from centralising functions. Hence, the group’s credit 
risk model might be developed in the parent bank, while the group’s liquidity is managed through a 
foreign subsidiary, and the group’s derivatives trading is done in yet another subsidiary. That is why 
integration  gives  rise  to  a  structure  that  often  seems  to  be  in  conflict  with  the  present  regulatory 
structure.  But  the  problem  is  not  integration  –  the  problem  is  that  our  regulatory  framework  is  not 
designed for a single market for financial services. 
Let me give you a concrete example of this. In the Nordic and Baltic countries – excluding Iceland – 
there are six banking groups with significant cross-border activities. Each one of these cross-border 
groups has regulatory contacts with seven supervisors and eight central banks.2  It is commonplace to 
                                                      
1   Banking Supervision Committtee (2004), “Cross-border banking and its possible pol-icy implications”, December 
2   The Bank of Lithuania also has supervisory responsibility. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
note  that  Western  Europe  is  over-banked.  It  would  not  be  outrageous  to  say  that  it  is  also 
over-crowded with regulatory authorities. 
Our  conclusion  is  that  we,  as  national  authorities  in  the  EU,  must  solve  the  issues  that  integration 
gives  rise  to,  rather  than  stopping  integration.  This  might  sound  very  obvious,  but  some  of  us 
authorities still only pay lip service to the idea of the single market. Or we love the idea of the single 
market as long as it means that our own banks survive as national champions and are able to expand 
abroad. 
The question of how the relationship between financial stability and supervisory responsibility might 
evolve is a big and difficult one. Still, it is dwarfed by and will be determined by the question of which 
will be the shape of the relationship between authorities – central banks and supervisors – in different 
countries  in  the  EU.  It  goes  without  saying  that  since  laws  and  regulations  and  the  division  of 
responsibilities between authorities are ultimately decided by the governments of the member states, 
the  challenge  of  integration  inevitably  also  concerns  finance  ministries.  I  will  now  try  to  give  some 
thoughts on the alternatives before us. 
Back to basics 
What will be the roles of national supervisors and central banks in an integrated EU financial market? 
If central banks and supervisors haven’t done it before, cross-border integration will force them to think 
hard about their responsibilities, mandates and tools.  
In order to do this, they will have to go back to the beginning and find their “raison d’être”. What is 
special  about  the  financial  system  and  why  are  we  regulating,  supervising  and  monitoring  financial 
markets and institutions? Who or what are we protecting and which tools do we need?  
Whether authorities want to defend the status quo or reform the regulatory framework, they will need 
to prove their case to politicians as well as to each other. By itself, this might very well improve the 
way supervisors and central banks work. You may call this a positive external effect of integration. 
Regulation and home-host issues 
There are many issues at the table, but in the context of this presentation I would like to divide them 
into two categories.  
The  first  category  includes  the  issues  of  what  regulations  should  be  imposed  on  institutions  and 
markets in the EU. How can we design laws and regulations that are flexible enough to fit all countries 
reasonably well, while strict and “harmonised” enough to support a single market?  
The second category is essentially about the relationship between supervisors and central banks in 
different  countries  –  the  division  of  labour,  power  and  responsibilities.  This  category  of  issues  has 
come  to  be  broadly  referred  to  as  the  home-host  issues.  I  will  just  give  a  short  comment  on  the 
regulatory issues, while devoting the rest of my time to the home-host issues. 
Regulation 
Regulation  on  the  EU-level  first  of  all  faces  the  same  basic  trade-off  as  on  the  country  level.  The 
Riksbank’s  view  is  that  since almost  all  regulation  involves costs  –  in  terms  of  lower  efficiency  and 
growth – it should be the last resort and used only when there is a clear case of market failure. Some 
regulation is surely needed to ensure a stable and sound financial system and necessary consumer 
protection.  But  too  much  or  too  strict  regulation  will  give  rise  to  new  costs  that  are  higher  than  the 
original costs that regulation initially aimed to address.  
Regulation on the EU-level also faces another trade-off that is not present on the national level – that 
between the value of a level playing field and the cost of an overly detailed or inadequate regulation. A 
completely  level  playing  field  presupposes  detailed rules  that  are  applied  in  the  same  way in  every 
market.  But  too  detailed  rules  on  the  EU  level  risk  being  inadequate  on  the  national  level  since 
national markets often differ widely. This could give rise to costly overregulation hampering financial 
development or driving financial institutions to settle elsewhere. Hence, it might be wise to leave some 
degree  of  freedom  to  the  member  countries.  Historically,  institutional  competition  has  proved  to  be 
very positive for development in the long run.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
At the same time, EU directives (as most international rules) tend to leave plenty of room for national 
discretions,  effectively  reducing  the  value  of  the  convergence/harmonisation  that  probably  was  the 
motivation for the directive in the first place. We risk ending up with the worst of two worlds – very 
detailed  rules  on  the  EU  level  and  loads  of  discretions  on  the  national  level.  This  makes  the  rules 
opaque  and  their  implementation  difficult  to  predict  for  the  private  sector.  The  starting  point  for  EU 
rules should be the least common denominator. Today instead, it often seems like the starting point is 
the sum of all member states’ national rules. 
As national authorities we are all convinced that our national discretions are worth fighting for and we 
take  pride  when  they  are  included  in  the  final  drafts.  Perhaps  we  should  ask  ourselves  more  often 
whether our discretions are motivated by a fundamental need or just deep-rooted tradition or, even 
worse, our unconscious caving in to special interest groups. I realise this might be naïve but why not 
take  this  opportunity  of  change  and  think  new  instead  of  designing  EU  regulation  on  the  basis  of 
existing, often imperfect, national regulation. 
The need for a common rule book for big cross-border banking groups is often raised by the industry. 
In principle, we are sympathetic to this wish. If a common rule book means “just” common rules we are 
certainly moving in that direction. One of the main objectives of the Committee of European Banking 
Supervisors (CEBS) is to promote convergence of supervisory rules and practices. However, in the 
sense of common or centralised decision making by authorities, I think it is still far away from coming 
true. As long as the implementation and interpretation of directives and rules is done on a national 
level it will take time before we have a common rule book.  
Still,  the  aim  should  be  to  eliminate  or  reduce  as  much  as  possible  these  differences.  Remaining 
differences in supervisory practices between countries should be clearly disclosed in order to improve 
the  predictability  of  the  EU  regulatory  system  –  which  is  another  area  where  the  CEBS  is  doing 
important  work.  Another  practical  example  on  how  to  reduce  the  regulatory  burden  would  be  for 
countries to agree on a common and centralised reporting standard for large cross-border groups.  
The home-host relationship…  
The  home-host  relationship  is  the  underlying  theme  running  through  a  number  of  issues  in  the 
regulatory debate. Broadly speaking, the home-host relationship is about how we should divide tasks, 
powers and responsibility between different countries when it comes to supervising, monitoring and, in 
the worst case, sorting out financial institutions in distress.  
Formally, the home-host relationship only refers to the division of responsibility between supervisors, 
which currently is based on the principle of home country control. The home country is the country 
where  the  bank  is  licensed.  For  a  bank,  this  means  that  the  home  country  is  responsible  for 
supervising the bank and its foreign branches. The home country’s deposit insurance also covers its 
banks’ foreign branches. In the case of a group, it means that the home country is also responsible for 
supervising the entire group on a consolidated basis, while the host countries are responsible for their 
respective  subsidiary  banks  and  deposits.  At  this  very  moment,  the  CEBS  is  drafting  the  so-called 
home-host paper giving guidance on how the home-host supervisory relationship should be arranged 
given existing EU legislation.  
Even  if  there  are  no  legally  binding  rules  regarding  the  relationship  between  countries  in  crisis 
management  or  crisis  resolution,  these  aspects  of  regulatory  involvement  have  borrowed  the 
terminology of the supervisory home-host concept. For example, when discussing lender of last resort 
in crisis management and burden sharing in crisis resolution we now talk about home and host central 
banks  and  finance  ministries,  respectively.  This  is  natural,  since  legally  the  financial  liabilities  for  a 
group  are  ultimately  carried  by  the  parent  bank.  Of  course,  a  parent  can  choose  to  default  a 
subsidiary, but it will then have to bear the capital loss. Subsequently, in practice, the ultimate public 
responsibility over a group rests with the home country. 
… comes under strain… 
At first glance, the home country principle seems very neat. But take a closer look and you will see 
signs  that  this  set-up  was  not  designed  for  a  fully  integrated  market.  Essentially,  there  is  a  gap 
between, on the one hand, legal powers and mandates and, on the other hand, de facto abilities and 
responsibilities. Home countries are given powers over branches and subsidiaries but might be unable 
or unwilling to use them, while host countries are losing powers that they have been willing to use. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
This gap becomes a problem once you have a banking group or bank that is systemically relevant in a 
host country (see table 1). Even if there are not so many of these cases yet, I am convinced that the 
number will increase. The potential conflicts of interest and coordination problems are of many kinds. 
Let me give you some examples:  
Table 1: The home-host relationship (both bank and group) 
 
relevance 
Systemic 
HOST country 
in 
Systemic 
HOST country 
relevance 
in 
Systemic 
in HOME country 
Significant 
Non-significant 
relevance 
Significant 
Non-significant 
Potential 
of 
and coordination problems 
conflict 
Potential 
of 
and coordination problems 
conflict 
interest
Not a big problem 
interest
Not a big problem 
… when branches and subsidiaries become systemically relevant 
Suppose there is a banking group of roughly equal systemic relevance in the home country and the 
host  country.  The  home  country  supervisor  is  the  consolidating  supervisor  and  coordinates  the 
activities  vis-à-vis  the  group.  If  cooperation  works  well,  the  host  supervisor  will  receive  information 
from the home supervisor. But in the event of a crisis in the banking group, all authorities have a clear 
mandate to only protect their depositors and systems. One can easily imagine a situation where, as in 
my earlier example, the group has surplus capital in one of its parts, extra liquidity in another and the 
cause of the problem is in a third part. The lack of coordination might very well result in a worse (more 
costly) outcome for all involved. 
If  the  presence  in  the  host  country  is  a  branch  and  not  a  subsidiary,  the  host  supervisor  has  only 
limited means of obtaining information about – or taking actions against – the bank. In the event of a 
crisis it can only hope that the home country will take the host country’s situation into account when 
managing  the  crisis.  The  home  country,  on  the  other  hand,  faces  a  situation  where  it  could  be 
necessary for its central bank to provide emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to support a bank which 
has a large part of its activities in other countries. Should the bank need to be reconstructed it would 
be the home country’s tax payers that would have to foot the bill – either by supplying the necessary 
capital to the bank or by supporting the deposit guarantee system with the funds needed to pay out 
insurance to the bank’s depositors. 
The  imbalance  between  home  and  host  countries  may  be  further  deepened  by  differences  in  size 
between the two countries. One case will be that of a big home country and a smaller host country.  
The banking group’s exposure to the host country is then probably relatively small on a consolidated 
basis. This results in the home country authorities spending relatively limited resources – in terms of 
staff  –  on  the  foreign  subsidiary’s  activities  in  the  host  country.  If  such  a  banking  group  runs  into 
problems, the home country authorities will not necessarily view it as systemic, while the host country 
authorities certainly will do. 
How to deal with the home-host asymmetry? 
In all these examples host authorities have a legitimate interest in being able to influence supervision, 
share assessments and have a say in the event of a crisis situation. They have been given the task of 
protecting  the  soundness  and  stability  of  their  financial  sector  and  the  general  public  in  the  host 
country will rightly expect their authorities to be able to do this. At the same time, the home authorities 
should  have  an  interest  in  sharing  resources  in  crisis  prevention  and  risks  and  costs  in  crisis 
management  and  resolution  with  the  host  countries.  In  the  current  setting,  however,  this  is  only 
possible to a very limited extent. 
First, there is a need to share information between the home and the host. This should be the least 
difficult, but in practice everyone who has tried to share information between authorities knows it can 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
be a complicated and cumbersome process, at least until there is an established routine. Even when 
there  are  no  confidentiality  concerns  there  are  many  practical  obstacles  to  overcome.  Information 
sharing  is  not  only  about  sending  data  back  and  forth,  but  more  importantly,  it  is  about  explaining 
information and sharing assessments. As long as hosts are under the impression that they know a lot 
less than the home, it will be very tricky to cooperate.  
Second, there is a need to cooperate on actions vis-à-vis the bank or the group and its components. If 
hosts cannot influence the process of supervision or crisis management, their trust in and use of the 
information from the home authority will be very limited.  
Sharing  information  and  cooperating  on  regulatory  actions  may  be  problematic  already  in  normal 
times,  but  is  probably  much  more  difficult  in  a  crisis  situation  when  economic  risks  and  costs  are 
clearly  visible.  So  far,  cooperation  and  coordination  in  crisis  situations  is  dealt  with  in  the  EU  by 
various Memoranda of Understanding. Even if these MoUs are not legally binding, they are valuable 
documents. They provide a basis from which more operational crisis cooperation agreements can be 
developed by the countries and authorities that see the need to do so.  
But looking at this increasingly complex patchwork of supervisory colleges, central bank networks and 
MoUs that we are now creating, one cannot help to wonder if there are not any better alternatives for 
cross-border cooperation. 
Future alternatives to the home-host model 
What are, in the long term, the alternative models to the current home-host set-up? In the EU, we are 
committed to creating a single market for financial services. If we take off our national central bank and 
supervisor hats, are we really convinced that the home-host model is the best one in the long run?   
After  all,  several  serious  alternative  models  have  been  suggested.  The  pros  and  cons  of  the  three 
main  models  are  reviewed  in  an  interesting  paper  by  Oosterloo  and  Schoenmaker.3   I  will  briefly 
comment on these. 
Three alternatives for supervision 
The first alternative is to give the home supervisor the role of lead supervisor with full responsibility for 
EU  operations,  branches  as  well  as  subsidiaries.  This  is  the  proposal  from  the  European  Financial 
Services Roundtable (EFR). The lead supervisor would be the single point of contact for reporting and 
would validate and authorise internal models, approve capital and liquidity allocations, decide about 
on-site inspections. In short, the lead supervisor would have full supervisory responsibility. The role of 
host supervisors would be as advisers in a college of supervisors. However, host supervisors would 
have  no  formal  power.  Also,  when  it  comes  to  financial  stability  and  crisis  management,  the  lead 
supervisor  would  only  have  a  national  mandate.  Thus,  there  would  still  be  a  need  for  cross-border 
regulatory cooperation. 
The second alternative, which is put forward by the two authors, is to give the home supervisor the 
role of lead supervisor with an EU mandate. The lead supervisor would work as in the EFR model, 
with the difference that the lead supervisor is given a “European mandate to ensure that the interests 
of all depositors/countries are taken into account”. In this model there is a decision-making agency of 
European  Financial  Supervisors  at  the  centre,  which  is  delegating  the  task  of  supervision  to  each 
respective home supervisor. Regarding financial stability issues, the home country central bank would 
also be involved, acting on behalf of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB).  
The third alternative is both the most obvious and the most radical and would be to create a European 
Financial Supervisor (for example put forth by Breuer). This simply means having one authority acting 
with  full  supervisory  powers  over  branches  and  subsidiaries  of  cross-border  European  banks.  The 
system could be tiered (like in the US) in the sense that the EU supervisor would only be responsible 
for banks and banking groups with significant cross-border operations, while purely domestic banks 
could remain the responsibility of the national supervisors. 
                                                      
3   Oosterloo and Schoenmaker (2004), “A lead supervisor model for Europe”, The Financial Regulator, Vol.9.3, 34-42. 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2005
A European financial supervisor 
All  three  of  these  alternatives,  even  the  first  one,  are  considerably  more  far-reaching  than  what  is 
currently  under  construction.  I  do  not  think  many  authorities  find  the  first  alternative  with  a  lead 
supervisor very appealing. It addresses the problem only from the cross-border bank’s perspective of 
minimising  the  regulatory  burden.  This  is  important  but  does  not  solve  the  underlying  conflicts  of 
interest between the home and the host countries. In short, it is a model which will only work in normal 
times when the weather is nice, if even then. The second alternative – the lead supervisor with an EU 
mandate  –  seems  nice  in  theory  and  aims  at  solving  the  conflicts  of  interest  by  creating  a  central 
decision-making body. In practice, however, it could easily become very bureaucratic and inefficient. If 
we are establishing a central decision-making body anyway, why act through 25 different authorities? 
Both the first and the second alternatives are half-way compromises trying to please different interests. 
My own view is that the third alternative, although radical, is the logical solution. There are two main 
arguments  against  the  idea  of  a  European  Financial  Supervisor  –  one  relevant  and  one  not  very 
relevant.   
The not very relevant argument is that the supervisor needs proximity to have knowledge about the 
markets  where  the  institution  operates.  First,  this  is  already  a  problem  with  the  home-host  model. 
Second,  this  is  an  organisational  problem  that  can  be  solved.  An  EU  supervisor  would  certainly 
employ staff from all EU countries and have local offices in the national financial centres. For instance, 
for a regional cross-border banking group, I imagine the supervisory team to be based in the relevant 
region, perhaps in the same premises as the national FSA, and to consist of staff from that region. 
The  relevant  argument  against  an  EU  supervisor  is  that  supervisory  power  ultimately  needs  to  be 
backed  by  financial  muscle.  In  the  present  set-up,  the  financial  muscle  derives  from  the  national 
central bank’s ability to act as a lender of last resort and the government’s ability to raise taxes. The 
EU lacks such power. 
However,  this  problem  is  hardly  unsolvable.  For  instance,  one  could  think  of  the  EU  building  up  a 
deposit insurance fund for cross-border banks supervised by the EU supervisor, which would be able 
to handle all but the largest banking failures. In fact, such an EU fund would be better diversified than 
the national funds are today, which all else equal would enable it to charge lower fees or hold a bigger 
risk-adjusted buffer. In the event of really large banks or several large banks failing, there could be an 
established  system  of  committed  drawing  rights,  where  the  EU  fund  has  the  right  to  raise  funds 
through national governments’ ability to raise tax. Regarding liquidity support, the ECB would be given 
the role as lender of last resort. 
To convince national governments to commit such guarantees would of course demand very strict and 
well thought-out rules governing what actions the EU fund should be allowed to take in the case of a 
bank failure. These rules could be inspired by the US FDIC’s very strict mandate to always choose the 
least cost solution. Among other things, this would in some cases mean allowing shareholders as well 
as  uninsured  depositors  and  debt  holders  to  lose  their  money.  Since  to  my  knowledge  most  EU 
countries lack the rules on how to handle large bank failures, it  would also be very positive from a 
contingency planning and moral hazard point of view. With a strong legal framework, the EU would be 
able to let investors in even the biggest banks take full financial responsibility. 
Concluding remarks 
I remember once hearing Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, the outgoing member of the executive board of 
the ECB, saying that there is no need for a European supervisor if national supervisors can prove that, 
when needed, they are able to act as one. Personally, I find it hard to see how, in the long run, the EU 
could  avoid  establishing  an  EU  financial  supervisor.  At  the  moment,  we  are  spending  considerable 
supervisory and central bank resources on trying to construct arrangements that will enable us to work 
and  act  as  one.  Why  not  instead  become  one,  and  spend  the  resources  on  supervision  and 
monitoring? 
Coming back to the title of this address, I would like to conclude that even though financial stability and 
supervision has been divorced in most EU countries there are few reasons to expect the life of central 
bankers and supervisors to be very stable in the coming years. It will probably not happen overnight, 
but  the  integration  of  European  financial  institutions  and  markets  will  eventually  mean  big  changes 
also for the financial authorities.  To ensure a good outcome for the European financial market, central 
banks and supervisors will have to be flexible and reinvent their roles and tools. 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 7
