Jaime Caruana: Monetary policy and Basel II 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the 33rd Economics Conference, Vienna, 13 May 2005. 
 Introduction, reflections on the topic and outline of the talk 
1. 
Let me first express my gratitude for the invitation to participate in this Economics Conference. I am 
honoured to address so many leading representatives of the political, academic, business and finance 
arenas, in one of the most renowned forums for economic discussion around the world. 
Governor Klaus Liebscher suggested I should focus my address on the links between monetary policy 
and the revised capital framework, known as Basel II. This is a very relevant topic but also a risky one. 
Testifying  to  its  relevance  is  the  increasing  attention  which  is  recently  being  paid  to  the  interaction 
between financial and macroeconomic stability. The risk stems from the very fact that we still lack a 
sufficiently solid conceptual framework to address all the key issues in the field and, particularly, to 
tackle the cross-implications between financial regulation and monetary policymaking. Yet there are 
few interesting topics that can be addressed without a significant measure of analytical uncertainty.  
Why is it worth pondering on the links between monetary policy and Basel II? Let me illustrate my own 
reflections on this point by drawing a simple analogy. In a way, liquidity is for an advanced economy 
much  like  blood  for  a  living  being.  Financial  market  participants  pay  considerable  attention  to  the 
monetary policy decisions made by central banks, for these are, in a broad sense, the “guardians” of 
liquidity.  
Excessively expensive liquidity is likely to result in a suboptimal volume of investment and, in turn, in 
an  inefficient  under-use  of  society’s  productive  resources.  Likewise,  when  monetary  conditions  are 
excessively lax, some liquidity may be directed to financing projects with poor returns. If this situation 
prevails for some time, inflation arises, the average productivity of investment declines, asset prices 
deviate  from  their  normal  or  fundamental  values  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  loses  its  ability  to 
maintain a sustained growth path.  
When deciding on monetary conditions, central  banks must understand the mechanisms underlying 
the workings of the economy in order to react to potential dangers and opportunities in due manner 
and  course.  No  diagnosis  could  ever  be  complete  without  a  careful  analysis  of  how  the  entire 
circulatory system is behaving.  
From that standpoint, central banks can then be thought as of being the heart, initially controlling the 
price of the transactions conducted in the money market. Commercial banks would naturally fit into 
this analogy as the veins and arteries, for they have the last word on the destination of the funds they 
are being endowed with, a decision that pertains greatly to the sphere of banks’ credit management. 
Furthermore, as the final outcome of this task is necessarily uncertain, it is no exaggeration to say that 
much of the success of the entire process hinges critically on how banks cope with the risks they face 
when deciding how to allocate resources.  
I have tabled some of the main elements on which I will base my subsequent arguments, which may 
be summarised as follows. The overall effects of monetary policy decisions cannot be meaningfully 
understood without previously assessing how the banking system is performing the job of channelling 
the original impulse of the central bank in the money market into the rest of the financial system and, 
ultimately, into the whole economy. Thus, a continuous assessment of the norms of behaviour and the 
overall conditions of the banking industry is a key input for any central banker wishing to be in the best 
position to foresee and evaluate the potential outcome of policy choices. 
In my address, I will focus on the general question of how Basel II may affect the way monetary policy 
influences some key financial and real variables. In doing so, I will follow a strategy that is very familiar 
to  the  economics  profession,  in  the  sense  that  I  will  regard  the  application  of  Basel  II  as  an 
“exogenous  shock”  that  will  eventually  unleash  some  spillover  effects  into  an  otherwise  unchanged 
current monetary policy framework. 
My task here will thus boil down to highlighting some of the special novel features of Basel II that will 
potentially exert some influence on the dimensions of monetary policy. Hopefully this analysis, while 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
necessarily brief, will highlight not only those elements of Basel II which are contributing directly to a 
cleaner and, perhaps, safer scenario for conducting monetary policy, but will also pay due attention to 
the - in my view - often overly exaggerated debate on procyclicality. To this end, let me first introduce 
the most salient aspects of the revised capital framework. 
Basic features of Basel II 
2. 
In  1988  the  Basel  Committee  launched  a  pioneering  Capital  Accord  that  contained  the  first 
internationally  accepted  definition  of  regulatory  bank  capital  and  provided  clear-cut  and  simple 
standards to measure it. The merits of that first step are well-known. However, a number of important 
changes have since taken place in the financial and banking industry landscape. In several important 
respects, we are now far removed from the environment of the late eighties.  
For  one  thing,  the  complexity  of  risks  now  faced  by  credit  institutions  operating  in  an  increasingly 
globalised  environment  has  increased  significantly  and,  as  a  result,  both  risk-management  and 
supervision have become much more difficult tasks.  
For another, some recent developments have also increased the opportunities to manage risks. The 
impressive  advances  in  technology  that  have  enhanced  the  industry’s  ability  to  collect  and  process 
large amounts of information in real time could hardly have been suspected 20 years ago. Collecting 
risk data across many business lines has catalysed further efforts to aggregate those measures of risk 
by quantifying them in a more rigorous and more consistent fashion. 
The  “ultimate  expression”  of  risk  aggregation  is  the  summation  of  many  types  of  risk  into  a  single 
measure  based  on  the  concept  of  economic  capital,  which  estimates  the  amount  of  capital  a  firm 
requires to protect itself against these risks with a certain degree of confidence. Using the concept of 
economic  capital,  banks  can  develop  sound  policies  for  monitoring  exposure  limits,  risk-adjusted 
pricing policies and sound provisioning practices based on the inherent risks of the portfolios. They 
can  also  measure  returns  and  assign  capital  on  a  risk-adjusted  basis.  Likewise,  the  progressive 
widening and deepening of financial markets and the continuous creation of new assets has enlarged 
the menu of choices available for banks to manage, share and transfer risks.  
The  Basel  II  process  started,  more  than  6  years  ago,  against  this  background  of  increasingly 
sophisticated risk management practices, heightened complexity in the financial markets and stronger 
interaction between the real and the financial economy. Rather than simply resetting the quantitative 
standards, we sought to develop a new forward-looking approach that would be more sensitive to the 
actual risks that banks take on. 
The new framework is a significant step towards achieving a more comprehensive and risk-sensitive 
supervisory approach. It seeks to provide banks with stronger incentives to employ the most advanced 
techniques  to  calculate  risk  exposures  and,  hence,  to  push  risk-management  towards  the  best 
available practices.  
Specifically,  Basel  II  makes  these  general  principles  operative  by  building  on  three  complementary 
pillars. 
The  first  pillar  is  intended  to  achieve  a  more  precise  and  sensitive  mapping  between  banks’  actual 
risks and the minimum regulatory capital requirements. Under the new framework, banks are allowed 
and, indeed, encouraged to rely on their own measures of certain risk parameters, thus fostering a 
wider usage of the best available techniques and tools for that purpose. The Committee firmly believes 
that  a  better  alignment  between  regulatory  and  economic  capital  is  conducive  to  a  more  efficient 
allocation  of  credit  and  a  less  distortionary  regulatory  system.  The  framework  is  also  extended  to 
operational  risks,  which  have  proved  to  be  more  relevant  in  an  increasingly  complex  world  that 
demands highly sophisticated processes.  
The  second  pillar,  supervisory  review,  requires  banks  to  assess  their  own  capital  needs  for  their 
overall  risk  profiles,  including  whether  any  activities  or  exposures  may  incorporate  more  risk  –  and 
hence may require more capital – than is assumed in Pillar 1. Supervisors, in turn, must evaluate the 
banks’ assessments and processes, and respond if these are not appropriate. In the case of those 
banks that use the advanced approaches offered by Pillar 1, Pillar 2 can be a useful tool for ensuring a 
constant enhanced dialogue between the supervisors and banks throughout the whole sequence of 
procedures and estimates, reflecting the ideas that wider freedom for banks to evaluate their own risks 
requires closer involvement by the supervisor.  
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
The third pillar, market discipline, imposes higher levels of transparency in banks’ financial reporting. It 
complements and reinforces the two previous pillars in the following sense. First, it stimulates a more 
efficient management of banks, since more transparency entails closer scrutiny by market participants. 
Second, it provides the supervisor with a most valuable ally, namely stronger external incentives for 
prudent risk-management.  
In sum, Basel II constitutes a forward-looking approach to capital regulation that blends some of the 
ideas  and  practices  that  have  shown  a  more  solid  record  of  success  in  finances  with  the  best 
regulatory principles we have learned over time. At the same time, I think that Basel II incorporates 
two of the key basic principles that are built into modern approaches to monetary policy and which 
have  successfully  resolved  the  debate  between  rules  and  discretion:  a  flexible  and  forward-looking 
approach, anticipatory rather than reactive behaviour to risk, and the need to take into account market 
views. 
Let me underline additionally two features that are important for our monetary policy discussion. 
The  first  is  that  Basel  II  has  tried  to  incorporate  in  the  framework  not  only  micro  risks  but  also  the 
macro perspective to risks. If you like, we have tried to incorporate how micro risks change through the 
cycle and in stressed economic conditions. We have therefore been very conscious about how micro 
prudential  regulation  can  influence  macro  behaviour  and  also  how  different  macro  scenarios  can 
change the risks that bank face.  
As Jean-Claude Trichet said in June last year, when presenting the new framework: “It will enhance 
banks’ safety and soundness, strengthen the stability of the financial system as a whole, and improve 
the financial sector’s ability to serve as a source for sustainable growth for the broader economy”  
This enhanced financial stability is a significant contribution of Basel II to monetary policy. In general 
terms, a better functioning of the banking system will tend to improve the efficiency of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanisms. In addition, one could think of a positive effect on the expectations 
about better financial stability. 
Second,  Basel  II  is  about  much  more  than  just  setting  better  quantitative  minimum  capital 
requirements.  It  is  about  establishing  an  incentive-based  approach  to  risk  management  and  capital 
adequacy, within a framework of the three mutually-supporting pillars 
The  new  comprehensive  framework  provides  at  least  four  transmission  channels  for  influencing 
financial  stability  and  the  overall  economy:  first,  by  setting  more  risk-sensitive  minimum  regulatory 
capital  requirements,  so  that  regulatory  capital  is  both  adequate  and  closer  to  economic  capital; 
second,  by  providing  incentives  to  encourage  improvements  in  banks’  internal  risk  management 
processes; third, the enhanced mechanisms to encourage the marketplace to exert external discipline 
on banks and the banking sector; and fourth, the necessary greater co-operation among supervisors 
across  jurisdictions.  The  effects  of  each  of  these  channels  will  be  different  in  terms  of  time  and  in 
terms  of  final  influence,  some  of  them  having  the  capacity  to  bring  significant  long-term  positive 
changes to the financial markets. In my view, perhaps too much attention is placed on the minimum 
capital rules of Pillar 1 and not enough on the effects of the other three channels.  
Implications of Basel II for monetary policy 
3. 
Let me therefore turn to the issue of how the main elements of Basel II may affect the ability of the 
monetary authority to fulfil its objectives. 
I believe that the achievement of price stability as a desirable medium to long-term target is, by now, a 
non-controversial objective of primary importance whose foundations are well known. On one hand, 
the proposition that labels inflation largely as a pure monetary phenomenon within long time-horizons 
can  hardly  be  contested  either  conceptually  or  empirically.  Furthermore,  a  wide  consensus  among 
academics  and  policymakers  has  emerged  over  recent  decades  on  the  damaging  effects  of  high 
inflation levels and variability on economic growth and, hence, on social welfare.  
Indeed,  the  history  of  monetary  policy  in  the  last  20  years  or  so  is  a  very  successful  one.  Price 
stability, as it is usually defined, is currently a tangible reality in most developed countries. Also, many 
less-developed  countries  previously  prone  to  endemic  high  inflation  have  managed  to  reduce  and 
stabilise it at reasonable levels, with noticeable effects on economic prosperity. 
I believe that the achievements of the last few years in terms of price stability are largely permanent. In 
the main, they respond to non-conjunctural factors such as a more refined conceptual understanding 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
of  issues  like  the  temporal  and  uncertain  nature  of  the  trade-off  between  output  and  inflation,  to 
institutional reforms -such as central bank independence- and, probably, to greater social awareness 
of the benefits to be had from sustained low inflation.  
Although low and stable inflation is a clear prerequisite for macroeconomic stability, this does not per 
se eliminate the potential risks of disturbances that can adversely affect economic performance. This 
is the case of negative demand shocks which can generate deflationary processes. 
Past episodes of persistent negative price growth, such as those seen in Japan over the last decade, 
have shown us that in those conditions monetary policy loses much of its potential to exert a decisive 
influence on the price path and on the level of output. In that regard, most central banks, such as the 
ECB, recognise that their price stability objective should be made compatible with a low probability of 
deflation. 
Moreover, in the current setting of low inflation and interest rates, we have witnessed episodes of rapid 
increases  in  some  asset  prices  that  have  led  analysts  to  suspect  important  deviations  between 
fundamental and observed values. Some notorious recent examples include the overvaluation in the 
real-estate sector in several East Asian countries in the 90s, and the surge and subsequent correction 
of  the  wave  of  excessive  optimism  in  some  equity  markets  around  the  turn  of  the  millennium. 
Currently, the extreme increases in housing prices and households’ level of indebtedness witnessed in 
some  western  countries  is  attracting  some  attention  and  concern  in  view  of  the  potentially  adverse 
consequences  on  the  stability  of  the  whole  economy.  Looking  back,  one  can  indeed  find  in 
unbalanced developments in asset and debt markets the seeds of some of the major financial crises 
that ultimately led to persistent negative output and price growth.  
Therefore, conditions such as low inflation and interest rates may sometimes conceal risks capable of 
bringing  a  phase  of  price  and  economic  stability  to  its  end.  Those  dangers  are  often  linked  to 
excessive risk-taking in the credit or asset markets leading to episodes of financial instability. In that 
situation, it may be difficult for monetary policy to meet its objectives since the relationship between 
certain key variables and interest rates becomes unstable. Moreover, as market volatility increases, 
the ability of central banks to affect the relevant interest rates becomes more uncertain. The conduct 
of monetary policy then becomes much like steering a boat in the middle of a dark stormy night.  
Even if the likelihood of such episodes of macroeconomic distress is low, the considerable implications 
in the economy and in terms of welfare have led to increasing concern among central banks and much 
discussion and research on what the monetary policy response to this kind of underlying risk could 
and should be. 
There  is  now  a  broad  consensus  among  central  bankers  that  they  should  not  directly  target  asset 
prices, and I must include myself among those who share this view. Detecting unsustainable patterns 
of asset prices or indebtedness ratios in real time is a complex task in practice. But even if central 
banks were able to do so, there would still be a lot of uncertainty as to how those financial imbalances 
would  react  to  a  specific  change  in  monetary  policy.  Under  the  most  realistic  case,  in  which  the 
monetary authority only possesses noisy information on the presence of unsustainable patterns, the 
remedy could be worse than the illness, since one can never be certain that a true illness is the case.  
Yet this is not to say that there is nothing left to be done by monetary policy to deal with low-probability 
high-impact events, such as an asset market collapse and/or a deflationary spiral. As we have moved 
towards a scenario of price stability and lax credit conditions, some leading central bankers have been 
inclined to consider more prevention-oriented policies. To the extent that monetary decisions may be a 
useful tool for reducing the likelihood of a major financial disruption, or for mitigating the effects of a 
really adverse shock on the entire system (full deflation, for instance), it might be desirable to pursue a 
monetary strategy that pays due attention to these unlikely crisis scenarios if the associated impact is 
disproportionately  high.  This  idea  is  at  the  root  of  what  Chairman  Greenspan  refers  to  as  the 
risk-management approach to monetary policy.  
Martin Feldstein has described the essence of this approach in a very insightful and simple way: “A 
prudent man carries an umbrella even when the forecast says there is only a small chance of rain. If 
there is no rain, he suffers the small inconvenience of carrying the umbrella. But if he does not bring 
the  umbrella  and  it  does  rain,  he  may  suffer  the  much  larger  inconvenience  of  being  caught  by  a 
downpour”.  
While this argument for a wider pre-emptive role for monetary policy would bring self-evident benefits, 
we  should  bear  in  mind  that  it  also  entails  some  costs  and  can  be  difficult  to  communicate  to  the 
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
public. These costs can be understood as an insurance premium that must be paid for using monetary 
policy in a decidedly preventive fashion.  
These considerations help to highlight some dimensions of the current monetary policy context that 
may  benefit  from  a  sound  banking  capital  regulatory  framework.  In  this  regard,  I  tend  to  think  that 
certain  important  elements  in  Basel  II  will  contribute,  firstly,  to  restricting  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances, thus diminishing the probability of extreme adverse shocks; and secondly, to mitigating 
their negative consequences for the overall system. 
As the disorderly granting of credit is often a defining characteristic of an extreme and unstable phase 
of financial euphoria, a regulatory framework that provides banks with strong incentives for sound risk 
assessment  must  clearly  be  conducive  to  a  more  watchful  and  efficient  allocation  of  credit.  In  this 
sense, one would naturally expect a more risk-sensitive capital framework to make banks more likely 
to account for the true risks of lending policies aimed at achieving short-run-focused targets, such as 
market share or portfolio size, at the expense of putting their medium-term financial health more at 
risk.  Since  speculative  activities  naturally  fit  into  this  risk-return  temporal  pattern,  given  that  they 
usually yield substantial immediate profits at the outset at the expense of a possible once-for-all large 
loss at an uncertain future date, a more cautious credit strategy will tend to penalise the funding of 
self-fulfilling asset-revaluation processes.  
Forward-looking risk management that is aware of how risk-drivers change through the cycle and in 
stress conditions will tend to build shock absorbers to be used when difficult times arrive. I will return 
later to this idea and how Basel II encourages the appropriate use of capital buffers. Let me add now 
that the idea of building robustness in good times is not only a prudent policy, it is also theoretically 
consistent  because  we  all  have  a  tendency  to  think  that  risks  increase  in  bad  times.  From  my 
perspective, this is only true in part. A better description is to say that exposures and therefore risks 
increase in good times and that in bad times these risks materialise.  
On top of that, to the extent that risk assessment and control methods become more formalised and 
rigorous, this will lessen the likelihood of making bad decisions and will improve risk-adjusted pricing 
policies. It will also contribute to the prompt detection of errors and deviations from targets, allowing 
banks to implement corrective measures at an early stage. Increased awareness of the risks and early 
reaction to problems is likely to lead to a smoother adjustment to new conditions or to the correction of 
mistakes, making decisions less abrupt and time-lags perhaps shorter. 
This early reaction will be supported by the supervisory second pillar and again by the transparency of 
the third, which will also reduce the temptation of supervisory forbearance. Let me add a few words on 
transparency. 
History has also taught us that some of the worst financial crises were ultimately unleashed by sudden 
bank crises, during which an upsurge of collective panic led individuals to withdraw their funding to 
banks. A vast amount of analysis and research on these issues has underlined the role of information 
asymmetries  in  financial  intermediation.  Indeed,  it  is  no  overstatement  to  say  that  the  presence  of 
asymmetric information between lenders and borrowers in financial markets can explain much of their 
inherent instability. Higher transparency in the information provided by banks on their balance-sheet 
and  risk  position,  along  the  lines  of  that  set  out  in  Pillar  3,  must  undoubtedly  alleviate  such 
asymmetries,  thus  reducing  the  likelihood  of  an  episode  of  profound  disintermediation  and,  by 
fostering the public’s confidence in the banking system, easing the recovery of the financial pulse in 
the event of a downturn. 
Before  moving  to  my  next  point,  let  me  sum  up  some  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  quoting  Alan 
Greenspan, who recently said: “Perhaps more critically, better risk management and the associated 
quantification have the real potential for reducing the wide attitudinal swings that are associated with 
the historical cyclical pattern in bank credit…”  
In a more general conclusion, I think that while the objectives of regulatory policies are different from 
those of monetary policy, the former should always be aware of the macro implications of their micro 
policies and the latter can clearly benefit from effective regulations that help ensure a safe and efficient 
financial system.  
Procyclicality and the link between Basel II and monetary policy  
4. 
So  far,  I  have  highlighted  key  features  of  Basel  II which,  in  my  opinion, will unambiguously  tend  to 
make the current terrain in which monetary policy operates a safer place. Yet in the course of the work 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 5
conducted  by  the  Committee  and,  especially,  after  the  release  of  several  consultative  documents, 
there has also been lively and enriching discussion about several potentially negative side-effects of 
the revised capital framework. 
The  issue  of  procyclicality,  in  particular,  has  attracted  much  attention.  Although  I  think  that  most 
arguments have been overstated and I have a more positive view of the macroeconomic implications 
of  Basel  II,  I  also  think  that  this  is  a  legitimate  concern  and  I  take  this  opportunity  to  gratefully 
acknowledge the interest and effort made by researchers and commentators to shed light on this and 
other issues relating to the macroeconomic implications of Basel II. To be sure, all this is also relevant 
for my topic here today, as monetary policy works precisely through its influence on economic activity 
at business cycle frequencies. 
Some commentators have warned that the new framework, by tying minimum capital holdings more 
closely  to  debtors’  creditworthiness,  may  exacerbate  the  cyclical  pattern  in  credit  aggregates,  thus 
altering the bank-based monetary transmission mechanism, perhaps in an unwanted direction. In this 
respect,  a  potentially  worrisome  picture  would  be  one  in  which  the  economy  falls  into  a  recession, 
credit ratings deteriorate, capital requirements become more demanding under Pillar 1, and monetary 
policy loses some of its stabilising effectiveness, as banks find it difficult or too expensive to secure 
funds to expand credit. 
My impression, however, is that this simple story must be qualified on several grounds, as there are a 
number of effects working in opposite directions as well as some mitigating factors. But before going 
into more technical details, let me mention the important steps towards mitigating excessive swings in 
regulatory capital included in the framework. Banks that use the internal rating systems are required to 
consider  longer-term  horizons  in  assigning  ratings,  and  to  estimate  risk  parameters  as  long-run 
averages  or  to  reflect  downturns.  Finally,  they  are  also  required  to  carry  out  stress  tests  under 
conditions of simulated recessions. 
Following on from this last point, as banks are required to perform a meaningfully conservative credit 
risk  stress  test,  they  will  hold  capital  buffers  that  make  regulatory  capital  requirements  less  of  a 
constraint. Pillar 2 will also enhance this precautionary behaviour. At present, actual capital held by 
most banks is, in general, well above minimum regulatory requirements and there is some empirical 
evidence of a negative relationship between the capital buffers and the cycle, although the magnitude 
of this effect is more disputed. 
By  promoting  sounder  practices  for  risk  assessment,  Basel  II  creates  incentives  for  more  forward-
looking capital management through which banks will fully recognise the benefits of a prudent strategy 
of capital accumulation from an intertemporal perspective. The new framework places capital and risk 
management  at  the  centre  of  the  bank’s  responsibility  and  strategy,  requiring  managers  to  be  very 
mindful of and serious about understanding the drivers of risk through the cycle within a medium-term 
time horizon. 
A second idea to bear in mind when considering procyclicality in bank credit is that bank behaviour is 
inherently procyclical. Regulatory considerations aside, a general fall in returns on investment together 
with a perception of increased risk are natural ingredients during a recession, thus leading per se to a 
contraction of credit. Moreover, such a contraction and even the closure of some firms in the industry 
can be understood, in some cases, as efficient outcomes on purely economic grounds. 
While concepts like full efficiency or maximum social welfare are “too grand” to be operative, I think we 
can still make some progress on this issue by posing the question in relative terms: will Basel II unduly 
exacerbate  the  tendency  towards  procyclicality  inherent  in  banks’  business?  In  response,  I  find  it 
helpful to focus on certain key determinants of bank capital supply and demand, for their interaction 
will  ultimately  determine  the  conditions under which banks may  gain  access  to  capital  markets  and 
withstand a general downturn.  
On  the  demand  side,  under  Basel  II  higher  overall  uncertainty  about  debtors’  solvency  during  a 
recession will admittedly tend to put upward pressure on the regulatory capital. But we shouldn’t view 
this  effect  as  economically  artificial,  since  we  know  from  basic  contract  theory  that  lenders,  i.e. 
depositors,  will  optimally  require  a  larger  amount  of  own  resources  from  investors,  i.e.  banks, 
whenever the former perceive higher risk in the projects to be funded. In plain terms, while regulatory 
capital is rising in such a situation, economic capital goes up as well. I firmly believe that the latter is 
the  most  relevant  variable  for  understanding  banks’  decisions  about  the  amount  of  credit  to  be 
extended and its price. Nowadays, well-managed banks already allocate economic capital and take 
decisions on the basis of incurred risks. Their economic capital is procyclical today and Basel II does 
6 
 BIS Review 34//2005
not alter the calculation of economic capital; if anything it can help to promote cycle awareness. In this 
regard I tend to think that the role of regulatory capital is overstated and the degree of risk sensitivity of 
banks’ behaviour today is underestimated. 
Furthermore, the most abrupt and procyclical behaviour will probably occur in a poorly provisioned and 
poorly  capitalised  bank  with  inadequate  risk  management.  In  a  downturn  this  bank  will  most  likely 
encounter  unpleasant  surprises  stemming  from  mismanaged  risks  and,  lacking  appropriate  shock 
absorbers (provisions and capital), it will have little room for manoeuvre. The most likely outcome is an 
abrupt cut-back on lending, therefore contributing to exacerbating the cycle. I mentioned before the 
importance of risk awareness and early detection and reaction by banks. I will just emphasise here 
that these are also important elements for restraining procyclicality. 
On the supply side, I have already commented on the beneficial effects of higher transparency in the 
information  released  by  banks,  especially  after  accounting  for  the  fact  that  lender-investor 
informational  asymmetries  could  result  in  a  lower-than-optimal  level  of  funds  available  for  bank 
lending.  Pillar  3  will  thus  grease  the  wheels  of  the  market  for  bank  capital,  building  up  capital 
providers’  and  depositors’  confidence  about  the  efficient  use  of  their  resources  and  easing  the 
conditions under which banks may gain additional funding if required. This observation is of special 
relevance  precisely  in  times  of  crisis,  when  some  bank  managers  may  be  more  tempted  to  pursue 
“gambling for resurrection” strategies. Likewise, as market participants understand that banks will have 
stronger motivation to employ better technologies for risk management, one would naturally expect the 
industry to move to a safer plateau, with its capital, therefore, enjoying a lower risk premium, all other 
things being equal. 
To summarise, while I think that a reasonable degree of procyclicality of the supply of loans is a logical 
feature of the credit market, I sympathise with the idea that all kinds of regulations affecting banks, 
from  accounting  to  prudential  ones,  should  try  to  minimise  or  compensate  for  the  risk  of  excessive 
sensitivity of bank lending policy to cyclical conditions. Indeed, the latter would normally appear when 
banks  are  poorly  capitalised  and  lending  decisions  are  based  on  inadequate  risk  assessments  and 
driven  only  by  current  market  conditions,  a  natural  terrain  for  unplanned  drastic  swings  in  credit 
policies.  
I believe that all investment in technology and human capital, enhanced transparency, and better and 
pre-emptive  risk  management  based  on  improved  control  structures  and  corporate  governance  will 
entail significant improvements not only to the stability and soundness of the financial system, but also 
to its efficiency in the allocation of resources. This, in my view, should benefit the cyclical behaviour of 
the banking system and also, it is very likely that it will be around a superior trend. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Let me conclude with a few reflections on the general issue of this talk, namely monetary policy and 
Basel II. I have tried to highlight those distinctive features of the revised capital framework which, in 
my opinion, are more likely to exert some influence on the terrain in which central bankers design and 
implement their monetary policies. Only the passage of time will reveal the consequences of the most 
ambitious bank-capital regulatory framework ever envisaged at a multinational level for the conduct of 
monetary policy. Still, I feel we can lay hands on some basic, but valuable, equipment for performing 
this jump into the future by looking at the past. 
So far, I have drawn on some important lessons imparted by past monetary and financial episodes 
and experiences. Let me now draw on one further lesson. The enormous success of monetary policy 
in  bringing  us  the  benefits  of  low  and  stable  inflation  could  have  hardly  been  possible  without  a 
preliminary  diagnosis  of  the  causes  of  high  inflation  and  its  effects  on  welfare,  including  an 
assessment  of  what  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  should  be,  their  relative  importance  over 
different  horizons,  and  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  best  institutional  framework  and  the 
instruments required. With hindsight, the right answers to these points seem clear: in general terms, a 
stable value for money should be the most precious output yielded by monetary policy; and, to achieve 
this, a wise mixture of simplicity, transparency, commitment and sound judgment, and, overall, a good 
measure of forward-looking behaviour should all be included in the monetary authority’s toolbox.  
You will recognise in this list of tasty ingredients some of the basic elements used in building up Basel 
II,  for  it  pursues  a  goal,  namely  financial  stability,  which  at  least  in  some  of  its  most  fundamental 
aspects  may  not  be  much  different  from  that  pursued  by  monetary  policy.  Just  as  the  economics 
profession concluded that over the relevant horizon price stability was essentially all about monetary 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 7
conditions,  we  on  the  Committee  believe  that  the  stability  of  the  banking  industry  is  all  about  risk 
awareness and management and adequate shock absorbers.  
Consequently, Basel II seeks to give due regard to the greater importance of managing bank risk and 
capital for the purpose of achieving higher levels of financial stability, but I am personally in little doubt 
that Its benefits will also be felt in monetary policy spheres. 
Thank you very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 34//2005
