Simon Topping: Improving the management of risk through 
implementation of Basel II 
Speech  by  Mr  Simon  Topping,  Executive  Director,  Banking  Policy,  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  ACIHK  The  Financial  Markets  Association  Basel  II  Seminar,  Hong  Kong,  
27 September 2005.  
 Only a few years ago it might have seemed a bit strange to invite a regulator to speak on the 
subject  of  risk  management.  After  all,  a  regulator  was  supposed  to  have  the  same 
relationship to risk as the preacher did to sin: he was against it. 
Historically, regulation and risk management were opposites. Regulation was supposed to be 
all about stopping banks from taking risks. Risk management, by contrast, was concerned 
with how you take on risk and how you manage it. Regulation has been criticised, rightly in 
my  view,  for  taking  insufficient  account  of  modern  risk  management  techniques  such  as 
credit risk and operational risk modelling, stress-testing, and portfolio management. 
Thankfully we are beginning to move away from the days when regulators were perceived as 
regarding taking any sort of risk as "a bad thing." Regulators care, above all, that the banking 
system should be sound and stable. One of the most important factors in a sound banking 
system is that banks should be profitable; and regulators recognise that without risks there is 
no chance of banks making money. What matters are not the risks that banks take, but how 
good they are at identifying, monitoring and controlling them. Hopefully we are also moving 
away from the days when regulators set regulations which have no real relation to how banks 
themselves look at risk, and how they manage risk. 
Basel II is a major step in this direction. It aims to link the way regulators look at risk to how 
banks themselves look at risk; to encourage the use of modern risk management techniques; 
to  encourage  innovation;  and  to  encourage  banks  to  ensure  that  their  risk  management 
capabilities  are  commensurate  with  the  risks  of  their  business.  As  a  result  Basel  II  brings 
regulation into the 21st century. 
Previously, regulators' main focus was on credit risk and market risk. Basel II takes a more 
sophisticated approach to credit risk, in that it allows banks to make use of internal ratings 
based systems - or "IRB systems" as they have become known - to calculate their capital 
requirement for credit risk. It also introduces, in addition to the market risk capital charge, an 
explicit capital charge for operational risk. Together, these three risks - credit, market, and 
operational risk - are the so-called "Pillar 1" risks. 
But Basel II goes much further than this in looking at risk. As you will I am sure know, as risk 
management  professionals,  these  three  risks  are  only  scraping  the  surface.  Banks'  risk 
management functions need to look at a much wider range of risks than this - interest rate 
risk in the banking book, foreign exchange risk, liquidity risk, business cycle risk, reputation 
risk, strategic risk. The risk management role of helping identify, evaluate, monitor, manage 
and control or mitigate these risks has become a crucial role in modern-day banking. Indeed, 
it is probably not exaggerating the importance of this to say that the quality of a bank's risk 
management has become one of the key determinants of a success of a bank. 
Basel II recognises the importance of these risks - and of the quality of risk management - by 
means of what is known as "Pillar 2". Under Pillar 2, there is an assessment firstly of all the 
risks a bank is running and, secondly, of its ability to manage these risks. This can lead to 
the bank being required to hold more capital to cover these risks, or to make improvements 
in  its  risk  management.  Pillar  2  therefore  encourages  banks  to  improve  risk  management, 
and gives capital incentives to do so. 
   1/5 
I will say some more about this later on, but it is probably time at this point that I said a little 
about how Hong Kong is implementing Basel II. 
Hong Kong implementation 
We  took  a  strategic  decision  early  on  in  the  Basel  II  process  that  Hong  Kong  should 
implement Basel II in accordance with the timetable recommended by the Basel Committee 
of Banking Supervision for its own members. This means adoption of most of the approaches 
under the new framework from the start of 2007, and the more advanced approaches from 
the  start  of  2008.  Thus  Hong  Kong  will  adopt  Basel  II  at  the  same  time  as  other  major 
international  financial  centres,  such  as  London,  Frankfurt  and  Tokyo.  From  a  regional 
perspective,  the  implementation  timetable  in  Hong  Kong  is  broadly  similar  to  that  being 
adopted by Australia and Singapore. 
For several years now the HKMA has been developing its supervisory approach along Basel 
II  lines,  and  this  is  leading  to  some  significant  changes  in  how  supervision  is  conducted. 
Central to this is the issue of "process versus rules". 
Process versus rules 
The original Basel Capital Accord was developed when risk management was still very much 
in its infancy. It reflects what might be called a "rules-based" approach to regulation in the 
sense that it sets prescriptive standards that banks are required to follow. It relies largely on 
the application of simple, mechanical formulas for assessing how much capital a bank should 
hold. 
The  essence  of  the  old  Capital  Accord  was  that  it  represented  an  attempt  to  monitor  the 
prudential soundness of banks by using a standardised risk measurement framework, which 
was  applied  to  all  institutions  and  which  employed  data  based  on  a  snap-shot  of  their 
balance  sheets  at  certain  specified  reporting  dates.  The  approach  was  standardised  since 
regulators  specify  the  precise  form  in  which  the  calculation  of  capital  adequacy  is  to  be 
performed - for example, the specific risk categories into which assets are to be assigned. 
There  are,  of  course,  still  plenty  of  rules-based  aspects  to  the  new  capital  framework:  it's 
difficult otherwise to understand what the many hundreds of pages of the Basel II document 
are needed for. However, the point I want to stress is that the advanced approaches, and 
especially IRB, introduce a new element into banking supervision. For want of a better term, 
I'll call this process-regulation. 
Whereas  the  old  Accord  focused  on  rules,  the  IRB  approaches  focus  instead  on  the 
processes by which risks are managed. Rather than prescribing detailed rules for assessing 
capital  adequacy,  supervisors  will  in  future  need  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  internal 
processes used by firms to manage their risks. This is reflected, for example, in the approach 
that we propose to take to the validation of IRB systems: we will not be prescribing specific 
numerical standards that we expect internal risk measurement systems to achieve. Rather, 
we  will  discuss  with  each  individual  IRB  bank  how  its  system  performs  in  relation  to  the 
bank's own internal objectives and appetite for risk. 
IRB  will  require  us  to  engage  in  a  dialogue  with  AIs  to  understand  how  they  go  about 
developing and approving their IRB models. As a result, the future for banking supervision is 
likely to take the form of an active discussion with our counterparts in the risk management 
and credit control functions. It will be less a matter of us setting hard and fast rules, and more 
a  matter  of  us  holding  a  dialogue  with  risk  managers.  Of  course,  the  dialogue  cannot  be 
open-ended: at some point we will have to draw our conclusions and make our assessment. 
But those of you in IRB banks can expect us to show a different level of engagement, and a 
greater  intensity  of  interest  in,  your  risk  management  systems  than  we  have  previously 
shown. 
   2/5 
Pillar 2 
As I mentioned earlier, much of the focus on Basel II has been on IRB, and thus on Pillar 1. 
Now, credit risk remains, of course, one of the most fundamental risks in banking. However, 
we  in  the  HKMA  determined  at  an  early  stage  in  the  Basel  II  process  that  it  would  be 
desirable to broaden the focus so as to bring into the equation the various "Pillar 2 risks." 
The case for this is, in our view, self-evident, as risks such as concentration risk, interest rate 
risk  in  the  banking  book,  and  liquidity  funding  risk  can  be  every  bit  as  devastating  for  the 
financial health of a bank as credit risk can be. In the run-up to final agreement on Basel II, 
therefore,  we  issued  a series  of  guidance  notes  to  give  encouragement  to  AIs  to  upgrade 
their ability to manage these risks appropriately. We knew that for the coming few years AIs 
and their risk management specialists were likely to be preoccupied with Pillar 1 and thus we 
wanted to make sure that these "Pillar 2 risks" were adequately addressed as a priority, and 
not as an afterthought. 
In  theory,  Pillar  2  requires  banks  to  have  a  formal  process  for  allocating  internal  capital 
against the wide range of risks that are not explicitly part of Pillar 1. This formal process is 
sometimes referred to as the Capital Allocation Assessment Process or "CAAP". However, it 
has  to  be  acknowledged  that  very  few  banks  currently  have  such  a  process  in  place,  and 
only the largest and most sophisticated institutions have been able to devote the resources 
necessary to building these types of formal  capital allocation systems. Consequently, as a 
regulator, we do not plan to require all banks to develop internal capital allocation models, at 
least initially. The need for such models must be commensurate with each institution's scale 
and sophistication. 
In  place  of  requiring  all  AIs  to  develop  these  models,  the  HKMA  has  developed  its  own 
internal Supervisory Review Process, or "SRP". As you may know, the HKMA has for a long 
time  set  capital  ratios  on  a  bank-by-bank  basis.  This  has  been  with  the  aim  of  trying  to 
ensure that the capital ratio reflects the risk profile of an individual AI, taking into account the 
full  range  of  risks  to  which  it  is  potentially  exposed.  We  intend  to  use  the  SRP  to  bring 
greater rigour into the process of setting AI-specific minimum capital ratios. 
In  effect,  the  SRP  is  our  own  credit  scoring  system.  It  takes  a  large  number  of  variables, 
each carefully chosen to reflect a different aspect of risk, and combines them to produce a 
single  overall  "score"  for  each  AI.  The  score  is  in  turn  mapped  onto  a  particular  range  of 
capital ratios. 
Among the factors that this process will consider are the Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 risks that I have 
already mentioned. In addition, the SRP will take into account a variety of other factors such 
as reputation risk, strategic risk, and the quality of corporate governance. The inputs into this 
process will be derived primarily from our existing supervisory arrangements, such as off-site 
and on-site examinations. 
We believe that the SRP is capable of replacing the current, relatively subjective, approach 
to setting AI-specific minimum capital ratios with something more rigorous and objective. Like 
all  good  credit  scoring  systems,  there  will  still  be  scope  for  expert  judgement  and,  in  my 
experience, there is no substitute for the supervisory smell-test. On the whole, however, we 
intend to base each AI's capital ratio on the output of this process. 
Once we have derived a score, and thus a corresponding capital ratio, for an individual AI, 
we will discuss the results of the SRP with the AI. Again, as in the review of IRB systems, the 
concept of supervisory dialogue will be important. It will be our aim to understand how each 
AI  approaches  the  range  of  risks  that  exist  outside  Pillar  1,  and  to  understand  the 
mechanisms they have in place for identifying, monitoring and controlling those risks. If an AI 
is able to demonstrate to us that it has a better way of allocating capital against these risks 
than our own SRP model, then we will be open to discuss with it a corresponding adjustment 
to its capital ratio. Thus one aim of this approach is to give banks an incentive to come up 
with  a  better  mousetrap.  There  will  be  capital  benefits  from  having  a  good  internal  capital 
allocation process. 
   3/5 
Implementation challenges 
I'd like to say a few words next about the implementation challenges associated with Basel II. 
Although  preparations  for  the  implementation  of  the  new  capital  framework  are  well 
advanced  in  a  large  number  of  jurisdictions,  including  in  Hong  Kong,  the  process  has  not 
been without its critics. It has recently been claimed that too much regulation is now itself the 
greatest source of risk in the global financial system, and the implication that is supposed to 
be drawn is that regulators are somehow engaged in a self-defeating exercise. 
At the root of this criticism is the compliance burden that arises from Basel II implementation 
taken in combination with other recent developments, such as the adoption of International 
Accounting Standards. 
The first point I should make is that the timing of these various initiatives is not completely 
under  our  control:  the  accounting  profession,  for  example,  has  tended  to  plough  its  own 
furrow  independently  of  any  of  the  banking  regulators.  This  has  been  the  case  in  many 
leading international financial centres, not just in Hong Kong. Efforts are now underway in a 
variety of contexts to try to secure better coordination in these various initiatives, but it has to 
be admitted that in an ideal world they would not be quite so clustered together. 
That said, I would be the first to acknowledge that Basel II requires heavy investment in risk 
management  systems  and  IT  infrastructure,  as  well  as  radical  changes  in  the  risk 
management culture at some banks. However, this is a healthy development. I suspect that 
banks  would  have  in  any  case  needed  to  make  most  of  the  so-called  "Basel  II-related" 
investment  if  they  wanted  to  stay  at  the  top  of  their  game.  By  agreeing  to  accept  banks' 
internal  risk  management  systems  as  the  basis  for  the  calculation  of  regulatory  capital 
requirements, the Basel Committee has provided a powerful incentive for banks to upgrade 
their risk management systems. But this is only what they otherwise would have needed to 
do to be able to compete with the best. 
There  are,  however,  some  quite  specific  challenges  for  Asian  banks  in  using  the  more 
advanced approaches under Basel II. One of the most important is the availability of data. 
Historically,  many  Asian  banks  have  not  collected  the  data  needed  to  develop  the  type  of 
models needed for IRB purposes. Some are only now starting to do so, and it will be several 
years  before  they  have  sufficiently  rich  data  that  it  can  begin  to  inform  their  credit  risk 
management  processes.  A  second,  related,  factor  is  that  even  where  the  data  has  been 
collected,  in  many  countries  the  default  experience  is  distorted  by  the  1997-98  financial 
crisis: the question for banks is to what extent this experience should be factored into their 
risk management systems. A third issue is the extent to which off-the-shelf models that have 
been developed primarily for the US market can  capture the behavioural characteristics of 
Asian borrowers. 
None  of  these  problems  are  in  principle  insurmountable.  However,  they  do  suggest  that  a 
degree of caution is in order before banks make the leap to IRB. That is why we have been 
advising those banks that are considering using IRB approaches to "look before you leap." 
The most important consideration is for banks to make sure that their IRB systems are robust 
and  well-founded,  and  that  they  are  integrated  with  their  overall  systems  for  identifying, 
managing and controlling risk, for making credit decisions, and for product pricing. We are 
willing  to  allow  banks  as  much  time  as  they  need  to  achieve  these  objectives.  The 
implementation dates for the IRB approaches should not be taken as a deadline. Banks that 
feel  they  need  longer  to  work  on  their  systems  will  have  our  full  support.  Getting  it  right 
matters more than a specific date in the calendar. 
Looking ahead, both the regulators and the industry will continue to face many challenges 
over  the  coming  months  and  years.  Putting  Basel  II  in  place  has  been  demanding  for 
everyone involved, and will continue to be so. However, I am confident that once the process 
is complete we will be able to look back with satisfaction on what has been achieved. There 
is no doubt in my mind that Basel II will produce a step-change in risk management practices 
   4/5 
around  the  world,  with  the  result  that  the  global  banking  system  will  become  both  more 
efficient and more robust. Through all the pain of the transition, we need to keep our eyes 
firmly on that prize. 
 
   5/5 
