Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report 
to the Congress  
Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington, 
16 February 2005.  
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. In the seven months since I last testified before 
this  Committee,  the  U.S.  economic  expansion  has  firmed,  overall  inflation  has  subsided,  and  core 
inflation has remained low.  
Over  the  first  half  of  2004,  the  available  information  increasingly  suggested  that  the  economic 
expansion was becoming less fragile and that the risk of an undesirable decline in inflation had greatly 
diminished. Toward midyear, the Federal Reserve came to the judgment that the extraordinary degree 
of policy accommodation that had been in place since the middle of 2003 was no longer warranted 
and, in the announcement released at the conclusion of our May meeting, signaled that a firming of 
policy  was  likely.  The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  began  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate  at  its 
June  meeting,  and  the  announcement  following  that  meeting  indicated  the  need  for  further,  albeit 
gradual, withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus. 
Around the same time, incoming data suggested a lull in activity as the economy absorbed the impact 
of  higher  energy  prices.  Much  as  had  been  expected,  this  soft  patch  proved  to  be  short-lived. 
Accordingly,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  followed  the  June  policy  move  with  similar  actions  at  each 
meeting since then, including our most recent meeting earlier this month. The cumulative removal of 
policy accommodation to date has significantly raised measures of the real federal funds rate, but by 
most measures, it remains fairly low.  
The  evidence  broadly  supports  the  view  that  economic  fundamentals  have  steadied.  Consumer 
spending has been well maintained over recent months, buoyed by continued growth in disposable 
personal  income,  gains  in  net  worth,  and  accommodative  conditions  in  credit  markets.  Households 
have recorded a modest improvement in their financial position over this period, to the betterment of 
many indicators of credit quality. Low interest rates and rising incomes have contributed to a decline in 
the  aggregate  household financial  obligation ratio, and delinquency  and charge-off rates on  various 
categories of consumer loans have stayed at low levels. 
The  sizable  gains  in  consumer  spending  of  recent  years  have  been  accompanied  by  a  drop  in  the 
personal saving rate to an average of only 1 percent over 2004 - a very low figure relative to the nearly 
7  percent  rate  averaged  over  the  previous  three  decades.  Among  the  factors  contributing  to  the 
strength of spending and the decline in saving have been developments in housing markets and home 
finance  that  have  spurred  rising  household  wealth  and  allowed  greater  access  to  that  wealth.  The 
rapid  rise  in  home  prices  over  the  past  several  years  has  provided  households  with  considerable 
capital gains. Moreover, a significant increase in the rate of single-family home turnover has meant 
that many consumers have been able to realize gains from the sale of their homes. To be sure, such 
capital gains, largely realized through an increase in mortgage debt on the home, do not increase the 
pool of national savings available to finance new capital investment. But from the perspective of an 
individual household, cash realized from capital gains has the same spending power as cash from any 
other source.  
More broadly, rising home prices along with higher equity prices have outpaced the rise in household, 
largely  mortgage,  debt  and  have  pushed  up  household  net  worth  to  about  5-1/2  times  disposable 
income  by  the  end  of  last  year.  Although  the  ratio  of  net  worth  to  income  is  well  below  the  peak 
attained in 1999, it remains above the long-term historical average. These gains in net worth help to 
explain  why  households  in  the  aggregate  do  not  appear  uncomfortable  with  their  financial  position 
even though their reported personal saving rate is negligible.  
Of course, household net worth may not continue to rise relative to income, and some reversal in that 
ratio is not out of the question. If that were to occur, households would probably perceive the need to 
save  more  out  of  current  income;  the  personal  saving  rate  would  accordingly  rise,  and  consumer 
spending would slow.  
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
But while household spending may well play a smaller role in the expansion going forward, business 
executives  apparently  have  become  somewhat  more  optimistic  in  recent  months.  Capital  spending 
and  corporate  borrowing  have  firmed  noticeably,  but  some  of  the  latter  may  have  been  directed  to 
finance the recent backup in inventories. Mergers and acquisitions, though, have clearly perked up. 
Even in the current much-improved environment, however, some caution among business executives 
remains.  Although  capital  investment  has  been  advancing  at  a  reasonably  good  pace,  it  has 
nonetheless lagged the exceptional rise in profits and internal cash flow. This is most unusual; it took a 
deep recession to produce the last such configuration in 1975. The lingering caution evident in capital 
spending decisions has also been manifest in less-aggressive hiring by businesses. In contrast to the 
typical pattern early in previous business-cycle recoveries, firms have appeared reluctant to take on 
new workers and have remained focused on cost containment. 
As  opposed  to  the  lingering  hesitancy  among  business  executives,  participants  in  financial  markets 
seem  very  confident  about  the  future  and,  judging  by  the  exceptionally  low  level  of  risk  spreads  in 
credit markets, quite willing to bear risk. This apparent disparity in sentiment between business people 
and market participants could reflect the heightened additional concerns of business executives about 
potential legal liabilities rather than a fundamentally different assessment of macroeconomic risks.  
Turning to the outlook for costs and prices, productivity developments will likely play a key role. The 
growth of output per hour slowed over the past half year, giving a boost to unit labor costs after two 
years  of  declines.  Going  forward,  the  implications  for  inflation  will  be  influenced  by  the  extent  and 
persistence  of  any  slowdown  in  productivity.  A  lower  rate  of  productivity  growth  in  the  context  of 
relatively stable increases in average hourly compensation has led to slightly more rapid growth in unit 
labor costs. Whether inflation actually rises in the wake of slowing productivity growth, however, will 
depend on the rate of growth of labor compensation and the ability and willingness of firms to pass on 
higher costs to their customers. That, in turn, will depend on the degree of utilization of resources and 
how monetary policymakers respond. To date, with profit margins already high, competitive pressures 
have tended to limit the extent to which cost pressures have been reflected in higher prices. 
Productivity is notoriously difficult to predict. Neither the large surge in output per hour from the first 
quarter of 2003 to the second quarter of 2004, nor the more recent moderation was easy to anticipate. 
It seems likely that these swings reflected delayed efficiency gains from the capital goods boom of the 
1990s.  Throughout  the  first  half  of  last  year,  businesses  were  able  to  meet  increasing  orders  with 
management  efficiencies  rather  than  new  hires.  But  conceivably  the  backlog  of  untapped  total 
efficiencies has run low, requiring new hires. Indeed, new hires as a percent of employment rose in the 
fourth quarter of last year to the highest level since the second quarter of 2001.  
There  is  little  question  that  the  potential  remains  for  large  advances  in  productivity  from  further 
applications  of  existing  knowledge,  and  insights  into  applications  not  even  now  contemplated 
doubtless will emerge in the years ahead. However, we have scant ability to infer the pace at which 
such gains will play out and, therefore, their implications for the growth of productivity over the longer 
run. It is, of course, the rate of change of productivity over time, and not its level, that influences the 
persistent changes in unit labor costs and hence the rate of inflation. 
The inflation outlook will also be shaped by developments affecting the exchange value of the dollar 
and oil prices. Although the dollar has been declining since early 2002, exporters to the United States 
apparently have held dollar prices relatively steady to preserve their market share, effectively choosing 
to absorb the decline in the dollar by accepting a reduction in their profit margins. However, the recent 
somewhat quickened pace of increases in U.S. import prices suggests that profit margins of exporters 
to the United States have contracted to the point where the foreign shippers may exhibit only limited 
tolerance for additional reductions in margins should the dollar decline further.  
The  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices  over  the  past  year  has  no  doubt  boosted  firms'  costs  and  may  have 
weighed  on  production,  particularly  given  the  sizable  permanent  component  of  oil  price  increases 
suggested  by  distant-horizon  oil  futures  contracts.  However,  the  share  of  total  business  expenses 
attributable to energy costs has declined appreciably over the past thirty years, which has helped to 
buffer  profits  and  the  economy  more  generally  from  the  adverse  effect  of  high  oil  and  natural  gas 
prices. Still, although the aggregate effect may be modest, we must recognize that some sectors of the 
economy and regions of the country have been hit hard by the increase in energy costs, especially 
over the past year. 
Despite the combination of somewhat slower growth of productivity in recent quarters, higher energy 
prices,  and  a  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  for  the  dollar,  core  measures  of  consumer  prices  have 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
registered  only  modest  increases.  The  core  PCE  and  CPI  measures,  for  example,  climbed  about 
1-1/4 and 2 percent, respectively, at an annual rate over the second half of last year. 
All told, the economy seems to have entered 2005 expanding at a reasonably good pace, with inflation 
and inflation expectations well anchored. On the whole, financial markets appear to share this view. In 
particular,  a  broad  array  of  financial  indicators  convey  a  pervasive  sense  of  confidence  among 
investors  and  an  associated  greater  willingness  to  bear  risk  than  is  yet  evident  among  business 
managers. 
Both  realized  and  option-implied  measures  of  uncertainty  in  equity  and  fixed-income  markets  have 
declined markedly over recent months to quite low levels. Credit spreads, read from corporate bond 
yields  and  credit  default  swap  premiums,  have  continued  to  narrow  amid  widespread  signs  of  an 
improvement in corporate credit quality, including notable drops in corporate bond defaults and debt 
ratings downgrades. Moreover, recent surveys suggest that bank lending officers have further eased 
standards  and  terms  on  business  loans,  and  anecdotal  reports  suggest  that  securities  dealers  and 
other market-makers appear quite willing to commit capital in providing market liquidity. 
In this environment, long-term interest rates have trended lower in recent months even as the Federal 
Reserve has raised the level of the target federal funds rate by 150 basis points. This development 
contrasts with most experience, which suggests that, other things being equal, increasing short-term 
interest rates are normally accompanied by a rise in longer-term yields. The simple mathematics of the 
yield curve governs the relationship between short- and long-term interest rates. Ten-year yields, for 
example, can be thought of as an average of ten consecutive one-year forward rates. A rise in the 
first-year forward rate, which correlates closely with the federal funds rate, would increase the yield on 
ten-year U.S. Treasury notes even if the more-distant forward rates remain unchanged. Historically, 
though,  even  these  distant  forward  rates  have  tended  to  rise  in  association  with  monetary  policy 
tightening. 
In  the  current  episode,  however,  the  more-distant  forward  rates  declined  at  the  same  time  that 
short-term rates were rising. Indeed, the tenth-year tranche, which yielded 6-1/2 percent last June, is 
now  at  about  5-1/4  percent.  During  the  same  period,  comparable  real  forward  rates  derived  from 
quotes on Treasury inflation-indexed debt fell significantly as well, suggesting that only a portion of the 
decline  in  nominal  forward  rates  in  distant  tranches  is  attributable  to  a  drop  in  long-term  inflation 
expectations. 
Some analysts have worried that the dip in forward real interest rates since last June may indicate that 
market participants have marked down their view of economic growth going forward, perhaps because 
of the rise in oil prices. But this interpretation does not mesh seamlessly with the rise in stock prices 
and the narrowing of credit spreads observed over the same interval. Others have emphasized the 
subdued  overall  business  demand  for  credit  in  the  United  States  and  the  apparent  eagerness  of 
lenders, including foreign investors, to provide financing. In particular, heavy purchases of longer-term 
Treasury securities by foreign central banks have often been cited as a factor boosting bond prices 
and pulling down longer-term yields. Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage rates have dropped to a level only 
a little higher than the record lows touched in 2003 and, as a consequence, the estimated average 
duration  of  outstanding  mortgage-backed  securities  has  shortened  appreciably  over  recent  months. 
Attempts by mortgage investors to offset this decline in duration by purchasing longer-term securities 
may be yet another contributor to the recent downward pressure on longer-term yields. 
But  we  should  be  careful  in  endeavoring  to  account  for  the  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  by 
adverting  to  technical  factors  in  the  United  States  alone  because  yields  and  risk  spreads  have 
narrowed globally. The German ten-year Bund rate, for example, has declined from 4-1/4 percent last 
June to current levels of 3-1/2 percent. And spreads of yields on bonds issued by emerging-market 
nations over U.S. Treasury yields have declined to very low levels. 
There is little doubt that, with the breakup of the Soviet Union and the integration of China and India 
into the global trading market, more of the world's productive capacity is being tapped to satisfy global 
demands for goods and services. Concurrently, greater integration of financial markets has meant that 
a larger share of the world's pool of savings is being deployed in cross-border financing of investment. 
The favorable inflation performance across a broad range of countries resulting from enlarged global 
goods, services and financial capacity has doubtless contributed to expectations of lower inflation in 
the years ahead and lower inflation risk premiums. But none of this is new and hence it is difficult to 
attribute  the  long-term  interest  rate  declines  of  the  last  nine  months  to  glacially  increasing 
globalization. For the moment, the broadly unanticipated behavior of world bond markets remains a 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
conundrum. Bond price movements may be a short-term aberration, but it will be some time before we 
are able to better judge the forces underlying recent experience. 
This is but one of many uncertainties that will confront world policymakers. Over the past two decades, 
the  industrial  world  has  fended  off  two  severe  stock  market  corrections,  a  major  financial  crisis  in 
developing  nations,  corporate  scandals,  and,  of  course,  the  tragedy  of  September  11,  2001.  Yet 
overall economic activity experienced only modest difficulties. In the United States, only five quarters 
in  the  past  twenty  years  exhibited  declines  in  GDP,  and  those  declines  were  small.  Thus,  it  is  not 
altogether unexpected or irrational that participants in the world marketplace would project more of the 
same going forward. 
Yet history cautions that people experiencing long periods of relative stability are prone to excess. We 
must  thus  remain  vigilant  against  complacency,  especially  since  several  important  economic 
challenges confront policymakers in the years ahead. 
Prominent among these challenges in the United States is the pressing need to maintain the flexibility 
of our economic and financial system. This will be essential if we are to address our current account 
deficit without significant disruption. Besides market pressures, which appear poised to stabilize and 
over the longer run possibly to decrease the U.S. current account deficit and its attendant financing 
requirements, some forces in the domestic U.S. economy seem about to head in the same direction. 
Central to that adjustment must be an increase in net national saving. This serves to underscore the 
imperative to restore fiscal discipline. 
Beyond the near term, benefits promised to a burgeoning retirement-age population under mandatory 
entitlement programs, most notably Social Security and Medicare, threaten to strain the resources of 
the working-age population in the years ahead. Real progress on these issues will unavoidably entail 
many  difficult  choices.  But  the  demographics  are  inexorable,  and  call  for  action  before  the  leading 
edge of baby boomer retirement becomes evident in 2008. This is especially the case because longer-
term problems, if not addressed, could begin to affect longer-dated debt issues, the value of which is 
based partly on expectations of developments many years in the future. 
Another critical long-run economic challenge facing the United States is the need to ensure that our 
workforce  is  equipped  with  the  requisite  skills  to  compete  effectively  in  an  environment  of  rapid 
technological  progress  and  global  competition.  Technological  advance  is  continually  altering  the 
shape,  nature,  and  complexity  of  our  economic  processes.  But  technology  and,  more  recently, 
competition from abroad have grown to a point at which demand for the least-skilled workers in the 
United  States  and  other  developed  countries  is  diminishing,  placing  downward  pressure  on  their 
wages. These workers will need to acquire the skills required to compete effectively for the new jobs 
that our economy will create. 
At the risk of some oversimplification, if the skill composition of our workforce meshed fully with the 
needs  of  our  increasingly  complex  capital  stock,  wage-skill  differentials  would  be  stable,  and 
percentage changes in wage rates would be the same for all job grades. But for the past twenty years, 
the supply of skilled, particularly highly skilled, workers has failed to keep up with a persistent rise in 
the demand for such skills. Conversely, the demand for lesser-skilled workers has declined, especially 
in response to growing international competition. The failure of our society to enhance the skills of a 
significant segment of our workforce has left a disproportionate share with lesser skills. The effect, of 
course, is to widen the wage gap between the skilled and the lesser skilled. 
In a democratic society, such a stark bifurcation of wealth and income trends among large segments 
of the population can fuel resentment and political polarization. These social developments can lead to 
political  clashes  and  misguided  economic  policies  that  work  to  the  detriment  of  the  economy  and 
society as a whole. As I have noted on previous occasions, strengthening elementary and secondary 
schooling in the United States - especially in the core disciplines of math, science, and written and 
verbal communications - is one crucial element in avoiding such outcomes. We need to reduce the 
relative excess of lesser-skilled workers and enhance the number of skilled workers by expediting the 
acquisition of skills by all students, both through formal education and on-the-job training. 
Although the long-run challenges confronting the U.S. economy are significant, I fully anticipate that 
they will ultimately be met and resolved. In recent decades our nation has demonstrated remarkable 
resilience and flexibility when tested by events, and we have every reason to be confident that it will 
weather future challenges as well. For our part, the Federal Reserve will pursue its statutory objectives 
of price stability and maximum sustainable employment - the latter of which we have learned can best 
be  achieved  in  the  long  run  by  maintaining  price  stability.  This  is  the  surest  contribution  that  the 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
Federal Reserve can make in fostering the economic prosperity and well-being of our nation and its 
people. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
