Ardian Fullani: The fight against money laundering 
Luncheon speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at an Anti Money Laundering 
workshop, Tirana, 22 June 2005. 
 Dear participants, 
The subject of today’s workshop is, as you well know, a matter of great concern worldwide. The way 
we fight money laundering (ML) and counter the financing of terrorism (FT), does not have an impact 
on us only, but also on our neighbours and any other country with which our citizens and companies 
perform trade and financial relations. In these last years, to this issue has been devoted considerable 
time and efforts by you, by Albanian authorities and by international organisations. 
Besides  meeting  each  other  again  and  exchanging  opinions  on  general  issues,  I  want  to  use  this 
opportunity to share with you some thoughts about the importance of the existence of a culture against 
ML  in  the  institutions  we  represent.  I  will  refer  in  this  case  to  banks,  meaning  non-bank  financial 
institutions as well. Following that, any consideration about ML will be valid also for the FT, for which I 
am convinced that our awareness and that of the public, is complete.  
With the term “culture” on anti-money laundering (AML), I refer not only to the existence in the bank of 
structures responsible for AML and its related procedures. I am aiming at the need for the existence in 
any  bank,  of  a  real  concern  and  of  a  positive  pressure  to  make  sure  that  those  structures  and 
procedures  are  applied  to  their  real  meaning,  throughout  the  institution  and  down  to  any  single 
employee. At the same time, I mean the real willingness of the bank for a careful and proactive role in 
the  inter-institutional  relationships,  with  the  aim  of  leaving  away  the  formalism  and  qualitatively 
improving the process of AML. I will be focusing in more details on these issues, as I proceed. 
Prior to proceeding with more details, allow me to put myself in each of your’s position. I feel I can do 
this, since I was one of you, as the executive director a commercial bank and head of the Association 
of banks. 
We  have  shared  common  concerns  about  the  speed  and  about  the  quality  with  which  the  legal 
requirements on AML were approved and implemented in practice. I still believe that a law is good 
when  its  requirements  are  applicable  in  practice  and  when  they  represent  affordable  costs  for  its 
subjects. I must say that the existing law on AML, needs to be revised under these considerations. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  often  discussed  about  the  concern  that  the  way  this  process  is  being 
implemented  is  endangering  to  go  in  the  opposite  direction  to  our  major  objective  of  reducing  the 
informal economy and bringing down the cash in circulation. While banks, as regulated, transparent 
and supervised institutions, play an important role in this objective, they are not the sole institutions. A 
no less important role play other institutions, especially those of tax collection or other institutions of 
services. Special attention should be paid to the supervision of market segments out of the banking 
system  but  within  the  scope  of  law.  The  terms  of  executing  different  payments,  on  a  household  or 
company level, should favour the usage of bank instruments (like electronic cards, wires, etc.) and in 
some transactions (where involved big amounts) payments in cash should be completely forbidden. 
There are exactly these transactions that may represent the biggest risk of money that is laundered 
from  illegal  activities,  including  fraud  and  tax  evasion.  I  believe  that  the  preference  of  holding  cash 
money  is  deep  in  our  society’s  mentality  and  is  also  linked  to  a  relatively  low  level  of  the  average 
salary in the country. As a result, one can say with an appropriate level of confidence that most of the 
money that circulates in cash, is in the hands of many people, hence it represents a relatively low level 
of ML risk. 
We  have  also  discussed  about  costs  that  are  encountered  when  adopting  full  compliance  with  the 
requirements of the regulatory and the legal framework. An effective system of AML, means advanced 
systems of information technology, especially on those parts that deal with the database of the clients, 
the  aggregation  of  the  information  from  any  single  point  in  the  network,  and  those  that  enable  the 
continuous monitoring and filtering of any bank transaction. For our institutions, especially for those 
that  are  not  branches  or  subsidiaries  of  any  stronger  financial  institution,  those  costs  can  be 
substantial and difficult to be absorbed. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
Furthermore,  we  have  been  witnesses  of  a  somehow  difficult  dialogue  with  the  institutions  that 
implement the law. I must say though that such a problem exists almost in any jurisdiction, including 
the  most  developed  countries.  But  their  attitude  toward  the  abidance  to  the  law,  of  constructive 
discussion  of  problems  and  of  quick  reactions  in  implementing  changes,  facilitates  the  solution  of 
different problems. 
Dear bank directors, 
I do like though to consider the issue from what we as bankers, can contribute more in this process, in 
spite of above-mentioned difficulties. Furthermore, history shows that the cost of dealing with those 
difficulties, whatever their size in normal times, can be easily exceeded in instances of unusual events 
that are linked with scandals on ML. 
Firstly, I want to say that we must be very careful not to allow such difficulties to distract our focus from 
the heart of the issue, that of being ensured at any time that our banks are clean and that they do not 
represent a place where dirty money and its creators or benefitors can not enter. If we do not act like 
this,  the  negative  consequences  can  be  unimaginable.  We  put  in  danger  the  reputation  of  single 
financial institutions and of the entire financial system; unwillingly, we have become instrumental of 
crime in reaching their goal of using the money generated from illegal activities; we have placed the 
reputation of our sound clients in a very difficult position; we have lost confidence in front of the honest 
market  players  and  have  darkened  our  positive  image  in  front  of  our  international  partners  and 
partners of our clients; we are going to face in the future a higher cost on doing the bank business, 
represented not only from the loss of clients (which can prove to be fatal), but also from difficulties in 
expanding our activities; we can also expect to be subjects of penal actions triggered by the regulatory 
framework.  The  damage  is  multifold  and  exceeds  any  quantitative  advantage  in  the  volume  of 
business  we  may  have  had  from  “outright”  acceptance  of  any  business  offer.  In  the  end,  through 
rigorous  application  of  AML  requirements,  we  have  protected  our  institution  from  a  potentially  very 
large damage. This is the key element of our duty, the feature of a good banker. By being active in 
AML, we are simply doing our job. Any negligence on this means we are not up to the requirements of 
our job. 
We need to emphasize that the key element in the process, is the strong commitment to understand 
and  implement  it.  It  is  very  important  for  such  commitment  to  come  from  the  highest  management 
structures of the bank. If such commitment is missing, this will be immediately shown at the structures 
of the bank that are directly involved in the AML process, whose functioning will be negligible and full 
of formalism. Within the institution, this commitment should be shown: in the preparation and approval 
of  the  internal  procedures  on  AML  (including  those  of  knowing  the  client),  in  setting  up  the  proper 
entities and appointing the responsible persons (on monitoring the AML implementation process) with 
the proper professional and hierarchical qualities, in rightly defining their rights and responsibilities, in 
giving them moral and material support, in providing qualitative and continuous training for the staff, 
especially  for  those  that  have  direct  contact  with  the  client  and  analyse  its  ML  risk  profile  and  in 
keeping  up  a  positive  pressure  in  the  institution  for  such  process  to  be  implemented  and  be 
continuously functioning. In one word, the climate that should exist within the institution for such issue 
(but not only) should favour in any instance the responsible actions being taken from the bank staff on 
AML.   
In an inter-institutional level, the commitment to be active on AML goes beyond full compliance with 
the regulatory requirements. We must be mindful of the role we have in the mosaic of the institutions 
that  are  relevant  on  implementing  the  AML  program  in  the  society.  Furthermore,  we  should  be 
sensitive  and  helpful  toward  such  institutions,  especially  when  we  know  the  difficulties  they  face  in 
performing their functions. More concretely, I do not believe that the banking industry and other non-
bank financial institutions, are giving their maximum contribution, if they suffice with fulfilling rigorously 
some quantitative mandatory requirements of the law, and not focusing also on some non-mandatory 
but  very  important  requirements.  For  example,  a  very  low  number  of  suspicious  transactions  is 
currently  reported  at  Anti  Money  Laundering  Directorate  (FIU),  while  the  number  of  reports  about 
transactions  above  the  threshold  required  by  law,  is  huge.  In  this  instance  banks  are  acting  in 
accordance with the law requirements, but are not in compliance with spirit of the law. As we all agree 
that  it  is  impossible  for  the  banks  to  totally  know  and  guarantee  for  the  cleanness  of  each  of  their 
clients, then we must accept the fact that the lacking of suspicious transactions reports means that the 
bank: 
• 
has difficulties in setting up its structures to ensure the real analysis of the risk profile of its 
client; 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
  doesn’t  have  a  good  understanding  of  the  problem  and  has  been  adopting  formalism  in 
fulfilling the law requirements; 
is not taking a proactive role, to understand other relevant institutions difficulties and to come 
forward with reasonable and acceptable solutions, in accordance with the spirit of the law. 
If a bank has chosen to act in formalism and if this gets a widespread adoption in the entire financial 
system, I think we really risk that this approach be counterproductive to the financial industry firstly. It 
would be somehow normal in this instance to think about lowering the minimum threshold required by 
law, as a possible solution to avoid formalism and to capture potential cases of ML that lie below the 
current threshold. Hence, we risk imposing on ourselves a development with a much higher cost of 
compliance and potentially more formalism, when we consider the difficulties that exist in analysing the 
reported information in AML Directorate. 
In this context, I would like to highlight that formalism in terms of law implementation is unacceptable 
and harmful. In this case formalism is based on task performance and makes the control structures 
become dormant or inhibits their positive progress. So it is crucial that the law itself and regulations be 
as  clear  and  implementable  as  possible  in  order  to  establish  confidentiality  and  facilities  in  their 
implementation process.    
Passing  in  the  definition  of  the  risk  profile  of  the  client,  is  the  only  way  that  would  permit  the 
compliance with the spirit of the law. This approach is based on a sound “know your client” policy of 
the bank, which should be a standard requirement nowadays. This approach has several advantages, 
where one could mention improved capabilities on tightening the system to prevent or detect cases of 
ML. Furthermore, it allows better distribution and focus of financial and human resources, resulting in a 
lowering  of  compliance  costs.  At  the  same  time,  it  allows  those  institutions  responsible  for 
implementing  the  law  and  analysing  the  information,  to  focus  on  the  full  investigation  of  those 
transactions that represent higher risk of being ML. 
Another  delicate  issue  that  I  would  to  stress  on  in  my  speech  is  keeping  and  protecting  the 
confidentiality  on giving  and  managing  the  information  on  suspicious  transactions.  Our practice has 
shown that problems with this issue are complex. We have had cases of confidential information being 
public  in  the  press,  the  next  day  they  were  filed.  In  another  case,  the  employees  of  a  bank  that 
reported a suspicious transaction, were called and probed in the prosecutor office as being those the 
persons of actually being involved in ML. The reporting subjects and the institutions that implement the 
law, must define among each other certain procedures that would eliminate the occurrence of such 
case  and  that  ensure  the  protection  of  confidentiality  of  the  persons  that  have  filed  the  suspicious 
reports. As long as this element is not totally ensured, any other discussion on the matter risks being a 
purely theoretical one, without much practical values. 
In  conclusion,  as  a  Governor,  I  must  say  that  I  would  encourage  a  better  cooperation  among  the 
institutions that are subject or that implement the law on AML. At the same time, Bank of Albania as 
the supervisory institution of its licensees will promote a stronger contribution by banks in Anti Money 
Laundering  requirements  implementation.  In  exerting  our  function,  we  shall  not  be  limited  to  the 
verification  of  the  existence  and  the  functioning  of  the  internal  structures  and  procedures,  but  will 
deepen  further  on  assessing  the  support  the  management  structures  of  the  banks,  give  to  the  real 
implementation of the AML internal policies. 
The position of a central bank is, according to the law, very comfortable, but playing the proactive role 
of  a  responsible  central  bank,  showing  the  concrete  implementation  of  this  responsibility,  we  will 
intensify our efforts together with the other actors of interest to enable a better implementation of the 
law on money laundering prevention.  
Allow me to close this speech, thanking the co-organisers of this workshop, the Tirana office of FSVC 
and the Albanian Association of Banks. I thank in particular all the specialists of the commercial banks 
and of the non-bank financial institutions that took part in this seminar, for their valuable contribution 
on preventing money laundering in their institutions. I thank particularly the foreign experts, Mr. Farrell 
and Mr. Burnside, that accepted to share with us their valuable experience. I wish this workshop has 
also been for them an interesting event. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
