Alan Greenspan: China 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Finance, US Senate, Washington DC, 23 June 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on 
China’s trade and exchange rate regime. I would emphasize that the views I will express are my own 
and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. 
Some  observers  mistakenly  believe  that  a  marked  increase  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  Chinese 
renminbi (RMB) relative to the U.S. dollar would significantly increase manufacturing activity and jobs 
in the United States. I am aware of no credible evidence that supports such a conclusion. 
The enhanced integration of China into the world trading system is having a notable effect on Asia’s 
trade with the rest of the world and on trade within Asia. After having risen rapidly through the 1990s, 
U.S. imports from Asia excluding China have flattened since 2000. This has occurred as production 
within  Asia  has  evolved,  with  the  final  stages  of  assembly  and  exporting  to  the  United  States  and 
elsewhere  becoming  increasingly  concentrated  in  China.  As  a  consequence,  because  exports  by 
country are recorded on a gross basis rather than as value added, the widening of the United States’ 
bilateral trade deficit with China, measured gross, has largely been in lieu of wider deficits with other 
Asian economies, including Japan. Measured by value added, our bilateral deficits with China would 
have been far less, and our bilateral deficits with other Asian exporters would have been far more. 
Accordingly, an increase in the exchange rate of the RMB, relative to the dollar, would likely redirect 
trade  within  Asia,  reversing  to  some  extent  the  patterns  that  have  emerged  during  the  past  half 
decade. However, a revaluation of the RMB would have limited consequences for overall U.S. imports 
as well as for U.S. exports that compete with Chinese products in third markets. Such a revaluation 
would affect Chinese value added but not the dollar cost of intermediate goods imported into China 
from the rest of Asia, which represents a significant share of the gross value of Chinese exports to the 
United States and elsewhere. (To the extent that exporters to China revalued as well, of course, the 
impact on overall Asian exports would be somewhat greater.) 
The broad tariff on Chinese goods that has recently been proposed, should it be implemented, would 
significantly  lower  U.S.  imports  from  China  but  would  comparably  raise  U.S.  imports  from  other 
low-cost  sources  of  supply.  At  only  slightly  higher  prices  than  prevail  at  present,  U.S.  imports  of 
textiles, light manufactures, assembled computers, toys, and similar products would in part shift from 
China  as  the  final  assembler  to  other  emerging-market  economies  in  Asia  and,  perhaps,  in  Latin 
America as well. Few, if any, American jobs would be protected. 
More  generally,  any  significant  elevation  of  tariffs  that  substantially  reduces  our  overall  imports,  by 
keeping  out  competitively  priced  goods,  would  materially  lower  our  standard  of  living.  A  return  to 
protectionism would threaten the continuation of much of the extraordinary growth in living standards 
worldwide, but especially in the United States, that is due importantly to the post-World War II opening 
of global markets. Such an initiative would send the adverse message to our trading partners that the 
United  States,  while  accepting  the  benefits  of  broadened  world  trade,  is  not  willing  to  absorb  the 
structural adjustments that are often necessary. 
To maintain a rising standard of living, a dynamic economy such as ours requires a continual shifting 
of  resources  toward  the  most  up-to-date  technologies,  financed  not  only  by  savings  but  also 
importantly by the depreciation of increasingly obsolescent facilities. 
This highly dynamic process is mirrored in our labor markets, where jobs are constantly being created 
and destroyed at a rapid pace. New hires in the United States currently average more than a million 
per week, half resulting from voluntary job change. At the same time, during a typical recent week, 
about 150,000 workers are temporarily laid off and another 225,000 are subject to permanent job loss. 
Any effect of trade with China on U.S. employment is likely to be very small relative to the scale of job 
creation and job loss in our economy. 
A policy to dismantle the global trading system in a misguided effort to protect jobs from competition 
would redound to the eventual detriment of all U.S. job seekers, as well as of millions of American 
consumers.  Policy  should  aim  to  bolster  the  well-being  of  job  losers  through  retraining  and 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
unemployment  insurance,  not  to  stave  off  job  loss  through  counterproductive  efforts  to  impede  the 
process of income-enhancing international trade and globalization. 
 While the presumption that a revaluation of the RMB will notably increase jobs in the United States by 
constraining imports or expanding exports is without statistical or analytical support, it is nonetheless 
the case that a more flexible RMB would be helpful to China’s economic stability and, hence, to world 
and  U.S.  economic  growth.  Rapid  accumulation  of  foreign,  largely  dollar,  reserve  holdings  by  the 
People’s Bank of China, China’s central bank, as a consequence of support for the RMB could boost 
the growth of the money stock, with the accompanying risk of triggering upward pressure on inflation 
and a general overheating of the Chinese economy. 
The Chinese central bank’s issuance of liquidity management bonds to lessen potential increases in 
the  money  supply  created  by  foreign  asset  accumulation  has  accelerated  since  regular  issuance 
began in April 2003. Nonetheless, only about one-half of the increase in reserves over the past two 
years has been offset, with the remainder showing through as money growth. 
Because the Chinese financial system has considerable distance to go before achieving a satisfactory 
degree  of  soundness  and  flexibility,  sterilization  of  continuing  inflows  of  speculative  funds  will 
presumably become more difficult as the scale of these operations, already large, increases over time. 
In  spite  of  its  recent  improvements,  the  financial  system  of  China  is  still  inordinately  governed  by 
administrative  command  and  control.  Market  pricing  of  financial  instruments  is  still  accorded  only  a 
minor role. 
Financial markets, if left free to continuously reprice interest rates and asset values, will identify and 
respond  to  imbalances  far  sooner  than  a  system  based  on  administrative  edict.  In  market-based 
financial  pricing  systems,  automatic  adjustments  are  inherent.  But  in  a  highly  administered  system, 
supervisors can identify emerging imbalances only when these imbalances become visibly large and 
are already troublesome. Adjustment in a system requiring human intervention is accordingly far less 
flexible than in a system based on the automaticity of markets. Given this vulnerability to emerging 
imbalances,  the  buildup  of  ever-larger  holdings  of  bonds  resulting  from  sterilization  of  foreign 
exchange  purchases  poses  threats  to  China’s  financial  stability.  Hence,  the  sooner  the  Chinese,  in 
their  own  self-interest,  move  to  a  more  flexible  currency  regime,  perhaps  leading  other  Asian 
currencies to become more flexible as well, the better for all participants in the global trading system. 
 In  the  decades  ahead,  it  is  in  our  interest  and  that  of  the  global  economy  that  China  continue  to 
progress  toward  becoming  a  more  market-based,  productive,  and  dynamic  economy  in  which 
individual  initiative,  not  government  decisionmaking,  is  the  fundamental  strength  behind  economic 
activity. For our part, it is essential that we not put that outcome, or our future, at risk with a step back 
into protectionism. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2005
