Sir K Dwight Venner: The ECCU economy in 2004 and prospects for 2005 and 
beyond 
Presentation  by  Sir  K  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank,  St.  Kitts, 
25 January 2005. 
 Introduction 
Good Evening, Ladies, Gentlemen, and Fellow Citizens of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. 
On  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Council,  Board  of  Directors,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Eastern 
Caribbean Central Bank, I bring you greetings and best wishes for the New Year. 
I welcome this opportunity to address you on the economic performance of the CURRENCY UNION in 
2004, as well as to share with you the Bank’s views on the prospects we face in the year 2005 and 
beyond. 
We live in a fast changing environment characterised as the INFORMATION AGE. The political, social 
and  economic  development  of  the  international  community,  and  the  nations  which  belong  to  this 
community,  are  influenced  by  the  access  to  information.  Information,  because  of  the  revolution  in 
information technology and telecommunications, is now potentially more accessible to the public in its 
various forms, namely print, audio or video. The means of communication have also been expanded 
by  way  of  methods  such  as  newspapers,  radio  and  television,  the  internet,  and  public  and  private 
meetings. 
This new environment requires certain reciprocal responsibilities in a democratic society. Information 
made available to the public must be TIMELY, ACCURATE, and COMPREHENSIVE and every citizen 
must be sufficiently literate and motivated to access and make use of this information. This must be 
the  case  if  we  are  to  expand  our  range  of  choices,  and  make  suitable  decisions  involving  our  own 
welfare. 
Central  Banks,  and  the  ECCB  is  no  exception,  have  the  responsibility,  given  their  position  in  the 
economic  system,  to  provide  economic  and  financial  information  of  the  highest  quality  so  that  their 
governments,  business  enterprises,  trade  unions and  individuals can  make  well-informed decisions, 
which can facilitate economic growth and socio-economic development. 
On this note, I would like to make an appeal to governments, the private sector and the public, to work 
together to develop our statistical services so that we can have at our disposal, the kind and quality of 
information which will facilitate our development. In the case of the governments, this means allocating 
the necessary financial and human resources, so that timely, accurate and comprehensive statistics 
can be available, to enhance policy-making. In the case of the private sector and individuals, it implies 
providing  the  information  required  from  them  by  the  statistical  services,  in  a  timely  and  accurate 
manner, and supporting the call for the timely publication of this data. 
I conclude these opening remarks by stating simply that, information is the OXYGEN of all modern 
economies. 
The domain of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union 
As essential background to this presentation, it is necessary to identify the DOMAIN of the Eastern 
Caribbean Currency Union. It comprises eight countries, which have in common, the use of the EC 
dollar  as  their  currency.  These  countries  have  a  combined  area  of  1,163  square  miles,  with  a 
population  of  approximately  600,000  people.  The  total  output,  measured  by  the  Gross  Domestic 
Product (GDP) of the Union for 2004, was estimated at $8.8 billion, with a capita income of $14,844. 
The  total  exports  of  goods  and  services  for  2004  was  $4.5  billion.  Of  this  total,  commodities 
contributed twelve per cent, and tourism services sixty-three percent. 
The foreign exchange reserves of the ECCB provide a 96 per cent cover for the currency, well above 
the requirement of 60 per cent stipulated in the ECCB Agreement, 1983. 
The  currency  in  circulation  at  the  end  of  December  2004  was  $663  million,  while  the  commercial 
banking system held deposits of approximately $12 billion, and loans of over $8 billion.  
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
It is important to portray the concept and inclusiveness of the currency union through the aggregates I 
have highlighted, since these serve to illustrate that the whole is greater than the sum of its individual 
parts. One of the concrete and beneficial manifestations of this fact has been our ability to maintain the 
value  of  our currency  at  EC$2.7  to  the  US  dollar,  for  the  last  twenty-eight years,  despite  the  many 
difficulties faced by our member countries individually. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  we  examine  the  economic  performance  of  the  currency  union  in 
2004. 
The economic performance of the Currency Union in 2004 
Growth 
The  currency  union  experienced  positive  growth  for  2004  estimated  at  4.1  per  cent.  This  can  be 
attributed  to  the  performance  of  the  tourism  industry,  which  recorded  a  significant  increase  in  both 
stay-over and cruise-ship arrivals. Our analysis indicates that the performance of this sector was due 
to  increased  buoyancy  in  the  economies  of  our  major  tourist  markets,  namely  the  United  States  of 
America, the United Kingdom and Europe; the depreciation of the US dollar relative to sterling and the 
euro; intensified marketing efforts; and increased airlift. 
Banana  output  rebounded  during  the  year,  but  one  has  to  take  into  consideration  the  major  fall  in 
output  in  the  previous  year.  The  factors  which  contributed  to  this  improved  performance  were:  an 
increase in the acreage under cultivation, favourable weather, and investment targeted at improving 
quality and productivity. The other major agricultural export commodities had varying fortunes, as the 
output of nutmeg and cocoa increased, but sugar production fell. 
The construction  sector was buoyant  in  2004 as  investments  in  both  the public and  private  sectors 
increased. These investments covered such projects as airport construction, road building, residential 
and commercial buildings, hotel construction and refurbishment, and activities related to the tourism 
industry. 
The  manufacturing  sector  continued  the  sluggish  trend  it  has  been  experiencing  over  the  last  few 
years, as the sector continued to face competition from lower cost producers in other countries. 
Inflation 
Inflation, as measured by the change in the Consumer Price Index, showed increases in all member 
countries in 2004. These were triggered by higher prices for fuel, and the increasing scarcity of major 
commodities such as cement and building materials, as the China effect, that is, the rising demand for 
commodities by that country, impacted global price structures. 
Central governments’ fiscal operations 
With respect to the Central Governments’ fiscal operations, a current account deficit of $47 million was 
recorded  at  the  end  of  November  2004,  in  contrast  to  a  deficit  of  $61  million  in  the  corresponding 
period of 2003. 
Based on preliminary data, the total outstanding debt of the combined public sectors in the currency 
union  continued  to  increase  in  2004,  reflecting  higher  external  borrowings  by  central  governments. 
Debt  service  payments  have  risen  significantly,  and  increasing  debt  to  GDP  ratios  require  resolute 
action by governments, to bring them back in line with the agreed benchmarks set by the Monetary 
Council. 
Monetary aggregates 
Monetary  liabilities,  namely  currency  in  circulation  and  private  sector  deposits,  rose  during  2004  to 
over $8 billion at the end of December, reflecting the expansion in economic activity in the currency 
union. 
Domestic credit also increased during the year reflecting growth of six per cent in loans to the private 
sector. Liquidity in the commercial banking system remained at high levels during the course of the 
year. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
Notable events in 2004 
Three  notable  events  affected  our  member  countries  during  2004.  In  Dominica,  which  is  currently 
under  an  IMF  programme,  there  are  signs  of  significant  improvement  in  the  fiscal  accounts,  and  a 
return  to  positive  economic  growth.  In  Antigua  and  Barbuda,  a  change  of  government  after  almost 
three  decades,  has  been  accompanied  by  an  apparent  change  in  stance  towards  fiscal  policy  and 
debt management.  
In  Grenada,  the  devastation  wrought  by  Hurricane  Ivan  has  reversed  what  had  been  a  very  robust 
growth  performance  of  over  five  per  cent.  There  has,  however,  been  a  very  focused  approach  to 
reconstruction,  with  the  assistance  of  both  the  regional  and  international  communities.  This  should 
bear fruit in the coming years.  
All in all, 2004 can be described as a year of moderate growth, despite the major set back in Grenada. 
Prospects for 2005 and beyond 
Looking  to  2005  and  beyond,  one  has  to  make  certain  assumptions  about  the  prospects  and 
possibilities, given two alternative scenarios. In the first scenario, we can continue on our present path 
with the same policies and hope, that as in 2004, we will have favourable outcomes. The alternative 
scenario would be to pursue more active policies to lock in the gains from 2004, and to build on these 
to achieve some critical development objectives. 
Using  the  first  scenario,  the  prospects  are  that  growth  will  continue  to  be  positive,  based  on  a 
favourable  international  economic  environment,  and  continued  growth  in  tourism  and  construction 
activity. The prospects for the tourism industry look very promising, with increased activity in both the 
stay- over and cruise sectors. 
There are also a number of projects in both the public and private sectors that are linked to the tourism 
sector directly, or are derived secondarily from activities in this industry.  
There  is,  however,  an  urgent  need  for  the  alternative  scenario  to  be  seriously  considered,  as  the 
currency union is faced with major challenges from both external and domestic factors, which could 
threaten the continuation of growth. 
The external factors which could affect us would include: high oil prices, an increase in international 
interest  rates,  the  impact  of  changes  in  trade  regimes such as  those connected with  the  WTO,  the 
FTAA,  the  European  Union,  and  the  CSME,  and  the  performance  of  the  US  dollar  against  other 
international currencies. 
The domestic factors would be the fiscal and debt issues, and the need for increased productivity and 
competitiveness. 
The countries of the ECCU need to revisit the five objectives set by the OECS Authority in November 
2002. These are - 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A growth rate of six per cent; 
A reduction in unemployment levels to at least six per cent; 
A reduction in poverty levels to at least six per cent; 
The maintenance and improvement of their Human Development Indices; and 
The  transformation  of  the  economies  into  highly  productive,  adaptable  and  competitive 
entities. 
The  Authority  identified  a  number  of  policy  instruments  which  were  available  to  facilitate  the 
achievement of these objectives. They included– 
• 
• 
• 
The OECS Authority has also agreed that its member countries should – 
• 
Monetary and Fiscal Policies; 
Incomes and Structural Policies; and 
Trade and International Economic Relations Policies. 
Increase the levels of functional cooperation; 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 3
  Move  to  higher  levels  of  economic  integration,  through  the  establishment  of  an  economic 
union; and 
Facilitate  these  two  processes  by  revising  the  Treaty  of  Basseterre,  to  establish  closer 
political union among the member countries. 
These matters raise interesting challenges for our countries to become and remain competitive in a 
rapidly  globalising  world  in  which  countries  and  regions  are  discussing  and  entering  into  closer 
economic  and  functional  cooperation  arrangements.  Such  trends  towards  closer  cooperation  have 
manifested  themselves  in  the  European  Union,  between  the  major  states  of  West  Africa,  in  Latin 
America and in Asia. 
The countries of the currency union and the OECS have already achieved a high level of integration 
with a common judiciary, a common currency and central bank, joint foreign representation, a common 
directorate  of  civil  aviation,  pharmaceutical  procurement,  telecommunications  regulation,  banking 
regulation, and close collaboration in health, education and security matters. 
The point, which is being made here, is that most countries have realised the necessity for some form 
of closer collaboration in addressing the global challenges which lie ahead. Our countries, which are 
among the smallest in the international community, and which have already made substantial progress 
in this area, must increase the level of collaboration significantly. They must then use the increase in 
size and critical mass as a platform for maintaining the current rate of growth, addressing the pressing 
fiscal and debt problems, and restructuring the economies to make them more competitive so that they 
are capable of sustaining high rates of growth over long periods of time. 
The  achievement  of  a  consistent  level  of  real  growth  at  the  six  per  cent  level  would  be  critical  for 
increasing income levels, lowering unemployment and reducing poverty. 
Under  the  umbrella  of  a wider  economic  and  financial space within  the currency  union,  it  would  be 
easier  to  effect  public  sector  reform,  financial  sector  reform,  and  private  sector  development. 
Significant investments could be made in the health and education sectors and social safety nets. The 
tourism industry would seem to be the major catalyst for growth, which would be most effective if the 
linkages  could  be  made  with  agriculture  and  light  manufacturing.  Finance,  and  information  and 
communication technology will be critical sectors, representing high technology activities, which would 
complement and be supportive of the traditional sectors. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, one could state that the prospects for 2005 and beyond are challenging, but quite within 
the  capabilities  of  our  countries,  if  we  apply  the  appropriate  version  of  the  alternative  scenario. 
However, it is necessary for our progress, that all sections of our community - the government, private 
sector  and  citizens  -  accept  their  specific  responsibilities  in  this  regard.  The  governments  have  the 
responsibility for providing the environment in which economic and social development can take place, 
and the rights of individuals are protected. The private sector, particularly in this new era, to produce 
goods and services, which are internationally competitive. The citizens, to participate in political, social 
and economic activities, which lead to the development of the society. 
There are two particular examples I would want to bring to your attention. First, in the demands made 
by citizens on governments, we must be aware of the fact that these are financed by taxation on the 
public. Second, in the case of loans made by banks, we must realise that these are made out of the 
deposits of other citizens.  
We need to have a knowledgeable and responsible community which, in the face of the challenging 
domestic  and  external  environment,  makes  judicious  and  objective  choices,  to  achieve  our  ultimate 
goal which is the welfare of our people. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2005
