Lucas Papademos: What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member 
countries (opening remarks) 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB 
Workshop  “What  effects  is  EMU  having  on  the  euro  area  and  its  member  countries?”,  Frankfurt, 
16 June 2005. 
 Introduction 
When the ECB started organising this workshop a year ago, we thought that addressing the question 
of  the  workshop’s  title  would  provide  a  necessary  stocktaking  and  useful  analysis  of  the  effects  of 
EMU  on  the  euro  area  and  its  member  countries,  6½ years  after  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency. Recent developments and debates have shown that the impact of EMU on the euro area 
countries  is  a  very  topical  issue  indeed.  Officials,  economists  and  commentators  have  sought  to 
analyse the pertinent issues and tried to answer the question of this conference. And some of them 
have  come  to  conclusions  which  my  colleagues  in  the  Governing  Council  have  called  “absurd”, 
“nonsensical” or implying “economic suicide” – and rightly so. This debate has sometimes risked being 
fairly long on polemics and rather short on arguments. With this workshop, to which I would like to 
welcome  you  all,  we  can  bring  to  this  discussion  some  solid  facts,  sound  arguments  and  a  better 
understanding of the manifold issues involved.  
The debate on these issues has often been couched in terms of two key concepts, “convergence” and 
“heterogeneity” (which do, however, need clearer definitions), and the relationship between the two. 
On the one hand, further integration of labour, product and capital markets can be expected to reduce 
economic heterogeneity within the euro area. On the other hand, some degree of heterogeneity can 
be  expected  to  remain  and,  indeed,  it  can  be  considered  a  natural  feature  of  any  monetary  union. 
These propositions raise several important questions, for example: 
• 
• 
What kind of convergence processes has EMU set in motion? 
To  what  extent  has  EMU-induced  convergence  moderated  economic  heterogeneity  within 
the euro area? 
What  are  the  causes  and  consequences  of  sometimes  sizeable  and  in  some  cases 
persistent inflation and output growth divergences across different euro area countries, in a 
macroeconomic environment shaped by the ECB’s monetary policy, which aims to preserve 
price stability for the euro area as a whole?  
 These questions, which will be addressed in this workshop, relate to diverse but interrelated issues, 
such  as  trade  integration,  business cycle  synchronisation,  financial  integration,  structural  reforms  in 
product and labour markets, as well as inflation persistence and inflation differentials. I believe that the 
quality  of  the  papers  to  be  presented  and  the  impressive  group  of  discussants,  chairpersons  and 
panellists will contribute to fruitful debates. 
Looking at the titles of the various sessions of the workshop, I would like to share some thoughts with 
you on three specific topics. The first relates to the consequences of market integration for trade. The 
second, “closer to home” for a central banker, concerns inflation and output divergences across euro 
area countries and their implications for policy. The third pertains to the role of the euro in fostering 
reforms in product, labour and financial markets. 
The implications of the integration of goods, services and financial markets for trade 
The first topic – the effects of market integration on trade – is particularly interesting, as it raises a 
number of issues which sometimes seem to lead to puzzling results. First, the conclusions about what 
we  should  expect  as  the  trade  effects  of  deeper  integration  are,  in  part,  ambiguous  –  think,  for 
example,  of  the  effects  of  specialisation.  Increased  competition  achieved  by  deregulation  and  the 
completion of the single market, as well as cross-border price transparency due to the single currency, 
may foster higher sectoral or industry-specific specialisation. Greater sectoral specialisation, as well as 
increased  financial  integration,  should  lead  to  increases  in  trade  flows  within  the  euro  area.  At  the 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 1
same  time,  however,  if  increased  integration  were  to  lead  to  more  similar  economic  structures  and 
business cycles, this could weaken trade flows within the euro area.  
But even if the expected effects of integration are not as ambiguous, appearing instead to be rather 
straightforward, the evidence available thus far seems not to fully conform with the expectations. Take, 
for  example,  the  significant  progress  that  has  been  made  in  the  1990s  regarding  product  market 
reforms,  which  had  positive  effects  on  the  integration  and  the  degree  of  competition  in  goods  and 
services markets in the euro area. One could expect that easing regulations and fostering competition 
would  lead  to  higher  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  industries  concerned,  as  has  happened,  for 
example, in the telecommunications sector. Yet, over the past decade the euro area as a whole has 
experienced a decline in trend labour productivity growth.  
A number of other effects of integration on trade should also be looked at: for instance, whether labour 
regulations and taxation that hamper technological innovation could lead to a decline in exports within 
the  euro  area,  as well  as  resulting  in  lower  exports  from  the  euro  area  to  the  rest  of  the world.  As 
regards the latter effect, it appears that the product composition of euro area exports might involve 
risks  for  the  future  export  performance  of  the  euro  area,  if  the  under-specialisation  in  fast-growing 
high-tech  sectors  is  not  adequately  addressed.  Richard  Baldwin’s  paper  offers  a  very  useful  and 
comprehensive treatment of the issues related to the euro’s trade effects. And what he found – or did 
not find – should certainly provide fertile ground for a fruitful discussion in the first session.  
Inflation and growth divergences in the euro area and policy implications 
The  existence  of  divergences  in  growth  rates  and  inflation  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  associated 
challenges  posed  for  economic  policy  in  general,  and  the  single  monetary  policy  in  particular,  are 
issues that have been debated extensively and intensively since the creation of the euro. They have 
again been at the centre of public debate in recent months, partly as a result of the performance of the 
euro area economies over the past few quarters, and partly as a result of uncertainties and concerns 
deriving from the ratification process for the Constitutional Treaty. In this context, doubts have even 
been raised about the sustainability of the single currency. There are four key questions that should be 
addressed regarding this matter: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Are growth and inflation divergences a real problem in a monetary union? 
And, if so, how serious is the problem for the euro area? 
Are these divergences likely to get worse or likely to be self-correcting? 
What can be done to reduce these divergences and at the same time foster higher growth 
for the euro area as a whole? 
It  is  worth  recalling  that  growth  and  inflation  divergences  between  member  countries  are  a  natural, 
inevitable  phenomenon  in  any  large  monetary  union,  as  evidenced  by  the  experience  of  a 
long-established  one,  the  United  States.  And,  in  general,  they  may  reflect  both  structural  and 
conjunctural  factors  that  affect  differently  the  monetary  union’s  countries  or  regions.  Differences  in 
economic  structures  and/or  in  market  adjustment  mechanisms  across  member  countries  imply  that 
common  or  global  shocks  and  common  policies  will  have  different  effects  on  their  economies. 
Moreover, growth and inflation differentials may also reflect the impact of asymmetric shocks, fiscal 
policies  and  diverging  productivity  and  wage  developments.  Whether  such  divergences  create 
problems for the performance and functioning of a monetary union depends on their causes, size and 
persistence. 
What are the facts about the relative macroeconomic performances of euro area member countries? 
And what is the diagnosis about the causal factors and the underlying processes that explain them? I 
would like to point out two interesting facts that are contrary to popular perceptions. The first is that 
during the first six years since the creation of the euro, the growth and inflation differentials observed 
between  member  countries  have  not  been  greater  than  those  recorded  in  the  25  years  before  the 
establishment of EMU. On the contrary, according to some measures, the dispersion in growth rates 
has  recently  reached  a  historically  low  level.  The  second  fact  is  that  both  growth  and  inflation 
differentials in the euro area since the introduction of the euro have been broadly of the same order of 
magnitude as the corresponding differentials observed across regions and metropolitan areas in the 
United States. These facts would seem to suggest that, at least on the basis of size, the heterogeneity 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2005
observed in the macroeconomic performance of euro area member countries is not exceptional and 
thus need not be a cause of alarm. 
Nevertheless, there are certain other developments that suggest caution and point to the need for a 
deeper  and  more  comprehensive  analysis.  One  such  development  relates  to  the  significant  and 
persistent  divergences  in  measures  of  competitiveness  between  member  countries.  The  diverging 
competitiveness  is  a  consequence  of  various  factors  and  policies  as  well  as  of  market  adjustment 
mechanisms, which in some cases reflect rigidities in labour markets and the low degree of integration 
and  competition  in  certain  product  markets,  particularly  for  services.  The  persistence  of  these 
developments suggests that adjustment mechanisms are functioning slowly and that self-equilibrating 
forces  are  not  sufficiently  strong.  The  extent  and  the  cumulative  effects  of  differences  in 
competitiveness between some euro area countries raise concerns about their impact on growth. In 
addition, other factors – some exogenous, such as competitive pressures resulting from globalisation, 
and some internal, influencing consumer sentiment – affect economic activity and tend to compound 
the adverse effects of the erosion of competitiveness in some countries or partly offset the benefits 
from the increased competitiveness attained in other countries. 
A  better  understanding  of  the  factors  and  processes  that  determine  economic  fluctuations,  inflation 
persistence and competitiveness developments across the euro area countries will contribute to the 
diagnosis of the present situation and the assessment of future trends. Two papers in this workshop 
provide insights and useful results to this end. The extent of synchronisation of economic activity in 
Europe  is  examined  in  the  paper  by  Domenico  Giannone  and  Lucrezia  Reichlin,  which  evaluates 
long-run tendencies and cyclical fluctuations. Different growth trends may be due to different patterns 
of specialisation, which can be desirable within the monetary union provided that countries can share 
risk  through  capital  market  integration.  This  study  and  other  recent  research  show  that  European 
financial  integration  has  resulted  in  increasing  opportunities  to  share  risk.  The  paper  by  Ignazio 
Angeloni, Luc Aucremanne and Matteo Ciccarelli concentrates on determinants of inflation dynamics 
in different euro area countries, notably the evidence on the price-setting behaviour of firms and on 
factors explaining inflation persistence. A thorough analysis of aggregate inflation dynamics and of the 
inertia characterising core inflation is of direct relevance to the formulation of monetary policy and also 
contributes  to  the  diagnosis  of  the  causes  of  growth  fluctuations  and  of  the  high  unemployment  in 
Europe. 
One  general  conclusion  that  emerges  from  the  papers  prepared  for  this  workshop  is  that  the 
divergences observed  in  the  euro  area  are  fundamentally  the  consequence  of  structural and  not  of 
conjunctural factors – even if current divergences may also have been influenced to a certain extent 
by conjunctural events. The policy implication of this general diagnosis is that more economic reforms 
are needed to address the structural impediments to growth and the causes of growth and inflation 
divergences. Of course, structural reforms are not always easy to implement, they may be politically 
costly,  and  their  positive  effects  may  not  be  immediately  visible  –  which  makes  it  difficult  to 
communicate  them  and  convince  the  public  at  large  about  their  benefits.  Nevertheless,  only  the 
implementation  of  appropriate  economic  reforms  can  address  effectively  and  permanently  the  root 
causes of the euro area’s economic problems. Consequently, the focus of the public debate should be 
how  to  speed  up  the  reform  process  and  its  beneficial  effects  and  thus  strengthen  consumer  and 
business confidence. 
The role of the euro in fostering reforms in product, labour and financial markets 
Has  the  euro  been  of  help  in  pushing  the  reform  agenda?  At  the  time  of  the  launch  of  the  single 
currency, some observers had seen the euro as a “reform whip” that, together with the completion of 
the single market, would push in the direction of increased competition, higher productivity growth and 
greater market flexibility, which are essential for the smooth functioning of monetary union. After all, in 
a single currency area, the adjustment of domestic imbalances cannot be corrected by exchange rate 
policy any longer, but rather has to take place via prices and costs. The paper by Romain Duval and 
Jørgen  Elmeskov,  which  will  be  discussed  tomorrow,  will  provide  empirical  evidence  about  the 
determinants of the pace of the reform process. Our own ECB research, presented in the paper by 
Lorenzo  Cappiello,  Philipp  Hartmann,  Peter  Hördahl,  Arjan  Kadareja  and  Simone  Manganelli,  will 
dwell on the impact of the euro on the integration of European financial markets, notably the equity 
and bond markets. This stock-taking exercise and associated analysis should also assist in identifying 
where,  precisely,  structural  changes  are  most  urgently  needed  and  how  to  make  the  necessary 
reforms a success. 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 3
Concluding remarks 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy  have  established  an 
environment of price stability in the euro area. The ECB’s monetary policy has acquired credibility and 
has  succeeded  in  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations  to  price  stability,  thereby  exerting  a 
moderating  influence  on  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour.  Both  short-term  interest  rates  and 
long-term bond yields are at historically low levels in nominal and real terms. But, as we know, price 
stability  and  favourable  financing  conditions  establish  necessary  but  not  sufficient  conditions  for 
sustainable  growth.  There  is  still  some  way  to  go  in  terms  of  the  implementation  of  the  necessary 
structural  reforms  that  will  result  in  faster  and  durable  growth  in  the  euro  area,  through  higher 
productivity growth, increased labour utilisation, and improved competitiveness in the global economy. 
Which brings me to a final reflection, opening up a broader perspective. 
The  issues  to  be  discussed  in  this  workshop  should  also  be  seen  against  the  background  of 
globalisation. The forces and dynamics of globalisation influence economic developments in the euro 
area  (for  instance  through  pressures  on  firms’  cost  structures)  and  also  have  an  impact  on  the 
integration process that has been triggered by the euro. Of course, it is not easy to disentangle the 
effects of globalisation on the European integration process from those which stem from the creation 
of  the  single  currency.  However,  both  processes  call  for  mechanisms  that  facilitate  the  economy’s 
efficient adjustment so as to cope with the challenges of a constantly changing environment for firms, 
consumers  and  policy-makers.  All  of  which  reinforces  the  urgency  to  pursue  the  structural  reform 
agenda in the euro area in a determined and systematic manner. With this wider-ranging reflection, I 
conclude.  Once again,  welcome  to  this ECB  workshop.  I  can rationally  predict  that  it  will be  a  very 
productive and enriching one. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2005
