Sunil Mendis: Creating a challenging and stimulating work environment 
New  Year  Message  2005  by  Mr  Sunil  Mendis,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  to  all 
employees of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 1 January 2005. 
 I issue this traditional New Year message at a time when the whole of Sri Lanka has been engulfed by 
a  national  tragedy  caused  by  “tsunamis”  that  hit  the  country  on  26th  December,  2004.  I  take  this 
opportunity to express our deepest condolence to the members of the families of bank employees who 
have lost their lives and to our employees and their loved ones who have suffered by this calamity. At 
the same time, I wish to share the sorrows of those employees who have lost their property. Words 
are insufficient but hope that they would move forward from this tragedy. 
With the magnitude of the disaster, there is no question that our nation needs to be rebuilt. Hence, as 
employees of a state organization which is at the apex of the country’s financial system, we have an 
invaluable task to perform. In this context, I place my message before you with the plea that we take 
part in the nation-building task by offering our maximum efforts. I have been greatly encouraged by the 
positive response which all the employees have demonstrated towards the provision of relief to victims 
and rebuilding of the nation. 
You would recall that in my first message to you on assuming the office of the Governor of the Central 
Bank on the 01st July 2004, I stated that I was deeply conscious of the great honour attached to my 
appointment to  this  august  post.  Now,  I  address  you  with  6  months’  experience  at  the  helm  of  this 
unique institution which is responsible for safeguarding the price stability and the country’s banking 
and payments system. 
During the last decade, the staff of the Central Bank faced several traumatic events and challenging 
situations.  The  Central  Bank  bomb  blast,  which  took  away  the  lives  of  41  employees  and  caused 
injuries  to nearly  1000  employees,  was  the  most  traumatic event.  However,  I  understand  that  even 
those seriously injured joined the unaffected employees to offer their best efforts to the Bank and as a 
consequence, the Bank was in a position to resume normal work without an interruption within a short 
period  of  time.  This  reflects  the  resilience  of  our  staff.  Thereafter,  the  Bank  was  subject  to  a 
modernization and restructuring scheme. A major feature of the restructuring process was the offering 
of a Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) for certain categories of the Staff at the end of 2001. Around 
a  third  of  our  staff  opted  for  the  VRS  and  left  the  Bank.  As  a  result,  all  of  you  were  forced  to 
re-organize  your  work  practices,  automate  certain  functions  and  put  extra  effort  to  ensure  that  the 
output of the Bank would not suffer as a consequence of the lower staff strengths. Although this would 
have caused problems at the initial stage, I believe that you managed to cope admirably in the face of 
this challenge. 
As you are aware, the Central Bank’s focus and functions have evolved over the years in response to 
changes in the economic environment. In keeping with trends in Central Banking around the world, the 
objectives  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  were  streamlined  by  amending  the  Monetary  Law  Act 
(MLA)  in  2002  which  defined  the  Bank’s  core  objectives  and  freed  it  from  the  multiple  objectives 
originally assigned to it. Accordingly, the Central Bank now pursues the core objectives of economic 
and price stability (through appropriate monetary policy) and financial system stability (mainly through 
its role as a supervisor and regulator of the financial sector). The Central Bank accordingly will, over 
time, devolve some of its other functions including agency functions to other institutions. However, it 
still has a major role to play in the interim to build up capabilities of the institutions earmarked to take 
over the functions performed by the Bank at present. Also, it is expected that there would be a further 
outsourcing of administrative and ancillary functions of the Central Bank. 
With the change in the MLA, the organizational structure of the Central Bank has undergone a major 
transformation on a function-oriented basis to support its objectives and functions. The Departments of 
the  Bank  were  grouped  into  four  major  categories  under  the  headings  of  price  stability,  financial 
system  stability,  agency  services,  and  corporate  and  support  services.  The  two  Deputy  Governors 
have been entrusted with the responsibility of overseeing the achievement of the two core functions. 
The  vacancies  to  the  posts  of  Assistant  Governors  (AGs)  have  been  filled  and  they  have  been 
entrusted with line responsibilities with a view to building the 3rd and 4th layers of succession in the 
Bank’s managerial hierarchy. 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 1
Price Stability means maintaining a low inflation rate. Central banks are mandated to maintain price 
stability as their main objective in order to create a conducive environment for long-term sustainable 
economic  growth  by  eliminating  uncertainties,  protecting  the  value  of  financial  assets,  enabling  all 
economic agents to take a long-term view of the economy and ensuring the well being of the general 
public. Maintaining price stability during the course of 2005 will prove to be a very challenging task 
given the surging oil prices, which may continue for some time during the year, and the enhancement 
of  demand  pressure  on  the  price  level  on  account  of  wage  increases  in  the  government  sector. 
Therefore, the central bank would have to fine-tune its monetary policy measures to provide adequate 
liquidity  to  support  economic  growth,  while  avoiding  the  build-up  of  inflation  and  inflationary 
expectations. 
Financial  Stability  means  ensuring  the  effective  functioning  of  the  financial  system  and  avoiding 
banking,  currency  and  payment  crises.  The  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  essential  for  the 
attainment and maintenance of price stability, building confidence of the public in the financial system, 
mobilizing savings and allocating them to the most productive uses. For this purpose, it is necessary to 
ensure a stable macro-economic environment, an effective regulatory framework, organized financial 
markets,  sound  financial  institutions  and  a  safe  and  robust  payment  infrastructure.  In  order  to 
strengthen the supervisory mechanism on banks and non-bank financial institutions, action has been 
initiated  to  establish  a  closer  dialogue  with  auditors  and  senior  management  of  such  financial 
institutions. 
With regard to work practices, during my first few months, I have instituted certain changes which I feel 
would serve not only to reduce the stress on the senior management but also to create a stimulating 
and challenging environment for work for all the categories of employees. 
The Central Bank is a prestigious institution, which is considered a model employer and is therefore, in 
a  position  to  recruit  the  cream  of  talent  passing  out  of  universities  and  professional  bodies.  The 
number and quality of aspirants for Central Bank employment reflect this. Over the years, it has built 
up  a  reservoir  of professional  talent,  which  has been  used  by  the  Government  and  by  international 
agencies  and  foreign  banks  for  the  performance  of  both  advisory  and  operational  functions.  Young 
central bankers have served with distinction both in Sri Lanka and abroad in various capacities. Their 
talents need to be further enhanced and they should be entrusted with responsibilities commensurate 
with  their  abilities.  Therefore,  I  feel  that  there  is  considerable  scope  for  further  delegation  of 
responsibilities in the Central Bank. As mentioned in my very first message I believe that our staff 
must be empowered to reach their optimum capacity which would enable them to give of their 
best. Through the process of empowerment staff in the bank would be able to play a major role in the 
banks operations. 
To  make  the  best  use  of  the  available  talent,  it  is  necessary  to  institute  a  continuous  process  of 
appraisal,  training  and  development.  The  Department  of  Human  Resource  Development  has 
already  collected  a  vast  amount  of  data  on  the  preferred  career  paths  of  officers,  job  descriptions 
pertaining to various posts, and goal statements of the various Departments of the Central Bank. They 
also have information on the existing skill deficiencies. Therefore, they are now in a position to identify 
the officers whose abilities and potential match each job. In this process, it may not always be possible 
to place officers in their preferred career paths given the training and experience already acquired by 
such  officers.  The  Training  Department  would  have  to  provide  the  requisite  training  to  address  skill 
deficiencies on an urgent basis. Training should also be a continuous process of skill development to 
meet global and technical challenges as well as those emanating within the Sri Lankan economy. In 
order to create a learning culture, it is necessary for the employees to take the initiative to enhance 
their  knowledge  and  skills  through  self-study  and  also  through  participating  in  relevant  seminars, 
workshops etc. In the future the Training Department would provide all assistance and even sponsor 
such  events.  The  Training  Department  is  also  in  the  process  of  preparing  a  more  comprehensive 
training plan for the entire Bank based on training needs information furnished by each Department. I 
should  also  mention  that  I  have  already  advised  the  Training  Department  to  take  steps  to  ensure 
greater transparency in the training policy of the Bank. 
Once  duties  are  delegated  and  personnel  empowered,  it  is  up  to  the  persons  entrusted  with  such 
duties to take up the responsibilities thrust on them and strive for excellence when performing such 
duties. A fair and just performance appraisal scheme will be put in place to evaluate the effectiveness 
of  performance.  The  aim  of  the  performance  evaluation  scheme,  the  reward  scheme  and  the 
promotion scheme would be to ensure that the best and brightest are promoted and rewarded. The 
management also intends to implement a Bank-wide job rotation scheme in the New Year. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2005
Another factor that needs to be reminded is that most tasks in the Central Bank are the outcome of 
teamwork. I have found instances where teamwork has been poor with only a few persons doing the 
bulk  of  work.  It  is  necessary  to  build  positive  team  relationships  within  the  Bank  and  encourage 
co-operation between individuals and functional areas to achieve team goals. One of the intentions of 
sending  the  senior  and  middle  management  of  the  Central  Bank  on  “Outward  Bound”  leadership 
training programmes  was to  promote  the  team  building  capabilities  among  the  management  and  to 
expose the participating officers to situations which require strategic planning on a team level. I am 
sure those who participated in the “Outward Bound” programmes would agree that they have gained 
new insights on working as teams through their participation. We intend to send staff at all levels on 
such programmes in the future. 
I  also  wish  to  request  all  Trade  Unions  of  the  Bank  to  extend  their  fullest  co-operation  to  the 
management  to  create  a  stimulating  work  environment  in  which  employees  would  be  able  to 
advance in knowledge and acquire the necessary skills to meet challenges and effectively fulfill their 
responsibilities thereby transforming the Bank into a center for excellence with enhanced productivity 
and staffed with competent professionals. Towards this end, I would encourage the staff to have better 
exposure to the developments in the real sector. I have also reiterated the importance of dealing 
with  the  employees  in  a  fair  and  equitable  manner.  The  management  on  its  part  is  ready  to 
listen  to  the  employee  grievances  and  problems  but  I  would  encourage  you  to  also  make 
innovative  suggestions  to  address  these  grievances  and  solve  problems.  At  the  same  time,  I 
wish to emphasize the importance of displaying your loyalty and commitment to this institution at all 
times. 
Finally, I wish that all of you would get the strength and determination to overcome all the bottlenecks 
and hindrances before you in the New Year. 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 3
