Niklaus Blattner: New banknotes project of the Swiss National Bank 
Speech by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 2 February 2005. 
 Introduction 
The Swiss National Bank is obliged by the Constitution and by statute to pursue a monetary policy 
serving  the  interests  of  the  country  as  a  whole.  This  includes  ensuring  the  supply  of  cash.  The 
National Bank thus has the exclusive right to issue banknotes. Along with this right comes the task of 
creating new banknote series if necessary. 
A new banknote series as a precautionary measure 
Why does the National Bank at this point in time start with the preparations for a new banknote series? 
After  all,  the  current  banknotes  were  introduced  not  that  long  ago,  between  1995  and  1998.  Their 
design  quality  is  very  high  and  they  meet  contemporary  requirements.  In  addition,  they  are  still 
adequately protected against counterfeiting. And last but not least: is it really worth investing in the 
preparation of a new banknote series for Switzerland at a time when our country is surrounded by a 
single currency, the euro? 
Although our country's accession to the European Union (EU) does not seem to be an issue at the 
moment, it can by no means be ruled out in the future. An accession would probably also result in the 
adoption  of  the  euro,  ie  Swiss  banknotes  might  become  obsolete.  At  the  present  point  in  time, 
however, we know neither if nor when such an accession scenario will become a reality. But even in 
the event that accession negotiations with the EU were started relatively soon, for example as early as 
2008, and proceeded rather swiftly, transition periods would still apply. Even if such negotiations were 
concluded  as  early  as  2011,  for  example,  and  if  they  entailed  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  Swiss 
banknotes  would  remain  in  circulation  at  least  until  2015.  The  National  Bank  is  thus  compelled  to 
tackle  the  development  of  new  banknotes  as  a  precautionary  measure.  This  step  has  become 
necessary because of the development of new technologies and the typically high demands on the 
design  quality  of  Swiss  banknotes.  Both  aspects  necessitate  an  adequate  preparation  period.  Our 
current decision to intensify the preliminary work already under way was decisively influenced by the 
awareness that the work can be halted at any time, whereas it is impossible to initiate it or catch up on 
it within a short period. The National Bank's decision must, therefore, not be mistaken for a statement 
on its European policy; it is solely a precautionary measure. 
Banknote security 
With progress being made in counterfeiting technology, a note-issuing bank, which has to ensure the 
security  of  its  banknotes,  must  always  strive  to  maintain  a  technological  advantage  over 
counterfeiters,  or  copy  machines  and  scanners.  This  need  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  security 
features  previously  reserved  for  banknotes  are  nowadays  increasingly  being  used  to  protect  such 
items  as  security  documents,  drugs  and  brand  products.  As  a  result,  the  know-how  in  security 
technology at the producer level is becoming trivialised and more prevalent. An increasing number of 
persons in more and more countries possess some elements of the security know-how that has so far 
been typically used for banknotes. This also poses a potential risk to the security of banknotes. 
It was notably the progress made in counterfeiting technology that, over the decades, lowered the life 
span of a banknote series from forty to around fifteen years. The life span could become even shorter 
in the future. Formerly, a counterfeiter mainly had to be a skilful artisan. Nowadays, counterfeits are 
produced  not  only  by  experts,  but  increasingly  by  laypersons  using  colour  copy  machines,  colour 
printers, and scanners. The dissemination of PCs and low-priced, yet qualitatively excellent scanners 
and printers today enables virtually anybody to produce good counterfeits at low cost and effort. The 
six  well-known  security  features  on  our  banknotes  are  still  difficult  to  counterfeit,  though,  and  the 
   1/3 
public can easily verify whether the banknotes are genuine. Moreover, we have updated the currently 
valid banknote series with regard to security technology as far as this was possible and reasonable. 
The  perforated  number  (microperforation),  for  example,  which  was  initially  used  only  for  the  large 
denominations of CHF 100, CHF 200 and CHF 1,000, has been applied to all the existing banknote 
denominations since the 2000 issue. We cannot rule out the possibility, however, that one day - given 
the progress being made in counterfeiting technology - some of the currently used security features 
could  be  imitated.  For  this  reason,  we  have  to  resort  to  state-of-the-art  technologies  and  visual 
phenomena  to  protect  our  banknotes.  As  it  is  a  long  way  between  the  development  of  such 
technologies  and  their  readiness  for  practical  application,  our  decision  to  develop  a  new  banknote 
series could not wait any longer. 
Theme of the new banknote series 
The  public  is  doubtlessly  more  interested  in  the  theme  and  design  of  new  banknotes  than  in  the 
security technology. For one thing, the motifs must be easy to perceive and remember. For another, 
banknotes serve as a kind of national showcase. The visual appearance of our banknotes must both 
satisfy aesthetic requirements and convey values that represent our country and that are shared by 
the Swiss people. 
Several design and communications experts were asked already some time ago to consider a theme 
for the new banknote series, and a number of proposals were submitted. The Governing Board of the 
National Bank decided on the theme “Switzerland open to the world” (“La Suisse ouverte au Monde”). 
This theme permits the depiction of a modern and internationally oriented country. Switzerland is to be 
represented as an entirety, as a country open to the rest of the world and also as a meeting place for 
the  world.  The  focus  should  not  be  on  any  individuals,  inventions  or  achievements.  Much  rather,  a 
basic  attitude  and  its  manifestations  should  be  conveyed:  Switzerland  as  a  platform  for  dialogue, 
progress,  humanitarian  commitment,  exciting  experiences,  creativity  and  the  search  for  practical 
approaches  to  solutions  within  organisations.  It  is  envisaged  that  these  topics  will  be  dealt  with 
through  the  lens  of  economics,  education,  research  and  development,  human  rights,  tourism  and 
recreation,  culture  and,  lastly,  sports.  Six  topics  have  to  be  depicted,  namely  the  activities  of 
negotiating and exchanging, teaching and researching, helping and mediating, enjoying and relaxing, 
creating and designing, and deciding and implementing. Each of these topics will be assigned to one 
denomination of the new banknote series. 
The artistic representation must emphasise the topics rather than specific events or institutions. The 
traditional portrayal of personalities and the depiction of institutions and previous achievements should 
be dispensed with. The illustration of a university, for example, should not serve as a self-portrayal but 
could symbolise “progress”. As previously, the banknote series should form a “family” both with regard 
to content and design. In other words, although each banknote type must have its own characteristics, 
they must at the same time share sufficient features to be easily recognised as part of the new series. 
Competition for ideas 
For  the  design  of  the  new  banknote  series,  a  competition  for  ideas  will  be  held  this  year.  Twelve 
graphic designers fulfilling the following requirements have been invited to participate: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
They are not older than 45 years of age.  
They are professionally active in Switzerland.  
They are familiar with the essential printing procedures.  
They have already demonstrated their creative and graphic skills.  
They dispose of adequate resources in terms of infrastructure and staff to ensure continuity, 
or are willing to build up such resources.  
They are willing to commit themselves to a long-term engagement.  
• 
In April 2005, a banknote seminar will be held for these designers to expand their knowledge of the 
subject matter. The seminar will also mark the beginning of the competition. The participants have to 
submit their drafts by 31 October 2005. A jury will assess the drafts and award prizes. At the end of 
November  2005,  the  drafts  will  be  presented  in  a  public  exhibition.  The  jury  will  be  chaired  by 
   2/3 
Jean-Christophe Ammann, an art historian, exhibition organiser and former director of the Museum of 
Modern Art in Frankfurt/Main, Germany, and will be composed of art and design experts. The National 
Bank may decide at its own discretion, however, with which designer it wishes to collaborate in the 
future. He or she may, but must not necessarily be one of the prize winners. 
 
   3/3 
