Xiang Junbo: The establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office 
Speech  by  Mr  Xiang  Junbo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  inauguration 
ceremony of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office, Shanghai, 10 August 2005. 
 Honorable General Secretary Chen, 
Honorable Mayor Han, 
Dear guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today, we are here to celebrate the inauguration ceremony of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai 
Head Office. The setup of the PBC Shanghai Head Office is an important decision made by the CPC 
Central  Committee  and  the  State  Council  to  further  improve  our  central  bank  system  in  the  new 
situation,  an  important  institutional  arrangement  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  central  bank  in  macro-
economic  management,  and  also  a  significant  initiative  facilitating  the  building  of  Shanghai  into  an 
international  financial  center.  Now  let  me,  on  behalf  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  express  our 
sincere  gratitude  to  all  departments  of  the  CPC  Central  Committee,  the  State  Council,  the  CPC 
Shanghai Committee, Shanghai Municipal Government and various social circles for your support in 
preparing the establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office. 
Since  China  adopted  the  reform  and  opening-up  policy,  and  with  the  gradual  improvement  of  the 
socialist market economy, the central bank system in China has been constantly improved. In 1984, 
the  State  Council  decided  to  have  the  PBC  function  as  a  central  bank.  The  Law  of  the  People's 
Republic of China on the People's Bank of China passed by the Third Plenum of the Eighth National 
People’s Congress in 1995 legally confirmed the PBC's central bank status. In 1998, the CPC Central 
Committee and the State Council decided to reform the administrative system of the central bank by 
dismantling  provincial  branches  and  setting  up  regional  branches,  which  further  strengthened 
independence of the central bank. As an integral part of the PBC Head Office, the Shanghai Head 
Office will operate under the guidance and authorization of the PBC Head Office in Beijing. Its major 
responsibilities include part of the central bank operational functions and some of the administrative 
functions. 
The establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office will help the central bank to further improve its 
decision-making  and  operational  system,  and  strengthen  its  macroeconomic  management  capacity. 
Since  China’s  accession  to  the  WTO,  China’s  opening  to  the  outside  world  has  escalated  and  the 
economy has become increasingly market-oriented. The consequent profound changes occurring in 
the  financial  industry  have  given  rise  to  higher  uncertainties  in  the  economic  and  financial 
development, posing new challenges to the central bank’s macro-economic capability. By shifting part 
of its operational functions to the PBC Shanghai Head Office and leaving the Head Office in Beijing 
with  decision-making  and  policy  formulation  responsibilities,  we  can  take  advantage  of  the  human 
resources  in Shanghai  to  build  a  team of  experts  good  at  central  bank operations,  financial  market 
analysis and financial products development, and form scientific and rational labor division in terms of 
policy  decision  procedure  and  administrative  methods,  so  as  to  further  strengthen  the  professional 
capacity of the central bank in macro-economic management. 
The establishment of PBC Shanghai Head Office will enable the PBC to take advantage of the direct 
access to financial markets to improve the role of the central bank in macro-economic management 
and financial services, particularly efficiency of financial market services. At present, the nation-wide 
unified inter-bank market, bond market, foreign exchange market as well as the gold market, futures 
market and Shanghai Stock Exchange are all located in Shanghai. These markets not only form the 
most  important  markets  where  financial  institutions,  enterprises  and  households  manage  financial 
assets and make investment, but also serve as the platform for the central bank to conduct market 
operations  and  implementing  macro-economic  management  policies.  Setup  of  the  PBC  Shanghai 
Head  Office  will  enable  the  PBC  to  obtain  first-hand  information  on  market  development  and  give 
feedback directly, accurately grasp the pulse of market development and conduct monetary operations 
and take fine-tuning measures in a timely and effective manner, so as to enhance the efficiency of 
macro-economic management and financial services. 
Establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office will expand the influence of Shanghai as a financial 
market  and  speed  up  the  building  of  Shanghai  as  an  international  financial  center,  which  is  an 
important  strategic  decision  made  by  the  CPC  Central  Committee  and  the  State  Council  from  the 
overall viewpoint of advancing China’s socialist modernization process. In the early 1990s, Mr. Deng 
Xiaoping said that China had to depend on the development of Shanghai to enhance the international 
competitiveness  of  its  financial  industry.  In  his  visit  to  Shanghai  in  July  2004,  President  Hu  Jintao 
called for continued efforts to make Shanghai an international center for global economic, financial, 
trade  and  marine  transportation  activities.  International  experiences  show  that  the  setup  of  central 
bank  headquarters  goes  hand  in  hand  with  development  of  international  financial  centers.  The 
opening  of  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office  will  facilitate  financial  innovation  and  financial  market 
development, give impetus to the development of commercial financial institutions, and enhance the 
influence of Shanghai as an international financial center on domestic financial sector and the financial 
development in the Asian-Pacific region.  
The  CPC  Shanghai  Committee,  Shanghai  Municipal  Government,  financial  regulatory  institutions  in 
Shanghai, and policy and commercial financial institutions have always supported the PBC in carrying 
out its work, which guaranteed the effective operation of the institutions of the PBC in Shanghai. The 
newly  founded  PBC  Shanghai  Head  Office  will  also  need  attention  and  support  from  all  of  you.  By 
making continued efforts to improve financial services, the PBC will seek to make new contributions to 
economic development and financial stability. 
Thank you! 
