Sunil Mendis: Financial system stability and Basel II - the way forward 
Inaugural address by the Chief Guest Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka,  at  the  17th  Anniversary  Convention  of  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka, 28 August 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  give  the  keynote  address  at  this  forum  of  eminent 
bankers in Sri Lanka and distinguished persons from the international banking arena.   I am 
happy to see our friends from the Reserve Bank of India and from the Basel Committee who 
will no doubt make this convention very lively for discussion on a subject which concerns us 
all.    
As Central Bankers we have a common interest in ensuring financial stability which impacts 
upon  the  macroeconomic  performance.    Further,  as  monetary  policy  transmission  takes 
place through the financial institutions for the achievement of its target of economic and price 
stability, the Central Bank has the responsibility for ensuring that the financial system as a 
whole is sound.  It should be strong enough to withstand internal and external shocks.   We 
must ensure that our payments and settlements system is protected from the risk of failure at 
any cost since it is the conduit through which our economic business and commercial activity 
is facilitated.  The causes and consequences of the recent Asian financial crises are still vivid 
in our minds and we from our part, as professional bankers, must endeavor to ensure that 
they are not repeated. 
The  Central  Banks  can  use  both  preventive  measures  and  corrective  action  to  maintain 
financial  stability.    A  constant  and continuous monitoring  of  risks  is  a  preventive  measure.  
Crisis resolution is a corrective action.  A strong regulatory regime would ensure the former 
and a financial safety net is an essential component of the latter.  The two supplement each 
other.    The  cooperation  of  all  parties  concerned  in  both  these  actions  is  of  paramount 
importance in maintaining financial system stability.   
In Sri Lanka, as in most emerging economies, we have a bank dominated financial system.  
Therefore,  ensuring  banking  soundness  will  inevitably  lead  to  financial  system  soundness.  
The  recent  initiatives  taken  in  this  regard  are  significant  –  we  have  enhanced  capital 
requirements to reflect the increased leverage in the industry.  Even regulatory capital is at a 
comfortable margin above the international norm but is still only 10% of risk assets which is 
the  absolute  minimum  should  these  risks  materialize.    Therefore,  increasing  the  minimum 
capital requirements would provide a healthy platform for growth and expansion of banking 
business.  However, capital is the last line of defence.  The more immediate needs are good 
corporate  governance  and  good  risk  management  which  will  steer  the  banking  system 
towards good financial health. 
A  sound  corporate  governance  regime  would  seek  to  promote  the  highest  standards  of 
professional  behaviour  and  integrity.  Policies  should  be  implemented  to  prohibit  any 
behaviour or relationship that diminishes its quality. This is very often evident in conflicts of 
interest,  connected  lending,  which  is  not  on  an  arms  length,  and  preferential  treatment  to 
related parties.  The independence of directors too is crucial where directors should have the 
ability  to  exercise  objective  judgement,  regardless  of  board  structures  or  ownership 
structures. 
Well  established  corporate  governance  committees  such  as  the  Board  Audit  Committee 
which  oversees  the  bank’s  internal  auditors,  with  objectivity  and  independence,  should 
   1/2 
comprise of non-executive members of the Board who have the requisite knowledge that is 
commensurate with the complex nature of the banking institution. 
Independent, competent and qualified auditors is an essential pre-requisite of good corporate 
governance which would achieve a number of important objectives.  It would ensure timely 
identification of risks and the publication of financial statements which accurately represent 
the financial position and performance of the bank.  Auditors should understand their duty to 
the bank and its stakeholders to exercise due professional care in the conduct of audits.  In 
this connection, we have, in the recent past, strengthened the relationship of auditors with 
the  regulator  and  the  company  to  benefit  from  each  others’  capabilities,  expertise  and 
knowledge.   
Basel II has attempted to capture all these critical aspects into the new accord.  A bank’s 
own  assessment  of  its  capital  needs,  coupled  with  the  regulator’s  assessment  of  the 
adequacy of capital, which would encompass all other aspects of its operations, apart from 
credit, would ensure adequate capital to insulate the bank against its risk exposure.  After all, 
managing risk is fast becoming the single most important issue for the regulators as well as 
for  the  institutions  that  are  regulated.    Therefore,  Basel  II  is  good  news  and  we  can  only 
benefit mutually from its adoption.  A roadmap is therefore already drawn up and we hope we 
can all commence our journey down this road to reach our goal of a safe and sound banking 
system resulting in financial stability which is what we all aspire. 
As you are all aware, our banking community is in the process of adopting the standardized 
approach within Basel II by 2007.  However, the major challenge faced by the banks in the 
next few years, are the IT, skills development and training that are required to implement the 
more advanced approach which relies heavily on quantitative techniques.  It is imperative, 
therefore, that banks start getting ready for this eventuality sooner, than later. 
Basel  II  should  not  be  looked  at  as  an  exercise  in  compliance  but  as  an  impetus  to  more 
efficient risk management across the banking sector.  Its benefits would be seen in the ability 
of the financial system, to promote sustainable economic growth which would be beneficial to 
the  banks,  the  central  bank  and  to  the  consumers  of  banking  business.  It  would  naturally 
require commitment of substantial capital and human resources from both the banks and the 
regulators.  We should all work together, therefore, to achieve these goals.  This should not 
only be the objective of the Central Bank as we are all guardians of financial stability – I trust 
this conference will provide an adequate forum for open discussion.  Thank you. 
 
   2/2 
