Kazumasa Iwata: Japan’s economy under demographic changes 
Summary of a speech by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Australia-
Japan Economic Outlook Conference, Sydney, 7 December 2004. 
The references can be found on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Japan  is  one  of  the  most  rapidly  ageing  countries  in  the  world.  The  ageing  process  has  been 
promoted by a lower fertility rate, preceded by a lower mortality rate and a higher life expectancy. This 
pattern  is  common  to  the  ageing  process  in  other  countries.  The  higher  life  expectancy  reflects 
improved living conditions, and thus can be regarded as a success in terms of economic development. 
It also implies the market expansion of new services for the elderly. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  lower  fertility  rate  implies  a  diminishing  market  size  due  to  the  decreasing 
population,  if  it  falls  below  the  threshold  of  the  reproduction rate,  which  is  2.1.  The  ageing  process 
brings  about  not  only  a  sharp  increase  in  the  dependency  ratio,  but  also  a  sharp  decline  in  the 
working-age  population  as  well  as  the  total  population.  The  total  population  is  forecast  to  peak  at 
128 million in 2006 and decline to 100 million in 2050. It will diminish to about 40 percent of the current 
size  in  2200,  with  aged  persons  above  65  years  old  exceeding  30  percent  of  the  total  population. 
Japan thus faces two problems: not only an increase in the proportion of retired elderly people, but 
also a decreasing population. 
The share of the working-age population had already peaked out in the early 1990s. Furthermore, if in 
the future the fertility rate remains at the current level (which is 1.29), then “the last baby will be born in 
about eight hundred years”.1 South Korea, Taiwan, China and Australia will follow a similar process in 
the absence of immigration, although the speed of their ageing process is divergent (Figure 1). 
Effects on the macroeconomy 
2. 
To  start  with  the  issue  of  the  decrease  in  the  working-age  population,  it  is  clear  that  the  economic 
growth  rate  will  fall  due  to  the  decline  in  labor  input.  Krugman  (1998)  argued  that  the  expected 
negative growth rate due to ageing is the basic cause of deflation in Japan, given the condition that 
the real interest rate cannot fall below zero under the constraint of a zero interest rate combined with 
persistent deflation. Nevertheless, the actual average economic growth rate since the bursting of the 
bubble economy has not been negative, and the expected growth rate cited by corporate managers 
has returned to slightly above 1 percent. 
There are three ways to prevent a decline in the economic growth rate. One is to raise the fertility rate. 
The  second  is  to  raise  the  labor  participation  rate  of  women  and  the  elderly.  The  third  way  is  to 
increase labor productivity, namely, the increase of labor input in the efficiency unit. 
In  order  to  raise  the  fertility  rate,  several  countries  such  as  France  and  Sweden  have  introduced 
special  tax  measures  to  promote  child-raising.  Yet  in  Japan,  government  intervention  to  raise  the 
fertility rate is unpopular due to lingering memories of efforts to promote a higher birth rate before and 
during World War II. The labor participation rate of women in Japan is still low, as compared with the 
United  States  and  Australia  (Figure  2),  and  there  is  room  to  expand  job  opportunities  for  women. 
Furthermore,  it  seems  possible  to  maintain  or  raise  the  fertility  rate  by  improving  the  working 
conditions  for  women  and  men  to  facilitate  child-raising,  while  at  the  same  time  increasing  the 
participation rate of women. In addition, there may be room to raise the participation rate of the elderly 
by  changing  the  incentives  for  retirement  and  adopting  new  employment  practices  on  the  side  of 
corporate management, even though the participation rate of the elderly in Japan is relatively high by 
international standards and has shown a declining trend in recent years. 
                                                      
1  Broda  and  Weinstein  (2004)  argue,  however,  that  the  current  fertility  rate  in  Japan  is  in  the  bottom,  and  will  return  to  a 
normal level in the future, because the preference for child-raising will increase as people become sufficiently prosperous to 
have more children. They assume that the population size will stabilize in 2060. 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 1
Let me turn to the third way, namely, the increase in labor productivity. It is important to recognize that 
what is important in terms of individual welfare is the level of per capita consumption, not the GDP 
growth  rate.  Thus,  we  can  pose  the  question  whether  the  decreasing  working-age  population  or 
smaller  size  of  the  labor  force  will  lower  per  capita  consumption.  The  neoclassical  growth  model 
predicts, although it is somewhat counterintuitive, that per capita consumption will increase, because 
capital  equipment  per  worker  will  rise  due  to  the  diminishing  number  of  workers,  given  the  existing 
capital  stock.  Nevertheless,  this  conclusion  is  flawed,  as  the  neoclassical  model  overlooks  the 
existence of retired elderly people. They live on revenue arising from the return on savings which are 
accumulated during their working lives. The increase in capital intensity may induce a lower rate of 
return  on  real  capital  stock  and  thus  savings,  due  to  the  law  of  decreasing  marginal  productivity  of 
capital. This leads to a reduction in the per capita consumption of elderly people. 
 2 
 BIS Review 1/2005
For the retired elderly, it is crucially important to secure a higher rate of return on savings. In order to 
prevent  a  decline  in  the  rate  of  return  on  capital,  it  is  necessary  to  increase  the  labor  input.  In  the 
absence of a change in the participation rate in the labor market and immigration, it is impossible to 
augment the labor input. However, it is possible to increase the labor input in the efficiency unit by 
raising labor productivity. It is well known that per capita consumption is maximized on the path where 
the economic growth rate is equal to rate of return on capital (called the “golden rule” growth path). 
The economic growth rate can be decomposed into labor productivity growth and the rate of increase 
in the labor input. This implies that in Japan, where the labor input will decline, the desirable increase 
 BIS Review 1/2005 
 3
in  labor  productivity  should  be  larger  than  the  rate  of  return  on  capital,  if  the  nation  seeks  the 
maximum per capita consumption growth path.2 
The next question, then, is how to increase labor productivity. There are two ways. One is to promote 
technological innovation and more efficient allocation of resources: that is, to increase the total factor 
productivity.  The  other  is  to  increase  capital  intensity.  Yet  an  increase  in  capital  intensity  is 
accompanied by a decline in the rate of return on capital stock. Therefore, what we should seek to 
attain is an increase in total factor productivity. It is interesting to note that the Japanese economy has 
suffered  from  distortions  in  resource  allocation  created  during  the  bubble  period.  The  size  of  the 
distortions  is estimated by  the  Bank  of  Japan’s staff  to  be  equivalent  to  nearly  0.5  percent  of  GDP 
growth (Figure 3). It is reasonable to assume that the final disposal of nonperforming assets by the 
banking sector implies the restructuring and reorganization of the corporate sector; this would lead to 
more  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and  thus  the  removal  of  such  distortions.  Furthermore,  there 
exists a wide gap in labor productivity between the manufacturing and the non-manufacturing sectors. 
The labor productivity of the latter is less than half that of the United States. This points to the potential 
to raise productivity of the non-manufacturing sector through the application of advanced information 
technology and the more efficient management of firms. 
The wide productivity gap between the manufacturing and the non-manufacturing sectors has been a 
basic  feature  of  the  Japanese  development  process  after  the  Meiji  Restoration.  It  has  caused  mild 
inflation in the high-growth era under the fixed exchange rate system, and given rise to the internal-
external price differential problem under the flexible exchange rate system. I am inclined to the view 
that one of the aims of structural reform after the Plaza Accord in 1985 was to narrow the productivity 
gap.  The  effort  to  raise  labor  productivity  in  the  non-manufacturing  sector  to  the  level  of  the 
manufacturing sector will result in a higher economic growth rate over the coming decade, although it 
works to delay the timing in overcoming deflation in terms of the core consumer price index, due to 
sustained downward pressure on the unit labor cost. The rise in productivity will nevertheless tend to 
increase the natural interest rate; that is, the equilibrium rate of return on capital stock in the absence 
of monetary disturbance. If it exceeds the real long-term market interest rate, then deflation will cease 
to exist. This doctrine was elaborated about one hundred years ago by the Swedish economist Knut 
Wicksell. His proposition can be summarized as “the higher the expected growth rate, the easier it is to 
exit deflation.” Krugman’s argument can be regarded as a corollary to this proposition. In this sense, 
the sustainability of recovery is the key to overcoming deflation. 
On  the  demand  side  of  capital  stock  in  the  process  of  the  ageing  population,  the  decreasing 
working-age  population  leads  to  diminished  demand  for  productive  investment,  because  the  capital 
stock required to maintain the capital equipment per worker decreases. In many countries, we observe 
that  the  change  in  the  share  of  the  working-age  population  in  the  total  population  is  associated 
positively with the productive investment ratio. According to the study by Poterba (2001), this positive 
association can also be observed with respect to the level of asset prices (measured by the dividend-
price  ratio),  although  the  relationship  between  the  rates  of  return  on  various  assets  and  the 
working-age  population  share  is  ambiguous.3  Several  experts  in  demography  argue  that  economic 
miracles such as those in Asia and Ireland are simply due to the rise in the share of the working-age 
population. In the case of Japan, the working-age population ratio increased from about 60 percent to 
about 70  percent  in  the  high-growth era  (from 1955  to  1970).  In  China,  the working-age population 
ratio increased from 55 percent in 1975 to 60 percent in the early 2000s, and is expected to surpass 
70 percent by 2010. 
Now  I  will  turn  to  an  example  with  respect  to  asset  prices  in  Japan.  Looking  at  the  relationship 
between the nation’s asset prices and the working-age population, land prices continued to slide for 
more than ten years after the bubble burst, although land prices in the Tokyo metropolitan area seem 
currently to have stopped declining. The ratio of total value of land to nominal GDP, 2.8, has returned 
to the level of the pre-bubble period (Figure 4). The fundamental price of land in the long run can be 
formulated as determined by the land rent, the discount rate (that is, the rate of time preference) and 
                                                      
2 
In my calculation, the desirable rate of increase in labor productivity on the “goldenest golden rule” growth path ranges from 
6 to 7 percent under the assumption of a zero time preference rate. See Iwata (2001). 
3  See Poterba (2001). The different effects of demographic change on rates of return on assets and asset prices may be due 
to the change in labor-saving technology to offset the decrease in the labor force, while the expected growth rate is affected 
by demographic change, resulting in an increase in asset prices. 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2005
the  expected  growth  rate  of  the  population.  It  seems  likely  that  elderly  people  have  a  shorter  time 
horizon and a greater mortality risk than younger ones, and thus a higher discount rate on future rent 
revenue.  Therefore,  the  combination  of  a  decreasing  population  and  a  rising  discount  rate  in  the 
ageing  process  implies  a  lower  ratio  of  total  land  value  to  nominal  GDP.  In  my  estimate,  the 
decreasing size of the working-age population (minus 0.5 percent) coupled with a lower discount rate, 
is likely to further depress the ratio, to a new equilibrium ratio which is 2 in my calculation. It will take 
several years to reach a new equilibrium ratio of the nationwide total land value to nominal GDP. 
At the same time, it is encouraging to see that the market for land and real estate has revived during 
the  process  of  corporate  restructuring  and  final  disposal  of  nonperforming  assets.  Prices  are  now 
based more closely on the future return on real estate, while investment in real estate by the corporate 
sector has begun to increase. This may suggest the start of an expansion in construction investment, 
 BIS Review 1/2005 
 5
which  was  subdued  for  a  long  time  following  the  bubble  period.  As  such,  it  constitutes  one  of  the 
brighter aspects of the current recovery phase. 
Turning to the supply side of capital stock, the ageing process entails the decline of the household 
saving rate due to greater dissaving by the retired elderly. In the early 1970s, the household saving 
rate in Japan was more than 20 percent, yet it is now about 6 percent. The rate showed a particularly 
notable  decline  after  1998.4  Its  current  level  seems  to  almost  correspond  to  a  new  equilibrium  rate 
under the decreasing size of the population. 
On the other hand, corporate saving has increased significantly in the recovery phase that started in 
early 2002. The corporate sector is enjoying a profit boom which is equivalent to the bubble period in 
the latter half of the 1980s. This is another encouraging aspect of the current recovery phase, in terms 
of  its  sustainability.  The  current  account  in  the  international  balance  of  payments  has  registered  a 
surplus  in  the  face  of  the  large  government  deficit  (8  percent  of  nominal  GDP)  and  the  declining 
household saving rate. It is not excluded that the current account surplus may continue, even though 
the household saving rate will remain at a low level due to ageing, as investment demand also shrinks 
due to the decrease in the working-age population.5 
Effects on the social security system and the financial system 
3. 
Now let me turn to issues involving the effects of ageing on Japan’s social security system and the 
financial system. The rapid ageing process may have a significant impact on the sustainability of the 
social security system. The existing public pension system in Japan consists of two parts: the National 
Pension System, which provides a flat benefit to all persons, and the Employees’ Pension Insurance 
System,  which  is  an  earnings-related  benefit  plan.  They  are  unfunded  based  on  a  defined  benefit 
scheme.  The  cap  on  the  insurance  premium  was  introduced  at  18.3  percent  in  the  most  recent 
pension  reform.  Yet  further  reform  is  needed  to  sustain  the  public  pension  fund  and  correct  the 
widening  intergenerational  inequality  of  burden sharing  under  the  existing  public  pension  system.6  I 
have  argued  that  it  is  desirable  to  privatize  the  earnings-related  portion  of  the  public  pension  fund. 
Privatization would work to prevent an excessive fall in the household saving rate and to correct the 
intergenerational inequality of burden sharing. 
In addition to the public pension system, there are private pension funds such as unfunded severance 
benefit  plans,  the  Employee  Pension  Funds,  the  Tax-Qualified  Pension  Plans  and  a  new  defined 
contribution plan similar to the 401(k) plan in the United States. They are funded based on a defined 
contribution  scheme.  If  Japan  moves  further  in  a  direction  weighted  toward  a  defined  contribution 
scheme  based  on  a  funded  system,  then  it  becomes  extremely  important  to  secure  a  high  rate  of 
return on pension funds. The efficient function of the capital market mechanism is a precondition for 
the efficient management of public and private pension funds. It is unfortunate that the rate of return 
on assets at the corporate level is relatively low in the Japanese capital market, although a tendency 
toward recovery has been seen in recent years. Market-based corporate governance may strengthen 
the monitoring mechanism and market discipline in corporate management. 
In  postwar  Japan,  the  financial  system  has  functioned  on  the  basis  of  bank-based  corporate 
governance.  As  a  result,  bank  loans  provided  by  main  banks  could  be  interpreted  as  subordinated 
debt or quasi-equity for the borrowing firms. Thus, economic risks have tended to be concentrated in 
the  banking  sector.  This  has  made  the  disposal  of  nonperforming  assets  all  the  more  difficult  and 
gradual. 
                                                      
4  The  recent  decline  in  the  saving  rate  may  be  attributable  to  the  introduction  of  a  new  system  of  elderly  care  in  1998, 
diminished interest income and the real balance effect. The money flow data suggest a further decline of the saving rate. 
The salient feature of Japanese households’ asset holding is the high proportion of life insurance coupled with the low share 
of investment trusts and government bonds. 
I once carried out a simulation analysis on longer-term development of the external balance between Japan and the United 
States in the ageing process. The main finding was that the current account surplus will remain until the mid-2020s despite 
the more rapid ageing process in Japan compared with the United States. 
5 
6  The intergenerational inequality is so large that the young decline to pay their contribution to the National Pension System. 
According to the Annual Report on Japan’s Economy and Public Finance 2000-2001, lifetime net benefits including the tax 
and social security burden, in present value terms, are estimated to total 57 million yen for persons aged 60 or over. On the 
other hand, lifetime net benefits for those in their 20s are estimated to be 13 million yen in present value terms. 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2005
Since Japan’s Big Bang in 1996, the nation’s financial system has been in transition to a market-based 
indirect financial system from a bank-based one. The major banks are in the process of transformation 
from corporate-finance oriented bank management to providers of comprehensive financial services. 
In this regard, it seems promising for them to extend their banking business to cover risk management 
of individuals’ assets, including human capital, over the life cycle as well as the assets of firms. 
In Japan, the major portion of household savings is held by the elderly, that is, people over 60 years 
old. It is well known that labor supply flexibility creates a kind of insurance against the risk of financial 
investment.  Young  people  have  greater  labor  supply  flexibility  and  thus  may  take  larger  financial 
investment risks than the elderly.7 The preference for safe assets among Japanese households can 
be partly explained by the labor supply inflexibility of the elderly and the lower labor mobility. 
More  specifically,  the  lifetime  employment  system  combined  with  the  seniority  wage  system  has 
implied that workers invest in equity of the employed company by the difference between the received 
wage and the marginal productivity of labor when they are young. In old age, the workers receive a 
higher wage than marginal productivity and the severance payment at retirement. Therefore, there is 
much less need for young households to hold risky financial assets such as shares and investment 
trusts, because the return on human capital over the life cycle is associated positively with the return 
on risky financial assets. The long-term profit-sharing aspect of wage payment has been reinforced by 
employees’  deposits  at  their  companies  during  the  high-growth  era  and  employees’  stockholding  in 
more recent decades. Other factors bringing about a smaller share of risky financial assets held in the 
Japanese household portfolio balance may be the borrowing constraint and the relatively high share of 
risky real asset holding (housing and real estate). It may be noted that, in Japan, there is no system 
such as the “home equity loan” in the United States that promotes borrowing, consumption and equity 
investment when housing prices rise. 
The  demographic  changes  are  working  to  transform  the  traditional  employment  system  into  a  new 
one.  The  structural  changes  in  the  Japanese  labor  market  have  tended  to  cause  a  shift  from  a 
seniority  wage  system  to  a  performance-based  system.  The  lifetime  employment  system  has  been 
eroded  significantly  by  the  increasing  share  of  part-time  and  temporary  workers.  The  delinking 
between  the  return  on  human  capital  and  equity  investment  may  enhance  the  tendency  for  the 
household  sector  to  hold  more  risky  financial  assets  such  as  shares  and  investment  trusts  in  the 
future.  It  is  accompanied  by  changes  in  the  incentive  structure  for  young  workers;  namely,  an 
increasing  number  of  young  non-regular  part-time  employees  (known  as  “freeters”)  totaling  nearly 
4.2 million  and  0.52  million  discouraged  young  people  who  are  not  in  education,  employment  or 
training (known as “NEET”). For these young people, it is difficult to form a long-term life plan and thus 
raise children. This aggravates the problem of fewer children and the decreasing population size. 
Finally, asset decumulation by baby boomers may exert an impact on the asset market. The public 
pension fund has accumulated about 130 trillion yen, which will be paid out as pension benefits for the 
baby  boomers.  Furthermore,  the  privatization  of  the  postal  saving  and  insurance  system  may 
complicate the debt management policy. It seems likely that a decline in the functioning of the asset 
market due to the decumulation of assets can be avoided by the gradual shifts in asset demand as 
well as the globalization of the financial market. 
Nevertheless, it seems important to develop the market for asset decumulation: that is, to transform 
the  real  capital  stock  held  by  the  elderly  into  income  streams.  In  Japan,  the  market  for  reverse 
mortgages has yet to be developed. The risk related to longevity and land price declines, in addition to 
underdevelopment  of  the  secondary  market  for  housing,  impedes  the  development  of  the  reverse 
mortgage market. It seems necessary not only to implement adequate assessment of the market value 
of  housing  stock,  but  also  to  improve  the  quality  of  housing  stock,  in  order  to  increase  the 
marketability.  The  securitization  of  housing  loans  seems  to  be  the  key  to  transform  the  financial 
system into a market-based one and to develop the market of released equities. In this regard, it is 
encouraging to  see  the recent  expansion  of real estate  investment  trusts,  private  real  estate  funds, 
asset-backed  commercial  paper,  asset-backed  securities,  mortgage-backed  securities  and 
collateralized  debt  obligations.  The  Bank  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  securitization 
market  by  introducing  the purchase of  asset-backed  commercial paper  and  asset-backed  securities 
after July 2003 and initiating a survey related to securitized instruments. 
                                                      
7  See Bodie, Merton and Samuelson (1992). 
BIS Review 1/2005 
 7
Conclusion 
4. 
To conclude, the ageing process in Japan is accompanied by systemic social changes including the 
employment system, the social security system and the financial system. For the central bank that is 
striving  to  overcome  deflation,  the  ageing  issue  of  society  presents  a  challenging  task,  because  it 
requires  the  establishment  of  a  more  efficient  financial  system  to  secure  a  higher  rate  of  return  on 
savings, while maintaining price stability and avoiding the risks of inflation as well as deflation. 
8 
 BIS Review 1/2005
