Ardian Fullani: Economic developments during the second semester of 2004 
and expectations for year 2005  
Statement by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 28 January 2005. 
 The second part of 2004 has generated a larger economic activity, marking a certain general impulse, 
especially after a relatively quiet start of the year. The acceleration of production growth is reflected 
almost in all the economy sectors, while the major objectives of the economy have been achieved in 
conformity with the overall programme of the country's economic and financial development.  
At international level, this semester coincided with an acceleration of the confirmed tendencies in the 
first  part  of  the  year,  especially  with  regard  to  US  dollar  performance  and  oil  price  rise.  The  Fed 
monetary  policy  has  changed  the  monetary  policy  tendency,  during  this  period,  through  some 
successive increases of the core interest rate, in attempting to prevent the inflationary pressures in the 
economy. On the other side, the European Central Bank, considering the inflation performance and 
the  strong  pressure  against  the  Euro  has  deemed  unreasonable  to  change  the  core  interest  rate, 
keeping it at the level of 2 percent for almost a year and half.   
Annual  inflation  in  December  resulted  2.2  percent,  while  the  average  annual  inflation  was  only  2.9 
percent.  The  maintenance  of  inflation  within  the  targeted  range  was  mainly  attributed  to  the  stable 
macroeconomic  situation,  the  control  of  domestic demand  of  the  economy  and  monetary  indicators 
stability.    
Year 2004 was characterized by the achievement of fiscal objectives in terms of budget expenditures 
and budget deficit, and also by a more uniform allocation of fiscal expenditures. Government demand 
for  loans  has  been  distinguished  by  a  rising  level  during  the  second  semester,  however  remaining 
within the projected levels. Also, the annual rate  of the change of current budget expenditures was 
stable.  The  implementation  of  a  prudential  fiscal  policy  has  provided  the  appropriate  conditions  to 
better control inflation rate.     
During the second half of 2004, the Bank of Albania monetary policy has kept an easing tendency, 
aiming above all at reducing the borrowing cost in the economy. Bank of Albania has twice cut the 
core interest rate, in July and November, by 0.25 percentage points. These cuts have brought the core 
interest rate to the lowest historical rate, by 5.25 percent.  
The banking system was characterized by an accelerated lending activity to the economy during 2004. 
The credit balance increased by LEK 9.2 billion during June-November 2004, being 51 percent higher 
than the balance growth in the first semester of the year. Lending to the economy is given an ever-
increasing  importance  in  the  assets  structure  of  the  banking  system,  constituting  a  considerable 
source of the demand for monetary assets. The credit/deposit ratio increases on a continuous basis, 
an indication that positively introduces the function of the intermediation role of the banking system in 
supporting the economic development. The balance credit rise marked during the eleven-month period 
of  the  year  the  value  of  LEK  15.3  billion,  reflecting  a  rise  of  30  percent  relative  to  the  yearend  of 
2003.    
The easing monetary policy of the Bank of Albania has helped smooth the appreciation pressure of 
the  Lek  exchange  rate.  The  differences  between  interest  rates  in  foreign  currency  and  those  in 
domestic currency incurred a decline during 2004. However, the rising foreign currency inflows on one 
hand,  and  the  reduction  of  imports  volume  on  the  other  one,  have  created  a  temporary  difference 
between  the  foreign  currency  supply  and  demand  during  the  summer  period.  This  misbalance  has 
exerted  a  significant  pressure  on  the  appreciation  of  the  Lek  exchange  rate,  fostering  the  foreign 
market  volatility.  The  exchange  rate  volatility  through  this  temporary  rise  of  foreign  currency  supply 
has  imposed  the  necessity  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  intermediation  to  the  foreign  market  during  the 
summer period, towards purchasing the foreign currency.    
Though  trade  deficit  increased,  the  current  deficit  in  the  third  quarter  has  been  lower  than  in  the 
previous  quarters,  thanks  to  increased  and  positive  balances  of  income,  services,  and  particularly 
current transfers. The current transfers balance is estimated at USD 295 million, being higher than the 
   1/2 
one  of  the  first  two  quarters,  and  nearly  44  percent  higher  than  the  one  of  the  third  quarter  of  the 
previous  year.  Overall,  the  balance  of  payments  performance  during  2004  was  positive.  The  gross 
foreign  reserve  level,  at  the  end  of  this  period,  was  estimated  at  USD  1  billion  and  244  million, 
adequate to cover 5.1 months of imports of goods and services.  
Based on the aforementioned developments, we may conclude that year 2004 contributed generally in 
further consolidating the country's macroeconomic equilibrium. Although full data for the yearend of 
2004 are not yet available, there is a crystallization of the idea that the primary targets projected in the 
medium-term plan on the country's development have been met satisfactorily. According to the latest 
estimations, the Albanian economy grew by 6 percent under the conditions of a low inflation rate, far 
closer  to  the  bottom  level  of  the  targeted  band.  The  structural  reforms,  through  their  problematic 
concerns, have progressed during 2004.       
All  this  consolidating  process  has  created  the  premises  for  a  better  stability  in  the  future.  The 
development program of the country for year 2005 already exists, part of which are the primary targets 
of monetary policy.   
The  primary  target  of  monetary  policy  for  2005,  projected  in  the  monetary  program,  remains  the 
maintenance of the annual inflation rate within the two-to-four percent targeted range. This target is 
supposed to be met through the control of the monetary supply growth at an approximate level with 
the  nominal  growth  of  GDP,  presuming  that  the  velocity  of  currency  circulation  in  the  economy  is 
stable. In this light, the annual growth rate of money supply for year 2005, projected in the monetary 
program,  is  9.4  percent.  This  rate  is  in  compliance  with  the  provided  demand  of  the  economy  for 
money, coming from its real growth by 6 percent. 
The Bank of Albania monetary program is designed in line with other policies of the economy, where 
its harmonisation with the government fiscal policy is highlighted. The Bank of Albania estimates that 
like in the past years, even in 2005, the country's economic development will be in conformity with the 
overall development program objectives. The last developments of the banking system consolidate the 
optimism  that  it  will  fulfil  to  the  best  of  its  knowledge  the  role  of  financial  intermediation  in  the 
economy. We deem that its consolidation will continue with accelerated rhythms throughout this year, 
providing to the large public more credits, more services and more security in the savings conduct.  
 
   2/2 
