Zamani Abdul Ghani: Malaysia - an investment destination 
Speech  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Investors’ Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 22 June 2005. 
 institutions,  domestic  and 
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim  
Your Excellencies, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullah hiwabarakatuh and good morning, 
First of all, allow me to welcome all of you to this conference on "Malaysia: An Investment Destination" 
held in conjunction with the 30th IDB Board of Governors' Meeting. We are most heartened that there 
are  representatives  here  this  morning  from  more  than  one  hundred  global  financial  institutions  and 
from over thirty countries. I would like to welcome all of you to Malaysia especially those who are here 
for  the  first  time.  I  hope  you  have  had  a  good  rest  after  a  journey  from  your  respective  countries 
because we have a very special program waiting for you. 
Indeed it is a great honour to be given the privilege to host this historic conference. The theme for the 
conference "Malaysia: An Investment Destination" is a fitting choice as we would highlight to you a 
wide range of investment opportunities available for you in Malaysia. This theme is most appropriate 
given  a  fast  changing  global  and  regional  financial  landscape,  driven  by  financial  liberalization  and 
consolidation, economic transformation and more discerning and demanding investors.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
We will do our best to ensure that this conference will be rewarding and useful for you. Over this two-
day  period,  we  have  lined  up  a  panel  of  distinguished  speakers,  including  the  Honourable  Prime 
Minister of Malaysia himself as well as Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia. The invited speakers are 
from  various  prestigious 
international  with  unique  expertise  and 
experiences. You can be rest assured that the speakers we are bringing to you are renowned in their 
own field and their views are well sought after by global investors and the financial fraternity. 
The major highlight of this conference is the keynote address by the Honourable Dato' Seri Abdullah 
bin Haji Ahmad Badawi, the Prime Minister of Malaysia who is also the Finance Minister. His address 
will  offer  invaluable  insights  into  Malaysia's  policy  and  strategies  to  sustain  its  strong  growth 
performance. The next significant highlight of this conference is a speech by Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr. Zeti 
Akhtar  Aziz,  the  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  who  will  touch  on  investment  opportunities  in 
Malaysia in an evolving global environment. This speech is timely given so much interest shown by 
both  domestic  and  international  investors  in  the  Malaysian  economy.  Both  the  Prime  Minister  and 
Governor will offer invaluable insights into strategic orientation of important policies that will chart the 
Malaysian economy going forward. Therefore, these are the main events not to be missed.  
Of course you should not miss other speakers too! They will touch on various topics according to their 
areas of expertise. More importantly, you will get to hear investment opportunities in Malaysia with a 
special focus on conventional and Islamic financial institutions products. For selected topis, there will 
be  workshops  for  in  depth  discussions  with  panel  members  who  are  prominent  speakers  from 
industries  as  well  as  regulatory  bodies.  It  will  be  interesting  to  find  out  what  will  transpire  in  the 
workshops that await you.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This Investors Conference is also a gathering of investors, bankers, fund managers, regulators and 
industry leaders from Malaysia and the world over. This is an excellent opportunity for you to capitalize 
on their presence by networking with them. I am sure you have a lot to gain from their experiences and 
first-hand knowledge in their own fields. Furthermore, for information on investment opportunities in 
Malaysia, there are 15 exhibition booths from major financial institutions and regulators set up in this 
convention  centre  specifically  for  you.  Please  make  a  point  to  visit  the  exhibition  booths,  which 
showcase  financial  products  and  services  in  Malaysia.  I  am  sure  these  booths  have  informative 
brochures to give out and are more than happy to answer any queries you may have. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
There will be a very special event at the end of the second day. Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, 
Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia will launch two new indices - the Citigroup Malaysian Government 
Bond Index and Dow Jones - RHB Islamic Malaysia Index. The launching of these indices marks yet 
another milestone in the development of the Malaysian capital market. As you are well aware, credible 
and transparent indices are very significant market infrastructure to raise the awareness and interest 
of investors. This will bode well for our aspiration to broaden and deepen the bond market in Malaysia. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to remind you that both the Day One and Day Two programs promise to be eventful. I 
know the very conducive environment for shopping at the Kuala Lumpur City Center or KLCC can be 
very tempting for some of us. But please resist that temptation for a while and wait until the conference 
is over. Then please, by all means savour the sights and sounds of Malaysia. 
On this note, I wish you all a rewarding and productive conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
