Lars Heikensten: The Riksbank and stabilisation policy 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a discussion seminar of LO 
(the labour organisation), Stockholm, 24 May 2005. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to attend this seminar. I look forward to an interesting 
and rewarding discussion. 
The  invitation  to  the  seminar  contained  a  list  of  questions  for  discussion.  I  intend  to  structure  my 
contribution in terms of working my way down the list and giving my views on these questions. 
Before I do so, however, I would like to take this opportunity to say that I appreciated the section on 
stabilisation  policy’s  possibilities  and  limitations  in  the  LO  economists  latest  “Economic  Prospects” 
report. Although I do not agree with everything – which will become clear later – I perceived the article 
to be serious and searching in a positive way.   
Is stabilisation policy important? 
My answer to this question is (of course): Yes, stabilisation policy is important. One only needs to look 
at our experiences in the 1970s and 1980s to realise this. What happened then was that the policy 
conducted could not sustain an adequate balance in the economy. The policy conducted was often too 
expansionary, which created an environment where it was difficult to keep price and wage increases at 
a reasonable level. The rapid increases in wages and prices were repeatedly in collision with the fixed 
exchange  rate.  The  result  was  that  the  krona  was  devalued  several  times  from  the  mid-1970s 
onwards.  The  economy  underwent  "boom-bust-cycles”  with  alternate  sudden  braking  and  strong 
stimulus  for  acceleration.  This  policy  had  devastating  effects  on  many  aspects  of  economic 
developments.  Sweden  lost  ground  in  terms  of  prosperity,  while  growth  in  real  wages  was  largely 
non-existent. This situation finally become untenable and after the fixed exchange rate system was 
abandoned in November 1992 there was a clear shift in stabilisation policy regime. 
When one looks back over the period since then, I believe that most people will agree with me that the 
new  regime  has  been  successful.  Sweden  is  no  longer  afflicted  with  excessively  high  inflationary 
trends, recurring cost crises and high interest rates. The more stable environment has contributed to 
better growth in prosperity. The new regulations have also created other, better frameworks for wage 
formation, a point often emphasised by LO representatives. Trade union organisation no longer need 
to play along in a destructive game where high nominal wage increases are eaten up by inflation and 
real wage increases prove to be a disappointment year after year. 
The fact that inflation has been lower and more stable during the period with inflation-targeting policy 
is a good result, although perhaps not surprising. What may have received less attention and been 
less evident, given the theories in this field, is that there has been less fluctuation in the real economy. 
It thus appears as though the new regime has also had a beneficial effect on the stability of the real 
economy.  
Now  that  it  appears  as  though  the  more  fundamental  stabilisation  policy  problems  have  been 
managed,  it  may  seem  natural  to  gradually  become  more  ambitious  and  wonder  if  things  could 
function even better. 
However, it is important to have realistic expectations as to what the stabilisation policy can achieve. It 
has  been  easy  to  gain  an  impression  in  the  recent  debate  that  there  are  expectations  that  the 
fluctuations in both inflation and the real economy – perhaps especially the latter – can be eliminated 
entirely.  When  the  heads  of  the  National  Labour  Market  Board  make  comparisons  with  a  situation 
where  unemployment  is  always  around  4  per  cent  and  then  claim  that  the  Riksbank  bears  the 
responsibility for the difference, they appear to be expressing this view.  
It is unavoidable that the economy and inflation undergo rapid changes from time to time that cannot 
be predicted or fully counterbalanced in the short term. No central bank – or any other economic policy 
decision-maker – can thus steer inflation and economic activity completely in the long term. In actual 
fact,  experiences  show  there  is  a  substantial  risk  that  actively  fine  tuning  stabilisation  policy  can 
reinforce  fluctuations  in  the  economy.  It  may  be  worth  noting  in  this  context  that  the  rise  in 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
unemployment we have observed in Sweden during the most recent economic downswing does not in 
any way appear remarkable from an international perspective.  
It is also extremely difficult to know what comprises a “normal” rate of unemployment, particularly as 
this is also something that changes over time. It is important that the Riksbank does not commit itself 
too strongly to a particular figure. We must be willing to test our way forward and if there is sufficient 
confidence in our policy, we must be prepared to question old truths. However there is reason to be 
sceptical of those who think they have infallible answers in this field. 
So, if I may modify my response to the question: Yes, stabilisation policy is important, but one should 
not overestimate what it can achieve.  
The  surprisingly  weak  development  in  the  labour  market  is  of  course  an  important  reason  why  the 
debate  on  stabilisation  policy  has  recently  intensified.  I  agree  that  we  must  take  the  problem  of 
unemployment seriously. However, this is not achieved by primarily concentrating the discussion on 
stabilisation  policy  and  repeatedly  blaming  weak  employment  growth  on  the  monetary  policy 
conducted  in  recent  years.  It  is  particularly  grating  when  those  pursuing  this  line  of  debate  –  the 
National  Labour  Market  Board  and  others  –  have  made  essentially  the  same  assessments  of  the 
economy and employment as the Riksbank at the points when the crucial decisions were made. We 
were all surprised by the relatively high growth rate combined with low inflation and almost unchanged 
employment.  
In times such as these, with extensive structural changes and "shocks” succeeding one another, it is 
especially important to consider the economy’s capacity to adapt. The conditions for achieving lasting 
success in the form of higher employment and lower unemployment are greater if the measures are 
aimed at making the economy less sensitive to shock rather than at using stabilisation policy to try to 
fend off shocks. Moreover, it is much simpler to find useful measures that can be taken if one adopts 
the former policy rather than the latter. 
The focus on stabilisation policy is also surprising given the fact that the nominal interest rate is the 
lowest  it  has  been  since  the  1960s  and  1970s  and  that  even  when  measured  in  real  terms,  i.e. 
nominal interest rate minus expected inflation rate, it is among the lowest we have seen in 20 years. 
Monetary policy is thus clearly expansionary. At the same time, fiscal policy is also expansionary and 
has stretched the limits of what is compatible with the long-term regulations. 
So, if I can modify my answer to the question even further: Yes, stabilisation policy is important, but it 
is  even  more  important  to  undertake  measures  that enable  the  economy  to  adapt  smoothly  to  new 
conditions. These are the type of issues we should discuss now that we actually have a system where 
stabilisation  policy  no  longer  contributes  to  creating  severe  economic  fluctuations  –  as  it  did  in  the 
1970s and 1980s – but instead seems to actually have a stabilising function.  
How should roles be allocated between fiscal policy and monetary policy? 
The change in regime in the 1990s involved the introduction of a distinct allocation of roles in Swedish 
economic policy. The exchange rate remained variable and monetary policy was given the main task 
of trying to keep inflation at a low, stable level. Fiscal policy, which had often resulted in large deficits 
under  the  previous  regime  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  would  now  instead  be  targeted  at  achieving 
long-term stability and sustainability in public finances. Corresponding changes in economic policy had 
been made in many other parts of the world.  
It is often said in the economic debate that one consequence of the change in system was that “the 
Riksbank was given responsibility for stabilisation policy”. As it is not always clear what is meant by 
this  exactly  –  the  interpretations  appear  to  vary  depending  on  whom  is  asked  –  it  may  be  worth 
providing a brief summary of the inflation-targeting policy we conduct.  
The Riksbank’s primary objective is to maintain price stability. This task often goes hand in hand with a 
stabilisation  of  the  real  economy;  if  demand  in  the  economy  develops  in  line  with  the  long-term 
potential, it will often contribute to a stable development in inflation. However, inflation does not solely 
depend  on  our  domestic  resource  utilisation;  it  is  also  influenced  by  supply  shocks,  international 
inflation,  exchange  rate  trends,  and  so  on.  In  certain  situations  it  is  necessary  to  find  a  balance 
between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy, for instance, when a severe cost shock 
pushes  up  inflation  while  the  real  economy  is  weakened.  The  typical  result  of  weighing  up  these 
considerations is that – unless it would threaten credibility – the central bank will allow much longer 
time  for  inflation  to  return  to  target  level  than  if  the  rate  of  price  increase  had  been  pushed  up  by 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
increased demand. The negative effects on the real economy will therefore be much less significant 
than if the central bank had merely reacted to the higher inflation and used an aggressive policy to 
rapidly bring inflation back in line.  
Considerations  of  this  nature  have  been  made  by  the  Riksbank  on  several  occasions  during  its 
decade  of  inflation  targeting.  There  are  examples  from  the  end  of  the  1990s  when  deregulation 
contributed to very low inflation and the Riksbank chose not to fully utilise the scope for interest rate 
cuts that might been offered by a stricter interpretation of the inflation target. There are also examples 
of  the  reverse  from  2001  and  2003,  when  temporary  supply  factors  pushed  up  inflation  and  the 
Riksbank did not react by raising the interest rate. To be even more explicit; when we formulate our 
policy we have on several occasions deliberately chosen to allow deviations from the inflation target 
for short or long periods of time. When the consequences of the deviations have been lower interest 
rates  than  would  have  been  the  case  with  a  stricter  interpretation,  there  has  been  practically  no 
criticism. However, it has been rather different with regard to deviations in the other direction. 
Neither  the  Riksbank  nor  any  other  central  bank  using  inflation  targeting  can  be  described  as  an 
“inflation nutter”, to borrow a famous phrase from Mervyn King, now Governor of the Bank of England. 
That is, we do not focus solely on stabilising inflation; we also take into consideration the real economy 
–  conducting  what  is  usually  termed  flexible  rather  than  strict  inflation  targeting  policy.  This  is  also 
entirely in line with our task as laid down in law. 
There  are  also  other  types  of  consideration  that  need  to  be  made  in  monetary  policy.  One  that  is 
immediately apparent is how financial stability will be affected by the interest rate decisions. Over the 
past year, and also on a few earlier occasions, there has been extensive discussion of developments 
in the credit market at our monetary policy meetings. We have relatively short experience of how credit 
cycles  affect  the  economy;  up  until  the  1980s  the  financial  markets  were  strictly  regulated.  Our 
knowledge of the risks entailed in a rapid increase in indebtedness and asset prices is thus limited. 
Although it can probably be said that the credit expansion and house price trends have not yet had 
decisive  significance  in  our  interest  rate  decisions,  they  are  factors  that  must  be  included  in  the 
equation.  
It is also important for the Riksbank to try to find a suitable balance between stabilising inflation and 
the real economy and also taking into account the consequences for financial stability. In the same 
way,  fiscal  policy  must  meet  the  requirements  for  long-term  stability  and  sustainability  in  public 
finances,  with  the  aid  of  budgetary  targets  and  expenditure  ceilings,  which  does  not  exclude 
consideration  of  the  real  economy.  This  allocation  of  roles  has  proved  successful  and  we  should 
therefore proceed with caution as regards making any drastic changes.  
My reply to the question of how roles should be allocated between fiscal policy and monetary policy is 
therefore; as they are now. The same conclusion has been reached in many other countries as well as 
in academic research. What is important in this context is that one realises that the Riksbank takes 
real consideration when formulating its monetary policy, to the extent it deems this to be wise. It is 
possible, however, that this is something we need to be clearer about.  
Can and should monetary policy and fiscal policy develop? 
In  my  opinion,  one  can  of  course  say  that  both  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  are  constantly 
developing. At the Riksbank we are working continuously on, for instance, improving our analyses and 
forecasting methods to provide the best possible basis for making decisions. Our decision to publish 
inflation forecasts based on market expectations in the March Inflation Report was an example of this. 
One can assume that the Ministry of Finance conducts equivalent development work.  
I  believe  that  an  even  deeper  discussion  of  what  is  entailed  in  the  considerations  made  between 
inflation  targeting  and  the  real  economy  can  be  a  good  thing.  During  the  first  years  of  inflation 
targeting,  the  Riksbank  sometimes  sounded  like  an  “inflation  nutter”.  However,  this  stance  was 
abandoned  after  a  few  years  and  since  then  we  have  communicated  that  we  also  take  into 
consideration financial and real factors. A decision by the Executive Board of the Riksbank in 1999 
clarifies our views on these issues. However, we can probably become even better at analysing and 
explaining the considerations we have to make when conducting a flexible inflation-targeting policy. 
The Executive Board has held several speeches on this theme over the past year and the aim is to 
publish some form of joint document on this subject in the near future. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
With  regard  to  fiscal  policy,  it  has  a  stimulating  effect  on  the  economy  primarily  through  what  are 
known  as  the  automatic  stabilisers,  i.e.  through  systems  for  taxes  and  expenditure,  which  are  very 
extensive in Sweden, being designed to allow some “automatic” adjustment to cyclical developments. 
In addition, as I mentioned earlier, fiscal policy can play a decisive role in the economy’s adjustment to 
shock, through its taxation and expenditure systems. The government’s economic policy arsenal also 
contains  labour  market  policy,  which  can  play  an  important  role  in  both  facilitating  adjustment  and 
maintaining demand for labour in the short term within individual sectors or regions. There is reason to 
continue looking for ways to develop policy in all of these fields and to make it more effective. 
However, in practice there is a risk that the potential for allowing automatic stabilisers to take effect or 
for  putting  in  more  extensive  labour  market  policy  measures  is  limited  unless  public  finances  are 
sufficiently  strong.  This  is  a  conclusion  that  I  share  with  the  LO  economists,  if  I  have  understood 
correctly. However, in practice the LO economists have rarely manned the barricades and argued in 
favour of stricter policy even during good times. Although a change may be under way here.  
But what the question of whether monetary and fiscal policy should be developed probably refers to is 
whether there is reason to modify the allocation of roles between monetary and fiscal policy that has 
prevailed since the introduction of the new stabilisation policy regime. This is based of course on LO’s 
suggestion that the Riksbank should “receive assistance” from discretionary fiscal policy in stabilising 
the real economy. The idea is, if I have understood correctly, that the Riksdag Committee on Finance 
or some part of it – a special stabilisation policy committee – would be given a greater role, with an 
analysis function and the authority to implement discretionary fiscal policy decisions when necessary. 
I have no faith in this idea, for several reasons. One fairly obvious reason is that a stabilisation policy 
committee would of course face the same difficult problems as the Riksbank and the government with 
regard  to  predicting  the  future.  The  fact  that  inflation  is  currently  low  is  largely  due  to  surprisingly 
positive surprise shocks that were not predicted by any analysts, rather than to the Riksbank making 
assessments  that  deviated  from  others  or  holding  back  demand.  Difficulties  in  predicting  and  fine 
tuning  the  economy  are  something  that  everyone  entering  this  field  will  face  and  scarcely  a  good 
reason for establishing a new public body. 
Another important reason for my doubts towards this proposal is connected with the leading principle 
for reforming monetary policy, namely that it should be formulated "at arm's length" from the current 
party politics. From what I understand of the proposal, the idea is that these problems will be managed 
by setting rules in advance that will indicate the situations in which discretionary fiscal policy measures 
shall  be  implemented  and  phased  out.  Of  course,  one  can  have  different  opinions  as  to  how 
successful  this  might  be.  But  if  one  compares  it  with  the  rigorous  institutional  framework  that 
encompasses monetary policy, it is difficult to rid  oneself of the thought that the “arm" which would 
mark the distance from present party politics would be on the short side. 
I believe that there are some worrying signs here. It appears as though there is a tendency, from a 
political point of view, to see stabilisation policy, or more precisely the repo rate, as the main solution 
to the problems we are currently seeing in the Swedish labour market. As I see it, there is an evident 
risk  that  this  type  of  view  would  also  colour  the  discretionary  fiscal  policy  with  an  increased 
stabilisation policy responsibility.  
However, before I round off, allow me to say that it is possible that situations might arise that are so 
serious  from  a  stabilisation  policy  point  of  view  that  discretionary  fiscal  policy  measures  could  be 
warranted.  Here  I  am  mainly  thinking  of  situations  with  a  severe  fall  in  demand  in  the  nature  of  a 
depression,  where  both  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  would  be  forced  to  make  substantial 
departures  from  the  normal  principles. These  would  be  extremely  unusual  circumstances,  however, 
and do not provide any argument for setting up a permanent stabilisation policy committee.  
So, my answer to the question on whether monetary and fiscal policy should be developed is yes, but 
not in the direction LO appears to have in mind. With regard to monetary policy, this means continued 
improvement of analysis and forecasting methods and to find ways to clarify the balance between the 
inflation  target  and  the  real  economy.  For  fiscal  policy  it  could  mean  finding  ways  to  make  the 
automatic  stabilisers  even  more  effective,  but  primarily  it  entails  designing  preventive  systems  to 
enable  smoother  structural  adjustments  in  the  economy  when  various  shocks  unavoidably  occur.  It 
does not entail any changes in the fundamental role allocation as regards stabilisation policy.  
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Summary 
Let me briefly summarise my responses to the three questions. Stabilisation policy is important, but 
one should  not  overestimate  what  it can  achieve.  Other  economic  policy  measures  are  much  more 
important to long-term growth in prosperity. A smoother adjustment process when the economy suffers 
shocks  could  benefit  employment  more  than  an  active  stabilisation  policy.  The  allocation  of  roles 
between fiscal policy and monetary policy with regard to stabilising the macro economy has functioned 
well in the new regime and I see no good reason to change it. Both fiscal policy and monetary policy 
can and should develop, but this should occur within the framework of the present allocation of roles 
regarding stabilisation policy. For monetary policy this is a question of analysing and describing the 
considerations made between the inflation target and developments in the real economy. The most 
important  issue  regarding  fiscal  policy  is  not  measures  aimed  at  stabilisation,  but  providing  a  good 
general foundation for prosperity growth.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 5
