Glenn Stevens: The changing statistical needs of central banks  
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Irving Fisher 
Committee for Financial Statistics of the International Statistical Institute, Sydney, 8 April 2005. 
 It is a pleasure to speak to you today about central banking and statistics, and particularly to see such 
a large gathering of statisticians, including from central banks, here in Sydney. It will be interesting to 
see whether there is a statistically significant impact on economic activity in the Sydney region as a 
result of your conference. I suppose that will depend on whether your rate and type of expenditure 
differs in a statistically significant way from that of the various other groups who occupy this precinct 
from week to week.  
Today's proceedings are organised by a committee named for Irving Fisher. Reading just a little about 
his life, one is struck by the breadth of his endeavours. These were covered very nicely in a speech 
some  years  ago  by  Hans van Wijk,  former  chair  of  the  Irving Fisher  Committee.1  Fisher  worked  on 
monetary  theory,  and  on  understanding  the  determinants  of  the  rate  of  interest,  saving  and 
investment.  The  distinction  between  the  nominal  and  real  rate  of  interest  –  second  nature  to 
economists today – was first made by Fisher. He worked on index-number issues – the 'Fisher ideal 
index'  is  named  after  him.  And  he  worked  on  understanding  the  nature  of  business  cycles.  A 
particularly insightful analysis of the role of asset price and credit fluctuations in propagating business 
cycles appeared in the 1930s.2 I have noticed that this has been quoted with increasing frequency in 
recent years, as similar issues have resurfaced (a theme to which I want to return shortly). So it seems 
particularly apt that either as central bankers or as statisticians, or both, we remember Fisher.  
Moreover central banks have long been intense users of statistics. Using the RBA as an example, our 
Economics and Financial Markets areas track several thousand individual economic and financial time 
series  on  a  monthly  or  quarterly  basis,  for  the  purposes  of  making  an  assessment  of  current  and 
prospective economic conditions as background for the Bank's monetary policy decision process. The 
majority of these data, particularly those seeking to measure the 'real' side of the economy and prices, 
are produced by other bodies, usually the official statistical agencies, both in Australia and abroad. Let 
me  say  at  this  point  how  much  we,  in  the  RBA,  value  the  professionalism  and  assistance  of  the 
Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics.  The  willingness  of  ABS  officers  to  help  our  staff  understand  the 
nuances of the various series is a great help as we try to put together the various pieces of the jigsaw 
that  make  up  the  Australian  economy,  in  order  to  decide  what  we  should  do  to  preserve 
macroeconomic stability. I am sure that in other countries this relationship is equally vital.  
Central banks are also major compilers of statistics in their own right. The bulk of central banks, for 
example,  put  together  data  on  the  balance  sheets of  banks  and  other  institutions.  This  is usually  a 
by-product of regulatory powers, a result in many instances of legislation for increased oversight of the 
banking  system  after  the  economic  and  financial  collapses  which  happened  in  the  1930s,  when 
Irving Fisher was at the peak of his career. Hence it is natural that it is usually central banks which 
publish measures of money and credit, as well as series for official interest rates, exchange rates and 
so on. A good many central banks publish data on the balance of payments as well, which I suspect is 
often a legacy of exchange controls. In many less-developed countries, the central bank is often one 
of the most capable and best-resourced institutions, and so is called on to bear additional statistical 
responsibilities.  So  central  banks  have  a  major  interest  in  compiling,  disseminating  and  using 
statistics.  
I want to suggest, however, that the statistical needs and interests of central banks are changing, as is 
the  data  environment  in  which  they  operate.  I  will  elaborate  on  this  theme  under  three  general 
headings: 
• 
The growth of the financial sector, and especially of the size of the balance sheet of the 
household sector in the past decade or more, has significant implications for the way the 
                                                      
1  http://www.ifcommittee.org/FisherBiogr.htm
2  
'The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions', 1933, Econometrica, 1, pp 337–357. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
  economy is likely to behave in the future, for the kind of analysis central banks conduct and 
therefore for the sorts of statistics they need to have.  
New  emphases  in  the  mandates  of  central  banks  –  in  particular  the  explicit  focus  on 
financial system stability (as opposed to prudential supervision of individual institutions) – 
carry implications for data collections and the way we process them.  
The changing data environment, and in particular more private provision of data, provides 
both  opportunities  for  central  banks  to  exploit  that  information,  but  also  some  potential 
pitfalls.  
The financial sector and balance sheets  
For a long time, data from the 'real' side of the economy were of primary interest to macroeconomic 
policy-makers. This presumably followed the intellectual currents in economics. The development of 
national  income  accounting  in  the  1940s,  and  the  growing  optimism  about  the  capacity  of 
macroeconomic policy to deliver consistently high levels of output and employment, emphasised the 
measurement,  forecasting  and  control  of  aggregate  demand.  The  various  partial  indicators  of 
economic activity, culminating in the quarterly estimates of national income and spending, were the 
raw statistical materials with which generations of economists learned to work their trade. Of course, 
central bankers always paid a good deal of attention to financial data like interest rates, lending, credit 
and money data, but even in central banks I suspect that until the mid 1970s most of the prestigious 
analytical jobs were in the areas dealing with the real economy. This period was also the heyday of 
large  scale  macroeconometric  model  building,  usually  with  great  detail  on  the  expenditure  side  of 
national accounting and with associated data requirements. It's worth noting, incidentally, that these 
models typically failed to capture adequately the inter-linkages between the real and financial sides of 
the economy. For some time, of course, the financial side was seen as just a passive add-on – many 
people  thought  that  changes  in  balance  sheets  didn't  matter  much,  and  that  movements  in  asset 
prices were of second-order importance. A common view for many years, in fact, was that monetary 
policy didn't matter much.  
As  the  intellectual  battle  raged  over  what  activist  stabilisation  policy  could,  in  fact,  achieve,  the 
economic and financial upheavals of the 1970s ushered in a period in which financial variables were 
suddenly seen as much more important – money did matter after all – and discussion focussed much 
more  on  financial  quantities.  There  was  the  observed  correlation  between  measures  of  the  money 
stock and the price level. Irving Fisher's Equation of Exchange, MV=PQ, made an appearance here, 
as  the  quantity  theory  of  money  was  turned  into  a  policy  prescription  of  beguiling  simplicity:  if  only 
central banks could control 'M', they would in due course stabilise 'P'.  
That idea seemed very appealing in the mid 1970s, but as we all know, the policy process turned out 
to be more complex than that. Today is not the time to explore all that again. It suffices to say that, 
despite  tremendous  efforts  in  developing  and  analysing  a  host  of  measures  of  money,  attempts  to 
impart  stability  by  targeting  closely  the  money  stock  were  much  less  successful  in  practice  than  in 
theory.  Most  countries  have  moved  away  from  that  idea  towards  some  sort  of  implicit  or  explicit 
targeting of the ultimate objective, prices, using the short-term nominal interest rate as the instrument.  
Yet it would be a mistake to think that this shift signifies that the behaviour of the financial sector has 
once again come to be viewed as unimportant to the economy. On the contrary, the way in which the 
financial  system  responds  to  financial  prices,  to  regulation  (or  deregulation)  and  to  the  demand  for 
products by the household and business sectors, and the way in which it is constantly innovating, has 
a major bearing on the path of economic activity. Moreover, the importance of these links is growing.  
Opinions vary on whether or not this is a good thing. It has been claimed, for example, that the growth 
of derivatives markets potentially enhances economic stability, insofar as risks inherent in life can be 
shifted from those who do not wish to run them to those who do. It has also been claimed that such 
innovations  are  highly  dangerous  –  'financial  weapons  of  mass  destruction'  was  one  colourful 
description.3 Either way, an interaction of financial processes with the real economy is in mind; what is 
at  issue  is  where  the  risks  inherent  in  economic  life  are  ultimately  borne,  and  whether  the  people 
running  them  understand  them  and  have  been  paid  an  appropriate  price  to  do  so.  This  is  an  area 
                                                      
3   http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/2002pdf.pdf
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
where  the statistical collections  find  it  hard  to keep  up,  particularly  with  the  proliferation  of  financial 
activity which crosses national borders or occurs off-balance sheet.  
Another trend which is playing a powerful role in the modern economy is the growth in the household 
sector's assets, occurring in parallel with the increase in households' access to credit. The growth of 
aggregate wealth, together with the constant search for new products and new business by financial 
intermediaries, has seen the increasing collateralisation of the housing stock. Your home was always 
the collateral for a mortgage loan, of course, but these days you are much more likely to be using it as 
collateral for a loan for some other purpose as well. Possibly you are doing so at a stage in life when 
you  would  traditionally  have  been  debt  free.  If  you  are  at  all  creditworthy,  moreover,  there  is  no 
shortage of institutions lining up to lend to you.  
This is a major issue in several countries, and we have seen extensive (and as yet largely unresolved) 
debates about what amount of household debt is 'sustainable'. Perhaps the trend towards larger and 
more  leveraged  household  balance  sheets  has  largely  run  its  course.  Certainly  for  Australia,  our 
analysis  of  its  main  underlying  causes  has  tended  to  suggest  that  it  should  be  a  one-time  portfolio 
adjustment, not a permanently different trend rate of growth in debt. But it is also possible that we are 
some  time  from  seeing  any  end  to  that  adjustment  process  since,  in  principle,  there  is  no  obvious 
reason why a much higher proportion of the housing stock might not yet be collateralised. If it were, 
there would be a lot more borrowing ahead. Either way, with the stock of household wealth now twice 
as large, relative to the flow of current income, as it was in the early 1980s, and the equity contained 
therein much more accessible via products such as re-draw facilities and home equity loans, and more 
recently reverse mortgages, these changes have the potential to exert bigger influences on economic 
performance than in the past.  
Yet  the  statistical  information  about  some  important  elements  of  these  phenomena  is  poor.  Take 
dwelling prices, a key ingredient in estimating aggregate household wealth. In Australia, there are five 
series that are routinely used. Because dwellings are far from homogeneous, and change hands only 
infrequently, getting a good representation of the true change in price of existing dwellings from one 
quarter  or  year  to  the  next  is  much  more  difficult  than,  for  example,  getting  a  reasonable  index  of 
changes  in  share  prices.  A  major  problem  is  that  compositional  effects  on  the  observed  mean  or 
median price of dwellings can be very large if transactions shift between high and low-value parts of 
the property market between one observation and the next. Another problem is that most series tend 
to  be  dated  from  the  time  a  property  settlement  is  advised  to  official  records,  which  may  be  some 
months after the sale and price were agreed. Some series try very hard to overcome these sorts of 
problems, but at the cost of being either untimely or highly prone to revision (or both). Other series are 
more timely but are unable to overcome technical flaws and so contain a high degree of short-term 
variability.  Memo  to  statisticians,  in  central  banks  or  elsewhere:  policy-makers  need  better  data  on 
housing prices.  
In Australia, the ABS is responding to this challenge with efforts to improve their house price series. 
The RBA very much welcomes this, and has been pleased to have the opportunity to be involved in 
the  discussions  that  the  ABS  has  had  with  various  interested  parties.  In  an  ideal  world,  we  would 
perhaps collect data from real estate agents at the time that sales and prices are first agreed. This 
would offer near-universal coverage and a high degree of timeliness, and allow collection of more data 
on  the  characteristics  of  each  house,  allowing  more  control  for  compositional  effects  and  quality 
changes. However, for cost-benefit reasons, including considerations of reporting burdens, the ABS 
has  decided  instead  to  collect  data  from  financial  institutions  providing  finance  for  transactions. 
Although this may not be quite as comprehensive or as timely as an ideal data set, it will still be a 
major  improvement  compared  with  collecting  data  from  state  governments  after  the  settlement  of 
transactions. We look forward to being able to use the new series in due course.  
Better data on house prices will be valuable, but central banks also need a good sense of people's 
behaviour  in  response  to  changes  in  asset  prices.  How  do  we  get  this?  Traditionally,  this  sort  of 
question has tended to be addressed by using time series for spending and wealth to estimate 'wealth 
effects', with the answer usually being that for every dollar of wealth change, there is an effect of a few 
cents on spending. But such estimates could well be hopelessly outdated given the immense increase 
in the capacity to borrow against collateral that has extended even to people of fairly modest incomes 
in the past decade. Hence there are demands for direct answers to questions like:  
• 
• 
what do people actually do with the equity extracted from dwellings through borrowing?  
how are debt and wealth distributed across the population by income, or by age or region?  
BIS Review 24/2005 
 3
how is changed borrowing behaviour likely to affect the inter-generational transfer of wealth?  
• 
There  is  growing  tendency  to  look  to  direct  surveys  of  the  population  for  the  answers  to  these 
questions. Here let me make mention of a survey that the RBA is currently working on, which focuses 
on the extent to which households used mortgage finance for non-housing purposes over 2004. The 
Bank engaged a private research firm to conduct the survey, which was designed jointly, drawing on 
the  Bank's  existing  knowledge  about  household  debt,  and  the  research  firm's  expertise  in 
questionnaire design. The main field work was undertaken in January and February this year and the 
Australian public were generally very co-operative. Indeed, Reserve Bank staff took a number of calls, 
emails and letters from people taking an active interest in the survey (though also, it must be said, a 
number of calls telling us to mind our own business!). The results will be published later this year.  
An  earlier  example  of  using  customised  survey  data  to  address  a  specific  issue  was  the  survey  of 
hedging practices of Australian enterprises in late 2001. This was conducted by the ABS with major 
input and funding from the RBA. It was motivated by the fact that while Australia had very substantial 
foreign liabilities, the foreign currency exposures reported by the financial sector were very small (as 
would  be  expected  given  that  such  exposures  carry  capital  requirements).  Clearly  these  entities 
engaged in substantial hedging, but we knew little about the other sectors of the economy. Hence we 
approached the ABS to carry out a survey to fill in the missing pieces. What we found was that even 
though net liabilities to foreigners were (and still are) substantial, the Australian community as a whole 
had, at end 2001, a modest net foreign currency asset position. The difference is of course due to the 
fact  that  foreign  demand  for  Australian  dollar-denominated  assets  was  substantial,  which  has 
remained  true  in  the  period  since.  Hence  while  absorbing  substantial  resources  from  abroad, 
Australian entities were not, by and large, accumulating large foreign currency risks. This was a very 
important  fact  to  know,  and  I  think  it  has  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  views  various  observers, 
including ratings agencies, have formed about the country's external accounts. Work is currently under 
way in the ABS for an update of this survey, with substantial funding support from the RBA.  
These are just two examples of the use of one-off surveys. In due course, regular statistical collections 
may well adapt to provide more information on some of these questions, but that takes time. Hence, I 
think there could well be more of this sort of approach by central banks in future: use of customised 
survey information to address specific questions which arise because of fast-moving structural change 
in the economy.  
An implication of this for central bank statisticians could be, I suppose, that a somewhat different set of 
skills  might  be  required.  Time  series  expertise  –  I  can  recall  in  the  past  reading,  or  trying  to  read, 
lengthy papers on the X-11 seasonal adjustment technique as applied to monetary data – might be 
relatively less in demand, and knowledge of how to design, implement and interpret surveys giving a 
cross section or panel data set, more in demand. Central banks might of course need to contract out 
for  that  expertise  –  and  may  well  use  official  agencies  for  that  purpose,  though  there  is  ample 
competition from private firms.  
Changing mandate  
Not unrelated to the growing size and complexity of the financial sector of the economy is the rise in 
emphasis  on  financial system  stability as a  'charter  item'  for  central  banks.  Financial stability  as  an 
objective has, of course, been around for as long as central banking. The lender of last resort function 
– to liquefy the system in times of crisis – was in fact a major part of the raison d'être of the modern 
central bank. But we have seen in the past decade or so a clearer focus on identifying potential threats 
to  system  stability  and  working  to  reduce  them.  This  has  been  reflected  in  the  structure  of  some 
central  banks,  as  for  example  in  the  'stability  wing'  of  the  Bank  of  England,  and  the  creation  of  a 
System Stability function in the RBA. It has also been reflected in the advent of regular publications 
about stability issues by central banks, in our case the Financial Stability Review now published twice 
each year.  
In this audience it is worth asking: what is the data set needed for this task?  
Thus far, in our own experience and, as best I can tell, that of some other central banks, the data used 
by the work on system stability overlap to some extent with those used by the macroeconomists in 
their  monetary  policy  work.  In  our  case,  aggregates  for  credit,  household  sector  debt  servicing 
burdens,  risk  spreads  and  so  on  are  commonly  used  for  both  types  of  work.  That  is  because  the 
ranking question of late has been whether the extent of additional household leverage amounts to a 
risk to financial stability. It turns out that this pretty much depends on whether it constitutes a risk to 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2005
macroeconomic stability first. That is, our assessment is that high household debt is unlikely, of itself, 
to lead directly to distress for lenders, or to a growth slump. Where there is a risk is that some other 
contractionary shock might be amplified by high levels of debt, with potential impacts on the economy. 
That might affect financial firms' profitability indirectly.  
Thus  far,  then,  the  data  sets  used  by  the  macro  policy  people  and  those  by  the  financial  stability 
people  have  been  similar.  As  our  work  on  system  stability  issues  continues  to  develop,  however,  I 
suspect we will need different sorts of statistical tools. There are likely to be two dimensions.  
First, while to date stability analysts have mostly been content to work with aggregates – that is, mean 
outcomes  –  they  are  becoming  much  more  interested  in  the  dispersion  of  experiences  around  the 
mean. The question will be not just how much debt is there, but who has it, and what are their other 
characteristics?  To  take  one  example, the  household  debt servicing  ratio  in  Australia  is  higher now 
than it has been before. But the implications of this may be quite different if it is mainly high income 
earners who have the largest debts (for which there does seem to be some evidence) compared with 
what would be the case if the debt is concentrated unduly in people of low incomes. Similarly, on the 
side  of  exposures  to  risk  in  the  financial  sector,  the  question  will  be:  where  does  it  reside?  The 
apparent total amount of risk could look quite acceptable but the concentration might not be.  
Second,  there  will  be  intense  focus  on  the  inter-linkages  –  the  correlations  –  between  institutions, 
portfolios and markets. In a full assessment of the resilience of the financial system in the face of an 
event which affects housing prices, for example, the direct effect on a bank's portfolio of housing loans 
of  lower  house  prices  and/or  higher  unemployment  is  only  part  of  the  story.  Other  elements  would 
include  how  the  bank's  portfolio  of  business  loans  would  be  affected  by  the  same  event,  including 
through  the  second-round  effects  of  households'  spending  responding  to  the  deterioration  in  their 
financial  position.  A  shock  large  enough  to  cause  the  household  sector  significant  problems  in 
servicing  mortgages  would  presumably  be  associated  with  some  belt  tightening  for  business 
borrowers too. Hence there could be a correlation between the two portfolios, and not necessarily the 
same one as in the past.  
These interrelationships point to stress testing, for individual institutions and systems, as the way in 
which assessments of stability and resilience need to be conducted. The raw materials for the required 
data sets here are the historical loan portfolios, defaults experience and so on of the individual lending 
institutions. For the most part, these are in the hands of the institutions themselves and the bodies 
which collect the prudential data. The processing of these raw data to produce a fully-developed stress 
test of the system will be in the hands of the institution responsible for assessing the stability of the 
system  –  which  is  usually  the  central  bank.  This  points  to  the  need  for  arrangements  which  foster 
close co-operation, particularly where the central bank is not the bank supervisor and hence may not 
collect data directly (as is the case in Australia).  
The  kinds  of  analysis  needed  for  a  robust  treatment  of  system  stability  also  require  substantial 
analytical and statistical skills in central banks: it's not just a matter of having the right data but being 
able to use it. Many countries have found this to be the case when participating in the Financial Sector 
Assessment Programs, or FSAPs, run jointly by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
This  is  a  comprehensive  process  which  assesses  the  strength  of  a  country's  financial  system,  and 
often involves stress testing which moves well beyond the single-factor sensitivity tests which banks 
and  their  supervisors  usually  conduct.  Australia  will  begin  our  own  FSAP  later  this  year,  and  the 
Reserve Bank is chairing the stress test exercise, working with APRA, the Treasury and the private 
sector.  
Changing data environment 
A third feature of the statistical landscape today is the proliferation of data collected and disseminated 
by  private  sector  entities.  One  of  the  most  common  examples  is  industry  associations  or  individual 
firms compiling data on aspects of business conditions. At last count there were, for example, some 
thirteen nationwide and several regional surveys of business conditions in the Australian economy or 
major parts of it. Another area is measures of housing prices, where private associations or research 
companies produce four of the five recognised series.  
Some of these private data sets command, rightly, the attention of economists and policy-makers. The 
issue of quality of data is key, however. Where an entity which has a vested interest is releasing data, 
upon which they then base claims for advancing their own opinions or agenda, we should take care. 
Some  private  surveys  one  occasionally  sees  could  only  be  described  as  crude  advertising  or 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 5
propaganda. Not so long ago a new series for housing prices in Australia was launched, with great 
fanfare,  by  a  lending  institution.  It  turned  out  that  the  prices  used  were  based  mostly  on  potential 
borrowers'  own  subjective  valuations  of  their  own  houses,  rather  than  any  actual  transactions.  The 
index  was  compiled  by  the  lending  department  of  the  institution  in  question  and  appeared  to  be  a 
marketing tool rather than a serious attempt to measure prices. Somehow it was not surprising that it 
showed  significant  rises  in  prices,  when  the  better-known  series  were  tending  to  show  a  decline. 
These sorts of series don't deserve to be taken seriously.  
Part of the art of policy-making is developing a sense of how to distinguish noise and signal from this 
mass of 'information'. Before placing too much weight on an indicator, some knowledge of how it is put 
together  is  obviously  important.  To  this  end,  it  is  often  worthwhile  for  people  in  the  policy  analysis 
process to develop a good dialogue with the compilers of these data. On occasion, well-trained people 
in  the  bureaucracy  have  been  able  to  suggest  methodological  improvements  to  privately-compiled 
surveys.  
No  survey  of  economic  conditions  should  have  much  weight  attached  to  it  until  we  have  seen  its 
performance over a period of time long enough for some business cycle fluctuations to be observed. I 
grant that, in Australia, a very long expansion means that this test is getting a bit demanding. But even 
within an expansion there are fluctuations in the pace of growth and a good business survey should 
pick these up. Most surveys will be found, in my experience, to have given some false signals as well 
as some genuine ones. This issue of type I versus type II errors can be critical in judging the state of 
affairs at key points in the business cycle, using survey data.  
It is in the area of financial prices where the proliferation of private data is perhaps most marked. The 
vast bulk of data on pricing of financial instruments is privately compiled, a result of the size of private 
financial markets and their continuous nature. Where financial instruments are traded on exchanges, 
their  prices  are  easily  observed,  and  there  are  relatively  few  challenges  associated  with  compiling 
pricing  data.  However,  with  the  increasing  shift  towards  over-the-counter  (OTC)  and  non-standard 
products,  this  task  is  more  difficult  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  rely  more  on  financial  institutions' 
proprietary data. There is no real alternative to this, but of course we need to take care to be satisfied 
as to the accuracy and impartiality of the data and it is incumbent on private providers of data to be 
prepared to provide some assurance here. As central banks increasingly use such data sets to infer 
market  attitudes  to  risk  and  expectations  about  the  future  (a  process  which  incidentally  requires 
increasingly sophisticated analytical skills), all these issues seem likely to grow in importance over the 
years ahead. Many challenges will surely come our way.  
Conclusion 
Central banks are heavy consumers of information, and hence of statistics, and always will be. But the 
nature  of  the  information we  need  to do  our  job,  both  in  the  monetary  policy  field  and  the  financial 
stability field, is changing. The larger and more dynamic role played by the financial sector, and the 
greater prominence and impact of swings in household balance sheets, raise as many challenges for 
our  statistical  collections,  and  for  the  way  we  process  them,  as  they  do  for  policy  itself.  Just  as 
supervisors of financial institutions or markets need to keep pace with developments, the challenge 
before our statisticians is to keep the nature and coverage of our collections fresh and relevant in a 
changing  world.  This  is  particularly  pertinent  for  financial  data. Just  as  important,  a  capacity  to  use 
relevant data to calibrate previous and potential future correlations between portfolios, institutions and 
markets is key to a sound assessment of stability and resilience of the system as a whole.  
This is a big task, which will never be finished. Let us grapple with it with vigour. But first, enjoy the 
rest of your visit to Sydney.  
6 
 BIS Review 24/2005
