Wu Xiaoling: Develop corporate bond market to improve financial asset 
structure 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Ninth Forum of 
China’s Capital Market, Beijing, 17 January 2005. 
 Establishing financial market system in line with the intrinsic needs of socialistic market economy is an 
important task in China’s economic and financial system reform. In recent years, China’s financial laws 
and regulations have been greatly improved, financial assets have been gradually expanded, diversity 
of financial institutions has been largely increased, and the financial market has been developing in a 
steady, rapid and healthy way. 
However,  many  problems  still  exist  in  China’s  financial  market  development,  such  as  the  irrational 
financial  asset  structure,  the  relatively  high  potential  risks  in  the  financial  sector,  the  frequent 
occurrence of irregularities and frauds in financial institutions, etc. Capital market, which constitutes an 
important  part  of  the  financial  market,  also  saw  its  role  in  resource  allocation  greatly  hampered  by 
problems such as unbalanced development between the stock and bond market. Therefore, how to 
steadily develop bond market, improve financial asset structure and advance the overall development 
of financial market poses a big challenge for policy makers like us. 
I. 
Current financial asset structure hindered economic restructuring and increased the 
social cost of economic operation  
Distinctions of China’s current financial asset structure 
1. 
In  recent  years,  China’s  financial  market  development  has  accomplished  some  progress.  However, 
growth of direct financing is relatively slow and the corporate sector still relies its financing largely on 
bank loans. At present, there are two main distinctions of China’s financial asset structure. 
First, the proportion of indirect financing stands excessively high in the economy compared to direct 
financing. With respect to overall financing structure in China’s financial market, new loans in financial 
institutions totaled RMB3 trillion yuan in 2003, accounting for 85 percent of the total financing, while 
new  issuance  of  stock,  treasury  bond,  corporate  bond  for  the  same  period  of  time  amounted  to 
RMB534  billion  yuan,  accounting  only  for  15  percent.  The  proportion  of  indirect  financing  is 
overwhelmingly higher than that of direct financing in the economy. 
Second, government bonds take a too high proportion in direct financing, indicating a dominant control 
of  financial  resources  by  the  government.  With  respect  to  the  direct  financing  structure  in  China’s 
financial market, a total of RMB1251.5 billion yuan worth of securities was issued in 2003. Among the 
new issues, RMB628 billion yuan were treasury bonds (accounting for 50.2 percent), RMB452 billion 
yuan were financial bonds issued by policy banks (accounting for 36.1 percent), RMB135.7 billon yuan 
were  stocks  (accounting  for  10.8  percent),  and  RMB35.8  billion  yuan  were  corporate  bonds 
(accounting for 2.9 percent). Therefore, funds raised by enterprises from the stock market and bond 
market only accounted for a combined13.7 percent of the total direct financing, while the government 
took a share of 86.3 percent, indicating that the government has a high monopoly on funds allocation. 
2. 
The underdevelopment of direct financing increased the social cost of economic 
operation 
The underdevelopment of direct financing was evident in the limited access to credit and low capability 
of the enterprises to directly raise funds in the market, which has resulted in a low proportion of direct 
financing  in  the  economy.  On  the  one hand,  a great amount  of  idle  funds  in  the  society  lack direct 
investment channels, and investors could not make free investment decisions according to their own 
risk preferences. On the other hand, enterprises could not locate the favorable strategies to lower the 
cost of financing and adjust the scale and structure of production according to the demand and supply 
of products and funds in the market. 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
In  a  financial  market  system  dominated  by  commercial  banks  with  indirect  financing  playing  a 
dominant role, if enterprises are unable to react to the signals of market change, the cost of economic 
restructuring may have to be mainly born by banks and the government. As a result, bad loans in the 
banking  sector  will  likely  increase  and  the  government’s  financial  burden  could  be  aggravated. 
Subjecting  risks  emerged  in  the  process  of  economic  development  that  should  be  absorbed  by  the 
market entities to the banking system and the government could lead to an increase of social cost of 
economic operation. 
Bond market constitutes an important platform for the development of direct financing 
3. 
Steadily promoting the development of direct financing will provide incentives to market participants 
and  enhance  the  efficiency  of  resource  allocation.  Direct  financing  market  in  market  economies  is 
dominated by fixed-income instruments, which account for 2/3 of the total market share, while equity 
instruments  only  account  for  1/3.  The  fixed-income  instruments  usually  consist  of  corporate  bonds, 
public bonds and institutional bonds, with corporate bonds as its core component. However, in China 
the  diversity  of  fixed-income  instruments  are  yet  to  be  improved  as  public  bonds  mainly  limited  to 
central  government  bonds  and  the  public  simply  has  no  idea  about  institutional  bonds.  Even  in 
corporate  bonds,  the  public  is  unable  to  properly  distinguish  between  bonds  issued  for  project 
investment and bonds issued to support business operation of an enterprise. With fresh memory of the 
redemption  risks  of  corporate  bonds  in  1980s  and  1990s,  the  State  Development  and  Reform 
Commission nowadays mainly limits its approval of bond issuance to project investment bonds not the 
ordinary  corporate  bonds  issued  to  support  enterprises’  business  operation,  which  has  forced  the 
enterprises to finance primarily through the stock market. In 2004 (till end-November), funds raised by 
enterprises  in  stock  market  amounted  to  RMB127.3  billion  yuan,  and  that  in  bond  market  totaled 
RMB24.5 billion yuan (only accounting for 20 percent of the former). As the deep-rooted problems in 
stock market remains unresolved and fiscal policy tends to shift from a proactive stance to a sound 
posture,  it  has  become  a  priority  to  steadily  press  ahead  with  the  development  of  corporate  bond 
market. A sound growth of the corporate bond market bears great significance in that it can help to 
disperse  the  concentrated  financing  risks,  alleviate  the  financing  pressures  of  the  banking  sector, 
improve  financial  asset  structure,  foster  favorable  credit  environment  and  nurture  commercial  credit 
development.  
II. 
Clarify risk responsibilities, cultivate institutional investors, and advance the 
development of corporate bond market 
Risk responsibilities should be clarified to steadily develop corporate bond market 
1. 
Both bonds and stocks are direct financing instruments for enterprises, which should follow rules and 
principles of market economy. While investors taking bond investment in an enterprise should have 
the right to get interests and principal of their investment repaid on time, they should undertake the 
enterprise’s default risks as well. However, this principle is not reflected in our current legal framework. 
For instance, the Provisional Administrative Rules for Corporate Bonds published in 1987 to a great 
extent  regarded  corporate  bonds  as  state-controlled  resources.  It  failed  to  identify  the  risks  that 
investors  should  bear,  but  stressed  instead  that  the  bond  holders  many  not  be  responsible  for  the 
enterprise’s performance. The Administrative Rules for Corporate Bonds issued in 1993 maintained 
relevant provisions and also failed to clarify the responsibilities of investors in taking enterprise’s credit 
risks. Current rules even mandates guarantee, mostly provided by state-owned banks, for corporate 
bond issuance, which has not only removed the demarkation line between corporate bonds in terms of 
their credit ratings but also transferred market risks to financial institutions, especially the commercial 
banks. Therefore, current administrative rules for corporate bonds must be revised to identify relevant 
risk responsibilities of the corporate bond investors and remove the mandatory guarantees so as to 
further develop corporate bond market. 
Institutional investors should be cultivated to steadily develop corporate bond market 
2. 
Investing in corporate bond requires a great deal of work in information collecting and processing, and 
a  high  capability  of  investors  in  identifying  and  taking  the  risks.  Also,  the  volatility  of  bond  price  is 
relatively small and only large-value transactions could effectively reduce costs. These features show 
that institutional investors who have relatively a strong capability in identifying and undertaking market 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
risks are ideal investors for corporate bonds. Therefore, efforts should be made to cultivate institutional 
investors  including  insurance  companies,  commercial  banks,  pension  fund  and  investment  fund 
companies  to  increase  market  liquidity  and  reduce  market  risks  so  as  to  further  develop  corporate 
bond  market.  Individual  investors  may  indirectly  invest  in  corporate  bonds  through  collective 
investment instruments such as investment-insurance and fund products, etc.  
3. 
Historical lessons need to be learned in the process of steadily developing corporate 
bond market 
While  developing  corporate  bond  market,  reviewing  historical  experience  and  lessons  on  market 
supervision  and  construction  is  a  necessity  for  finding  solutions  for  new  problems.  The  slow 
development of corporate bond market in China could be mainly attributed to the following reasons:  
First,  heavy  government  intervention.  From  end-1980s  to  the  beginning  of  1990s,  corporate  bond 
issuance has been under strick quota control like the credit funds. Under such a system, corporate 
bond  became  a  tool  of  governments  at  various  levels  to  support  local  economic  development  and 
supplement the inadequacy of credit funds, leading to a sharp increase of default risks under the low-
efficient  expansionary  economic  growth  pattern;  local  governments  even  forced  local  financial 
institutions to redeem the bonds at maturity on the behalf of the enterprises unable to fulfill their debt 
obligations, resulting in a great deal of unsettled problems.  
Second, a mismatch between the individual investors and the underlying risks of corporate bond. For 
long, investors of corporate bonds in China are mainly individual investors, corporate bond issuance is 
also mainly targeted at small and medium-sized institutions and individual investors. These investors 
lack the capability in identifying and underwriting the risks, thus tend to ask the government or financial 
institutions  to  compensate  any  losses  if  the  bond  issuer  finally  defaults  on  redemption,  which  quite 
often leads to a rise of fiscal burdens and non-performing financial assets.  
Third,  lack  of  a  sound  system  for  corporate  bond  rating  and  information  disclosure.  In  China’s 
corporate bond market, due to the administrative approval system for bond issuance and the investors’ 
limited awareness of risks, credit rating of corporate bonds is effectively artificial, which is neither good 
for  the  building  of  a  market-based  credit  system,  nor  for  the  cultivation  of  qualified  credit  rating 
institutions. Also, China’s corporate bond market lacks improved and effective information disclosure 
system. 
Unmindful  of  the  historical  lessons,  stricter  control  has  been  imposed  later  on  the  issuance  of 
corporate bonds. Concerned about the threats of corporate bond default to social stability, zero risk 
has been targeted in the current supervision of bond issuance. To ensure repayment of principal and 
interests on debt maturity, the supervisory authorities conducted rigorous control both on the quality of 
the  bond  issuer  and  the  quantity  of  the  issuance.  As  a  result,  only  a  few  qualified  large  state 
enterprises  with  good  access  to  the  capital  market  can  issue  bonds,  while  a  large  amount  of  the 
enterprises could not have their financing needs satisfied in the market. 
III. 
Foster intermediaries and improve financial services to promote healthy development of 
the corporate bond market 
Improve credit rating system for corporate bonds and cultivate credit rating institutions 
1. 
According  to  advanced  international  experience,  a  credit  rating  system  with  public  credibility  is  the 
foundation  for  corporate  bond  market  development,  because  credit  ratings  could  provide  important 
information  for  the  investors  to  make  investment  decisions.  Market  demand  should  serve  as  the 
catalyst  for  market  supply,  only  in  a  market  environment  where  enterprises  are  allowed  to  issue 
corporate  bonds  independently  and  investors  undertake  risks  at  their  own  discretion,  will  the  real 
demand arise for credit rating of bonds, will the credit ratings function as the true signals for the risk 
profiles  of  corporate  bonds,  and  will  the  credit  rating  institutions  value  their  market  reputation  and 
improve service in competition. 
Improve market supervision to facilitate corporate bond trading 
2. 
The  trading of  financial  products  mainly  falls  into  two  categories:  based  on  price  match or on  price 
negotiation. In general, price match is suitable for trading of financial products of small value or with 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 3
simple trading factors while price negotiation is more applicable to the trading of financial products of 
large  value  or  with  complex  trading  factors.  For  the  time  being,  in  China’s  financial  markets,  bond 
transactions are either based on price match in the stock exchanges or based on price negotiation in 
the inter-bank bond market. Corporate bond featuring complex trading factors and demanding highly 
professional  investment  skills  is  an  ideal  financial  product  for  institutional  investors  to  be  traded  on 
large-value basis. In the advanced international markets, 95 percent of issuance and trading of bonds 
(including  corporate  bonds)  is  conducted  through  over-the-counter  market.  Allowing  corporate  bond 
issuers  and  investors  to  decide  independently  on  the  markets  to  issue  and  trade  their  products 
according to their individual needs is the best choice for the steady development of corporate bond 
market. In the meantime, supervisory authorities should improve market regulation, relax restrictions 
on corporate bond market and build up effective market incentives and disciplines, so as to ensure 
free flow of fund and strengthen market competition and transparency. In order to put into full play the 
role  of  intermediaries  and  other  market  participants,  and  guarantee  transparency  in  the  market, 
stringent requirements on information disclosure should be established in addition to a sound credit 
rating  system  for  the  bond  issuers,  in  which  the  contents,  standards,  procedures,  frequency  of 
disclosure as well as the penalties for irregularities must be explicitly stipulated. 
Improve bond custody and settlement services to facilitate bond transactions 
3. 
Bond  investors  undertake  the  risks  while  the  financial  institutions  and  intermediaries  only  provide 
relevant services in bond investment. Therefore, the invested bonds and the margin deposits of the 
customers must be kept in custody of the third party. Current custody arrangement cannot protect the 
customers’ invested assets from being misused, and hence must be thoroughly reformed. 
Market  participants  differ  in  their  demands  for  settlement  services.  The  co-existence  of  China 
Securities Registry and Settlement Co. LTD and China Government Securities Depository Trust and 
Clearing Co. LTD with a highly efficient trans-custody relationship established between them should 
be able to promote market development, competition and services. The current arrangement based on 
custody  through  trading  seats  in  these  two  companies  leaves  room  for  manipulation  of  customers’ 
invested bonds and margin deposits, thus should be transformed to a system based on custody by the 
bond investors, so as to improve the custody efficiency and facilitate customers’ choices of market for 
bond issuance and trading. 
IV.  
Strengthen coordination among supervisory authorities and conduct functional 
supervision to advance corporate bond market development 
1. 
Improve current supervisory system for the bond market and realize functional 
supervision 
The bond market in China is currently under the supervision of different regulatory authorities, with the 
issuance of government debt supervised by the Ministry of Finance, the issuance of corporate bond by 
the State Development and Reform Commission, the issuance of financial bonds by the People’s Bank 
of China, the bonds traded in stock exchanges by the China Securities Regulatory Commission and 
that listed in the inter-bank market by the People’s Bank of China. Due to the problems associated 
with labor division and coordination among supervisory authorities, there tends to have an overlap in 
supervision which will hamper the healthy development of the bond market.  
To  avoid  either  an  overlap  or  a  void  in  supervision,  the  bond  market  needs  to  be  brought  under 
functional supervision in which the responsibilities for making the rules and supervising market entry 
and  daily  transactions  must  be  assumed  by  different  authorities.  Adopting  functional  supervision 
requires  a  change  of  the  supervision  philosophy  so  that  the  different  supervisory  authorities  could 
focus  on:  first,  formulating  rules  on  the  issuance  and  trading  of  bonds;  and  second,  improving 
information  disclosure  and  credit  rating  system,  establishing  disclosure  standards,  monitoring 
disclosure progress, and punishing unfaithful, untimely or inadequate disclosure. Besides, restrictions 
set on the quality of bond issuers and the quantity of issuance and interest rate must be abolished so 
as  to  let  the  enterprises  decide  for  themselves  as  to  whether  and  how  much  they  could  issue 
corporate bonds in the market.  
4 
 BIS Review 8/2005
Set up a supervisory coordination mechanism to improve supervision efficiency 
2. 
In order to improve supervision efficiency and propel the development of corporate bond market and 
the financial market as a whole, coordination and communication between the supervisory authorities 
should be enhanced under an institutional framework:  
First, unify supervisory philosophy. The starting point of formulating relevant rules and implementing 
the  supervisory  function  is  to  respect  the  independence  of  the  bond  investors  and  issuers,  ensure 
adequate  information  disclosure  and  the  openness,  impartiality  and  fairness  of  trading,  and  make 
investors self responsible for the risks. 
Second, unify supervisory rules. In the issue market, rules should be formulated respectively to accord 
the characteristics of public bonds, corporate bonds, institutional bonds and foreign bonds, while in the 
trading market, rules should be unified based on the trading formalities to facilitate the integration and 
efficiency of the bond market. Strict punishment on irregularities must be included in all supervisory 
rules to deter any wrongdoing. Self-discipline is of utmost importance in terms of market supervision, 
and the responsibilities of the supervisors should be to examine the compliance of market participants 
and enforce punishment on any violations of the rules. 
Third, improve information sharing. This is the only way to improve supervision efficiency under the 
current framework of segregated supervisory functions. 
Advancing  the  development  of  corporate  bond  market  is  of  realistic  significance  for  improving  the 
structure of financial assets and speeding up the growth of direct financing in China. In the process, 
we should clearly define the risk responsibilities of various parties, foster financial intermediaries and 
institutional investors, and in the mean time, change the supervisory philosophy to realize functional 
supervision, strengthen coordination and cooperation among the supervisory authorities. On the one 
hand,  the  reform  of  commercial  banks  is  deepening  and  disciplines  on  credit  extension  are 
strengthened, on the other hand, huge amount of funds in the economy are looking for proper chance 
of  investment.  Under  such  circumstances,  we  should  speed  up  the  growth  of  direct  financing  to 
improve  allocation  of  financial  resources.  Both  the  large  and  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
should  be  allowed  to  issue  bonds  in  the  corporate  bond  market,  provided  the  information  is  truly 
disclosed, bond prices are adequate to cover risks and the investors have a capability to identify risks. 
With  the  deepening  of  relevant  reforms  and  the  implementation  of  consistent  policy  measures,  the 
corporate  bond  market  and  the  overall  financial  market  in  China  will  surely  enter  a  new  era  of 
sustainable and fast development. 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 5
