Ishrat Husain: The Asian Clearing Union 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  inaugural 
ceremony of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Board of Directors of the Asian Clearing Union (ACU), 
Lahore, 16 May 2005. 
 It is a great honour for the State Bank of Pakistan to host the 34th Annual Meeting of the Board of 
Directors  of  the  Asian  Clearing  Union.  I  welcome  you  all  to  Pakistan  and  wish  you  a  pleasant  and 
productive  stay  in  our  country.  It  is  also  indeed  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  the  guests  from 
Afghanistan and the Maldives Monetary Authority, who are attending this conference as Observers. 
We  all  are  familiar  with  the  purpose  and  background  of  the  Asian  Clearing  Union.  We  have  also 
reviewed  each  year  the  progress  that  was  made  and  problems  that  our  members  had  faced  in 
international trade and payments and tried to modify the coverage, mechanism and procedure of the 
Asian Clearing Union. What I wish to emphasize today is that major changes have taken place in the 
international scene during the last one year which necessitates our taking a closer look at the record 
and relevance of the Asian Clearing Union in relation to fast changing global environment. 
In  the  rapidly  changing  environment,  in  which  regional  grouping  is  becoming  a  vehicle  for  trade 
promotion and economic co-operation, the Asian Clearing Union should revisit its charter, examine its 
relevance and find ways to expand the intra-regional trade and economic co-operation in a multilateral 
context. We have to be outward looking and our objective should be to bring about coherence and 
consistency in our macroeconomic policies that attract direct foreign investment. The Annual Report of 
ACU  for  the  current  year  (2004)  indicates  that  even  though  intra-regional  trade  is  growing,  the 
operations through the Asian Clearing Union are limited. Our efforts to expand its membership have 
not as yet succeeded. However, I may add here that the ACU has not experienced a default. Although 
there  have  been  persistent  debtors  in  the  ACU  system,  their  negative  net  balances  have  not  been 
large. There has not been a "structural creditor problem" in the ACU. 
I  would  like  the  Governors  to  give some  thought  as  to  how we can  make  Asian  Clearing Union  an 
important vehicle for the expansion of intra-regional trade and further economic coordination, and how 
our banking and financial markets could be made complementary for the maximization of economic 
welfare of the member states. 
Asian Countries have demonstrated during the last several decades that it is possible to make great 
strides in uplifting the living standard of the majority of the people within a short span of time. I am 
extremely  encouraged  by  the  impressive  progress  that  is  being  made  by  member  countries  of  the 
Asian  Clearing  Union.  Each  and  every  country  is  working  hard  to  bring  about  reduction  in  the 
incidence  of  poverty  and  improve  the  human  development  indicators.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
challenges ahead of us are quite formidable but giving the political will, national determinations and 
collective action I am sure we will be able to march ahead on the road to progress and prosperity. 
The  last  five  years  have  been  extremely  critical  for  our  own  country,  Pakistan.  The  strategy  of 
economic  revival  that  was  initiated  in  December,  1999  has  been  successfully  implemented  and  its 
main  pillars  were  achieving  macro-economic  stability,  improve  the  governance,  introduce  structural 
reforms and resume the path to accelerated growth. The results of the implementation of this strategy 
are quite well known and I will not get into the details as Pakistan delegation will dwell on them in their 
presentation. 
Let me briefly add here that the banking sector reforms undertaken by the State Bank during the last 
five years have helped us provide stability and strength to Pakistan’s financial sector. Independence of 
monetary policy has been a major factor in inculcating financial discipline in the public finances, while 
autonomy of the State Bank in regulating the financial system has been the main strength of reviving 
the financial institutions of the country. By contributing to financial discipline and financial stability, we 
have  managed  to  turn  a  poorly  managed  financial  system  into  a  strong  and  sound  one.  The  State 
Bank would be glad to share the details of the legal, structural, prudential and administrative changes 
that Pakistan has undertaken in the last five years to reach this stage of stability in the banking and 
the financial sector of the country. 
BIS Review 38/2005 
 1
I would like to briefly mention here that country’s economy has been continuously growing for the past 
two years. The GDP for the current fiscal year is likely to be over 7½ per cent which will be the highest 
growth witnessed in the country during the past 13 years.  
Before concluding, I would once again like to welcome the participants and wish them a pleasant stay 
in Pakistan. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2005
