David Dodge: International issues and the Canadian economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canada-UK  Chamber  of 
Commerce, London, 28 June 2005. 
 The international Monetary Order and the Canadian Economy 
As  business  people  with  ties  to  Canada  and  the  United  Kingdom,  you  are  keenly  interested  in  the 
economic prospects of both countries. When we look closely at our economies, it is striking how much 
they have in common in terms of policies and outlook. 
The  United  Kingdom  may  have  roughly  twice  the  population  of  Canada,  but  our  economies  share 
some  very  important  characteristics.  Both  are  relatively  small  compared  with  our  respective 
neighbours—the  euro  zone  and  the  United  States.  From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  we  both 
operate  with  an  inflation-targeting  regime,  backed  by  a  flexible  currency.  We  have  had  a  record  of 
sound  fiscal  policy,  certainly  in  comparison  with  our  large  neighbours.  We  are  relatively  open 
economies  and  depend  greatly  on  international  trade  for  economic  growth.  This  means  that  global 
developments  are  central  to  our  own  domestic  economic  performance.  So  I  will  begin  my  remarks 
today  by  talking  about  international  issues—particularly  global  economic  imbalances—before 
discussing how the Canadian economy is adjusting to international events. 
Global Imbalances-Origins and Solutions 
When I say "global imbalances," I am referring to the persistent and growing current account deficit in 
the United States that is mirrored by large current account surpluses elsewhere, especially in Asia. 
While Canada and the United Kingdom have not contributed in a major way to the creation of these 
imbalances,  we  will  be  part  of  the  solution,  whatever  that  solution  turns  out  to  be.  And  given  our 
dependence on international trade and global financial stability for economic growth, we both have a 
major stake in seeing that global imbalances are resolved in an orderly way. 
These imbalances reflect the financial flows associated with mismatches in savings and investment on 
a  global  scale.  Since  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s,  many  economies  outside  the  United  States  have 
increased their national savings by a very large amount for various reasons. At the same time, the 
United States has reduced its savings and has become increasingly reliant on foreign borrowing. 
Why  should  we  care  about  global  imbalances?  After  all,  isn't  it  a  good  thing  that  markets  allow 
investors in Asia and elsewhere to fill the savings gap in the United States? In theory, yes. But there 
are  three  concerns  with  the  current  situation.  First,  these  financial  flows  are  not  sustainable 
indefinitely, and there are risks that markets could adjust in an abrupt way. Second, it seems clear that 
the excess savings in Asia could be put to better use in Asia itself. And third, there is concern that 
imbalances are contributing to rising protectionist sentiment. 
So  how  can  we  achieve  an  orderly  resolution  of  these  imbalances?  Within  domestic  economies, 
savings  flow  across  sectors  and  regions  without  much  risk  of  disruption,  because  market-based 
mechanisms—such as changes in relative wages, prices, and returns on capital—are allowed to work. 
These  market-based  mechanisms  should  also  be  allowed  to  work  internationally.  Unfortunately,  a 
number of inappropriate national policies are preventing these mechanisms from working effectively, 
and so imbalances are growing unchecked. We know that U.S. external indebtedness—even with that 
country's reserve-currency status—cannot keep growing indefinitely as a share of its GDP. Eventually, 
investors will balk at increasing their exposure to the United States. Should that occur suddenly, we 
could  see  economic  growth  plummet  and  world  financial  markets  become  disorderly,  threatening 
global financial stability. 
Global imbalances are a global problem, and we need to think about them collectively. There is no 
simple  solution  to  these  saving-investment  mismatches.  But  we  must  deal  with  the  fact  that  the 
amount  that  citizens  and  businesses  in  the  euro  zone  and  much  of  Asia  currently  want  to  save 
exceeds the amount that firms there want to invest. And with current policies, this situation may persist 
for some time. As well, most oil-exporting countries are now generating large net savings. At the same 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 1
time,  desired  investment  in  the  United  States  exceeds  desired  national  savings  by  a  considerable 
amount, although it is not certain that this situation will persist. 
Thus, as we look out over the next decade or so, there is a risk that we will find ourselves in a situation 
of global excess supply. This could happen if policy-makers fail to take appropriate measures, and the 
risk  will  increase  if  policy-makers  resort  to  protectionism.  Should  these  risks  materialize,  the  global 
economy would then be headed for a period of very slow growth, perhaps punctuated by periods of 
outright recession. 
I hasten to add that this is not a prediction on my part. I am only saying that such an outcome would 
be  the  consequence  of  inappropriate  policies  in  many  economies.  And  this  outcome  would  hurt  us 
all—including Canada and the United Kingdom—even if in our own case we are following appropriate 
policies. So it is clearly in everyone's interest to discuss these issues, not only domestically, but most 
importantly in international forums, such as the International Monetary Fund, the G-7, and the G-20. 
Ironically enough, the key to changing global savings and investment flows rests with each country 
doing what is right for itself. If all countries followed a framework of appropriate domestic policies, this 
would go a long way towards defusing the danger posed by global imbalances. These policies go well 
beyond the responsibilities of a central banker. But I am raising them because it is important that they 
be discussed more broadly. So let me take a few minutes to review some of these policies. I'll start 
with issues outside of central banking before turning to monetary policy. 
Appropriate Policies Support Confidence 
The way to ensure that global demand continues to grow over time is for all policy-makers to follow 
frameworks that give households the confidence to spend and businesses the confidence to invest. 
Let's  look at  how  this  applies  to  fiscal policy.  There  is  a clear  need  for countries  to pursue  a  fiscal 
policy aimed at producing a sustainable ratio of public debt to GDP. Such a policy gives businesses 
and consumers confidence that the value of their money will not be eroded over time, either by high 
inflation or by excessive rates of taxation. Where a sustainable public debt-to-GDP ratio is now absent, 
it should be achieved; where it is present, it should be maintained. Clearly, fiscal consolidation is in the 
best  interest  of  the  U.S.  economy  and  would  also  be  helpful  in  resolving  global  imbalances.  More 
generally, sound fiscal policies help support investor and household confidence in all economies.  
The second point is that authorities everywhere need to ensure that domestic policies are promoting 
well-functioning markets for goods, services, capital, and labour. In particular, labour markets need to 
be flexible enough to facilitate the movement of workers from sector to sector as the economy adjusts 
to events. This is especially true in the euro zone, where rigid labour markets have been undermining 
confidence. Businesses hesitate to hire when labour market rules are so restrictive, and households 
lack the confidence to spend when unemployment rates are so high. By promoting domestic flexibility, 
policy-makers  everywhere  could  support  confidence  and  boost  growth.  This  would  be  good  for 
national economies, and it would also help to resolve global imbalances. 
There is also a need for policy-makers to recognize the positive role played by a well-functioning social 
safety  net.  Here,  I  am  referring  to  unemployment  insurance,  public  health  care,  and  public  pension 
systems.  The  benefits  of  a  well-functioning  safety  net  should  not  be  underestimated.  Consider  the 
countries of emerging Asia, where such systems are lacking. Because there is no social safety net, 
citizens in those countries need very high levels of savings to mitigate the risk of job loss and illness, 
and to provide for the years after they leave the workforce. A well-functioning social safety net pools 
risk,  so  that  citizens  can  have  increased  confidence  about  the  future  and  reduce  their  need  for 
precautionary  savings.  Boosting  consumption  in  Asia  would  certainly  help  with  the  resolution  of 
imbalances. Of  course,  the  key  to  a  well-functioning  safety  net  is  that  it  actually  functions  well.  We 
have  seen  examples  where  safety  nets  become  so  unwieldy  that  they  act  as  a  hindrance,  holding 
back prospects for growth. Certain Asian economies also face the particular challenge of ensuring that 
the benefits of increased growth and higher incomes are spread more widely throughout the economy. 
I'll return to this point in a moment. 
Authorities everywhere also need to follow policies that help a country's financial system work well. 
This  is  critical  if  the  financial  system  is  to  carry  out  its  vital  role  of  helping  to  match  savings  with 
productive  investments.  The  financial  system  can  also  support  confidence  by  giving  households 
appropriate  access  to  credit.  So  it  is  essential  that  emerging-market  economies  have  sound  and 
efficient  banking  systems.  The  Asian  crisis  of  1997-98  illustrated  this  point  clearly.  International 
institutions, such as the Financial Stability Forum, have been working on this issue. While a number of 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2005
emerging-market  economies  still  have  some  distance  to  go,  I  am  happy  to  say  that  we  have  seen 
some progress in many countries over the past few years. 
Finally, appropriate monetary policy is very important. It can help instill confidence among consumers 
and  businesses  alike.  Canada's  monetary  policy  is  anchored  by  an  inflation-targeting  system—a 
system  that  has  also  been  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  England.  The  Bank  of  Canada  aims  to  keep 
inflation at 2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. Under this regime, not only has inflation 
in Canada remained near the target in recent years, but inflation expectations are now anchored near 
2  per  cent.  As  a  result,  market  signals  can  be  sent  and  received  more  clearly,  and  Canadian 
businesses and consumers are more confident about the future value of their money. 
A critical feature of our inflation-targeting system is that we operate symmetrically around our target. 
This means that we care just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about inflation rising 
above it. This symmetric approach helps keep the Canadian economy near its production potential, 
thus encouraging strong, sustained growth in output and employment. I'm not arguing that all countries 
should copy every detail of our inflation-targeting regime. But it is important that central banks follow 
policies that anchor inflation expectations and thus prevent a buildup of deflationary as well inflationary 
pressures. 
As I mentioned before, both Canada and the United Kingdom operate with a flexible exchange rate. 
Much has been said recently about floating exchange rates in relation to certain Asian economies—
China  in  particular—and  global  imbalances.  The  policies  of  some  Asian  economies  to  encourage 
export-led growth, including the fixing of their exchange rates to the U.S. dollar, have caused a buildup 
of large foreign exchange reserves, thus exacerbating global imbalances. 
It's important to point out that, in theory, there is nothing wrong with countries having fixed exchange 
rates.  But  in  practice,  there  is  a  major  problem.  Through  "sterilization,"  certain  Asian  countries—
including  China—have  been  trying  to  offset  the  domestic  price  effects  of  their  foreign  exchange 
intervention. This is inhibiting economic adjustment. 
At the Bank of Canada, we have argued that it is very much in China's own economic interest to float 
its  currency.  By  having  a  flexible  currency,  China  could  gear  its  own  monetary  policy  to  its  own 
domestic  considerations.  If  the  external  value  of  the  renminbi  were  allowed  to  rise,  the  global 
purchasing power of Chinese citizens would also rise. This, in turn, would help to spread the gains 
from integrating into the world trading order throughout Chinese society and would allow that country 
to boost its consumption, thus helping to resolve global imbalances. Floating exchange rates are not 
the whole answer to the problem of global imbalances, but they are an important part of the solution. 
As  I  just  said,  when  countries  offset  the  effects  of  intervention,  they  delay  domestic  economic 
adjustment.  They  also  delay  global  adjustment.  Just  as  worrying,  such  intervention  is  provoking 
threats  in  certain  political  quarters  of  protectionist  measures.  Such  wrong-headed  measures  could 
choke off the growth of international trade that has led to rising incomes worldwide. 
And so it is very important that all countries work to protect and enhance the free flow of goods and 
services by pushing the Doha round of trade talks to a successful conclusion, and by strengthening 
the World Trade Organization to ensure proper compliance with the rules of trade. All of us need to 
support these efforts and to be vocal in resisting calls for protectionism. 
In addition, it is critical that we get on with the job of building an international monetary order for the 
21st  century.  A  more  effective  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  this 
regard. This issue is extraordinarily important, and I spoke at length on this topic in a speech I gave 
last month in Montréal. 
Current Economic Developments in Canada 
Against  that  backdrop,  what  specific  policies  are  needed  to  help  the  Canadian  economy  adjust  to 
global  developments?  While  imbalances  pose  risks  ahead,  recent  economic  growth  in  the  global 
economy has been quite strong, led by the United States and China. This growth has increased the 
world prices of oil and of many other commodities that we produce in Canada. As a result, there has 
been a marked improvement in our terms of trade—that is, the ratio of the prices that we receive for 
our exports to the prices we pay for our imports. This improvement has helped to raise real incomes 
and  stimulate  domestic  demand  in  Canada.  We  have  also  been  importantly  affected  by  the  sharp 
appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  against  the  U.S.  dollar  over  the  past  couple  of  years—an 
appreciation that has had a major impact in many sectors. 
BIS Review 50/2005 
 3
The  Canadian  economy  has  been  adjusting  to  these  economic  forces.  We  have  seen  increased 
business  investment  spending  in  sectors  that  are  benefiting  from  higher  world  prices.  We  are  also 
seeing rising investment in sectors that are not very exposed to international trade, as such firms react 
to strong growth in domestic demand. And we've had very strong investment in housing. But in other 
sectors  that  are  highly  exposed  to  international  trade,  mainly  goods-producing  sectors,  prices  are 
either  falling  or  rising  very  slowly.  Firms  in  these  industries  are  feeling  the  pressure  of  the  higher 
Canadian dollar, and they are also facing increased competition from other regions of the world. 
The  good  news  is  that  many  Canadian  firms  are  making  the  necessary  adjustments.  Investment 
spending  is  being  directed  towards  increased  specialization,  higher  productivity,  and  lower  costs. 
Since  much  of  the  productivity-enhancing  machinery  and  equipment  is  priced  in  U.S.  dollars,  the 
stronger Canadian dollar has made it easier for firms to make investments. A growing number of firms 
are looking to cut costs by importing more inputs, particularly from Asia. Other firms are phasing out 
production lines with low profit margins. 
Through  its monetary  policy,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is helping  these  adjustments  by  keeping  inflation 
low,  stable,  and  predictable,  and  by  aiming  to  keep  the  economy  operating  close  to  its  production 
potential. With the recent sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar, net exports have been acting as a 
drag on economic growth. So growth has been driven by domestic demand, supported by monetary 
stimulus. In our April Monetary Policy Report, we projected that final domestic demand would grow by 
almost 4 per cent in 2005. According to recently released data, it grew by more than expected during 
the first quarter of the year. So we continue to see evidence that strong domestic demand is offsetting 
the weakness in net exports. 
On 14 July, we will publish our Monetary Policy Report Update, in which we will spell out our latest 
views on the Canadian economy. The Bank is now in the process of gathering and analyzing the full 
set of information on the global and the Canadian economies that will feed into our next interest rate 
decision, and into the Update. 
On our last policy announcement date in May, we decided to keep the target for the overnight rate at 2 
1/2 per cent. At that time, we indicated that global and Canadian economic developments had been 
unfolding broadly in line with our expectations and that our outlook for the Canadian economy through 
to the end of 2006 was unchanged from the one presented in our April Monetary Policy Report. The 
analysis in that Report is still relevant. So is our statement that, in line with this outlook for growth and 
inflation, a reduction of monetary stimulus—that is, an increase in our key policy interest rate—will be 
required over time. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. On the one hand, I'm bringing you a hopeful message: Canada's economy, backed 
by a sound policy framework, is adjusting to forces at work in the global economy. This adjustment is 
not painless, but it is taking place, leaving Canada well placed to thrive in the years ahead. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  want  to  leave  you  with  a  caution  against  complacency. We are  all  part  of  the 
global economy and, as such, we can do little to shield ourselves from a major economic disruption, 
such as a disorderly resolution of global imbalances. Collective action is needed now to minimize the 
chances  of  a  major  crisis  down  the  road.  The  task  won't  be  easy,  but  it  is  up  to  policy-makers—
whether they gather at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, at the IMF in Washington, or 
around the G-7 table at Gleneagles in a few days—to work towards an environment that will support 
sustained economic growth worldwide. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2005
