David Dodge: Adjusting to change 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Winnipeg  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 15 June 2005.  
 Good  afternoon.  I'm  glad  to  be  back  in  Winnipeg.  The  last  time  I  delivered  a  speech  here  was  in 
January 2002. A lot has changed since then - in this city and in the Canadian economy. At that time, 
our  economy  was  recovering  from  a  worldwide  economic  slowdown  and  from  the  impact  of  the 
September  2001  terrorist  attacks  in  the  United  States.  Today,  we  face  more-intense  international 
competition, but we also face new opportunities, as expanding economies become important markets 
for  our  products.  Like  the  rest  of  Canada,  Winnipeg  and  Manitoba  are  feeling  the  impact  of  these 
international changes. 
Change is the central theme of my remarks today. First, I will talk about some of the changes that 
have  taken  place  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  over  its  70-year  history.  Then,  I'll  talk  about  some  of  the 
changes that are currently taking place in the global economy, as well as how we see our economy - 
across Canada and right here in Manitoba - adjusting to these changes. 
Changes at the Bank of Canada 
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the Bank of Canada. The Bank opened its doors on 11 March 
1935, at a time when the Canadian economy was reeling from the effects of a Prairie drought and a 
worldwide Depression. In its early days, much of the Bank's work was focused on trying to cushion the 
economy  from  the  effects  of  high  unemployment  and  falling  prices,  and  replacing  bank  notes  from 
different  issuers  with  Bank  of  Canada  notes.  Almost  every  aspect  of  the  Bank's  work  has  changed 
since that time. But today I'll focus on the changes that have taken place in the conduct of monetary 
policy.  
By the late 1950s, the Bank's monetary policy and the federal government's fiscal policy were trying to 
find a balance between controlling inflationary pressures in the economy and encouraging high levels 
of employment. The economic boom of the 1960s and the bitter inflationary experiences of the 1970s 
eventually led to an increased focus on price stability as the goal for monetary policy. We developed a 
better appreciation that keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable is the best contribution a central 
bank can make to the economic welfare of a nation. 
During those decades, we learned some key lessons. The first is that a floating exchange rate is a 
tremendous asset in helping an economy adjust to changes, particularly an economy as open as ours. 
A floating currency gives a country the flexibility it needs to adjust to economic forces that originate 
from inside and outside its borders. 
The second lesson we learned is that, for monetary policy to be successful in controlling inflation, a 
floating  exchange  rate  is not  enough. An  "anchor"  for  monetary policy  is also  needed. Canada  first 
floated its dollar in 1950, but returned to a fixed exchange rate for eight years during the 1960s. After 
the decision to float the dollar again in 1970, the Bank spent the 1970s and 1980s searching for an 
appropriate monetary policy anchor. By this, I mean a clear target for monetary policy, a way to help 
policy-makers  keep  policy  on  track,  and  a  way  to  tie  down  or  "anchor"  expectations  about  future 
inflation. The outcome of that search was the eventual adoption of inflation targets as the anchor for 
Canadian monetary policy. 
In  February  1991,  the  Bank  and  the  federal  government  announced  an  agreement  on  a  series  of 
inflation-reduction  targets.  This  agreement  has  been  extended  three  times,  and  since  1995,  it  has 
called for the Bank to keep inflation at 2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. This 
inflation-targeting system, supported by a floating exchange rate, has done more than keep inflation 
low - it has delivered strong and sustained growth in output and employment in Canada.  
Let me quickly stress that our inflation-targeting framework operates in a symmetric way - we care just 
as much about inflation falling below target as we do about inflation rising above target. If demand for 
goods and services pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is 
poised to rise above the target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. And when 
the economy is operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, 
the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate growth. This symmetric approach helps the Canadian 
economy adjust to changing circumstances, while maintaining strong, sustained growth in output and 
employment. 
The Bank's commitment to the idea of transparency is another way in which our monetary policy has 
evolved. There was a time when central bankers kept their actions and thoughts shrouded in secrecy, 
convinced that their policy would be more effective if implemented with an element of surprise. Times 
have  changed,  and  best  practices  in  monetary  policy  have  evolved.  We  have  found  that  monetary 
policy  is  more  effective  when  people  understand  what  we  are  doing  and  why.  That's  why  we 
communicate regularly with parliamentarians, with markets, and with the public. We do this through 
our regular Monetary Policy Reports and Updates to those reports. We do this through press releases 
on fixed announcement dates for interest rate decisions, eight times a year. And we do this through 
public speaking engagements with audiences across the country.  
Our  methods  of  communication  also  continue  to  change.  Today,  we  use  more  tools  and  more 
technologies to reach Canadians and explain our work. For example, the audio portion of this speech 
is being broadcast live on the Internet. And we have just completed a redevelopment of the Bank's 
website. Since its creation in 1995, our website has been central to our efforts to conduct the Bank's 
business in an open and transparent manner. The site is visited over 180,000 times a week. In 2003, it 
was  named  "Central  Bank  Website  of  the  Year"  by  Central  Banking  Publications  in  the  United 
Kingdom. We wanted to make the site even better, and so on Monday we launched a new version. It 
features an attractive graphic redesign, improved navigation, and a lot of new content. I encourage 
you to visit our new site, and we welcome your comments. 
Changes in the global economy 
So  that's  a  quick  look  at  some  of  the  ways  that  the  Bank  has  changed  in  70  years.  I'll  spend  the 
remainder of my time today discussing some of the major changes afoot in the global economy and 
how the Canadian economy is adjusting to these developments. 
I've  just  returned  to  Canada  from  meetings  with  central  bankers  in  China  and  Japan.  I  have  also 
attended meetings in Switzerland, the United States, and Morocco over the past month. And in two 
weeks, I will head to the United Kingdom. In these countries, and in almost every other nation, people 
are  being  affected  by  the  same  powerful  forces  -  growing  competition  from  emerging-market 
economies, such as China and India, and large and growing financial imbalances in the United States 
and Asia. The growth of emerging-market economies has driven up demand for commodities, and that 
has  pushed  up  the  world  prices  for  oil  and  many  other  commodities  that  we  produce  in  Canada. 
Meanwhile, the more competitive world environment and productivity improvements in some countries 
are  lowering  the  prices  for  a  number  of  consumer  goods,  communications  services,  and  computer 
equipment.  
All of these forces are causing significant exchange rate movements, including a sharp appreciation of 
the  Canadian  dollar  against  the  U.S.  dollar  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  Higher  prices  for  many 
commodities produced in Canada means that our terms of trade - that is, the ratio of the prices that 
Canadians receive for their exports to the prices that they pay for their imports - have improved by 
about  14  per  cent  since  late  2001.  This  has  contributed  importantly  to  higher  real  incomes  and 
stronger domestic demand.  
How has the Canadian economy been adjusting to these various economic forces? In the Bank's last 
Monetary  Policy  Report,  published  in  April,  we  noted  that  we  have  seen  increased  business 
investment  spending  in  oil  and  gas  extraction,  in  other  mining  activity,  and  in  wood-product 
manufacturing. These sectors are benefiting from higher world prices for their products. We are also 
seeing rising investment in sectors that are not very exposed to international trade, such as electric 
power generation, finance and insurance, and information and cultural industries. In these latter cases, 
firms  are  reacting  to  strong  growth  in  domestic  demand.  We've  also  had  very  strong  investment  in 
housing. 
But in other sectors that are highly exposed to international trade, prices are either falling or are rising 
very slowly. Here, I am referring to goods-producing sectors, such as auto parts, furniture, and clothing 
manufacturing, as well as service sectors such as tourism. Firms in these industries are feeling the 
pressure  of  the  higher  Canadian  dollar,  and  they  are  also  facing  increased  competition  from  other 
regions of the world.  
The  good  news  is  that  many  Canadian  firms  are  making  the  necessary  adjustments.  Investment 
spending  is  being  directed  towards  increased  specialization,  higher  productivity,  and  lower  costs. 
Since  much  of  the  productivity-enhancing  machinery  and  equipment  is  priced  in  U.S.  dollars,  the 
stronger Canadian dollar has made it easier for firms to invest in equipment that boosts productivity. 
Stiffer competition is also encouraging firms to seek new markets, increase their specialization, and 
offer more value-added, customized services.  
Other  adjustments  are  also  taking  place.  A  growing  number  of  firms  are  looking  to  cut  costs  by 
importing more inputs. We've certainly seen this type of adjustment taking place among manufacturers 
of telecommunications equipment. Other firms are phasing out the production of goods and services 
with low profit margins and concentrating on those that yield higher returns. 
Current economic developments in Canada and Manitoba  
Through its monetary policy, the Bank is helping these adjustments by supporting domestic demand. 
In our April Monetary Policy Report, we projected that domestic demand would grow by almost 4 per 
cent in 2005. According to recently released data, it grew by slightly more than expected during the 
first quarter of the year. So we continue to see evidence that strong domestic demand is offsetting the 
smaller contribution that net exports are making to economic growth.  
On 14 July, we will publish our Monetary Policy Report Update, which will contain our latest views on 
the  Canadian  economy.  The  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  gathering  and  analyzing  the  full  set  of 
information  on  the  global  and  the  Canadian  economies  that  will  feed  into  our  next  interest  rate 
decision, and into the Update.  
On  our  last  policy-announcement  date  in  May,  we  decided  to  maintain  the  target  for  the  overnight 
interest  rate  at  2 1/2 per cent.  At  that  time,  we  indicated  that  global  and  Canadian  economic 
developments  had been unfolding broadly in line with our expectations and that our outlook for the 
Canadian economy through to the end of 2006 was unchanged from the one we presented in our April 
Monetary  Policy  Report.  The  analysis  contained  in  that  Report  is  still  relevant.  So  is  our  statement 
that,  in  line  with  this  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation,  a  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  -  that  is,  an 
increase in our key policy rate - will be required over time.  
Now,  let  me  say  a  few words  about  the  economic prospects  for  Manitoba.  The  provincial  economy 
grew by an estimated 2.3 per cent last year, up from 1.5 per cent in 2003. Like the rest of Canada, 
Manitoba  will  rely  heavily  on  domestic  spending  as  an  engine  of  growth  in  2005.  Private  sector 
forecasters are expecting output growth of about 2.7 per cent this year, largely as a result of strong 
consumption and investment. Exports should also continue to grow, albeit at a slower pace than in 
2004.  This  projection  assumes  that  agricultural  production  will  increase  in  2005.  It  is  too  early  to 
predict the impact of the recent floods that have ruined many fields in the province.  
Diversification in Manitoba's economy has been helpful. This province's economy is one of the most 
diversified  in  Canada  -  with  a  good  mix  of  goods-producing  and  service  industries,  resources  and 
manufacturing,  traditional  and  new  technology.  And  there  is  growing  diversity  and  innovation  within 
industries, such as pharmaceuticals, furniture manufacturing, and the transportation-equipment sector. 
The broadening of Manitoba's economic base has provided stability to the economy and has kept the 
province's  unemployment  rate  well  below  the  national  average.  Manitoba  has  also  been  helped  by 
continued fiscal prudence. 
Conclusion 
Change is rarely made without difficulty, even when we know that the change is for the better. This is 
certainly  true  of  adjustments  in  response  to  the  global  economic  realities  of  today.  In  some  cases, 
industries are being forced to rethink the way they do business. Some firms will close, and some jobs 
will be lost. This type of adjustment is never easy. 
But economic change creates new opportunities. And in cities like Winnipeg, and all across Canada, 
individuals, businesses, industries, and public sector institutions are making the adjustments that will 
help  them  improve  their  competitiveness  and  seize  new  opportunities.  These  efforts  also  make  the 
Canadian economy  stronger  and  more  resilient.  That  is  the  best  way  to  prepare ourselves  and  our 
economy for whatever changes the future may bring.  
