David Dodge: 70 years of central banking in Canada 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Economics 
Association, Hamilton, Ontario, 27 May 2005.  
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  with  you,  and  to  chair  this  special  conference  session 
celebrating the 70th anniversary of the Bank of Canada. 
The Bank opened its doors on 11 March 1935, at the height of the Great Depression, and immediately 
faced  enormous  challenges.  In  meeting  those  challenges,  the  new  Bank  of  Canada  drew  on  the 
experience of other, established central banks. It received valuable guidance in functions such as the 
issuance of bank notes, managing foreign exchange reserves, and promoting financial stability.  
However,  such  guidance  did  not  prove  to  be  much  of  an  advantage  in  what  has  become  the  main 
function of the Bank of Canada - monetary policy. Up to the time that the Bank was founded, monetary 
policy had been subject to the tight discipline of the gold standard - a topic that Angela Redish has 
explored in her work. That discipline severely limited the authorities' room to manoeuvre. 
The  notion  that  countries,  acting  through  their  central  banks,  might  actually  try  to  stabilize 
macroeconomic activity within their borders is a relatively new one. As a consequence, over the past 
70 years, the Bank of Canada and other central banks have had to learn by doing - by experimenting 
and  gradually  refining  the  art  and  science  of  monetary  policy  implementation.  We  have  received  a 
great deal of help in this effort from the academic community, including the people here today. But it 
has not been an easy exercise - nor is it finished. Monetary policy is still very much a work in progress. 
The evolution of monetary policy 
Let me now briefly review some of the significant changes in monetary policy that have taken place 
over the past 70 years. The Preamble to the Bank of Canada Act states that the Bank should:  
…mitigate  by  its  influence  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production,  trade, 
prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary 
action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
Seventy years later, this is still an accurate description of our goal. However, the Act does not provide 
any practical guidance as to how this objective should be pursued. 
Through the late 1930s and the early post-war period, the main concern of the central bank was to try 
to eliminate, and then to avoid a return to, the deflation and high unemployment of the Depression 
years. The government shared this preoccupation, as evidenced by the 1945 federal White Paper on 
Employment and Income.  
Things  started  to  change  in  the  late  1950s  and  early  1960s,  when  economists  led  authorities  to 
believe  that  there  was  a  permanent  trade-off  between  a  little  bit  more  inflation  and  a  little  bit  less 
unemployment.  All  authorities  had  to  do,  it  was  believed,  was  pick  their  preferred  point  on  a 
downward-sloping  Phillips  curve.  But  the  bitter  inflationary  experiences  of  the  1970s  and  a  belated 
recognition that the Phillips curve might be vertical in the longer run - if not slightly upward sloping - 
eventually led to an increased focus on price stability as the goal for monetary policy. We began to 
appreciate what Olivier Blanchard calls the "divine coincidence" - that is, the realization that aggregate 
demand-supply  equilibrium  and  price  stability  are  complementary  objectives.  We've  realized  that  a 
low, stable, and predictable inflation rate is probably the best contribution a central bank can make to 
the economic welfare of the nation.  
Since  inflation  was  viewed  as  being  "everywhere  and  always  a  monetary  phenomenon,"  monetary 
aggregates were used as intermediate targets. But eventually, they proved to be an ineffective anchor. 
As Gerald Bouey said, we didn't abandon monetary aggregates, they abandoned us. And so, at the 
beginning of the 1990s, in the search for a new policy anchor, central banks started to focus directly 
on inflation, either through implicit or explicit inflation targets.  
Monetary policy transmission and policy effectiveness 
The instruments that we have used for the transmission of monetary policy have also changed over 
the years. In the first 35 years of the Bank's existence, we relied on a "belt and braces" approach to 
policy execution, in the belief that credit was fungible and that every possible financial avenue had to 
be covered.  
The result was a complex mix of primary and secondary liquidity requirements, interest rate ceilings, 
quantitative  limits,  outright  restrictions and  prohibitions,  foreign  exchange  market  intervention,  and - 
when all else failed - a healthy dose of moral suasion. Attempts to describe the conduct of monetary 
policy  turned  into  a  bewildering  stream  of  arcane  details  that  left  listeners  confused  or  -  it  was 
sometimes hoped - in awe of the economic alchemists who plied this mysterious craft.  
This  started  to  change  in  the  1960s,  particularly  following  the  Royal  Commission  on  Banking  and 
Finance in 1964, chaired by Chief Justice of Ontario Dana Porter. It would be hard to overestimate the 
impact  of  this  analysis,  and  the  sea  change  in  official  thinking  that  was  initiated  by  the  Porter 
Commission.  
The  Commission's  revolutionary  analysis  threw  out  the  old  reliance  on  extensive  control  over  the 
financial  system.  As  a  result,  Canadian  officials  were  among  the  first  to  understand  that  reserve 
requirements and various other controls are actually inimical to the efficient operation of the financial 
system. The government gradually abandoned these controls in its regulation of financial institutions, 
and so did the Bank in its implementation of monetary policy. Today, the Bank simply announces its 
target  overnight  rate,  and  the  market  does  the  rest  -  a  form  of  virtual,  yet  effective,  control, 
back-stopped by the Bank's ability to borrow and lend near-infinite amounts of liquidity. After decades 
of  research,  and  trial  and  error,  we  have  reduced  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  to  its  essential 
elements - perhaps a form of alchemy, after all!  
From there, the next logical step was to make the conduct of monetary policy more transparent and 
accountable. In the past, central banking had often been cloaked in deliberate secrecy, relying on the 
element  of  surprise  for  its  presumed  effectiveness.  Governance  and  accountability  were  not 
considered important. Communications and reporting were limited to an annual report and a few public 
addresses. Now, following on the work of John Chant - albeit with a significant lag - we have a clear, 
highly transparent paradigm for the conduct of monetary policy, and the Bank can be held accountable 
for its performance. Effective communication is an essential part of that transparency. 
Monetary policy and a flexible exchange rate 
Finally, let me talk about the role of the exchange rate in monetary policy. Canada moved to a flexible 
exchange  rate  in  1950  and  again  in  1970  -  well  before  most  other  countries.  Although  this  gave 
Canada monetary policy independence, a flexible exchange rate alone does not provide a "coherent 
monetary order," as David Laidler has noted. The monetary policy framework still requires a nominal 
anchor to help guide decisions and expectations. 
As  I've  said  before,  the  Bank  searched  for  that  anchor  throughout  the  1970s  and  the  1980s.  The 
outcome of that search was our eventual adoption of inflation targets in 1991. And this anchor has 
exceeded our most optimistic expectations. 
Looking ahead 
This isn't to say that we have reached the end of monetary policy history. The Bank of Canada and 
other central banks are constantly looking for improvements. The inflation-targeting framework that the 
Bank and the government put in place 14 years ago has performed well. It is up for renewal in 2006, 
and we are now in the process of assessing both its past performance and possible refinements for 
the future. 
As in the past, we are drawing on the work of researchers both outside and inside the Bank. A long 
tradition of successful modelling and analysis underlies our work, going back to people such as John 
Helliwell,  who  put  the  Bank  on  the  frontier  of  macro-modelling  in  the  late  1960s  with  initiatives  like 
RDX.  This  research  and  external  networking  continues  and  was  evident  in  the  conference  that  the 
Bank hosted last month on "Issues in Inflation Targeting." 
As  we  move  forward  and  add  to  the  Bank's  proud  history,  it  is  always  useful  to  look  back.  Special 
occasions, such  as  this 70th  anniversary,  are  valuable  opportunities  to  reflect  on  the work  of  those 
who have preceded us.  
I look forward to the presentations of our four  distinguished panellists - John Chant, John Helliwell, 
David Laidler, and Angela Redish - all of whom have served as special advisers to the Bank. I want to 
thank  them  for  the  contribution  they  made  while  at  the  Bank,  and  for  their  continued  efforts  in 
advancing the practice of monetary policy in Canada. They will each speak for about 15 minutes. After 
that, I will open up the proceedings for questions and comments.  
