Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Building financial bridges between Asia and the 
Middle East 
Luncheon address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Minister for Education and Deputy Chairman of 
the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Inaugural Asia-Middle East Dialogue, Singapore, 21 June 
2005. 
 Your Excellencies 
Distinguished Guests 
Friends, it is a privilege to address you here today at this important gathering, as we discuss ways to 
strengthen ties between our two regions, Asia and the Middle East - two regions of the world that not 
only have immense potential in themselves but have the potential to shape each other’s futures for the 
better. Let me use this opportunity to talk about the bridges we can build in financial services, and how 
financial  flows  can  help  shape  this  inter-dependence  between  the  Middle  East  and  Asia.  I  will  also 
touch  on  what  we  can  do  in  education  together,  because  it  is  in  education  that  we  build  trust  and 
lasting relationships between our peoples. 
Financial bridges between Asia and the Middle East - the economic underpinnings 
The economic underpinnings for financial flows between our two regions are in many ways obvious. 
Both  the  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  regions  are  on  an  upward  trajectory  of  economic  growth.  The 
economies of Asia and the Middle East are growing at a trend rate of 7.5% and 5% respectively. To 
put this in historical perspective - no region of the world saw sustained growth exceeding 5% for any 
period before the middle of the last century, except for Australia and New Zealand in the 19th century. 
No one expects growth to be linear or to continue unbroken, in either Asia or the Middle East. There 
will  be  bumps  along  the  journey,  sometimes  flash  floods,  and  sometimes  a  cave-in.  But  the  basic 
trajectory is upward. The growth story that we are seeing is not an aberration, or a flash in the pan 
before growth in Asia or the Middle East recedes to the very modest norms that were seen for much of 
economic history before World War II. 
Growth  is  being  propelled  by  fundamentals.  First,  both  our  regions  have  an  abundance  of  natural 
resources,  and  are  benefiting  from  the  natural  interplay  between  industrialization  and  demand  for 
natural  resources.  Asia’s  industrialization  alone  is  driving  an  unprecedented  global  demand  for  raw 
materials,  energy  and  other  commodities.  China  and  India  alone  have  contributed  over  35%  of  the 
increase in global oil demand over the last 15 years. Yes, there are huge inefficiencies in energy use, 
and concerns over the environment, that have to be addressed before long. But the basic interplay 
between industrialization and natural resources will continue for many years to come. 
Further, both our regions are not just opening up to global markets, but developing domestic demand 
in our own economies. They are diversifying, and growth is becoming more balanced. Asia is reducing 
its dependence on manufactured exports as the main driver of growth, and Middle East is seeking to 
reduce its dependence on energy exports. Both regions are strengthening their social, transport and 
economic infrastructures as they diversify their economies. The examples are all around us, like India 
and Indonesia’s major energy and transport infrastructure plans, Bahrain’s Financial Harbour project, 
and Qatar’s Education City. 
Finally, the appetite for prosperity is unshakeable among our younger generations. Young people all 
across our regions can see what economic growth brings, for their families and themselves, and for 
their  communities.  Whether  their  quest  is  for  material  or  spiritual  fulfilment,  young  people  know 
instinctively that economic growth and better jobs will help them fulfil their needs. They want to move 
ahead,  to  educate  themselves,  and  to  give  whole  communities  pride  in  what  they  can  achieve  -  in 
science, in business and in culture. These aspirations of our young are probably the biggest positive 
for our regions. They will also bring us together over the long haul. 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 1
High savings will be increasingly intermediated within Asia and the Middle East 
On the financial side of things, the fundamentals are also solid in both our regions. First, the supply of 
savings in Asia and the Middle East is higher than in any other region of the world. Savings rates in 
Asia  are  expected  to  remain  in  the  region  of  35-40%  of  GDP  for  some  years  to  come.  Likewise 
savings in the Middle East have been rising over the past decade and are expected to average about 
32% of GDP in coming years. (In 2004, the current account surpluses as percentage of GDP for Asia 
and  the  Middle  East  were  about  6%  and  14%  respectively.)  With  Asian  official  foreign  currency 
reserves exceeding US$ 2 trillion, and Middle East oil revenues topping US$ 180 billion in 2004 alone, 
the  management  of  surplus  savings  and  reserves  in  both  regions  will  offer  large  business 
opportunities.  It  will  also  offer  scope  for  sharing  of  experience  between  government  investment 
agencies and central banks in both regions. 
Besides official savings, there is also a growing number of wealthy individuals in the two regions. Asia 
alone  now  has  an  estimated  2.3  million  high  net  worth  individuals  (HNWI;  people  with  at  least 
US$ 1 million in financial assets), not far behind the US with 2.7 million and Europe with 2.6 million. 
Asian HNWIs control an estimated US$ 7.2 trillion in financial assets. The size of this group in Asia is 
growing at 7% per year, second only to the Middle Eastern HNWI, now 300,000 which is growing at 
9% per year. Traditionally, Asian and Middle Eastern investors have looked to the developed, Western 
markets to meet their investment needs. But increasingly, they are looking to diversifying their assets 
globally. It is a interesting new story, that is only beginning to unfold in Asian markets. 
This is not just a post-9/11 story. Increasingly, wealthy investors the world over are looking to spread 
the risks and enhance the overall returns on their investment portfolios. We are seeing this search for 
diversification and improved returns on investment amongst sophisticated investors from the Middle 
East  and  Asia.  It  provides  an  opportunity  for  markets  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  which  can  offer 
wealthy investors with higher expected returns at acceptable risk. 
The demand side of the financial equation in our two regions is equally compelling. First, there are 
unprecedented  demand  for  funds  to  finance  infrastructure  projects,  across  the  region.  In  Southeast 
Asia  alone,  about  US$ 461 billion  is  expected  to  be  spent  over  the  next  15  years  to  upgrade 
infrastructure.  This  is  not  even  looking  at  China  and  India.  Likewise  in  the  Middle  East  -  the 
reconstruction of Iraq and Qatar’s infrastructural plans are each expected to cost US$ 100 billion. 
Second, besides infrastructure finance, we are seeing huge growth potential in the consumer finance 
sector in our two regions. It is driven by a rapidly expanding middle-class, who want better housing, 
cars and other big-ticket items like middle classes anywhere else in the world. For instance, India’s 
“consuming class” will rise from the current 30% of households to 40% by 2010. Similarly in China, the 
“middle class” is set to double over the next 5 years. 
Facilitating greater financial flows between Asia and Middle East 
Financial services are therefore growing rapidly in Asia and the Middle East. And there is scope for 
greater  deployment  of  our  savings  within  our  two  regions,  as  investors  in  both  regions  look  for 
improved returns. 
We are seeing the beginnings of a fruitful and meaningful relationship in financial sector cooperation. 
There  is  much  scope  for  regional  financial  centres  like  Singapore  and  Kuala  Lumpur  to  provide  a 
gateway for fund flows between the Middle East and Asia. Singapore can by no means be a complete 
financial centre for the Middle East. That role will be played by financial centres in the Middle East. But 
we can and will  complement  and work  in  partnership  with  financial  centres  in the  Middle  East,  and 
other  Asian  centres  like  KL.  We  can  provide  a  gateway  to  take  Middle  Eastern  investors  into 
Southeast Asia and China, and to take investors from the region into the Middle East. 
What can we do to facilitate and spur on these financial ties and build sturdy bridges? Allow me to 
make three observations. First, the wealth management industry can play a pro-active role in helping 
investors to diversify their portfolios by introducing them to opportunities in Asia and the Middle East. 
In so doing, we will also help Asian and Middle Eastern capital markets grow and become deeper and 
more  liquid.  We  are  already  seeing  asset  managers  based  in  Singapore  receiving  investment 
mandates from investment agencies in the Middle East. And Singapore’s CapitaLand and the Middle 
Eastern-owned Arcapital Bank have recently set up a property fund aimed at investing in Japanese 
real estate, with a target asset size of US$ 300 million. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2005
Second,  similarly  for  the  banking  sector.  I  expect  to  see  more  Middle  East  banks  and  financial 
institutions set up in Singapore and Asia going forward, and a counter-flow into the Middle East over 
time. Some Middle East banks are already planning to scale up their presence in Singapore to service 
Middle Eastern entities interested to operate in Asia, as well as to help Asian corporates to operate in 
the  Middle  East.  There  are  similar  plans  by  Singapore-based  financial  institutions  to  step  up  their 
profile in the Middle East as they seek to tap into Middle Eastern financial flows. Such plans may give 
added  impetus  as  Singapore  concludes  FTAs  with  more  Middle  Eastern  countries,  including  those 
which are currently ongoing with Qatar and Kuwait. 
Third, Islamic finance is an area that shows considerable promise globally. We know the size of the 
market - around US$ 200 to US$ 300 billion globally, and growing at about 15% per annum. Efforts 
are being made in Asian markets, to grow Islamic financial services. For example, Malaysia has been 
awarding Islamic banking licences to foreign players and encouraging the subsidiarisation of Islamic 
banking windows. It aims to have 20% of total banking assets to be Islamic by 2010. Singapore, as an 
international financial centre, is also keen to offer Islamic financial services. We must, as part of the 
comprehensive suite of financial services that we offer to global investors and borrowers. 
Shariah-compliant financial instruments allow issuers to tap a new source of funds and liquidity. But 
the  development  of  an  Islamic  financial  services  market  does  not  just  serve  indigenous  Muslim 
populations. Malaysia, for instance, has successfully launched global sukuk, or Islamic bonds, to tap 
liquidity  from  investors  in  both  Asia  and  the  Middle  East.  Other  issuers  of  global  sukuks  have  also 
stopped by Singapore on their road shows to tap Singapore’s investor pool. It may not be too long 
before we have a Singapore corporate issuing a sukuk to raise funds from global investors. 
We  are  also  seeing  already  private  fund  managers  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  working  together. 
Recently, for instance, ARA Asset Management based in Singapore had worked in partnership with 
Dubai Islamic Bank to launch a US$ 450 million Islamic Far Eastern Real Estate Fund with underlying 
assets located in Asia. 
Fourth and finally, we can do more to foster people-to-people interaction in the financial sector. For 
instance, Asian central banks including the Monetary Authority of Singapore have participated actively 
in Middle East finance and central banking seminars to share our perspectives on issues of mutual 
interest. Tomorrow there will be a seminar organised jointly by the Islamic Financial Services Board 
and Islamic Development Bank tomorrow in Kuala Lumpur on developing a 10-year master plan for 
the Islamic financial services industry globally. In Singapore, the MAS conducts courses in banking 
supervision  and  capital  markets  which  we  have  extended  invitations  to  both  our  Asian  and  Middle 
Eastern counterparts to participate in. We must think of many other platforms and vehicles which could 
facilitate  people-to-people  interactions,  including  those  involving  think-tanks,  universities,  training 
institutes, and private sector financial bodies like the Association of Banks for example. 
There is also a financial stability dimension to these networks. As cross-border financial transactions 
increase, effective supervision will require countries to foster greater cooperation with their regulatory 
counterparts. The Monetary Authority of Singapore, for example, is in discussions to conclude MOUs 
with  the  UAE’s  Emirates  Securities  and  Commodities  Authority  and  Qatar’s  Financial  Centre 
Regulatory Authority to provide for training and supervisory cooperation. 
I  have  highlighted  earlier  that  investment  agencies  in  our  two  regions  are  now  managing  sizeable 
foreign  reserves.  There  is  much  scope  for  our  investment  agencies  to  touch  base  with  each  other, 
exchange knowledge of global markets, share the latest in reserve management techniques, and help 
each other navigate in one another’s regional hinterlands where appropriate. We could even co-invest 
in specific investment opportunities when they arise. 
Building educational bridges 
Finally, a few remarks on education, and how we can bring our young people together. We all know 
how much education matters, for all our societies. It is the bedrock for human development, and the 
means for whole societies to realise their potential. 
But there is further significance in education as we address the issue of strengthening ties between 
Asia and the Middle East. Our long historical ties, going back to the 2nd century B.C., are an asset. 
Singapore’s  Arab  lineages  run  through  our  veins.  But  to  build  bridges  between  our  peoples  in  the 
21st century, we have to not only look back to our historical ties and roots, or rekindle and reinvigorate 
our ties in trade. We have to work with our young. Our young today grow up knowing very little of each 
BIS Review 47/2005 
 3
there 
other. We have to give them opportunities to meet, to find resonance in each other, and to strike up 
friendships. If we do this when our people are young, we build up trust for the future. And trust is what 
makes economic and business relationships last. 
Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and other Asian cities can play a growing role in this regard. For some years 
now, we have been creating what we call a “global schoolhouse” here in Singapore. Today, Singapore 
has some 66,000 international students pursuing different levels of education. At the university level, 
we  have  today  some  16 of  the  best  global  institutions  providing programmes  in  diverse  areas.  Top 
business schools such as INSEAD and University of Chicago have established their own campuses in 
Singapore. 
At  our  Singapore  universities, 
is  already  a  small  Middle  Eastern  presence,  with 
10 undergraduate  and  16  postgraduate  students  from  Middle  Eastern  countries  (including  Turkey, 
Jordan and the UAE). For the coming academic year, 31 Iranian graduate students have been offered 
A*STAR International Graduate Scholarships, to pursue Master’s degree studies at NUS and NTU in 
the areas of Biomedical Sciences, Physical Sciences and Engineering. (The scholars were selected 
from top Iranian Universities, including Sharif University of Technology, University of Tehran, Shiraz 
University and Isfahan University of Technology.) 
Recently, Al-Azhar University, the Harvard equivalent of Islamic education, announced that it will be 
helping Singapore develop a centre of Islamic learning. Established in 988 AD, Al-Azhar is the oldest 
operating  university  in  the  world.  It  is  collaborating  with  the  Islamic  Religious  Council  of  Singapore 
(MUIS)  to  run  programmes  that  are  likely  to  range  from  introductory  to  post-graduate  courses  in 
Islamic studies. 
We can bring students together not just for formal degree courses, but for summer schools. Middle 
Eastern  families  can  come  to  Singapore  for  holidays  and  health  services,  while  the  young  go  to 
school. Middle Eastern youth will find Singapore a friendly, multicultural and multi-religious city. They 
will find an English language environment and educational programmes that combine the best of East 
and West. They will find friends from Singapore, Southeast Asia, China and India. 
A further area of potential collaboration is in teacher training and education research. For example, the 
National Institute of Education has been appointed by the Abu Dhabi Educational Zone in the UAE to 
advise on the setting up of a teacher training institute. We will be able to exchange training materials 
and officials, as well as collaborate on innovative projects in education. 
Each of these initiatives may be small. But they all add to the soft infrastructure and networks that we 
have to create between Asia and the Middle East, to build enduring economic and business ties. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me just say that the financial centres of both our regions can play an important role in 
catalysing  cross-regional  flows  of  savings,  and  creating  a  multiplier  effect  on  Asia  and  Middle  East 
growth and investment. We must also establish and strengthen people-to-people links, and contribute 
to each others’ efforts to develop financial sector skills and build management capacity. And we must 
start with our young, bring them together, and help them dispel stereotypes of each other, not just by 
understanding their differences but finding what they share in common. I suspect they share far more 
in common than the generations before them. 
AMED provides a vehicle to jumpstart this process. I hope that the potential areas of cooperation that I 
have highlighted will throw up more ideas, for the financial sector panel session later today as well as 
in the field of education. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2005
