Sir K Dwight Venner: Evolution of global governance and its critical offshoot 
corporate governance 
Opening remarks by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the 
2nd Meeting of the Caribbean Corporate Governance Forum, St Kitts, 8 March 2005. 
 Mr Chairman 
We meet at a time of unprecedented change in the international system with the advent of the New 
Millennium. Prior to this, however, the seeds of change leading to the very dynamic, fluid and volatile 
state  of  the  international  economy  and  political  system  were  being  laid  by  several  critical  events. 
These events laid the basis for the evolution of Global Governance and its critical offshoot Corporate 
Governance, which is the reason why we are gathered here today. 
An understanding of the history of the evolution of the international system is vital to an understanding 
of the Corporate Governance movement if one can term it that. The phenomena of globalisation which 
underpins this seemingly new aspect of our lives is not in fact new, but has been occurring with major 
interruptions since the 19th century. Certainly between 1860 and 1913 there was a considerable flow 
of trade and capital between the established states and their colonial empires. This was interrupted by 
the World War I and the interwar period. The trade disputes and struggles for resources led to World 
War II, following which there was an unprecedented period of stability and growth during the 1950s 
and 1960s. This came to an end in the late 1960s and certainly by 1971. 
During this period the map of the world changed considerably as did the geopolitics of the international 
system. A large number of countries, parts of former colonial empires, became independent and took 
their place in the community of nations. At the same time, however, the world became divided along 
ideological lines, the East-West divide which ushered in the Cold War era. Competition between East 
and West took the form of differences in political and economic systems, communism versus liberal 
democracy, and the command versus the market economy. 
One  could  describe  the  post  World  War  II  environment  as  one  of  ideological  competition  revolving 
around  politics,  finance  and  trade.  This  system  began  to  unravel  in  a  remarkable  way  with  the 
destabilisation  of  the  market  system  as  the  inflation  generated  by  the  Vietnam  War  in  the  United 
States,  and  the  dollar  surplus  in  Europe,  caused  the  demise  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed 
exchange rates, which had guided the international financial system in the post war period. This, one 
can argue, led to the first oil crisis and further destabilisation. 
The world in very quick time moved from a comfort zone of fixed exchange rates and a low and stable 
price for oil to a new era of floating exchange rates, and an unprecedented high price and volatility of 
one of the most critical commodities in international trade. Further, fundamental change came in 1989 
with the demise of communism and the unraveling of the Soviet Union, the other super power. 
The results of these separate events, when put together, represented a fundamental change in the 
architecture of the international political and economic system on the approach of the New Millennium. 
A number of seminal books have been written on this new phenomena and they are worthy of note at 
this point. They are – 
• 
• 
• 
All  of  these  books  in  direct  and  indirect  ways  speak  to  the  issue  of  Global  Governance  in  a  world 
which  had  apparently  lost  its  original  moorings  and  needed  new  paradigms  on  which  to  base  its 
relationships. These relationships involved those between states as well as between firms. The books 
raised various questions. For example, will differences in civilizations like Western Civilisation versus 
Islam  be  a  governing  principle  in  the  conduct  of  international  political  and  economic  affairs?  The 
current situation revolving around the issue of terrorism may suggest this, although the jury is still very 
much out on the matter. 
The End of History and the Last Man by Francis Fukuyama; 
The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order by Samuel Huntington; 
The Borderless World by Kenichi Ohmae. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
The  ascendancy  of  liberal  democracy  has  been  certainly  confirmed  as  in  theory  there  are  certainly 
more  states  which  have  reasonably  fair  electoral  practices.  However,  the  deeper  underpinnings  of 
liberal democracy such as an independent judiciary, freedom of the press, and well-regulated markets 
are yet to appear in many countries. 
The borderless world is real in so far as the movement of finance, capital and the increasing flow of 
goods is concerned, but we are yet to see the demise of the nation state as predicted by Ohmae as a 
corollary to the borderless world. What is clear is that there has been a consolidation of states into one 
world  in  terms  of  inclusiveness  through  such  international  institutions  as  the  United  Nations,  the 
Bretton Woods institutions, the IMF and World Bank, and the World Trade Organisation representing 
respectively politics, finance and trade. 
The  demise  of  communism  and  the  command  system  of  resource  allocation  has  left  the  market 
system  in  sole  command  as  the  arbiter  of  economic  decision  making.  All  countries,  including  the 
former  Soviet  Union  are  moving  to,  or  have  established,  market-type  economies.  The  debate  over 
whether the state or the market is the more appropriate means of allocating resources has, in a sense, 
been decisively won by the market. 
The overriding question which now has to be posed is: who governs the market? This question must 
be answered both globally and nationally for the simple reason that all states are not equal and within 
countries all sections of society are not equal. There are, and can be, consequences if there is market 
failure on a global scale like the Great Depression, or a systemic global financial crisis as was the fear 
during the Asian crisis or before that with the default of Mexico in 1982 and the subsequent debt crisis 
in Latin America. 
The  international  economic  system  is  so  interdependent  and  the  flow  of  capital  so  huge  and  so 
potentially  volatile  that  safety  nets  and  governance  systems  must  be  put  in  place  to  prevent  an 
economic  and  financial  melt  down.  This  would  have  spill-over  effects  on  the  system  of  liberal 
democracy, as in a response to such crises, governments may be tempted to assume authoritarian 
power.  It  could  provoke  ethnic  strife  within  and  between  countries  as  scarce  resources  may  be 
commanded by those who have political, military and economic power. 
Where  does  this  place  Corporate  Governance  in  the  context  of  a  rapidly  changing  and  volatile 
environment? 
Firstly,  there  are  serious  contradictions  in  the  architecture  of  the  international  system.  There  is  an 
increasing  cross  border  flow  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  even  labour.  There  are  international 
conventions  which  states  subscribe  to,  but  there  is  no  political  architecture  which  can  effectively 
regulate, police and redress the major issues which follow in the wake of these massive cross border 
flows. 
Secondly,  and  because  of  the  first,  there  has  been  a  perceptible  shift  in  power  from  nation  states 
represented  by  their  ministries  of  finance,  tax  authorities  and  central  banks  to  the  participants  in 
international  and  national  financial  and  equity  markets,  namely,  pension  funds,  trust  funds,  hedge 
funds, large financial conglomerates and bond holders. Bond holders, for example, have been able to 
hold up sovereign debt restructurings and pension funds have been able to unseat Boards of Directors 
and Management. 
This has in a sense provided a counterbalance to the pressures within the market system, particularly 
stock valuations for consistency, improving performance to impress markets and investors. This has 
led to serious abuses and corporate malfeasance as in the celebrated cases of Enron, Worldcom, 
Parmacat and others. The tensions in the market system spring from competition not only within, but 
also between countries with variants in the kind of market capitalism they practice. One author, Bruno 
Amable  has  identified  five  types  of  market  capitalism,  each  characterized  by  specific  institutional 
forms, and particular institutional complementarities: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The Market based Model; 
The Social Democratic Model; 
The Continental European Model; 
The Mediterranean Model; 
The Asian Model. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
These models which we will not describe in detail, are characterized by a greater or lesser degree of 
state involvement, the particular role of financial and labour markets and the presence or absence of 
welfare state arrangements. The fact of the matter is that market failure and/or corporate malfeasance 
can  create  havoc  with  economic,  political  and  social  arrangements  and  stability.  Regulation  by  the 
state, social welfare or social protection mechanisms, and the self regulation of private sector entities 
are critical for stability, growth and development. 
The  rights  of  shareholders,  the  rights  of  participants  in  pension  funds,  and  the  rights  of  ordinary 
citizens to enjoy the economic benefits of being part of a community are intrinsically enshrined in the 
social  contract  between  state  and  citizen  and  to  the  extent  that  they  become  threatened,  become 
enshrined in the laws of the country. This certainly is the case in the nation state where the concept of 
public  goods  and  public  policy  represent  the  necessity  to  protect  citizens’  rights  en  bloc  and  not  a 
particular section of the society. 
Since the world is now so interdependent and contagion both in the economic and financial spheres is 
no longer a theoretical construct, but a highly possible event, there is an understanding that there are 
such  things  as  international  public  goods  and  that  corporate  governance  therefore  extends  beyond 
national  borders.  The  most  obvious  area  which  reflects  this  is  the  financial  arena  and  international 
standards and codes have started and proliferated from this arena into other related areas. 
The  successive  financial  crises  in  different  regimes  of  the  world  over  the  last  two  decades  have 
manifestly illustrated the impact of the volatility of the financial system on both economic and political 
events. A special G22 Working Group on Transparency and Accountability was established in the late 
1990s  to  review  and  report  on  this  matter.  They  concluded  that  “inadequate  transparency  by 
international  organizations,  national  and  governmental  units,  and  private  sector  entities  was  a 
contributing force to the serious financial disturbances that have plagued the global economy”. They 
concluded that markets cannot function efficiently and that they will continue to be highly vulnerable to 
instability, in the absence of adequate, reliable and timely information from all quarters. 
A number of standard setting bodies dealing with a number of financial sector related areas have been 
established to address the situation. The IMF has produced for example, the Code of Good Practices 
on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies  and  there  have  been  standards  and  codes  in 
Accounting,  Auditing,  Banking  Regulation  and  Supervision,  Bankruptcy,  Insurance  Regulation, 
Payment System and Securities Market Regulation, and of course, Corporate Governance. 
The  OECD  has  taken  the  lead  responsibility  for  Corporate  Governance  and  has  issued  the  OECD 
Principles of Corporate Governance in 2004 after extensive international consultation. The Principles, 
as stated in the preamble, are intended to assist OECD and non-OECD governments in their efforts to 
evaluate  and  improve  the  legal,  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  for  corporate  governance  in 
their countries and to provide guidance and suggestions for stock exchanges, investors, corporations, 
and other parties that have a role in the process of developing good corporate governance. 
In  the  Caribbean  we  have  some  definite  advantages  as  we  embark  on  the  development  of  our 
corporate governance systems in the region. The most important of course, is a sound foundation of 
liberal democracy which has flourished since the attainment of universal adult suffrage in the 1950s 
and 60s. We have had a system and series of free and fair elections in which the losers were not shot 
or exiled, and had the right to challenge the results in our courts. We have had an outstanding system 
of justice certainly in comparison with many countries in the first, second and third worlds. 
We have also had the rights of religion, free association and freedom of the press. These rights and 
institutions  are  the  bedrocks  on  which  good  corporate  governance  is  built.  It  has  been  a  principle 
among our firms that their accounts and performance should be publicly audited and because of the 
importance of foreign investment the standards of OECD countries have been accepted as the norm. 
We do have some grounds to cover in this new dispensation when the Standards of Transparency and 
Accountability have been raised considerably in response to the international environment. The flow of 
foreign investment needed to facilitate sustainable growth and development over a time period, long 
enough  to  treat  successfully  with  our  unemployment  and  poverty  issues,  will  be  dependent  on  our 
practice of good corporate governance both in the public and private sectors. 
In  the  public sector,  good  public  finance  and  debt management  policies  will  be  vital  in  creating  the 
environment for development. The regulatory activities of the state in passing and enforcing legislation 
to  support  good  corporate  governance  will  also  be  important.  However,  the  example  set  by  the 
government  in  publishing  statistics  and  having  their  financial  statements  pass  through  the 
constitutional process of parliamentary scrutiny of the public accounts committee after examination by 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
the  Auditor  General,  is  absolutely  vital  to  the  integrity  of  the  corporate  governance  process  in  our 
region. 
The regional private sector in order to develop and be internationally competitive has no other option 
than  to  accept  these  practices.  Their  commitment  to  good  corporate  practices  and  corporate 
citizenship is critical not only for their own growth and development but for that of the region as well. 
There is, in our societies because of our history, a great suspicion of the motives of businesses and 
businessmen. The Anancy image is quite alive and well in our societies. In addition, the ethnic images 
of our business classes pose some ambiguity, as, since they are essentially family oriented, there is 
no  public  disclosure.  The  suspicion  of  the  Tax  Departments  also  encourages  an  attitude  on  non-
disclosure. The public and private sectors have to work in tandem to realize an atmosphere of trust. 
Professions  such  as  Law  and  Accounting  have  to  play  a  critical  role  in  bringing  our  business 
communities into the new paradigm of transparency and disclosure. 
The  market  economy,  we  can  conclude,  works  best  when  it  is  properly  regulated  and  the 
dissemination of information is supportive of choices which lead to improved resource allocation. All 
institutions,  both  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  must  strive  to  ensure  that,  both  nationally  and 
regionally,  we  set  and  maintain  standards  of  corporate  governance  which  lead  to  the  sustainable 
growth and development of our region and our people. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2005
