Svein Gjedrem: Experiences with inflation targeting in Norway and other countries 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Centre for 
Monetary Economics/Norwegian School of Management, Oslo, 7 June 2005.  
The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or current interest rate setting. Please note that the text 
below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Monetary  policy’s  most  important  task  is  to  provide  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  Through 
history  this  task  has  been  accomplished  in  different  ways.  All  of  them  have  not  been  equally 
successful. Five hundred years of Norway’s inflation history nevertheless show that price stability is 
normal and that high inflation is a phenomenon of wartime and years of social distress as well as a 
phenomenon of the 1970s.1  
The economic policy of the 1970s and parts of the 1980s contributed to wide fluctuations in output and 
employment and high and variable inflation.  
It  was  gradually  recognised  that  monetary  policy’s most  important  task  is  to  ensure  low  and  stable 
inflation. Throughout the 1980s, monetary policy was oriented towards reducing inflation.  
Norway and a number of other countries chose a fixed exchange rate as a target for monetary policy. 
The fixed exchange rate was chosen to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. In Norway, this 
was a breach in the approach whereby monetary policy and exchange rate policy had been oriented 
towards strengthening  the  internationally  exposed sector.  Deteriorating competitiveness  due  to  high 
wage growth would no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. This is clearly indicated in the 
following quotes from the Steigum Commission which submitted its report in 1988.  
“If international inflation is low and stable, such an exchange rate policy will contribute strongly to price 
and wage developments in Norway that are also favourable, assuming that the value of the krone is 
not gradually devalued.”  
“If  a  fixed  exchange  rate  rule  is  to  be  credible,  the  authorities  must  also  refrain  from  using 
(devaluations of the krone) in the current economic policy when weakened cost competitiveness leads 
to a decline in output and employment.”  
With increasingly mobile capital, it became gradually more difficult to maintain the fixed exchange rate. 
Small differences in interest rates could result in substantial capital flows and monetary policy easily 
became pro-cyclical. That fiscal policy dampened fluctuations in the domestic economy and that wage 
growth  was  held  at  bay  were  not  sufficient  grounds  for  a  fixed  exchange  rate  either.  Currency 
speculation could be self-fulfilling because interest rate increases that were necessary to counter an 
attack  on  the  exchange  rate  could  trigger  such  a  low  level  of  activity  that  confidence  in  the  fixed 
exchange rate was pulverised.  
In  Norway,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  was  abandoned  in  December  1992.  There  had  been 
persistent unrest and widespread speculation in European currency markets. A number of countries 
had to abandon a fixed exchange rate.  
The  exchange  rate  target  in  Norway  became  more  flexible.  Monetary  policy  was  oriented  towards 
maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate  in  relation  to  European  currencies,  without  defining  a  central 
exchange rate with fluctuation margins. At the same time, fiscal policy was to stabilise the domestic 
economy.  
With rising petroleum revenues, it proved demanding to use the government budget to curb growth in 
domestic demand and costs. The krone exchange rate began to fluctuate increasingly from 1997, and 
interest rate setting had to increasingly be oriented towards maintaining low and stable inflation.  
                                                      
1   See Qvigstad, Jan (2005), “500 års prishistorie – Prisstabilitet er det normale. Hva kjennetegner det unormale?” (500 years 
of inflation history - Price stability is the norm. What distinguishes the abnormal?) Lecture at Norges Bank’s conference on 
Historical monetary statistics for Norway, Bogstad Gård, 7 June. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
Through the 1990s, inflation targeting had emerged as an attractive alternative. This monetary policy 
regime was based on experiences from the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.  
One important lesson was that it was not possible to reduce unemployment in the medium and long 
term by merely accepting somewhat higher inflation. Faced with the question of whether an increase in 
inflation from say 10 to 12 per cent was acceptable if stimulating the economy could at the same time 
reduce unemployment from say 2 to 1½ per cent, the decision-making authorities would most likely 
have been inclined to answer yes. But experience showed that this was not an available option. An 
attempt to increase output beyond the level that is consistent with stable inflation will over time lead to 
steadily rising inflation. Economic agents will eventually incorporate higher inflation into their inflation 
expectations. In the long run, the result will only be higher inflation, not higher employment. Output 
and employment will return to their potential level.  
Another important lesson from the 1970s and 1980s was that economic agents look to the future when 
they  make  decisions  about  consumption  and  investments,  wages  and  prices.  They  will  take  into 
account not only current economy policy, but their expectations of future economic policy.  
If  economic  agents  expect  that  tomorrow’s  policy  will  result  in  high  inflation,  the  cost  of  reducing 
inflation  may  be  high  in  terms  of  increased  unemployment.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  establish 
confidence in monetary policy and the objective of price stability. There must be consistency between 
the stated objectives of economic policy and what is actually done to achieve these objectives. This is 
the  most  important  reason  why  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  has  been  delegated  to  the 
central bank in Norway, as has been the case in other comparable countries. In Norway, responsibility 
for  interest  rate  decisions  was  delegated  to  Norges  Bank  through  the  1985  Norges  Bank  Act  and 
through adaptations in practice in 1986.  
However, confidence in the inflation target also requires that government finances are in order. One 
aspect of independence is that the government is not allowed to borrow directly from the central bank. 
In this way, it is possible to avoid a situation where the government uses the printing press to finance 
deficits. Printing press financing will lead to inflation over time.  
In  Norway,  the  government’s  possibility  of  borrowing  directly  from  Norges  Bank  was  eliminated  by 
means of changes in the Norges Bank Act in 2003. (The change became effective 1.1.2005.) Now, the 
Norwegian government has large surpluses and saves considerable amounts through the Government 
Petroleum  Fund.  The  change  may  therefore  appear  to  be  of  little  practical  importance,  but  it  is  not 
completely uninteresting. The Petroleum Fund is invested abroad. The government must borrow funds 
to finance domestic lending and financial investment. One observation is that the prohibition would be 
more important if the assets in the Petroleum Fund were earmarked for a particular purpose and could 
not be used for general financing of government expenditures. But there are no plans for this.  
Today, more than 20 countries have adopted inflation targeting. Some of them have had an inflation 
target for more than 10 years, but many adopted inflation targeting after 1998.  
Which  countries  actually  have  inflation  targeting  and  when  they  introduced  this  regime  is  open  to 
discussion.  The  following  chart  is  based  on  information  from  T.  Pétursson  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland.2  
In New Zealand, the new monetary policy regime emerged as a solution to a practical problem. Like 
most OECD countries, New Zealand had experienced high and variable inflation in the 1970s and the 
first  part  of  the  1980s.  Monetary  policy  was  tightened  and  inflation  fell.  At  this  time,  they  needed  a 
robust system that could ensure stable and continued low inflation. The arrangement chosen was part 
of a more far-reaching reform of the central government administration in New Zealand. Management 
by objectives, delegation and accountability were important aspects.  
Developments in Canada are of particular interest. This country is one of the industrialised countries 
with the longest experience with a floating exchange rate regime, first from 1950 and later from 1970. 
Canada spent many years searching for a credible and sustainable system.  
The UK and Sweden switched to inflation targeting after currency crises and the collapse of their fixed 
exchange rate regimes at the beginning of the 1990s.  
                                                      
2   Pétursson, Thórarinn G. (2004), “Formulation of inflation targeting around the world,” Monetary Bulletin 2004/1, pp. 57-84. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
In Chile and Israel, the introduction of inflation targeting was important for reducing inflation. This has 
also been the case for a number of the countries that introduced inflation targeting around the turn of 
the millennium.  
The practice of inflation targeting varies. There are, nevertheless, a number of common features that 
we will refer to as the core of inflation targeting.  
First,  low  and  stable  inflation  in  the  long  term  is  defined  as  the  most  important  monetary  policy 
objective in inflation targeting countries. The government authorities state this explicitly.  
Second,  the  inflation  target  is  quantified.  The  actual  target  varies,  however,  from  one  country  to 
another.  
In  some  countries,  such  as  New  Zealand  and  Israel,  the  target  has  been  set  as  a  target  band  for 
inflation,  and  not  as  a  single  target  figure.  Other  countries  like  Canada  and  Sweden  have  a  target 
figure  with  a  target  band  around  it.  Common  to  all  inflation-targeting  countries  is  the  existence  of 
symmetry: It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation 
rate that is too high.  
Monetary policy in the US and the euro area is not usually considered to be inflation targeting. In the 
US, low and stable inflation is an important long-term monetary policy objective, but no explicit target 
has been set. In the euro area, price stability is the most important monetary policy objective. This is 
stipulated by a treaty. The ECB has defined price stability as a rise in consumer prices that is less than 
but close to 2 per cent. This means that there is no symmetry. The ECB differs here. It also appears 
that the ECB has a longer time horizon for its assessments, and the bank emphasises developments 
in the money supply.  
For most inflation-targeting countries, the explicit target is linked to a level or a band for the consumer 
price  index.  Some  of  the  prices  in  the  consumer  price  index  vary  considerably,  however,  due,  for 
example, to tax changes, weather and wind. Changes in these prices provide little information about 
inflationary pressures in the economy. Therefore, some central banks focus on an underlying measure 
of inflation. This may be the consumer price index excluding prices that fluctuate most, or measures 
such as the trimmed average or the weighted median.  
While the purchase and sale of a dwelling is an investment, the advantage we derive from using the 
dwelling – shelter services – is part of consumption. Therefore, the price of shelter services should be 
included in the consumer price index. However, this is a price that cannot be observed and is difficult 
to measure. Consequently, some central banks completely disregard shelter services. New Zealand 
uses an index for construction costs, while Iceland includes the market value of resale homes.  
As  a  rule,  the  price  of  shelter  services  will  increase  when  the  interest  rate  rises.  All  central  banks 
disregard the direct effect of interest rates on the price of shelter services. This is also the case at 
Norges Bank.  
In very open economies, inflation may fluctuate somewhat without prompting fluctuations in domestic 
output and employment or leading to changes in inflation in the medium term. In such economies, it 
may be appropriate therefore to accept somewhat wider fluctuations in inflation.  
Which prices to include in the price index is a topic of discussion. In the academic literature, some 
have suggested that the central bank can increase economic stability or reduce the negative effects of 
slow price adjustment by stabilising an index with fewer prices and weights other than those in the 
consumer price index.3 Prices that adjust slowly should have a relatively higher weight than prices that 
change quickly. Prices for goods and services where labour costs are a major component often adjust 
slowly.4 Labour costs are very important in these indices not only because they change slowly but also 
because they react to cyclical movements and are seldom exposed to extraordinary disturbances.  
                                                      
3   See  Aoki,  Kosuke  (2001),  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  Responses  to  Relative  Price  Changes,”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics,  Vol.  48,  pp.  55-80,  Arrazola  Maria  and  José  de  Hevia  (2002),  “An  Alternative  Measure  of  Core  Inflation,” 
Economics  letters,  Vol.  75,  pp.  69-73,  Mankiw,  Gregory  and  Ricardo  Reis  (2003),“What  Measure  of  Inflation  Should  a 
Central  Bank  Target?”  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association,  Vol.  1,  pp.  1058-1086,  and  Woodford,  Michael 
(2003), Interest & Prices – Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press. 
4   Angeloni,  Ignazio,  Luc  Aucremanne,  Michael  Ehrmann,  Jordi  Gali,  Andy  Levin  and  Frank  Smets  (2004),  “Inflation 
Persistence in the Euro Area: Preliminary Summary of Findings”, presented at the ECB’s conference on inflation persistence 
in the euro area, Frankfurt am Main , 10-11 December 2004. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
Another topic currently of interest to academic research is whether a price level target may be better 
than an inflation target. With a price level target, high inflation today must be followed by low inflation 
tomorrow. This is not the case with an inflation target. One advantage of a price level target is that it 
may reduce the uncertainty surrounding the price level ahead. But the view has been that a price level 
target results in wider fluctuations in output and employment and less stable inflation. Recent literature 
challenges this view.5 As far as we know, there are no concrete plans in any country to shift to a price 
target.  
A  third  characteristic  of  inflation  targeting  is  that  the  central  bank  alone  sets  the  interest  rate  -  the 
central bank has instrument independence. One exception must nevertheless be mentioned here. In 
the UK, the authority to set interest rates was not transferred from the Ministry of the Exchequer to the 
Bank of England until 1997, five years after an inflation target had been set.  
In  some  countries,  legislation  allows  the  authorities  to  review  the  decisions  under  very  special 
conditions. This has not had any practical significance.  
A  fourth  characteristic  is  that  central  banks  in  inflation-targeting  countries  are  transparent.  This 
provides broad insight into the basis for interest rate decisions.  
Transparency  makes  monetary  policy  more  predictable.  Inflation  targeting  provides  an  explicit  and 
understandable  framework  for  clarifying  and  stating  the  reasons  for  the  trade-offs  in  interest  rate 
setting.  
Central banks practice transparency in different ways.  
Inflation-targeting central banks usually publish inflation reports or monetary policy reports, but there 
are major differences in the frequency of publication, horizons and assumptions for projections as well 
as the contents in general.6  
In the UK, economic developments receive broad coverage. The Bank makes projections two years 
ahead, but only for developments in GDP and prices.  
Sweden  has  a  two-year  horizon  for  the  inflation  target.  The  inflation  report  does  not  discuss  the 
monetary policy stance. Instead, this is presented in the published minutes from the monetary policy 
meetings. The inflation report contains relatively detailed prognoses.  
In  all  inflation-targeting  countries,  with  the  exception  of  Iceland,  the  interest  rate  is  assessed  at 
pre-announced times. The interest rate may also be assessed at extraordinary meetings. In addition, 
signals about the interest rate may be given in speeches or other statements.  
Practice varies with regard to the publication of meeting minutes and voting.  
At  Norges  Bank,  we  have  become  more  transparent  in  recent  years  about  the  background  for  the 
interest rate decisions. So far, we have only had positive experience with this. In statements following 
monetary policy meetings, press conferences, inflation reports and speeches, we present an account 
of aspects of economic developments that influence the Executive Board’s assessments and interest 
rate decisions. Everything is available on Norges Bank’s website. Interest rate decisions are based on 
a  monetary  policy  strategy  drawn  up  by  the  Executive  Board  every  four  months.  The  strategy  is 
published as soon as it is adopted and prior to the relevant strategy period. In the last year, we have 
commented on market participants’ interest rate expectations.  
The  fifth  characteristic  is  that  central  banks  in  inflation-targeting  countries  must  be  accountable  in 
different ways for the results of their monetary policy.  
Inflation targeting is transparent. This allows for a regular follow-up and assessment of the interest rate 
setting.  
Norges  Bank’s  Annual  Report  with  a  discussion  of  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  sent  to  the 
Ministry of Finance for submission to the King and communication to the Storting. The Government’s 
                                                      
5   See Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999), “Price Level Targeting vs Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking,  Vol.  31,  pp.  277-295,  and  Vestin,David  (203),  “Price-level  versus  Inflation  Targeting”  forthcoming  in  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics. 
6   See  Fracasso,  Andrea.,  Hans  Genberg  and  Charles.  Wyplosz  (2003),  “How  do  Central  Banks  Write?  An  Evaluation  of 
Inflation Reports by Inflation Targeting Central Banks, Geneva Reports on the World Economy, Special Report 2. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2005
evaluations are presented in the annual Credit Report. As governor of Norges Bank, I appear at an 
open hearing in the Storting’s Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs as part of the 
Committee’s deliberations on the Government’s Credit Report. In addition, Norges Bank Watch sends 
an independent professional evaluation of monetary policy to the Ministry of Finance.  
In many countries, the central bank governor must appear before parliament and answer questions. 
For example, the Riksbank in Sweden reports to the Swedish Parliament’s Finance Committee on the 
conduct of monetary policy at least twice a year. Canada has a similar arrangement.  
The Bank of England must write an open letter to the Minister of the Exchequer if inflation deviates 
from the target by more than one percentage point. In the letter, the bank must explain why the target 
has  not  been  reached  and  what  measures  will  be  initiated.  In  Norway  in  the  summer  of  2003,  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  asked  Norges  Bank  to  provide  a  more  detailed  account  of  actual  price 
developments  in  relation  to  the  monetary  policy  target.  At  that  time,  inflation  was  more  than  one 
percentage point below the target.  
Many central banks are required to inform the Ministry of Finance concerning their use of monetary 
policy  instruments.  The  formal  frameworks  vary.  The  central  banks  in  Australia  and  Canada  have 
regular  consultations  with  the  government  authorities  concerning  monetary  policy.  In  Sweden,  the 
central bank informs the authorities in advance about important monetary policy decisions. This is also 
the  practice  in  New  Zealand.  Norges  Bank  has  provided  information  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in 
special  meetings  ever  since  the  Bank  received  instrument  independence  in  1986.  The  Ministry  can 
then also express their view. This procedure does not reduce the Executive Board’s responsibility for 
their decisions.  
In  some  central  banks,  government  representatives  can  participate  in  monetary  policy  committee 
meetings, as a rule without voting rights. In Australia, the senior official in the Ministry of Finance and 
Administration is a member of the monetary policy committee. He or she has voting rights. In the UK, 
the Ministry of the Exchequer has the right to be present but only has the right to speak. In the ECB, 
the  chairman  of  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  one  member  of  the  Commission  may  participate  in  the 
meetings of the Governing Council, but they have no voting rights.  
At  Norges  Bank,  the  Executive  Board  makes  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  Executive  Board 
consists of internal and external members and has responsibility for all of Norges Bank’s operations. 
Australia has a similar arrangement. In the Bank of England and the Riksbank in Sweden, the interest 
rate is set by a monetary policy committee with members who in practice work full-time for the bank. In 
New  Zealand,  the  central  bank  governor  alone  sets  the  interest  rate.  In  Canada,  the  central  bank 
governor has also been given this responsibility.  
In  the  UK  and  Sweden,  the  individual  member’s  responsibility  is  emphasised  in  particular.  Minutes 
from  the  monetary  policy  meeting  as  well  as  the  voting  results  are  published.  At  the  same  time, 
members participate actively in the public debate with speeches and articles on monetary policy.  
In Norway, we have chosen to provide a broad account of the interest rate decision that reflects the 
Executive Board’s discussions.  
Differences in the practice of inflation targeting are often due to historical and cultural differences. It is 
reasonable to expect that some of the differences will disappear over time.  
Result 
With  more  than  ten  years  of  experience  with  inflation  targeting,  we  can  now  evaluate  what  the 
countries have achieved.  
Inflation  had  already  fallen  somewhat  among  the  OECD  countries  that  first  introduced  inflation 
targeting. Inflation has fallen further and has remained at the lower level. There is also considerably 
less variability in inflation.  
Inflation  targeting  in  Chile  and  Israel  reduced  inflation  from  a  very  high  level.  There  is  also  less 
variability in inflation.  
The  countries  that  introduced  inflation  targeting  from  the  end  of  the  1990s  may  be  divided  into 
countries with high inflation and countries with low inflation at the time of the shift in monetary policy. 
Inflation has remained low and stable in those countries that initially had low inflation. The countries 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 5
where  inflation  was  high  have  so  far  experienced  the  same  favourable  developments  as  Chile  and 
Israel.  
Many of the countries that have inflation targeting today previously had a fixed exchange rate regime. 
With inflation targeting, the nominal exchange rate fluctuates.  
In  those  countries  that  introduced  inflation  targeting  first,  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  have 
diminished.  
Changes in the exchange rate are of importance to interest rate setting because the exchange rate 
affects inflation and output. When there are prospects of moderate economic activity, low wage growth 
and low inflation, the central bank will reduce the interest rate. This will normally result in a weaker 
currency.  Prices  for  imported  goods  and  services  will  increase.  A  weaker  currency  strengthens  the 
competitive  strength  of  a  country’s  enterprises  and  indirectly  increases  output,  employment  and 
inflation.  
Most inflation-targeting countries base their monetary policy on inflation targeting that is more flexible 
and use some time to bring inflation back to target, i.e. flexible inflation targeting. Such a policy has a 
less pronounced effect on demand and output than stricter inflation targeting.  
We see that real economic developments among the  first inflation-targeting countries have become 
more stable.  
Growth has also accelerated. For all OECD countries in the first group of inflation-targeting countries, 
growth has been higher since inflation targeting was introduced than before.  
With confidence in the inflation target, monetary policy can make a greater contribution to smoothing 
fluctuations in the economy.  
Inflation expectations have also fallen and are stable at the target.7  
On the whole, we may conclude that the inflation-targeting countries have had low and stable inflation. 
Growth has increased and become more stable.  
Nevertheless, we cannot necessarily conclude that inflation targeting alone has been responsible for 
these favourable results. Other countries have also had favourable economic developments in the last 
ten to fifteen years.  
The results must be seen in the light of the fact that all of these countries have conducted a sound 
monetary policy. Low and stable inflation is an important and often the only monetary policy objective. 
The central bank sets the interest rate, and in all of these countries monetary policy is currently based 
on  the  understanding  that  in  the  long-term  there  is  no  trade-off  between  inflation  and  employment. 
This applies regardless of whether they have introduced inflation targeting or not.  
Among  the  countries  with  positive  economic  developments  in  the  last  ten  to  fifteen  years,  different 
degrees of confidence in the nominal anchor early in the 1990s have probably been decisive for the 
choice of inflation targeting as a monetary policy regime. When confidence was lacking, it was costly 
to  reduce  inflation.  For  many  countries  it  was  important  to  establish  a  system  that  could  build 
confidence. Inflation targeting is tailor-made for this purpose.  
It  is  possible  that  the  disturbances  in  the  world  economy  were  particularly  large  in  the  1970s  and 
1980s, and that later it has been easier to stabilise inflation and output.8 In the 1970s and early 1980s, 
oil prices rose sharply. We have not had similar disturbances in the last fifteen years. On the other 
hand,  monetary  policy  is  probably  more  robust  now.  Disturbances  are  not  allowed  to  spread  in  the 
same way as earlier. Many countries have been exposed to major disturbances in the last fifteen years 
as well.  
                                                      
7   Consensus Forecasts Inc. provides an overview of different institutions’ inflation forecasts for different countries. This may 
be a measure of inflation expectations. See also Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci and Jeremy M. Piger (2004), “The 
Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 86, pp. 51-80. 
8   See, for example, Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (2003), “Has the business cycle changed? Evidence and explanations”, in 
Monetary policy and uncertainty: Adapting to a change in economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2005
Globalisation, increased trade and at times strong growth in productivity may have made the trade-offs 
easier. It is possible that the costs of holding inflation at bay have been reduced.9  
It appears that the short-term trade-off between inflation and unemployment has changed in Norway 
as well.10  
Whereas a given rise in unemployment resulted in a relatively small reduction in inflation in the 1970s 
and 1980s, the gain in the form of lower inflation was far greater in the 1990s. This may be due to a 
more  successful  monetary  policy  and  supply-side  conditions  in  the  economy,  including  wage 
determination.  
Inflation targeting has proved to be a sound system and may be particularly well suited for small and 
medium-sized open economies.  
A topic currently being discussed by academia and central banks is whether and how monetary policy 
should contribute to stability in the financial system.  
Price stability and financial stability often require the same medicine. For example, periods of strong 
growth in demand for goods and services will usually result in both higher inflation and increased asset 
prices. Both considerations may imply a tighter monetary policy. There are also examples of situations 
where these objectives must be weighed against one another.  
In  recent  years,  inflation  has  been  low  and  stable  in  many  countries  while  asset  prices  have  risen 
sharply. There may be several reasons for this.  
First,  a  credible  monetary  policy  will  result  in  expectations  of  low  inflation.  Long-term  implicit  and 
explicit price and wage contracts based on low inflation in the period ahead may thus become more 
common.  This  would  mean  that  it  could  take  longer  for  increased  demand  to  translate  into  higher 
inflation.  Asset  prices  will  not  necessarily  be  constrained  by  expectations  and  may  on  the  contrary 
react quickly to changes in the activity level.  
Second,  periods  of  higher  productivity  growth  may  lay  the  basis  for  high  corporate  earnings, 
heightened optimism and reduced risk awareness. Productivity growth may also result in low inflation. 
Banks usually have low losses and solid profits and can increase lending without eroding their capital 
adequacy. Debt-financed investments may lead to a faster rise in house and property prices.  
Increased globalisation and changes in trading patterns may have similar effects.  
There seems to be broad agreement that extreme events that can threaten financial stability should be 
met with a resolute monetary policy response. For example, a number of countries initiated measures 
to  ensure  liquidity  in  the  financial  system  after  the  terrorist  attacks  on  11  September  2001.  This 
reduced the risk in the financial systems.  
There is less agreement, however, about how central banks should respond to financial imbalances 
that accumulate gradually.  
One  view  is  that  it  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable  to  counter  financial  imbalances  with  an  active 
monetary policy. According to this view, it is impossible to determine precisely the level of debt, asset 
prices and investments that constitutes an unacceptable risk for the financial system. Both an increase 
and the level of these variables may be important, but also the situation in the rest of economy.  
In addition, it is very difficult to determine the timing for a monetary policy response since monetary 
policy often functions with a lag.  
Third, the change in the interest rate that is necessary to reduce financial imbalances may be so large 
that it results in a sharp downturn.  
It is also conceivable that such an active policy may lead to moral hazard. Investors may undervalue 
risk if they expect the central bank to intervene when financial imbalances build up. The result may be 
that economic agents take more risk than is desirable.  
                                                      
9   See Rogoff, K. (2003), “Globalization and global disinflation”, in Monetary policy and uncertainty: Adapting to a change in 
economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
10  In the UK, developments have been similar. See King, Mervyn (2005), “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory, Mais 
Lecture 2005“, lecture at the Cass Business School, City University, London, 17 May. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 7
to 
to 
long 
over 
price 
order 
stability 
the  medium 
Central banks will, nevertheless, place emphasis on the effects of developments in asset prices, the 
money supply and credit on future inflation and output.  
The  grounds  are  somewhat  different.  Ben  Bernanke  from  the  US  Federal  Reserve  points  to  the 
relationship between the rise in the stock market and nascent inflationary pressures.  
“For  example,  to  the  extent  that  a  stock-market  boom  causes,  or  simply  forecasts,  sharply  higher 
spending on consumer goods and new capital, it may indicate incipient inflationary pressures. Policy 
tightening  might  therefore  be  called  for  –  but  to  contain  the  incipient  inflation,  not  to  arrest  the 
stock-market boom per se”, Ben S. Bernanke, October 200211  
Otmar  Issing  at  the  ECB  states  that  pressures  in  the  financial  system  can  be  detrimental  to  the 
objective of price stability in the long term.  
“Truly  optimal  monetary  policy  cannot  avoid  that,  at  times,  strains  in  the  financial  system  might  be 
such that deviations from the desired inflation rate during shorter periods of time have to be accepted, 
run” 
in 
preserve 
Otmar Issing, March 2003.12  
Lars  Heikensten,  the  governor  of  the  Riksbank  in  Sweden,  stresses  the  possible  repercussions  of 
financial imbalances on output when household debt is high and interest rates are rising.  
“…the developments in credit and house prices are one argument against looser monetary policy. A 
rate  cut  followed  by  a  faster  hike  could  bring  about  problems  through  their  effects  on  household 
indebtedness and consumption.”13 Lars Heikensten, March 2005  
None of the three set separate objectives for developments in asset prices or debt.  
Another  view  is  that  monetary  policy  should  take  into  account  the  effects  of  financial  instability  in 
addition to its impact on inflation and output. For example, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand will in an 
extraordinary  situation  with  a  very  sharp  rise  in  asset  prices  consider  extending  the  horizon  for 
achieving the inflation target in order to dampen developments in asset prices. The purpose of this is 
to reduce the risk of a serious economic downturn at a later time.  
In  Norway,  we  have  flexible  inflation  targeting.  We  have  chosen  to  incorporate  assessments  of 
financial  stability  in  the  interest  rate  decisions.  This  is  primarily  because  developments  in  financial 
balances  affect  inflation  and  output  over  time.  Through  its  work  on  financial  stability,  Norges  Bank 
gathers  information  about  the  financial  strength  of  the  financial  system  and  the  financial  position  of 
households  and  the  corporate  sector.  This  information  is  useful  in  connection  with  monetary  policy 
decisions. Integrating the objective of financial stability into monetary policy ensures that we are giving 
adequate attention to risks in the financial system.  
But it is important to remember that we have only one monetary policy instrument, the interest rate. 
Monetary policy should continue to focus on price stability. In the light of the experiences of different 
countries  in  the  last  10-15  years,  I  am  confident  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  provides  us  with  a 
sound framework for performing this task.  
                                                      
11  “Asset price ‘bubbles’ and monetary policy”. Remarks before the New York Chapter of the National Association of Business 
Economics, New York, 15 October. 
12  Issing, Otmar (2003), “Monetary and Financial Stability: Is there a Trade-off?” Speech at the conference “Monetary stability, 
financial stability and the business cycle”. 28-29 March, BIS, Basle. 
13  Heikensten,  Lars  (2005),  “Introduction  on  Monetary  Policy”  speech  to  the  Committee  on  Finance,  Swedish  Parliament, 
Stockholm, 15 March. 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2005
