David G Opiokello: Bank of Uganda - recent achievements 
Opening address by Mr David G Opiokello, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, on the occasion 
of  the  senior  management  workshop  for  the  FY2005/2006  work  plan  and  budget  preparations, 
Entebbe, 4 March 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I welcome you all to this annual event. I would like to thank all Bank staff who have been effectively 
participating  in  the  implementation  of  the  Strategic  Plan  2003-2008.  Allow  me  to  mention  a  few 
achievements. 
• 
• 
• 
The issuance of 2, 3, 5 and 10 year Government Bond was successfully done. 
The Bank successfully implemented automation of currency note processing. 
The RTGS has been launched while that of the Foreign Exchange Application had reached 
the stage of identifying the winning bidder. 
On  the  Capacity  Building  front,  the  Bank  trained  a  number  of  staff  on  professional  and 
academic courses, and most staff are now computer literate. 
The  installation  of  the  internet  link  was  a  tremendous  success  for  the  Bank.  It  has 
enormously eased communication both internally and externally and also helped to improve 
positively the perceptions of staff and external persons on the BOU operations. 
  Last year around the same time in Jinja, we resolved that this event is necessary for overcoming some 
of  the  challenges  the  BOU  faces  in  drawing  up  Budgets  and  Work  Plans.  However,  in  spite  of  the 
resolutions we made last year the challenges in implementing and monitoring the current Budget and 
Annual Work Plans have remained onerous. I wish to point out three areas of major concern: 
Absence of the linkage between Planning and Budgeting 
1. 
Best  practice  requires  that  Annual  Work  Plans  be  closely  linked  with  the  Budget.  Last  year  the 
budgeting exercise was carried out before agreeing on Work Plans. This caused a mismatch between 
planned activities and resources, with the resulting risk of making the whole Work Planning process 
irrelevant. Part of this problem was caused by functions and departments not submitting their Budgets 
and Work Plans according to the agreed submission calendar. It is, therefore, not surprising that the 
Budget and Work Plans were approved late - in September 2004 for the Budget and October 2004 for 
the Annual Work Plans. 
To  overcome  this  problem  this  year,  we  must  strictly  adhere  to  the  timetable  for  submission  of 
departmental  Budget  Proposals  and  Work  Plans,  which  should  then  fit  consistently  into  the  overall 
Budget.  It  means  that  functions  and  departments  should  give  due  time  to  the  process  so  that 
documents are ready and approved according to schedule. 
Over/Under Budgeting 
2.  
Unrealistic budgets have continued to be submitted as a matter of practice. This has often resulted 
into under or over budgeting. Over budgeting has resulted into funds remaining unutilised and some 
planned projects  not  being  carried  out  at  all. Under  budgeting  has resulted  into  funds  rapidly  being 
exhausted - in some instances, within a few months into the financial year. But even more serious, 
over  budgeting  and  under  budgeting  have  provided  departments  with  the  opportunity  for  virement. 
Some  departments  now  easily  vire  funds  from  non-performing  budget  lines  to  fund  deficits  in  other 
lines.  Virement  is  usually  only  justifiable  in  unforeseen  circumstances.  Producing  realistic  budgets 
which, reflect capacity to implement projects or carry out certain activities, would help reduce the time 
spent on reviewing the budgets at Committee and Board levels. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  issue  of  the  Bank’s  income.  As  you  are  all  aware,  we  have  witnessed  a 
dramatic fall in the Bank’s gross revenues in the last three years from Shs.97.7billion in 2000/01 to 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 1
Shs.70.7billin in 2003/04 against a background of rising recurrent expenditures, which increased from 
Shs.79.1billion  in  2000/2001  to  Shs.96.7billion  in  2003/04.  The  resulting  diminished  surpluses  and 
large losses have been a major concern to management, the Board and indeed Government, which 
have  not  received  any  dividends  since  2001/02.  The  main  cause  of  this,  of  course  has  been  the 
general decline and volatility in interest rates in the international markets during this period. The Bank 
has also lost income from penalties levied against banks as well as loans to commercial banks both of 
which  have  continued  to  decline  on  account  of  strengthened  supervision.  Income  has  also  been 
forgone on the discounting of treasury bills. More seriously the margin on forex transactions, which 
has traditionally brought in the bulk of the Bank’s income has had to be reduced from 1% to 0.5%, as 
a result of the policy to transfer Government project accounts to BOU to help manage liquidity. 
Clearly  the  above-described  situation  is  unsustainable  and  the  Bank  may  have  to  adopt  drastic 
measures including further rationalization of structures and staff to contain it. 
Late Submission of Performance Assessment Reports (PARs) 
Business continuity and contingency planning; 
Staff performance appraisal exercises; 
Responses to Audit Queries. 
3. 
Last  year,  prompt  submission  of  reports  to  help  generate  analysis  for  feedbacks  and  management 
decisions  were  not  easily  forthcoming.  First  of  all,  no  department  attempted  to  report  to  the  CSO 
bottlenecks they were experiencing in carrying out some tasks. As such, some tasks were cancelled or 
deferred without drawing the attention of the SPC or management. Clearly, this is contrary to what was 
agreed. It was agreed that departments experiencing difficulties in implementing some tasks should 
report such incidences promptly without the need to follow the established reporting calendars. This 
was  to  enable  management  to  make  fast  track  decisions  to  keep  planned  programmes  on  course. 
Second, some departments appeared to be unwilling to give these exercises the due attention they 
deserve  regarding  them  as  needless  bother  by  deliberately  not  responding  to  reminders.  This  has 
resulted into late submission of PARs and, therefore, a delay in the production of quarterly and annual 
reports. 
But,  I  should  add  that  the  problem  of  late  submission  of  reports  goes  beyond  Work  Planning  and 
Budgeting activities. As a matter of fact, it is endemic and pervasive in the Bank, and involves all other 
bank-wide initiatives, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
The  fact  that  the  Bank  recognises  the  importance  of  these  initiatives  in  management  and  that  we 
signed up to their basic principles, means that we should devote much of our time to the processes 
involved to realise the benefits. This involves changing our attitudes and mindset and to recognise that 
we must always work as a team and deliver services promptly to derive the maximum benefits of our 
collective efforts. 
And so this coming year, I would like senior management to take much of their time and attend very 
seriously to bank-wide programmes. Obviously, this will mean Senior Management devolving much of 
routine functions to the rank and file and concentrating on strategic functions. I also think we should 
introduce a system of rewards and sanctions for performing and under performing departments and 
functions.  Naming  and  shaming  under  performing  departments  and  functions  could  be  a  useful 
sanctioning tool. 
Such a system could be important because as more and more strategic functions are introduced into 
the Bank so will the role of Senior Management increase to attend to those functions. Very soon, the 
Bank  will  be  adding  to  the  menu  of  bank-wide  programmes,  Risk  and  Performance  Standards 
Management frameworks. Therefore, if we do not have the right mindset to absorb these additional 
responsibilities, we will, definitely, not succeed. 
On  the  issue  of  staff  performance  appraisal,  I  am  deeply  concerned  that  senior  management  are 
persistently not appraising staff consistently either because they fear to do so or because they do not 
follow  the  proper  monitoring  system.  A  proper  monitoring  system  provides  that  at  the  beginning  of 
every appraisal period performance targets are agreed between staff and managers, which are then 
monitored continuously with the participation of the staff during the period. It means performance is 
measured against known indicators and recommendations agreed upon are recorded on a continuous 
basis, the total sum of which, provide the basis for the end-of-the-year appraisal report. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2005
Currently,  because  this  is  not  done  and  probably  because  staff  appraisal  is  regarded  only  as  an 
end-of-year  exercise,  the  Bank  has  often  suffered  a  great  deal  of  embarrassment  in  circumstances 
where staff have been accused of non-performance or indiscipline and for which disciplinary actions 
have been sought, but no evidence to the effect have been provided. 
Beginning  this  coming  year,  I  would  like  to  see  senior  staff  take  the  matter  of  staff  appraisal  very 
seriously. All end-of-the-year appraisal reports must contain evidence of continuous monitoring of staff 
performance  and  managers  should  stand  ready  to  defend  their  recommendations.  The  appraisal 
system should never be used to patronize or unfairly punish staff. To the contrary, it should be used to 
enhance staff performance. 
I call upon your undivided support of and active participation in bank-wide programmes. It is this way 
that, together, we will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of Bank Services. 
I hope you will reflect what I have just said in your deliberations today. 
With these few words, I declare the workshop open. 
Thank You. 
BIS Review 31/2005 
 3
