Jean-Claude Trichet: In memory of Wim Duisenberg  
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
memorial service for Mr Wim Duisenberg, Amsterdam, 6 August 2005.  
 It is with great sadness and emotion that we all are here in the Concertgebouw after the terrible loss of 
Wim Duisenberg, our first President and our dear friend. 
The French writer Chateaubriand said: “In my eyes, nobody is going down in the grave (…). Death, in 
touching us, does not defeat us; it only makes us invisible”. 
Wim is, and will for ever continue to be, present with us, in our heart and soul, with each and every 
one of us, and with our dear European Central Bank. He will be with us as a great central banker, a 
great first President of the European Central Bank, and a great European and friend. 
As regards the central banker, I would like to say very simply that, seen from my own perspective hen 
I was Governor of the Banque de France, the monetary policy of De Nederlandsche Bank was a role 
model for an institution and a currency wanting to inspire confidence, to improve credibility and to be 
state of the art in the handling of monetary policy in the uncharted European waters of that time. Can I 
also  say,  Gerrit,  en  passant,  that  the  Netherlands’  economic  strategy  was  also  a  role  model  for 
France’s economic strategy. And as a natural consequence, Wim, as President of De Nederlandsche 
Bank, was a role model for fellow central bankers in Europe. 
At  the  helm  of  the  national  central  bank  of  the  Netherlands,  as  President  of  the  Committee  of 
Governors, as President of the BIS, as a key member of the DELORS Committee, as President of the 
European Monetary Institute, Wim always displayed three unique qualities: 
   a fantastic capacity to synthesise the most complex situations; 
an exceptional gift for taking clear decisions in an expeditious way; 
and, finally, a strong determination to stick to the decision and stand firm in all 
circumstances, even when going through unexplored and difficult territory. 
Each  of  these  three  qualities  can  be  possessed  independently  of  the  others.  What  is  absolutely 
exceptional in the case of Wim is that he had all three of them simultaneously. 
As far as demanding circumstances and exceptional challenges are concerned, Wim had, like all of 
us, his fair share. Then his unique qualities worked wonders. I would like particularly to mention three 
examples: 
   Wim’s firm position in the 1980s and 90s, when there were dramatic periods of increased 
tension and outright crisis and, notably, in 1992 and 1993. 
The influence he exerted in the DELORS Committee, taking action at all crucial moments to 
permit the effective delivery of what became the blueprint for the single currency. 
Equally, Wim’s influence at the European Monetary Institute under the chairmanship of 
Alexandre Lamfalussy and as President, where the crucial decisions to prepare effectively 
the single currency were wisely taken, including the decision that the ECB should have all its 
accounts in euro from the outset, which owed a lot to Wim. 
In July 1997 Wim became the second President of the EMI and in June 1998 the first President of the 
European Central Bank. We found ourselves in a deeply sceptical environment. Some global media, 
influential commentators, analysts and observers were betting on our presumed incapacity to deliver 
effectively in all important circumstances: namely to start the new currency on time on the first working 
day  of  January  1999,  to  make  the  immense  new  money  market  a  reality  for  11  economies  and 
countries, and then 12, and to have it functioning perfectly from day one, to introduce smoothly euro 
banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002 for the 307 million people of the euro area and, overall, to 
keep the promise made to the same 307 million fellow Europeans that the new currency would be at 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
least  as  good,  reliable  and  credible  as  each  of  the  national  currencies,  including  the  most  credible 
ones, such as the guilder. 
All this was done, to the highest professional standards and with outstanding success, by the full body 
of the team of the European Central Bank, by the full body of the Eurosystem with all twelve national 
central  banks  under  the  captainship  of  Wim.  On  these  occasions  Wim  made  history,  and 
demonstrated two other major qualities, on top of the three I have already mentioned. First, a capacity 
to  lead  a  team  with  a  fantastic  team  spirit,  in  particular  the  Executive  Board  and  the  Governing 
Council, and second, an exceptional ability to keep his nerve in some highly demanding and extremely 
hostile environments. All the members of the European System of Central Banks who are present here 
would say as I do: “Thank you Wim, from the bottom of our hearts, for having guided us so skilfully and 
successfully in so many “battlefields”. 
Wim was not only a great central banker. He was not only a great President of the European Central 
Bank, making history in launching the single currency. He was a great friend, a great European friend. 
The Dutch writer Cees Nooteboom says in “The question of Brussels”: “How to become a European? 
In starting by being one, a quality that we can acquire, for instance, in being born in the Netherlands. 
The same result could be obtained, according to some, in Sicily, in East Prussia, in Lapponia or in 
Wales,  but  being  myself  a  European  of  the  Dutch  kind,  I  prefer  to  stick  to  this  particular  kind  of 
European  (…).  In  fact  if  I  am  a  European,  it  probably  means  that  the  European  wealth  of  different 
cultures influences my Dutch specificity”. 
Wim was a great European, fully open to our common cultural wealth. Fluent in English, German and 
French, as well as Dutch of course, he was a man of culture, a man of great intellectual and moral 
elegance.  Among  his  many  friends,  his  extreme  kindness,  his  wit,  his  humour,  his  smile  were 
legendary. His openness to others and his simplicity were always appreciated by all, particularly by the 
staff of the ECB. He gave a lot to colleagues and friends only out of the goodness of his heart. 
Gretta, I am particularly fond of one memory of Wim, an event which I must relate because it says so 
much about him. The two of you were in Aachen when Wim was to receive the Charlemagne Prize. 
There  was  he,  that  tall  fellow  with  his  magnificent  mop  of  hair  and  there  were  you,  a  picture  of 
supreme elegance. But you had a problem walking on the cobblestone streets of Aachen – so Wim 
gave you his shoes, carried yours and walked in his socks through the streets with his prize around his 
neck. 
Simplicity, imagination, humour and great kindness are the best words to define our dear friend Wim, 
who will be with us, with all of us, forever, as Chateaubriand said, “not defeated, only invisible”. 
I would like to give the last word to Wim himself. At his farewell celebration on 22 October 2003 he 
said: 
“All in all, I had the privilege of being part of history. Being responsible for the introduction of a new 
currency is the dream of any central banker, I believe. A dream that, in my case, has become reality. 
However, it would never have become reality without the support, commitment, resolve and efforts of 
all of you. I really feel privileged having worked with you. You have all the reasons in the world to be 
proud of your achievements”.  
Never did this sentence have a better application than to yourself, Wim: “You have all the reasons in 
the world to be proud of your achievements”.  
Wim, je kunt met recht trots zijn op alles wat je hebt bereikt in je leven. 
 
