Benny BM Popoitai: Prudential supervision of the financial system in Papua 
New Guinea 
Speech by Mr Benny BM Popoitai, MBE, Acting Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
seminar for external auditors of regulated financial institutions to CPA - PNG, Port Moresby, 7 April 2005. 
 My dear auditors, good morning. It gives me great pleasure to address your association once again. 
The  purpose  of  this  seminar  is  to  enhance  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea’s  relationship  with 
important  players  in  the  financial  system,  with  respect  to  compliance  with  the  Bank’s  reporting 
requirements to ensure stability of the financial system in Papua New Guinea. BPNG, as a corporate 
statutory  body  established  by  the  Central  Banking  Act  2000  (CBA),  is  empowered  to  supervise  the 
operations  of  the  licensed  financial  institutions,  including  commercial  banks,  licensed  financial 
institutions, savings & loan societies, superannuation funds and life insurance companies. 
The primary function of Bank, as the prudential supervisor, is to foster efficiency, maintain confidence 
and stability in the financial system. Effective prudential supervision of financial system is an essential 
component  of  a  strong  economic  environment  because  the  financial  sector  plays  a  central  role  in 
mobilizing the necessary capital for private sector participation in the economy to stimulate economic 
growth. 
Prudential  supervision,  however,  cannot,  and  should  not,  provide  an  assurance  that  financial 
institutions will not fail. In a market economy, failures are a part of risk-taking and the objective of the 
Bank, as the prudential supervisor, is to ensure that the number of failures and the resulting financial 
losses  to  depositors,  policyholders  and  contributors,  is  minimized.  Financial  crises  are  a  serious 
concern  and  can  be  extremely  costly  –  not  only  in  terms  of  the  direct  cost  to  the  government  and 
taxpayers, but also in terms of foregone growth. The NPF saga is a classical example. 
Perhaps, the challenging part of prudential supervision and threat to stability in the financial sector in 
Papua New Guinea is the potential for corruption and blatant dishonesty creeping into our financial 
institutions, and the Bank will have to ensure that there is zero tolerance to such behaviors. 
This is the reason why the Bank requires individuals holding or intending to hold Board, Trustee and 
Management  positions  to  go  through  a  vigorous  ‘fit  and  proper  person’  test  before  occupying 
responsible position in any financial institution regulated by the Bank. The primary responsibility for the 
overall conduct of the financial institution is vested in the board of directors and management and they 
have a fiduciary duty to manage the institution in a honest and prudent manner. An unfit board and 
management will run the institution down for sure. 
The Bank has developed and issued prudential standards and guidelines, and directives to allow the 
licensed  financial  institutions  to  develop  appropriate  risk  management  tools  and  practices  that  limit 
risks to prudent levels. It is the responsibility of boards, trustees and management of each individual 
institutions to adhere to these prudential and statutory requirements. 
The Bank also conducts on-site inspections and off-site surveillance based on information provided by 
the licensed financial institutions. Even the most successful supervisory agencies must rely, to some 
degree,  on  the  information  provided  by  individual  financial  institutions  that  it  regulates,  so  that 
corrective  measures  can  be  taken  –  including  placing  them  on  statutory  management  and  initiating 
liquidation of financial institutions. 
This brings us to the important issue of corporate governance, which has gained increased attention 
all around the world, including Papua New Guinea. 
Although the Companies Act does not specifically emphasize corporate governance, the Bank expects 
all  the  financial  institutions  that  it  supervises  to  adopt  and  implement  good  corporate  governance 
practices. 
The issue of strong corporate governance cannot be overly emphasized because the roll-on effect of a 
financial institution collapsing, particularly in the case of a bank or life insurer, can be very dramatic for 
both individuals, and can severely affect the stability of the financial system. Recent experiences in the 
Asia, US, Australia, and even Papua New Guinea, particularly in the superannuation industry, indicate 
that the risk of such collapses are heightened where poor corporate governance prevail. 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 1
The  Bank,  however,  is  aware  that  each  financial  institution  is  unique,  in  terms  of  its  structure, 
objectives and operating environment, and circumstances change over time, particularly in regard to 
globalization, technology and innovation. It is, therefore, impractical to “prescribe” how an institution 
should structure its corporate governance practices. 
The  Bank,  therefore,  places  the  onus  on  the  financial  institutions,  the  need  to  embrace  effective 
internal control measures, good accounting and strong corporate governance practices, and thorough 
risk-management procedures. These are fundamental to the institution’s management in achieving its 
objectives of ensuring proper conduct of business, so that the assets of institutions are safeguarded, 
fraud  is  detected  and  prevented,  and  accounting  records  are  accurate  and  completed  on  time  to 
prepare reliable financial information. 
External auditors, thus play a very important role in this game because their primary role is to test and 
certify,  based  on  internationally-accepted  accounting  standards,  that  the  financial  statements  of  the 
entities are accurate – that is, it is a “true and fair view” of the institution’s financial position for the 
period in which such statements are prepared. 
Although  the  auditor’s  report  is  normally  intended  for  the  shareholders,  the  Acts  that  the  Bank 
administers, including the Banks and Financial Institutions Act, Superannuation (General Provisions) 
Act, Life Insurance Act and Savings and Loans Societies Act, require the Auditor to report to Bank on 
any matters where the auditor has reasonable grounds for believing that the institution is insolvent, at 
significant  risk  or  the  state  of  affairs  of  the  financial  institution  will  materially  affect  depositors, 
policyholders, and contributors. The auditor’s opinion helps to establish the credibility of the financial 
statements, and the Bank, as the supervisor, would normally rely on this opinion and use the accounts 
to verify and complement the periodic financial reports received from the financial institutions. 
The Bank, as the prudential supervisor of licensed financial institutions, also wants to see the role of 
external  auditor  extended  to  include  conducting  compliance  auditing.  The  Bank  would  like  to  see 
licensed financial institutions attest their internal control systems, conduct checks and balances on the 
governance structures, and issue comprehensive disclosure statements, including disclosures along a 
number  of  risk  dimensions,  and  be  approved  by  the  external  auditors.  This  should  assist  license 
holders to comply with the prudential requirements of the Acts. 
In  summary,  the  Bank  would  like  to  have  a  tri-partite  approach  in  the  supervision  of  the  licensed 
financial institution, which is important for fostering closer working relationships, particularly with the 
external auditors. Consequently, auditors will require better understanding of the supervisory concerns 
in order to help them perform their audit functions and thus report adequately on those requirements. 
An example of such arrangement is the tri-partite meeting arrangements between the Bank, financial 
institutions licensed under the Banks and Financial Institutions Act and their external auditors, where 
the licensed financial institutions are required to provide a statement on compliance on all prudential 
standards and FX limits, a declaration by the CEO, endorsed by the board on whether the board and 
senior management have identified key risks facing the bank, established systems to monitor those 
risks and whether those systems are operating effectively and are adequate having regard to the risks 
they are designed to control. The external auditor shall provide to the BPNG a report on their opinion 
whether  the  bank  has  complied  with  all  specified  prudential  standards  and  FX  limits,  conditions 
imposed on a bank’s license, and any other relevant BPNG instructions  
While  financial  stability  is  the  supervisor’s  primary  concern  and  monitors  the  present  and  future 
viability of the institution through the use of financial statements the auditor provides, the auditor, on 
the other hand is concerned with the institution as a “going concern” and expresses professional view 
on the “true and fairness” of the institution’s condition expressed in its account. 
At the end of the day, both the supervisor and the auditor is looking at the same coin but from different 
sides. This commonality therefore justifies the position for closer understanding and knowing of each 
other’s concerns, and the need to maintain good working relationship and liaison between supervisor 
and external auditors in order to promote a sound and stable financial system. 
It is in this light that I feel the need for Auditors and Accounting Associations of PNG to come down 
hard on members who do not properly carry out their tasks, be it deliberate or otherwise. Sanctions for 
such behaviour be punitive and must be enforced and not for show only. 
Our  experiences  with  some  of  your  members  in  their  roles  as  external  auditors  leave  a  lot  to  be 
desired. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2005
At the very least annual public advertisement of registered auditors is a necessity. How will anyone 
know if a firm or an individual is a registered member of the PNG Auditors Charter? Is this information 
readily available? 
BIS Review 30/2005 
 3
