V Leeladhar: Contemporary and future issues in Indian banking 
Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to Kanara Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, Mangalore, 11 March 2005. 
 Banking scenario has changed rapidly since 1990s. The decade of 90s has witnessed a sea change in 
the  way banking  is done in  India.  Technology  has made  tremendous  impact in  banking.  ‘Anywhere 
banking’ and ‘Anytime banking’ have become a reality. The financial sector now operates in a more 
competitive  environment  than  before  and  intermediates  relatively  large  volume  of  international 
financial  flows.  In  the  wake  of  greater  financial  deregulation  and  global  financial  integration,  the 
biggest challenge before the regulators is of avoiding instability in the financial system. 
Economic outlook and banking sector’s performance 
Keeping in mind the impact of real sector shocks on financial stability, any assessment of the banking 
sector needs to be done in the backdrop of national as well as international economic outlook. During 
the last couple of years, global growth has been above the forecast in almost every region stimulated 
by strong monetary and fiscal measures. The domestic economic outlook is also bright with the real 
GDP  growth  rate  surpassing  8%  last  year  and  estimated  to  be  around  7%  in  the  current  year. 
Industrial performance also improved considerably with a strong manufacturing growth for the second 
consecutive year. Inflation rate has been under control, barring some hiccup for a short period. 
Aided by a good macro economic environment, banks’ bottom line has improved significantly over the 
last  two  years.  However,  let  us  not  forget  that  a  major  contributor  to  the  windfall  gains  has  been 
treasury profits fuelled by a secular decline in interest rates during the three years period from 2001 to 
2004 and consequent profit booking on sale of government securities. From the current year, with the 
hardening  of  interest  rates,  this  trading  component  of  profits  is  no  longer  going  to  shore  up  banks’ 
profitability. On the contrary, most banks have been required to provide for the decline in the market 
value of their investments portfolio. Thankfully, one offsetting factor has been the strong pick up in the 
credit  off-take  due  to  buoyant  demand  in  the  economy  and  revival  of  industrial  activity,  which  have 
resulted in substantial increase in banks’ core interest income. 
High capital inflows: an opportunity as well as a challenge 
As you all know, liquidity position in the financial sector has been quite comfortable in the recent times. 
The buoyant capital market coupled with an appreciating rupee vis-à-vis US dollar has been attracting 
large  foreign  institutional  inflows  during  the  last  two  years.  While  we  have  an  all  time  high  foreign 
exchange reserves of more than $130 billion, high capital inflows pose a big challenge to monetary 
and  exchange  rate  management.  In  this  context,  operationalisation  of  Market  Stabilisation  Scheme 
(MSS)  has  given  an  additional  instrument  for  liquidity  and  monetary  management.  To  sum  up  the 
challenge,  I  would  like  to  quote  a  statement  of  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
which he made at the annual meeting of Bank for International Settlement (BIS) on June 28, 2004. 
And I quote, “…..Special defences need to be put in place for ensuring financial stability in the case of 
countries  like  India  that  are  faced  with  the  prospect  of  volatile  capital  flows.  The  issues  relating  to 
cross-border  supervision  of  financial  intermediaries  in  the  context  of  greater  capital  flows  are  just 
emerging and need to be addressed.” 
Technology is the key 
As I mentioned in the beginning of my speech, technology has thrown new challenges in the banking 
sector and new issues have started cropping up which is going to pose certain problems in the near 
future. The new entrants in the banking are with computer background. However, over a period of time 
they  would  acquire  banking  experience.  Whereas  the  middle  and  senior  level  people  have  rich 
banking experience but their computer literacy is at a low level. Therefore, they feel the handicap in 
this regard since technology has become an indispensable tool in banking. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
Foreign banks and the new private sector banks have embraced technology right from the inception of 
their operations and therefore, they have adapted themselves to the changes in the technology easily. 
Whereas the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and the old private sector banks (barring a very few of them) 
have  not  been  able  to  keep  pace  with  these  developments.  In  this  regard,  one  can  cite  historical, 
political  and  other  factors  like  work  culture  and  working  relations  (which  are  mainly  governed  by 
bipartite  settlements  between  the  managements  and  the  staff  members)  as  the  main  constraints. 
Added to these woes, the PSBs were also saddled with some non-viable and loss making branches, 
thanks to the social banking concept thrust upon them by the regulatory authorities in 1960s. 
Globalisation of financial services 
Growing integration of economies and the markets around the world is making global banking a reality. 
The surge in globalization of finance has also gained momentum with the technological advancements 
which have effectively overcome the national borders in the financial services business. Widespread 
use  of  internet  banking  has  widened  frontiers  of  global  banking,  and  it  is  now  possible  to  market 
financial  products  and  services  on  a  global  basis.  In  the  coming  years  globalization  would  spread 
further on account of the likely opening up of financial services under WTO. India, as you know, is one 
of  the  104  signatories  of  Financial  Services  Agreement  (FSA)  of  1997.  This  gives  India’s  financial 
sector including banks an opportunity to expand their business on a quid pro quo basis.  
Indian Banks at the global stage: A Reality check 
As  per  Indian  Banks'  Association  report  ‘Banking  Industry  Vision  2010’,  there  would  be  greater 
presence  of  international  players  in  Indian  financial  system  and  some  of  the  Indian  banks  would 
become global players in the coming years. So, the new mantra for Indian banks is to go global in 
search of new markets, customers and profits. Let us not forget that the competition is not only on 
foreign turf but also in the domestic field as well from foreign banks operating in India. 
Now against these lofty objectives of Indian banks going global, let us see where we stand. Although, 
Indian  banks  have  also  made  their  presence  overseas,  yet  it  is  limited.  Only  twenty  Indian  banks 
including private sector banks appear in the list of “Top 1000 World Banks” as listed by the London 
based magazine “The Banker”. What is even more revealing is that State Bank of India, India’s largest 
bank, ranks 82nd amongst the top global banks. Size is increasingly becoming important for the global 
banks as it is crucial to improved efficiency. However, India’s largest bank, SBI is not even  a 10th in 
size of the 9th largest bank, Sumitomo Mitsui, which has assets of $950 billion as against SBI’s assets 
of  $91  billion.  Therefore,  the  notion  that  SBI  or  ICICI  Bank  can  compete  in  the  international  arena 
seems far fetched at the moment. 
Is size the only constraint for Indian banks? 
The  problem  is  not  just  one  of  lacking  the  necessary  size;  few  Indian  banks  have  the  necessary 
products or human resource capabilities. If anything, the implementation of Basel II norms has raised 
the bar for Indian banks seeking an international presence. The top international banks can lower their 
capital requirements through the use of sophisticated risk management techniques and thus compete 
more aggressively than before. 
What is being done to prepare Indian banks to meet global challenge? 
Indian banking sector has already implemented internationally followed prudential accounting norms 
for classification of assets, income recognition and loan loss provisioning. The scope of disclosure and 
transparency has also been raised in accordance with international practices. India has complied with 
almost all the Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee. Some of the 
Indian banks are also presenting their accounts as per the U.S. GAAP. The roadmap for adoption of 
Basel  II  is  also  under  formulation.  All  these  factors  give  Indian  banks  much  needed  confidence  for 
overseas operations. But as I said earlier overseas operations is one thing and competing against the 
global players in the international market is quite another. And Indian banks have a lot of catching up 
to do before they can emerge as truly global players. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
Supporting Regulatory Framework 
Supporting  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  at  home  is  vital  for  domestic  banks  aspiring  for 
global operations. RBI has suitably changed the country’s regulatory framework from time to time to 
support  Indian  financial  institutions  to  withstand  the  competitive  pressures  placed  on  them  by 
increasing globalization.  
Proper steps  have been  taken  to guide  the banking  sector  to  see  that  the  banks pass  through  this 
transition  phase  by  and  large  successfully.  The  reforms  initiated  in  the  banking  sector  have  now 
reached a crucial stage. Government’s stake in some PSBs is reduced and as a consequence public 
equity in these PSBs is enlarged. This led to greater responsibility on the bank managements since 
the level of accountability has increased. Pressures of performance and profitability will keep them on 
their toes all the time as the public shareholders expect good performance along with good returns on 
their equity. Many PSBs have already started the exercise of cleaning up of their balance sheets by 
shedding the excess baggage. The VRS scheme in the recent past in some of the banks was aimed 
not  only  at  downsizing  the  manpower  but  also  at  cutting  down  the  staff  costs  and  increasing  the 
performance levels of the staff in the long run. Some of these banks are able to run the show to certain 
extent by low cost funds that are available thanks to the branch network spread over the length and 
breadth of the country. 
Consolidation and move towards Universal Banking    
We are slowly but surely moving from a regime of “large number of small banks” to “small number of 
large banks.” The new era is going to be one of consolidation around identified core competencies.  
Mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  banking  sector  are  going  to  be  the  order  of  the  day.    Successful 
merger of HDFC Bank and Times Bank earlier and Stanchart and ANZ Grindlays three years ago has 
demonstrated that trend towards consolidation is almost an accepted fact.  We are also looking for 
such signs in respect of a number of old private sector banks, many of which are not able to cushion 
their NPAs, expand their business and induct technology due to limited capital base. 
Coming times may usher in large banking institutions, if the development financial institutions opt for 
conversion into commercial banking in line with the recommendation of Narasimhan (II).  In India, one 
of  the  largest  financial  institutions,  ICICI,  took  the  lead  towards  universal  banking  with  its  reverse 
merger  with  ICICI  Bank  coming  through  a  couple  of  years  ago.    Another  mega  financial  institution, 
IDBI has also adopted the same strategy, and has already transformed itself into a universal bank. 
Now the process of its progeny IDBI Bank merging itself with the parent IDBI is underway, and is likely 
to be completed soon. This trend may lead logically to promoting the concept of financial super market 
chain,  making  available  all  types  of  credit  and  non-fund  facilities  under  one  roof  or  specialised 
subsidiaries under one umbrella organisation.  Consolidated accounting and supervisory techniques 
would  have  to  evolve  and  appropriate  fire  walls  built  to  address  the  risks  underlying  such  large 
organisations and banking conglomerates. 
Will the stable conditions continue for the banks? 
The  big  question  we  have  to  ponder  is  whether  these  stable  conditions  marked  by  all  round 
improvement in banks’ performance can continue into 2005 onward in the light of potentially dramatic 
changes  that  include,  among  others,  a  sliding  dollar,  rising  interest  rates,  introduction  of  Basel  II 
accord and international accounting standards, and the possible flattening of consumer lending boom. 
Hopefully, the banking industry in tandem with the regulatory authorities will rise to the occasion, and 
collectively face the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
