David Dodge: Inflation targeting - a Canadian perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  National  Association  for 
Business Economics, Washington DC, 21 March 2005. 
 Good  afternoon.  Three  years  ago,  when  I  last  addressed  this  group,  I  spoke  about  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in the presence of economic shocks. In those remarks, I made passing reference to 
the  Bank  of  Canada's  inflation-targeting  framework.  Today,  I  am  happy  to  accept  your  invitation  to 
return and talk in more depth about how we use inflation targeting as our monetary policy anchor.  
The  invitation  is  timely,  given  that  the  Bank  of  Canada's  inflation-targeting  agreement  with  the 
Canadian  government  is  up  for  renewal  next  year.  At  the  Bank,  we  are  always  reflecting  on  our 
framework,  deciding  what  works  well  and  what  we  can  improve.  Against  that  backdrop,  we  have 
watched  with  interest  the  debate  taking  place  here  in  the  United  States  -  inside  and  outside  the 
Federal  Reserve  -  about  whether  that  institution  should  join  the  ranks  of  inflation-targeting  central 
banks. 
As part of that debate, the minutes of the February FOMC meeting show that my colleagues at the 
Fed  had  a  discussion  about  the  merits  of  inflation  targeting  last  month.  According  to  the  minutes, 
arguments were made both for and against the adoption of an explicit inflation target. Those in favour 
spoke of how such a target can anchor inflation expectations, add clarity to monetary policy decision 
making,  and  help  with  communications.  Those  opposed  said  that  the  benefits  of  adopting  a  target 
were unlikely to be large, that adopting a target might bias or constrain policy, and that it might appear 
-  and  I  stress  the word  "appear" -  to be  inconsistent  with  the Fed's  dual  mandate  to promote  price 
stability and maximum employment.  
Before I proceed with my remarks today, I want to make it absolutely clear that my purpose here is not 
to  weigh  in  on  the  debate  within  the  Federal  Reserve.  I  would  not  presume  to  tell  the  Fed  what  it 
should or should not do. Rather, I want to talk about the Canadian experience with inflation targets. 
However, in doing so, I will address some of the arguments raised at the FOMC meeting that I just 
mentioned. 
I will begin by discussing the Bank of Canada's legislated mandate, and how inflation targeting helps 
us  to  meet  the  objectives  of  that  mandate.  I  will  then  talk  about  some  of  the  choices  that  we  have 
made to establish and refine our particular framework. I'll discuss some of the benefits that we can 
attribute - at least in part - to inflation targeting. And I will conclude by touching on some of the issues 
still facing us as we look to the future. 
Our Mandate and Objectives 
Let me start with the Bank of Canada's legislated mandate. It is interesting to compare our mandate 
with  the one spelled  out  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  given  that  the  nature  of the  Fed's  mandate  is 
often cited as one reason why it should not adopt an explicit inflation target. 
The pieces of legislation that govern the Bank and the Fed do contain some clear differences. But in 
terms of the conduct of monetary policy, it is the similarities that are more striking. Our mandate is 
broadly set out in the preamble to the Bank of Canada Act. The preamble was drafted in 1934 and, of 
note,  has  not  been  substantively  amended  over  the  past  70  years.  The  preamble  calls  on  us  to 
"regulate credit and currency in the best interest of the nation." It goes on to say that the Bank should 
mitigate "fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may 
be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally to promote the economic and financial 
welfare of Canada." By comparison, the most recent revision of the Federal Reserve Act calls on the 
Fed to maintain growth of credit and the money supply "commensurate with the economy's long-run 
potential  to  increase  production,  so  as  to  promote  effectively  the  goals  of  maximum  employment, 
stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."  
The Fed's mandate is a bit more specific than ours in that it states directly that monetary policy should 
aim at having the U.S. economy operate at full capacity. But the main point is that both central banks 
have references in their mandates to production, prices, and employment. Indeed, a key goal for all 
central  banks  is  to  conduct  monetary  policy  so  as  to  provide  favourable  conditions  for  maximum, 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 1
sustainable  long-run  growth,  while  recognizing  that  monetary  policy  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  bring 
about that growth. 
So the question is, What is the best way to operate monetary policy in order to provide the conditions 
for sustainable growth, bearing in mind the words in our mandate: "so far as may be possible within 
the  scope  of  monetary  action"?  Over  the  years,  central  banks  have  tried  various  frameworks  in 
attempting to answer this question. First, central banks tried fixing exchange rates to gold; most later 
tried fixing their exchange rates to those of other countries. Some central banks tried to target credit or 
the  growth  of  monetary  aggregates,  while  many  relied  solely  on  their  own  judgment.  All  of  these 
frameworks have had their problems, which I won't go into today. 
But over time, what has become clear is that the best way for monetary policy to promote sustainable 
economic  growth  is  to  anchor  expectations  about  the  future  purchasing  power  of  money.  What  we 
have learned from the bitter experience of many countries - including Canada and the United States - 
is that when monetary policy chases short-term goals, mistakes are made, uncertainty is increased, 
and fluctuations in economic activity are aggravated. Focusing on domestic price stability - however 
that term is defined - is the best contribution monetary policy can make to economic stabilization and 
sustainable long-term growth. Indeed, as my predecessor Gordon Thiessen put it, "Focusing on price 
stability helps us to guard against the sort of systematic [policy] errors that often occurred when we 
tried to aim directly at output and employment."1
At the end of the 1980s, the Bank of Canada faced the question of how to pursue price stability in a 
way that would allow it to accomplish three things: first, help to anchor expectations about the future 
purchasing power of money; second, give the Bank a guide for the conduct of policy; and third, help us 
to explain to markets, politicians, and the Canadian public what we are doing and what actions they 
could expect from their central bank.  
By 1991, the Bank and the Government of Canada had agreed that inflation targeting was the right 
framework  for  pursuing  this  objective. We considered  targeting  inflation  as  the  best  way  to  achieve 
high, sustainable growth of output and employment. To be clear, inflation targeting is not an end in 
itself. Rather, it is the best means of fulfilling our commitment to promote the economic and financial 
welfare of Canada. 
The Canadian Version of Inflation Targeting 
Let me now say a few words about some of the particular choices we have made over the years to 
shape  our  inflation-targeting  framework.  A  central  bank  that  wants  to  target  inflation  and  run  an 
independent  monetary  policy  must  allow  its  currency  to  float.  As  you  know,  a  monetary  authority 
cannot control both the domestic and external values of its currency. We have one instrument, so we 
can  have  only  one  target.  Thus,  with  inflation  as  our  target,  we  naturally  operate  with  a  floating 
currency. 
Once the Bank and the government agreed on the concept of inflation targeting, we needed to make 
some choices to put the concept into practice. Our goal of price stability came to be defined as low 
and stable inflation. Like many other central banks, we chose a target for the annual increase in the 
consumer price index (CPI). Initially, our focus was on inflation reduction. So it was announced that 
the target would decline gradually - from the 3 per cent midpoint of a 2 to 4 per cent target range at the 
end of 1992 to the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range by the end of 1995. The target has 
remained there since. Let me take you through some of the key decisions that we made in 1991, and 
the rationale behind our choices, as we set out the details of our framework. 
First  of  all,  why  did  we  choose  the  CPI  as  our  target?  The  key  reasons  were  that  it  is  widely 
understood  and  is  the  measure  of  inflation  most  familiar  to  Canadians.  Choosing  a  well-known 
indicator  as  a  target  makes  it  easier  to  explain  our  actions  and  to  be  accountable  to  Canadians. 
However, movements in the prices of particularly volatile components of the CPI can cause the index 
to  fluctuate  sharply.  So  we  use  a  measure  of  core  inflation  as  an  operational  guide.  This  measure 
strips out the most volatile components and the effect of changes in indirect taxes on the rest of the 
index, giving us a better understanding of the trend of inflation. 
                                                      
1   G. Thiessen, "Can a Bank Change? The Evolution of Monetary Policy at the Bank of Canada 1935-2000," The Thiessen 
Lectures, (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2001), p. 79. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2005
Second, why have a range? While we emphasize the 2 per cent target, we have a range - as many 
central banks do - because monetary policy operates with long and variable lags. If we tried to target 
inflation too precisely we could have "instrument instability;" in other words, we would be adjusting our 
policy  interest  rate  sharply  and  frequently,  which  would  lead  to  greater  instability  in  the  economy. 
Further, measured inflation itself can be volatile as specific prices adjust. But to be clear, the range 
does not represent a zone of indifference - we do aim to achieve the 2 per cent target.  
Third, given that we must always be forward looking as we conduct policy, what time frame would we 
choose to achieve our target? From the beginning, we said that if a demand shock pushed inflation 
away from the target, we would conduct policy so as to return inflation to target over a period of 18 to 
24 months. This is because our research suggests that it takes 12 to 18 months for changes in interest 
rates to have most of their impact on output, and 18 to 24 months to have most of their impact on 
prices. Of course, there is always uncertainty about the lags involved, and I'll have more to say about 
this later on. 
To be sure, there will always be times when there are large swings in relative prices in the economy - 
energy prices being a good example. Under inflation targeting, the objective is not to try to offset or 
stifle these relative price movements. Our experience has been that with a clear inflation target and 
with well-anchored expectations, these types of relative price shocks have only a one-off effect on the 
price level, and do not feed into ongoing inflation.  
Before I leave this section, I want to emphasize two points about our inflation-targeting framework. The 
first is that we operate in a symmetric way, and we make it clear to everyone that we do so. By this, I 
mean that we worry just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about it rising above 
target. This is a tremendously important point. When the demand for goods and services pushes the 
Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above target, the 
Bank  will  raise  interest  rates  to  cool  off  the  economy.  Just  as  importantly,  when  the  economy  is 
operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below target, the Bank will lower 
interest rates to stimulate growth. Whatever the direction of the demand shock, the Bank of Canada 
will respond appropriately. 
This symmetry is our answer to the charge that central banks target inflation at the expense of growth. 
On the contrary, paying close attention to signs of deviation from our target promotes timely action in 
response  to  both  positive  and  negative  demand  shocks.  This  is  how  we  can  keep  the  economy 
operating near its full capacity and thus keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
The second point I want to stress is that having an inflation target as an anchor is very helpful in terms 
of  the  Bank's  accountability.  If  inflation  persistently  deviates  from  the  target,  we  are  committed  to 
explaining the reasons why this is so, what we will do to return it to target, and how long we expect the 
process to take. 
Our Experience with Inflation Targeting 
Now let me turn to our experience with inflation targeting. Just as Canada was a pioneer at having a 
floating exchange rate, we were also among the very first to adopt inflation targeting. And as in other 
countries that have done so, the result has been unambiguously positive. Indeed, as Claudio Borio put 
it, "no country embracing inflation targeting has regretted doing so."2
Back  in  1991,  Canada  had  several  compelling  reasons  for  moving  to  inflation  targeting.  Compared 
with today, inflation was still relatively high. Further, the Bank of Canada and the federal government 
wanted to minimize the possibility of a wage-price spiral developing in the wake of the introduction of 
the Goods and Services Tax. We recognized the importance of having both the general public and 
financial markets understand our actions. And as inflationary pressures built towards the end of the 
1980s, we saw that the lack of a monetary anchor was leading to rising inflation expectations. 
As we look at Canada's record since 1991, in terms of inflation and economic growth, I can tell you 
that all of the benefits we had hoped would come from inflation targeting have, in fact, materialized. 
We  expected  that  inflation  would  become  more  stable  under  a  targeting  framework  -  and  it  did  so, 
sooner  than  we  had  anticipated.  We  expected  that  our  credibility  would  increase  and  that  inflation 
                                                      
2   C. Borio, "Wrap-up Discussion." The Future of Inflation Targeting, (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 2004): p. 278. 
BIS Review 20/2005 
 3
expectations would become well anchored under targeting - and this also happened. Indeed, short-
term expectations quickly became anchored to our target, although longer-term expectations took a bit 
more time to fall in line. Together with marked improvements in Canada's fiscal position in the mid-
1990s,  our  excellent  track  record  on  inflation  added  to  our  credibility.  Private  sector  forecasts  for 
inflation in Canada now average close to the 2 per cent target far into the future.  
We  expected  that  setting  out  a  clear  paradigm  for  operating  under  inflation  targeting  would  bring 
benefits  -  and  it  did.  Internally,  focusing  on  inflation  brought  increased  discipline  and  clarity  to  our 
monetary policy deliberations. But more importantly, being transparent about our operational paradigm 
has allowed markets and analysts to better predict how we will react to different economic outcomes. 
Financial markets and analysts now pay more attention to their own evaluations of the prospects for 
the economy and inflation in assessing the future path of our policy interest rate. Appropriately, they 
do not have to rely on the wording of our communications for guidance.  
Empirical  evidence  shows  that  inflation  targeting  has  been  an  unqualified  success  for  Canada. 
Inflation  has averaged  very  close  to  2 per cent  and  has remained  within  the  target range since we 
adopted our targets, with rare exceptions that were due mainly to large swings in the prices of oil or 
other  commodities.  Further,  there  is  evidence  that  inflation  targeting  has  been  successful  as  a 
macroeconomic stabilizer, helping to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle.  
Our symmetric approach to inflation targeting is crucial in this regard. Because we guard against both 
inflationary  and  deflationary  pressures,  businesses  and  individuals  can  make  long-range  economic 
plans  with  increased confidence.  Scarce  economic  resources  are  no  longer wasted  trying  to  hedge 
against  the  threat  of  runaway  inflation.  And  because  our  paradigm  makes  it  clear  that  we  guard 
against deflationary pressures, Canada has avoided any serious threat of deflation. Throughout all the 
shocks  we  have  experienced,  Canadian  inflation  expectations  have  remained  remarkably  well 
anchored on the 2 per cent target. 
At the time that we were considering the adoption of inflation targeting, we heard many of the same 
arguments  against  such  a  framework  that  we  hear  today  in  the  United  States.  Some  argued  that 
inflation targeting could constrain our ability to act, or would take away our ability to apply our own 
judgment in the conduct of policy. Our experience has shown these concerns to be groundless.  
Let  me  illustrate  with  a  couple  of  recent  examples.  In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  9/11  terrorist 
attacks,  we  lowered  interest  rates  quickly  and  decisively  to  underpin  confidence,  which  could  have 
been profoundly shaken by the attacks. When a major loss of confidence did not materialize over the 
next few months, we were able to reverse course and withdraw some of that monetary stimulus. Our 
inflation-targeting framework did not restrict our ability to act. Indeed, because our paradigm is clear, 
financial markets were able to understand why we made these rapid rate adjustments. 
Another example is our reaction to the continuing realignment of world currencies over the past two 
years. The Canadian economy has had to adjust to sharp movements, not just in the external value of 
our dollar, but also in the foreign demand for many of our goods and services. Inflation targeting gives 
the Bank an important guideline for dealing with the currency appreciation, allowing us to maintain our 
focus on macroeconomic stabilization at a time when various sectors of the economy are dealing with 
the exchange rate shock. Our paradigm has given us the flexibility to apply judgment in the face of 
considerable uncertainty over this period. 
The Future of Inflation Targeting 
Before I close, let me say a few words about the future of inflation targeting in Canada. As I noted at 
the beginning, our current agreement with the federal government is up for renewal in 2006. So it is 
useful to think about those elements of our framework that we would not want to change, and other 
areas where changes might be considered. 
From  the  central  bank's  point  of  view,  the  basic  arrangement  of  aiming  inflation  at  the  2 per cent 
midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range has served us well, along with the use of the CPI as our 
target. The CPI may not be a perfect indicator of inflation, but it is the most readily recognized and 
understood  measure,  and  so  likely  represents  our  best  option  for  targeting.  However,  given  the 
volatility  inherent  in  the  index,  the  Bank  has  emphasized  a  core  inflation  measure  for  operational 
purposes. I would expect that these elements of our framework will remain in place. But good public 
policy demands that we continue to do the necessary research to confirm that these remain the best 
options.  
4 
 BIS Review 20/2005
Also,  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  recognize  the  importance  of  communications  and 
transparency  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Inflation  targeting  is  a  helpful  tool  for  anchoring 
expectations, but its effectiveness is greatly enhanced when a central bank communicates well. And a 
symmetric  approach  to  inflation  targeting  allows  the  bank  to  make  a  convincing  case  for  its  policy 
actions, even during difficult economic conditions. 
But I don't want to suggest that there aren't questions to be answered as we go forward. One question 
facing us now is whether 18 to 24 months is the appropriate time horizon for monetary policy to bring 
inflation back to target after various types of shocks. One type of shock that we have to consider is a 
major movement in asset prices. Do these types of movements in asset prices contain any information 
about future inflation beyond our typical policy horizon? And if so, what should we do about it? This is 
not to suggest in any way that we should try to target asset prices. Rather, the question is whether it 
would ever be appropriate to lengthen the time horizon for returning inflation to target. 
A similar question applies to exchange rate shocks. Globalization appears to have altered the way in 
which economies adjust to movements in exchange rates. This applies both to the adjustment of real 
economic  activity  to  the  shock,  as  well  as  the  direct  pass-through  of  exchange  rate  movements  to 
prices. This raises the question of whether 18 to 24 months is too short a time horizon for monetary 
policy  to  deal  with  exchange  rate  shocks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reduction  in  the  persistence  of 
inflation  that  we  have  seen  under  inflation  targeting  would  suggest  that  it  may  instead  be  more 
appropriate to shorten the policy horizon. 
Given the success to date of handling shocks within an 18 to 24-month horizon, we should not change 
our framework lightly. But  we need to think hard about the appropriate time horizon in dealing with 
various shocks as inflation targeting evolves in the future. 
Conclusion 
Let me close by emphasizing a few key points. There is no doubt in my mind that inflation targeting is 
the right monetary policy framework for Canada. Through our symmetric approach of keeping inflation 
low, stable, and predictable, we have laid the groundwork for solid, sustainable growth in output and 
employment. In doing so, we fulfill our commitment to "promote the economic and financial welfare of 
Canada,"  as  spelled  out  in  the  Bank  of  Canada  Act.  With  inflation  targeting,  our  policy  is  more 
focused,  our  communications  are  clearer,  and  Canada's  inflation  expectations  are  more  solidly 
anchored. 
During a period when consumer price inflation is low and appears to be stable, it may be tempting to 
some  to  conclude  that  an  inflation  anchor  is  unnecessary.  In  my  opinion,  to  reach  this  conclusion 
would be a huge mistake. On the contrary, it is particularly important at this time, in the face of large 
terms-of-trade  movements  and  other  shocks,  that  central  banks  have  an  anchor  to  keep  monetary 
policy focused. From my perspective, inflation targeting is the best anchor we've seen. 
Of course, I'm not saying that inflation targeting is the end of monetary policy history. And, I love a 
good debate. So I hope that my remarks today may have helped to add some context to the ongoing 
discussions here in the United States. And I can tell you that we in Canada will continue to watch, with 
great interest, as the debate unfolds.  
BIS Review 20/2005 
 5
