Stanley Fischer: Overcoming poverty in Israel  
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Globes Israel Business 
Conference, Tel Aviv, 5 December 2005. 
 Israel's  economy  is  experiencing  fairly  rapid  growth,  an  annual  rate  of  4.8  percent  from  the  third 
quarter  of  2003  to  the  third  quarter  of  2005.  This  is  expressed  by,  among  other  things,  improved 
figures of employment and unemployment, particularly in the business sector, as was shown in the 
data issued last week by the Central Bureau of Statistics. 
Against this background, and assuming that the government's macroeconomic policy will continue, the 
Bank  of  Israel  published  its  forecasts  for  2006,  according  to  which  GDP  is  expected  to  rise  by  4 
percent,  and  business-sector  product  by  more  than  5  percent.  These  are  certainly  high  rates  of 
growth. 
It is important to bear in mind, however, that the current favorable situation of Israel's economy did not 
simply  occur  by  chance.  It  is  the  outcome  of  three  main  factors:  the  first  is  the  state  of  the  global 
economy; the second is Israel's macroeconomic strategy; and the third is the security situation. 
The  first  is  external,  and  relates  to  the  positive  effects  on  Israel  of  the  global  economy,  which  is 
showing a clear growth trend. This is reflected inter alia by the expectation that the global growth rate 
in 2006 will be a relatively high 3.5 percent. 
The  main  domestic  economic  explanation  for  Israel's  economic  situation  is  the  macroeconomic 
strategy decided upon. Thus, for the last two-and-a-half years a clear strategy has been pursued of 
reducing the government's share in the economy, and lowering the tax burden and the government-
debt/GDP ratio. Yet despite the reduction achieved in the latter, there is still a very long way to go, as 
the ratio of government debt to GDP in Israel is still extremely high compared to that in other advanced 
countries. It is clear to me that had we not adopted the approach we did, we would eventually have 
had to pay the price, in the form of higher rates of interest in the financial markets and lower rates of 
growth and employment, among other things. 
At the same time the government spearheaded a series of structural reforms, such as those in the 
labor market, in the public sector, in the capital market, and in the ports; implemented privatization, 
e.g., of Bank Leumi, Discount Bank, Bezeq and El Al; and invested in infrastructures, such as in the 
railways. The steps already taken will continue to bear fruit in the future. But our work in these areas is 
far  from  over.  The  Bank  of  Israel  is  also  playing  its  part  in  this  strategy,  mainly  by  carrying  out  an 
interest-rate policy that underpins price stability, according to the government's target, and supports 
financial stability. This strategy is essential, as it creates the conditions for sustained growth. 
The great importance to economic growth of the calm in the security situation - and expectations with 
regard  to  the  peace  process  -  must  not  go  without  mention;  these  have  a  positive  effect  on  the 
economy,  in  particular  via  tourism  and  domestic  and  foreign  investors'  desire  to  invest  in  Israel's 
economy. 
Nevertheless, despite all the above we may not rest on our laurels. Various goals confront us, and I 
will refer to two of the most important ones: 
The first is in the sphere of Israel's economic strategy. We are already in an election period, and at the 
height of the democratic process. At such a time many questions raised in the past are raised again, 
and  it  is  natural  that  this  is  accompanied  by  uncertainty  regarding  what  is  to  follow.  Since  the 
Economic Stabilization Program of the 1980s, and especially since the 1990s, Israel's economy has 
followed  the  path  to  openness  and  exposure  to  the  global  economy  and  towards  the  adoption  of 
economic norms based on those accepted in the advanced economies. It is of great importance that 
uncertainty  in  the  political  arena  not  be  allowed  to  become  uncertainty  with  regard  to  economic 
strategy in the broad meaning of the term. 
Clearly,  Israel's  economic  strategy  is  not  an  end  but  a  means  to  the  very  important  objective  of 
sustained growth. On the face of things it would seem that it is clear enough to everyone why that 
objective is so important, but it is worth focusing on one or two points in this regard. 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 1
Continued growth is vital to enhance the welfare of Israel's citizens, to improve Israel's ability to attract 
immigration, including that from the advanced countries, to boost Israel's security, and to improve its 
ability to tackle its social problems, and in particular, to reduce poverty. 
This brings me to the second objective facing us. We must deal with social problems. This subject is 
important to all of us as human beings, and also as economists; after all, economics and society are 
two sides of the same coin. 
Responsible  policy  towards  social  issues  is  one  which  acts  within  the  framework  of  the  strategy 
described  above,  and  which  does  not  undermine  it.  It  will  be  of  little  avail  if  we  achieve  economic 
growth long term and attain a European standard of living without attending to the social issues. But 
we cannot handle them properly without such growth, and would even quickly increase their severity. 
For example, one could deal with the question of social gaps by means of drastic hikes in taxes and 
transfer payments, but such a policy would also have a serious adverse effect on growth, and after a 
few years this would lead to a situation in which we would all be more equal, but also poorer. That is 
no way to attract immigration; on the contrary, it would boost emigration. And that is a position we do 
not want to be in. 
Before dealing with the social problems we should examine them realistically, as a sine qua non for 
formulating the appropriate policy. The problem of poverty is too complex to be viewed from only one 
aspect,  and  it  must  be  analyzed  from  several  aspects.  For  example,  although  here  it  is  generally 
accepted  to  measure  poverty  in  relative  terms,  and  thus  to  consider  the  problem  of  poverty  as  a 
question of social gaps, we should be aware of other possibilities. 
To  illustrate:  poverty  can  be  viewed  in  absolute  terms,  i.e.,  in  such  a  way  that  the  poverty  line  is 
determined  in  terms  of  the  level  of  real  income  considered  the  minimum  required  to  buy  a  certain 
basket of goods, such as food, clothing and housing. If we define the poverty line of 1997 as the level 
of income defining poverty in absolute terms, we would get the result that the rate of poverty, using 
this  definition,  hardly  changed  from  1997  to  2004,  and  actually  went  down  a  little.  It  declined  until 
2001, and rose somewhat thereafter. 
The Bank of Israel is engaged in this complex matter of measuring different aspects of poverty, and I 
hope that in the Bank's Annual Report for 2005, due to be published in the first quarter of 2006, we will 
be able to refer to the subject at greater depth, and that this will contribute to the public debate and to 
the formulation of policy on this issue. 
An aspect of poverty seen from another angle is the identification of the population that suffers most 
from  poverty.  We  know  that  the  highest  incidence  of  poverty  is  in  the  ultra-orthodox  ("haredi")  and 
Arab sectors of the population, mainly because of the low participation rate of haredi men and Arab 
women in the labor force. According to an estimate we carried out, these sectors of the population 
account for more than 40 percent of the poverty in Israel. This is important for purposes of adapting 
policy instruments so that they are effective for these groups. 
Although specific steps  for  dealing  with  poverty  are very  important  in  the short  run,  there are other 
measures of equal importance for the medium and long terms, and these must not be forgone. One 
such is the attainment of continued growth as the basic solution to the problem of poverty. But that is 
not all. Another required step is a policy that will enable all Israel's citizens to realize their full potential. 
This  would  contribute  to  economic  growth  and  help  the  more  vulnerable  to  avoid  falling  into  the 
poverty trap. In this context the following steps should be promoted: increasing the resources in the 
education budget allocated to the weaker strata in order to improve the ability of the next generation to 
achieve greater equality of opportunity; enhancing the government's system of professional retraining, 
with the focus on essential skills; encouragement of professional retraining by the business sector, for 
example by adapting the Encouragement of Capital Investment Law to focus on human capital; and 
extending the programs for providing adults with basic education. 
It is also important to promote policy measures to deal with the problem of poverty in the short term. 
Such a policy should be based on the principle of providing incentives for those capable of working, 
giving assistance to poor workers (in such a way that will encourage them to stay in the labor market), 
and providing relief for those unable to work, such as the handicapped and the elderly. 
The following are some examples of policy measures consistent with the above principles: the first is 
instituting a system of negative income tax. This is one step which the Bank of Israel supports, and 
which has featured in discussions held by the team headed by Yossi Bachar in which representatives 
of the Bank also participate. A second example is government participation in the costs connected with 
encouraging the weaker sections of the population to go out to work, for example, day care centers for 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2005
children, and transportation. A third example is establishing a legal and supervisory infrastructure that 
would  encourage  the  institution  of  reverse  mortgages,  which  would  enable  the  elderly  to  obtain  a 
monthly income flow from the apartment they own. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  has  been  engaged  in  the  subject  of  poverty  for  a  long  time,  and  has  published 
position papers, policy proposals and many research papers on it. I hope that as the government's 
economic  advisor  we  will  be  able  to  contribute  on  this  matter,  in  two  main  fields:  the  government's 
social policy, and no less important, in the public debate on social problems, which are both of the 
highest importance. And as they are so important, we must analyze them extremely carefully, and in 
particular must understand that the problem of poverty cannot be resolved in the medium and long 
terms without persisting on the need for continued economic growth. 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 3
