Ardian Fullani: Key policy issues for remittances in transition economies 
- a view point from a recipient country 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the high level conference 
organised by the EBRD and sponsored by Switzerland, London, 28 September 2005. 
 Remittances these days can easily classify as one of the most important sources of finance 
assisting the convergence of developing nations, to the point of overshadowing conventional 
funding like bank credit. The flow of remittances worldwide goes beyond 100 billion USD per 
year, with developing countries being recipients of more than 60 percent of this considerable 
amount. 
Remittances’ estimations in these countries often exceed trade inflows, or foreign financing 
and investment. Therefore, they have become an important device for channelling funds and 
resources  from  developed  countries  toward  countries  in  need.  Moreover,  remittances,  like 
foreign direct investments (FDI), are regarded as very stable and safe capital flow, helping 
developing countries to achieve sustainable high growth rates. 
In  recent  years,  we  have  seen  a  growing  awareness  about  emigrants’  remittances  as  an 
important  financial  source  for  development.  This  issue  was  included  in  the  G8  meeting 
agenda  of  2004  and  in  the  spring  meeting  of  IMF  and  World  Bank  earlier  this  year, 
emphasizing  the  growing  significance  of  migration,  and  with  it,  of  migrants’  remittances, 
calling for intensification of efforts to improve and identify their causes, as well as to establish 
an environment that could enhance the impact of remittances on development process. 
Let me briefly give you our (Albanian) experience with remittances and some suggestions to 
improve their ingress and effectiveness in the economy. During 90s, Albania experienced a 
massive migration movement abroad, which soon became a crucial financial source for the 
new market economy. According to some studies (Barjaba, 2004; INSTAT, 2002; Kule et al, 
2002,  2002),  since  1990,  nearly  800,000  Albanians  may  have  left  the  country  either 
permanently  or  temporarily.  Some  more  recent  estimations  show  that  the  number  of 
Albanians living abroad may have reached 1 million. This is a considerable figure for a small 
country like Albania with just 3 million of inhabitants. As a result, exodus phenomenon has 
attracted a great deal of attention in political and economic circles. 
Remittances role in the economy has grown considerably over time. We can appreciate their 
weight easier if we put them against some main economic indicators. However, before doing 
that I want to say a few words on data reliability of remittances. It is very difficult to carry out 
an accurate estimation of remittances in Albania bearing in mind that a large share does not 
go through formal (official) transferring channels, therefore escaping the official registration of 
capital flows. The Bank of Albania traces only that part of remittances that goes through the 
official  network,  which  includes  banks  and  money  transfer  agencies.  Remittances  sent 
unofficially such as, cash brought by emigrants or their friends during their visits to Albania, 
need to be estimated. 
Transition experience so far has shown that high trade deficits were not just financed through 
official capital flows, which undoubtedly have played a key role, but also through remittances 
that have increased financing opportunities within current account. During the period 1994 – 
2004, out of 6.3 billion USD current transfers that entered the country, 5.8 billion is estimated 
to be contribution of Albanian emigrants. 
economic  developments.  Although  during  the  first  stage  of  transition,  inflationary  and 
depreciation  expectations  were  high,  monetary  policy  reaction  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  of 
   1/5 
keeping high (Lek) interest rates, ensured a normal inflow of remittances in Albania. Between 
1994  and  1996  the  attraction  of  foreign  exchange  inflow  was  further  boosted  by 
extraordinarily interest rates offered by pyramid schemes, reaching a historical peak level in 
1996. A considerable drop in the volume of remittances was recorded during 1997 and 1999, 
a  period  characterized  by  a  political  and  social  unrest.1  With  the  return  of  serenity 
remittances inflow picked up again. 
The Bank of Albania estimations indicate that total workers’ remittances has reached around  
1,028  million  (one  billion)  of  USD  or  13.5  percent  of  GDP.  This  is  main  country  export. 
Furthermore,  remittances  are  estimated  to  be  three  times  higher  than  foreign  direct 
investments (FDI) inflow and its value exceeds by far official aid from abroad. 
I want to concentrate a bit more on the mechanism of transfers and on the ways remittances 
are used. 
In the case of Albania, as in many other developing countries, remittances enter the country 
by either formal or informal means. The most recent surveys show that only 22.6 percent of 
emigrants prefer to use official means, whereas 77.4 percent turn to unofficial channels – in 
most cases by themselves. 
The  official  network  includes  the  commercial  banks  and  money  transfer  companies,  the 
activity of which is regulated and supervised  by BoA. Money transfer companies (Western 
Union and Money Gram) have played a significant role in transferring remittances from the 
beginning of their activity in the 90s. 
Their  wide  geographical  extension  throughout  the  country  covering  also  many  rural  areas 
has complemented adequately the rather slow expansion of the banking sector in facilitating 
money transfers. 
Lately, the official network has gained considerable grounds over the informal ways in terms 
of total transfers carried out. The volume of remittances channelled via official means in 2004 
is estimated to have been around 46 percent of the total, as opposed to just 12 percent - the 
average  for  the  period  1994-1996.  It  seems  the  official  network  has  earned  Albanian 
emigrants’  trust  for  transferring  their  money.  The  development  of  the  financial  system  in 
Albania it’s a key factor in explaining the movement of transfers toward official means. Thus, 
only  during  2004,  there  have  been  30  new  branches  and  banking  agencies  opened 
throughout  the  country.  Nevertheless,  the  unofficial  flows  remain  still  high,  accounting  for 
more than half of the total volume. 
Banks and licensed agencies, despite being safer, are more expensive than the alternative 
unofficial means to the point of inducing many emigrants to stick to the latter means. In a 
comparative  study  of  Manuel  Orozco,  2003  looking  at  transfer  costs  across  different 
countries,  show  that  banks  appear  to  charge  less  than  money  transfer  companies.  These 
latter tend to be costlier because of higher transfer charges and disadvantageous exchange 
rates they face. 
Moreover, some research shows that transaction costs of transferring remittances via money 
transfer  companies  in  the  South-Eastern  Europe  are  higher  than  the  region  risk.  Banks 
becoming  aware  of  this  comparative  advantage,  have  introduced  lower  transfer  charges 
while offering at the same time new financial products and services to encourage and attract 
savings of this segment of clients. However, I retain that although banks have the opportunity 
to be cheaper than money transfer companies, remain quite bureaucratic and less flexible 
compared  to  money  transfer  agencies,  not  to  mention  their  inadequate  geographical 
                                                 
1   Year 1997 represents a year of chaos for the Albanian economy and society, as a result of the collapse of 
pyramid schemes and 1999 the year of Kosovar crisis. 
   2/5 
coverage of rural areas where more than 60 percent of population lives. Therefore, despite 
recent promising developments, banks have not gained much market share of remittances in 
Albania. 
The  results  obtained  by  a  survey2  on  remittances  carried  out  recently  also  show  that,  the 
banking system still remains less preferable by Albanian emigrants who send money to their 
family members or relatives - only 15.2 percent of emigrants show interest for using banking 
system.  Some  of  the  reasons  influencing  migrants’  decision  for  (not)  choosing  banks  to 
transfer their money were: 
- 
Geographical  proximity  of  Albania  and  Greece  (Albanians  residing  in  Greece  and 
Italy travel to Albania frequently, on average 2 to 3 times a year, transferring money 
themselves). 
Insufficiency of emigrants’ families to the banking system. Empirical measures have 
shown  that  while  a  considerable  number  of  emigrants  have  become  familiar  with 
banking in the resident country (74.4 percent of them hold their savings in the banks 
of  their  country  of  residence),  the  corresponding  families  in  Albania  appear  to  be 
less  familiar  with  the  banking  system  in  Albania.  Only  45.3%  of  Albanian  families 
hold a banking account. 
 At  this  point,  some  policy  implications  are  evident:  improving  population  awareness  of 
banking services, encouraging expansion of banking throughout the country and facilitating 
possibilities  of  money  transfers.  BoA,  is  in  process  of  designing  a  public  communication 
strategy  that  aims  at  brining  the  public  closer  to  banking  products  and  services,  including 
transfers. The flow of remittances may also raise if the fiscal burden of financial transfers is 
reduced.  Enhancing  competition  by  increasing  the  number  of  participants  in  the  market 
would  also  push  transfer  commissions  down.  Here,  the  government  has  to  incite  the 
establishment  of  other  companies  as  well  as  apply  the  reduced  taxes.  Another  way  of 
amplifying competition in the sector is by pressing on price transparency. 
Remittances, as mentioned earlier, are also affected by economic and financial situation in 
beneficiary  country.  International  experience  brings  many  examples  to  illustrate  this  point. 
After  a  constant  growth  of  remittances  in  Philippines,  as  a  result  of  improvements  in  the 
investments  environment  in  the  early  90s,  they  became  very  shaky  as  the  financial  crisis 
affected  the  Asian  countries  at  the  end  of  the  90s.  Likewise,  Turkey  after  experiencing  a 
stable growth of remittances during the 90s, saw a drastic fall as the financial crisis broke out 
in 1999-2000.  
However, an interesting observation in these cases is that, the fall of remittances and their 
volatility  were  lower  than  those  of private  capital  flows.  Remittances  seem  to  react  less  to 
economic  ups  and  downs  compared  to  other  capital  flows  displaying  considerable  stability 
over time (Ratha, 2003). In this context, countries with high remittance percentage relative to 
other capital flows could be more immune to capital drain during crises. 
Remittances  are  not  simply  expression  of  emigrants’  fondness  to  assist  their  families  in 
adverse situations. They also represent an important financial source that augments capital 
inflows and investments in economy. Remittances may have a positive impact not only on 
the volume but also on the quality of investments. Migrants and/or their relatives being more 
familiar  with  the  local  economic  and  social  environment  could  make  a  better  use  of  the 
capital brought into the country than foreign investors. Nowadays this is not just a theoretical 
inference. A growing number of emigrants that fled during 90s, are returning and funds but 
also a lot of know-how. 
                                                 
2   A survey carried out with the assistance of the International Organization of Migration (IOM) in Albania and 
CARDS project. The questionnaire period comprises April-June 2005. 
   3/5 
However, there is always another side of the coin. Remittances inflow might have negative 
effects  as  well.  If  the  recipient  country  remains  dependant  on  money  transfers,  it  will 
encourage  further  migration  of  labour  by  reducing  the  effectiveness  of  investments  of 
domestic and foreign investors because of the unstable workforce. What's more important, if 
remittances go mainly for financing imports, their impact in the development of the domestic 
economy drops significantly. I fear Albania is one of these cases. 
Remittances are being mainly used to secure daily family needs and to improve life style, as 
well as to construct or reconstruct houses, and to finance traditional family ceremonies. Only 
a small portion goes into banks as saving deposits. In fewer cases, remittances have been 
invested in real estates, manufacturing or services and agricultural sectors. This distribution 
of remittances alleviates poverty but does not lead to new job creation via investments, which 
would  prevent  new  emigration  by  generating  local  opportunities.  Being  utilised  little  as 
resources for the economic and social development of the country, remittances may have led 
to individual, family or local dependency. 
During  the  first  stage  of  transition  in  Albania  policies  for  optimising  the  administration  and 
utilisation of workers’ remittances for developing purposes have been completely lacking. A 
few sporadic measures have aimed at driving workers’ remittances into official channels and 
improving savings and investments incentives of emigrants in the country but have been by 
and large inadequate. 
More  recently,  the  Albanian  government  has  taken  a  more  attentive  approach  toward 
remittances and their potential contributions in financing the growth and development of the 
country. With the assistance of the European Union by means of CARDS program, and the 
support  of  the  International  Organization  of  Migration  (IOM),  this  year  the  Albanian 
government  has  compiled  two  important  documents  regarding  migration  and  remittances 
issues, called: National Strategy of Migration and Action Plan. The main objectives are: (i) 
the  review  of  remittances  flows  and  (ii)  the  identification  of  political  constraints  and 
institutional and regulative framework that influence these inflows, in order to: 
• 
• 
• 
Bank  of  Albania  role  in  achieving  these  objectives  consists  primarily  in  maintaining  the 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  which  constitute  important  preconditions  for  the 
success of any policy related to workers’ remittances. 
Migrants will be more willing to send and invest remittances if inflation is kept under control 
and exchange rate and financial conditions are reasonably stable.  
Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  cooperation  with  other  governmental  and  non-
governmental  institutions  has  been  considering  some  more  concrete  measures  in  order  to 
enhance the role of remittances in economy. I would like to mention a few of them: 
First: improvement of statistics on remittances. Reliable data regarding remittances is a 
key  ingredient  in  designing  and  assessing  policies  about  enhancing  their  developing  role. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continuously  stressed  the  importance  of  accurate  estimation  of 
capital inflows in the form of migrants’ remittances. Assisted by IMF  missions, it has been 
working  to  bring  the  methodology  closer  to  the  international  standards  in  defining 
remittances. 
Also, there is a close cooperation with our main partner countries Greece and Italy, as the 
main  destinations  of  the  Albanian  emigrants,  to  harmonise  our  methodologies  in  order  to 
improve the accuracy of remittances’ estimation. 
Second:  Bringing  workers’  remittances  into  formal  channels.  The  high  portion  of 
remittances that goes through unofficial channels asks for actions to make official channels 
increase the volume of remittances; 
help shifting them into formal channels; and 
enhance their use in support of country’s economic growth. 
   4/5 
more  appealing  in  terms  of  efficiency,  safety,  cost  and  anonymity.  Although,  I  mentioned 
earlier that emigrants seems to have more access to banking that their families back home, 
their relation with the banks is still difficult due to language problems (most often the forms 
are in the native language of the resident country) and in many cases excessive document 
requirements to open a bank account. Regulatory authorities in respective countries could be 
of help in this respect. Also, Albanian banks may receive Albanian workers’ remittances via 
“banking correspondent institutions” in the resident country and microcredit and microfinance 
Albanian organizations which could serve as local agencies to handle this process. 
Third:  Directing  workers’  remittances  toward  country’s  development  needs.  Usually, 
emigrants  are  out  of  the  main  focus  of  banking  services,  since  this  category  of  clients  is 
considered to have unstable jobs. 
Nonetheless,  there  exists  opportunities  to  offer  financial  services  to  emigrants  too.  Among 
others I could mention here: linking of workers’ remittances with investments for example by 
channelling  remittances  flows  toward  micro-credit  loans  or  projects;  also  supporting  of 
migrants’ contribution and migrants societies in the development of the country. Remittances 
could also help approaching rural areas population to the banks. If the recipient families also 
decide to keep remittances in their bank accounts this could assist economic development as 
more  funds  are  available  to  be  lent  to  private  sector.  Microcredit  programs  and  qualitative 
improvements  of  banking  infrastructure,  in  concert  with  introduction  of  new  financial 
instruments that would attract more remittances, are also important. 
Finally, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to those involved in this conference 
which provides us a valuable support in our efforts to improve effectiveness of remittances 
utilization  in  our  economies.  I  am  confident  that  the  distinguished  speakers  from  various 
institutions,  who  are  present  at  this  conference,  would  share  further  helpful  ideas  and 
suggestions (we already heard some very interesting ones in the previous discussions), thus 
ensuring  the  formulation  of  sound  measures  to  be  incorporated  in  our  policies  on 
remittances. 
And I strongly hope this exchange of experiences and expertise will continue in the future 
and  contribute  producing  adequate  human,  infrastructure,  and  institutional  capacities  to 
transform  remittances  from  potential  into  real  driving  forces  for  the  development  of  our 
countries. 
Again, my highest consideration for this activity and 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
   5/5 
