Martín P Redrado: Protecting financial systems from abuse - experiences in 
implementing anti-money laundering and terrorist financing standards: the 
case of Argentina 
Presentation by Mr Martín P Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, to the IMF/World 
Bank Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 23 September 2005. 
 We live at a time in history, which faces us against new challenges on a daily basis. Against these 
challenges there can only be collective responses, which are essential for our growth and security.  
The  international  agenda  has  yet  important  problems  to  be  addressed:  inequalities,  injustices  the 
persistence of violence, the lack of understanding among cultures, the need for sustainable economic 
growth  and  human  development.  None  of  our  nations  has  the  means  to  respond  to  them  by  itself. 
Consequently, cooperation, full disclosure and joint efforts will be our strength.  
The  list  also  includes,  as  a  growing  concern,  fighting  new  crimes,  such  as  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing. Crimes that have direct consequences on security. The response must meet the 
requirements of our times: the union of the international community, the respect for the rule of law and 
the assertion of collective responsibility.  
Global  crimes  require  global  solutions.  In  particular,  internationalization  requires  concerted  efforts 
among countries because, as we all know, players located in various parts of the world are involved in 
organizing and materializing these crimes, with effects that have an influence in all regions.  
Consequently, we need a shared vision. In the face of threats that ignore national borders, effective 
solutions  will  come  only  after  a  collective  effort  takes  place.  The  demand  for  respect,  justice  and 
security is not only a political imperative but also a condition for peace.  
Thus, working for the efficient prevention and punishment of money laundering and terrorist financing 
constitutes a top priority on our country’s agenda at the national, regional and international levels.  
The  Central  Bank  of  Argentina  has  put  forward  a  robust  policy  with  the  goal  of  both  providing  a 
regulatory framework for the financial system and enhancing supervision to enforce a new set of rules 
according to international standards. Additionally, we have been collaborating with other government 
authorities in the policy process aimed at updating current anti-money laundering national legislation. 
To  prove  our  commitment  to  work  jointly  with  the  international  community,  we  also  have  brought 
forward  this  issue  within  the  Center  for  Latin  American  Monetary  Studies  (CEMLA)  a  hemisphere 
agency we are chairing until May 2007 – and we are in active cooperation with the work done in the 
Americas by the Organization of American States (OAS), in South America through GAFISUD, as well 
as  with  initiatives  at  the  national  level  such  as  those  developed  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina 
together with my colleagues in the region. 
As a result of increasing capital mobility and the ongoing development of new means of payment, and 
given their complex nature, these crimes directly hit the financial system. However, we are aware that 
they affect the financial system in a somewhat different way compared to traditional criminal activities. 
Therefore, prevention, combat and follow-up actions must be addressed differently. 
Money  laundering  has  both  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  implications  that  may  corrupt 
financial, legal and even political structures. 
In  macroeconomic  terms,  it  generates  market  volatility  and  instability  with  systemic  effects  on  the 
financial  system  and  on  monetary  developments.  Money  laundering  may  also  have  effects  on  the 
formation of asset prices bubbles, due to the fact that informal money becomes available to acquire 
different types of assets, real estate in particular.  
On  the  microeconomic  side,  it  distorts  competition,  originating  unfair  business  practices  and  the 
creation  of  shell  organizations.  It  also  involves  higher  transaction  costs  and  promotes  other  illegal 
activities.  
Faced with these types of crimes, in its capacity of overseer of the financial system required to report 
transactions, the Central Bank of Argentina has developed an active policy aimed at both regulating 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
   financial  institutions  activity  and  improving  supervision  based  upon  the  new  applicable  international 
standards.  
As  you  all  know,  Argentina  does  have  anti-money  laundering  legislation  that  is  being  amended  in 
order  to  fully  comply  to  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF)  and  GAFISUD  recommendations 
concerning banking, tax and professional secrecy, among other issues.  
In  addition  to  actively  working  on  the  legislative  arena,  the  Central  Bank  has  focused  its  efforts  on 
updating its regulatory framework for financial institutions. As an example we recently have updated 
regulation on the following:  
- 
Identification  of  usual  and  occasional  customers  and  definition  of  specific  identification 
requirements for each type of customer.  
Special identification standards for politically exposed individuals.  
Special tracking of non face-to-face transactions. 
Special attention to be paid to identify account holders (individual or corporate) in cases of 
suspicion that they are acting on behalf of third parties (trusts, corporate vehicles) 
Specific definition of internal control responsibilities by creating a Money Laundering Control 
and  Prevention  Committee  and  by  assigning  specific  responsibilities  to  each  financial  and 
foreign exchange institution’s internal auditor and Human Resources area.  
Design and implementation of mechanisms to control and monitor customer operations and 
to adopt gradual risk analysis policies. 
Definition of criteria to create and maintain customer and transaction databases.  
terrorist 
financing 
is  also  different.  Terrorism 
the  analysis  we  should  make  on 
- 
The main goal is to improve supervision and to enhance our customer base knowledge, whichenables 
us  to  distinguish  unusual  transactions  –that  may  be  justified  –  from  crime-related  transactions.  In 
addition,  it  allows  us  to  distinguish  between  money  laundering  transactions  and  other  criminal 
transactions with different purposes. 
We are aware that in our country and region there are serious problems to account for transactions 
that take place in the informal economy. Tax evasion is a major problem in the region. But let’s be 
frank. These transactions have nothing to do with money laundering. They have other purpose, other 
treatment and other punishment. 
Likewise, 
internationalization has changed financing methods, involving the financial system in a different way.  
Classic or domestic terrorism –typical from past decades- used to employ direct financing methods, 
since those who financed it generally acted in the same territory in which attacks were perpetrated. 
Financing sources came, in most cases, from criminal activities. There was little use of the financial 
system and, therefore, the approach for fighting it was mainly based on police action.  
Nowadays, terrorist groups act anywhere in the world, which forces those financing them to enter into 
the  financial  system,  at  some  point.  The  aggravating  circumstance  here  is  that  members  of  these 
groups, usually carry out purportedly lawful activities involving low amounts of money, which cannot 
initially  be  considered  suspicious.  This  feature  demands  acting  in  coordination  with  other  bodies, 
directly related to security and intelligence.  
Under this framework, the financial system is used intensively to move money through long distances. 
Unlike in classic terrorism, the financial approach towards blocking the flow of funds to activists is of 
utmost importance.  
However, the financial system is not, in this case, the only scenario. The analysis of the Bali, Jakarta, 
Madrid, Turkey and London attacks shows that there are, at least, three alternative mechanisms for 
terrorist  financing:  use  of  non-profit  organizations,  alternative  fund  remittance  systems,  and  cross-
border transportation of currency.  
This  means  that,  in  most  cases,  action  by  financial  institutions  does  not  result  directly  from  their 
detection  of  suspicious  transactions.  It  results  from  the  financial  institutions  prompt  and  effective 
action. There is an effective detection of transactions made by individuals previously identified. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
In  order  to  cooperate  in  following  up  and  supervising  this  kind  of  transactions,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Argentina  issued regulations  this  year, which  established  rules  on  Prevention  of  Terrorist  Financing 
applicable to financial institutions. It includes the following: 
- 
Observance of Resolutions adopted by the United Nations Security Council concerning the 
fight against terrorism. 
Obligation  to  report  to  the  Central  Bank  the  existence  or  nonexistence  of  financial  assets 
owned by identified individuals and their transactions.  
Implementation of special mechanisms to keep transaction records. 
Implementation  of  policies  and  designing  internal  proceedings  and  controls  aimed  at 
preventing activities related to terrorist financing. 
Development  of  a  Transaction  Guide  intended  to  identify  transactions  suspected  to  be 
related  to  such  purpose,  in  agreement  with  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF) 
recommendations. 
   In  this  case,  as  opposed  to  what  happens  on  money  laundering,  Argentina  does  not  yet  have  any 
substantive  law  on  terrorist  financing,  which  hinders  the  application  of  sanctions  in  addition  to  the 
freezing of funds, which takes place immediately.  
Our country is aware of the importance of typifying terrorist financing as soon as possible. Therefore, 
we are working jointly with other bodies of the Executive, Legislative and Judicial Branch, to pass new 
legislation to make Argentine criminal law consistent with international regulations.  
The  first  step  in  this  process  was  the  recent  ratification  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  for  the 
Suppression  of  the  Financing  of  Terrorism.  This  has  been  the  result  of  a  persistent  effort  to  raise 
awareness  among  political  leaders  -mainly,  the  Congress-  of  the  importance  of  working  on  these 
issues. Undoubtedly, it is a solid basis for a national regulatory framework.  
We  are  conscious  that  having  rules  and  regulations  consistent  with  international  standards  is  not 
enough. Prevention and punishment of money-laundering and terrorist financing crimes demand day-
to-day follow-up and supervision.  
Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  has  prioritized  the  supervision  of  the  proper  operation  of  the  financial 
system. In particular, it has created a specific compliance area, composed by a group of specialized 
examiners,  exclusively  dedicated  to  the  investigation  and  surveillance  of  the  financial  system.  Full 
disclosure to other regulatory authorities around the world is the right policy to pursue.  
For this reason, our team is working with and being trained by the US Treasury and Federal Reserve, 
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank –our hosts today-, and the Treasury of Spain, 
among others.  
We are well aware that we cannot make any progress just on ourselves. As I started today, global 
crimes  need  global  solutions.  Therefore,  we  are  working  towards  including  these  issues  on  our 
regional  agenda.  For  such  purpose,  late  last  March  we  organized  the  First  Regional  Seminar  on 
Money-Laundering  and  Terrorist  Financing.  We  hosted  outstanding  specialists  on  this  subject,  to 
discuss  and  exchange  experiences  with  our  Latin  American  partners,  and  mainly  to  assess  all  the 
work that is still to be done.  
The  degree  of  compliance  with  the  international  requirements  in  terms  of  money  laundering  and 
terrorist  financing  in  Latin  America  varies  depending  on  the  type  of  crime.  Concerning  money 
laundering, eight out of the nine countries that are part of GAFISUD have legislation to criminalize it. 
Just Ecuador remains and is working on a legislative project to fulfill the international standards.  
Different is the situation on terrorist financing, where only three countries – Brazil, Peru and Uruguay – 
have enabled related legislation.  
Our  nine  countries  are  also  working  together  to  deepening  the  investigation  process  on  money 
laundering and terrorist financing, through the approval – at the regional level – of the Guidelines on 
Special  Investigative  Techniques  and  the  Guide  of  Contacts  and  Procedure  for  International 
Cooperation on Money Laundering. 
Despite  this  progress,  countries  from  the  region  still  confront  some  of  the  following  challenges: 
insufficient  coordination  among  national  agencies;  underdeveloped  tools  for  financial  institutions  to 
identify  specific  risks  –  including  politically  exposed  persons  and  correspondent  banking  -;  lack  of 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 3
low  supervisory  capacity  and 
adequate  training  at  many  levels  –  particularly,  in  terms  of  trained  judicial  officials  -;  difficulties  in 
designing  and  implementing  balanced  regulations  for  remittance  service  providers  and  non-profit 
organizations  and 
financial,  human  and 
technological. 
Nevertheless, Latin American countries are working together in order to improve our capacities and be 
up to the global challenges. 
Commitment is shown with concrete facts, as every important thing in life. It is shown by delivering 
professionally  on  the  field  every  single  day.  And  we  are  delivering,  from  our  workplaces,  with 
conviction and promptness. 
limited  resources  – 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2005
