John Hurley: The Central Bank and the Eurosystem 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  John  Hurley,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the Seminar for Irish Media, Dublin, 6 December 2005. 
 Introduction 
I would like to begin by thanking you all for making time to come here this morning. This promises to 
be a busy news week and I am sure there are many other demands on your time, so I am very grateful 
that so many of you have turned up this morning.  
The aim of the session is to give an overview on the role of the Central Bank as a member of the 
Eurosystem. The main focus is on monetary policy, looking at the strategy, the experience to date and 
communication. The session will also include the launch of some new euro area statistics.  
Experience and achievements 
For almost seven years now the euro area has had a single currency and a single monetary policy 
conducted by the Governing Council of the ECB. The introduction of the single currency has been an 
historical  landmark.  In  twelve  countries,  the  euro  has  replaced  the  national  currency  and  rapidly 
become part of everyday life. For the business community, intra-euro area exchange rate volatility and 
the uncertainty it caused for trade and investment have been eliminated. In the financial area, the role 
of the euro in global markets and the growth in the use of the new currency outside the euro area have 
also  been  impressive.  The  euro  has  very  quickly  become  an  important  part  of  the  global  financial 
system and the evidence of the past seven years is that its role can continue to grow.  
Within  the  euro  area,  the  key  challenge  has  been  to  formulate  and  implement  the  single  monetary 
policy.  As  you  are  well  aware,  it  has  not  all  been  plain  sailing.  Since  coming  into  being,  the  single 
monetary  policy  has  been  conducted  in  a  very  testing  environment,  characterised  by  a  series  of 
shocks. At various times, especially in the early years, there were periods of exceptional economic, 
financial  and  geopolitical  uncertainty.  The  first  18  months  witnessed  a  very  strong  increase  in  oil 
prices, the peak of the dotcom boom and a significant fall in the value of the euro. The subsequent 
correction following the collapse of the dotcom boom, allied to heightened geopolitical tensions, then 
triggered  the  most  critical  and  sustained  period  of  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  witnessed  in 
decades. This persisted until early 2003, and while uncertainty has unwound considerably since, the 
sharp rise in oil prices has led to uncertainty returning periodically in the interim. On top of all this, we 
have also seen a sizeable appreciation of the euro since 2002, particularly against the dollar, taking it 
back to the level prevailing at its initial launch. From that short outline, it is clear that the economic and 
financial environment of the past seven years has provided a stiff test of the single monetary policy.  
Given  this  background,  what  has  been  the  outcome?  Over  the  past  seven  years,  the  evidence 
indicates that both inflation and inflation expectations have remained firmly under control. Since the 
beginning of 1999, indicators of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area have remained below 
but  close  to  2  per  cent.  This  suggests  that  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in 
anchoring long-term inflation expectations and that the public and the markets are convinced about 
the determination to maintain price stability over the medium-term. This has been a very significant 
achievement in a relatively short period of time and has been an important factor in permitting euro 
area interest rates to remain accommodative, even after last week's interest rate rise.  
I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  last  week's  move  and  to  emphasise  its  consistency  with  the 
monetary policy strategy we have in place. The decision to increase interest rates was taken against 
the background of the risks to price stability that have been identified. The decision will help to keep 
medium  to  long-term  inflation  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  Even  after  this 
increase,  interest  rates  remain  low  and  continue  to  lend  considerable  support  to  growth.  As  to  the 
future, I would emphasise that the Governing Council has not taken any 'ex ante' decision to engage in 
a series of interest rate increases. Our mandate is to maintain price stability and we will continue to 
monitor  all  developments  closely.  We  will  examine  the  data,  make  our  assessment  and  act  as 
appropriate to deliver price stability. 
BIS Review 82/2005 
 1
The institutional framework 
The  Eurosystem  institutional  set-up  involves  centralised  decision-making  on  monetary  policy  issues 
and decentralised implementation of those decisions. I can assure you that the Central Bank of Ireland 
plays an important role in both areas. One of the features of the Governing Council is the democratic 
way in which it goes about its business. In a sense one should not be surprised by this: the Statute of 
the  ESCB  provides  for  each  member  to  have  one  vote  and  specifically  restricts  weighted  voting  to 
financial matters. I am impressed by the manner in which these principles are observed in practice. 
Certainly, there is no sense of Governors operating in a representative capacity when addressing euro 
area  policies.  Equally,  it  is  the  force  of  an  argument,  rather  than  who  makes  it,  that  commands 
respect. I can assure you that we have a very comprehensive monetary policy preparation process in 
place  in  the  Central  Bank,  which  ensures  that  we  play  a  full  part  in  the  formulation  of  euro  area 
monetary policy.  
We  also  play  a  full  part  in  the  monetary  policy  implementation  process.  At  the  operational  level, 
Central  Bank  staff  carry  out  the  Eurosystem's  money  market  management  operations  with  Dublin 
based banks. The banking system in Ireland actually takes a disproportionately high share of funding 
in ECB operations. This reflects the importance of Dublin as a financial centre, as testified by the still 
growing  number of  financial  institutions  choosing  Ireland  as a  location  for  their  operations. Thus,  in 
terms of our interaction with the market, it may be surprising but it is nonetheless true that membership 
of monetary union has actually brought the Central Bank in contact with a wider range of domestic 
counterparties than was the case before 1999. 
The  Eurosystem  is  also  responsible  for  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems.  The  main 
instrument for carrying out this task is the provision of payment and securities settlement facilities. To 
this end, the Eurosystem has created TARGET for large-value payments in euro. At present, TARGET 
is a 'system of systems' made up of interlinked national payment systems, and again here the Central 
Bank plays a full part. In excess of one million transactions, amounting to almost EUR5 trillion, were 
processed  through  the  Irish  system  in  2004.  This  represented  1.5  per  cent  by  volume  of  the  total 
transactions processed by the TARGET system last year.  
While I have focussed on the Central Bank's responsibilities in relation to Eurosystem monetary policy, 
I would like to emphasise that this is only one part of what we do. Additional responsibilities, among 
other things, include contributing to the maintenance of financial stability and providing banknotes and 
coin; our full set of responsibilities are set out in the Three Year Strategic Plan which we published in 
2004. This gives you a flavour of some of our activities and I feel I should now stop and hand over to 
Tom  O'Connell  and  his  team  who  will  tell  you  a  lot  more  about  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  as  a 
member of the Eurosystem, with a particular focus on monetary policy. 
Once again I would like to thank you for taking the time to come here this morning. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2005
