Jaime Caruana: The future of banking supervision in Europe 
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the conference “Supervision of International Banks: Is a Bank Crisis still 
Possible in Europe?” – European Banking Federation (FBE), Brussels, 28 October 2005.  
 Introduction 
First of all, I would like to thank Michel Pébereau and the European Banking Federation for inviting me 
here  today  to  participate  in  this  conference  on  important  issues  relating  to  the  future  of  banking 
supervision in Europe.   
Usually  I  speak  from  the  perspective  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  Today, 
however, I will mainly take the viewpoint of one of the central banks of the Eurosystem with banking 
supervisory responsibilities. 
The subject of this debate is particularly timely, given the European Commission’s current initiative to 
define financial services policy for the EU over the next five years, to which I understand the FBE has 
been an active contributor.   
I would like to use my time this morning to suggest a number of principles that I believe could help in 
addressing the key challenges for European banking supervision structures in the coming years, and 
also to reflect on some concrete steps to build a European framework fit to meet these challenges.   
What is the main issue we face? 
There is no need for me to explain the dichotomy that arises when we have, on one hand, an industry 
that is becoming increasingly internationalised in nature and, on the other, a supervisory framework 
that remains predominantly based on national responsibilities and accountabilities.   
In a context where banking groups increasingly take decisions and manage risks on a global basis, 
inconsistencies or differences in the regulation and supervision across the countries in which they are 
active  may  create  compliance  costs  and  inefficiencies.    Furthermore,  adverse  developments  in  one 
bank  are  more  likely  to  have  financial  stability  implications  for  several  countries.  These  issues  are 
certainly not exclusive to the EU.  But the existence of the EU project adds an extra dimension, which 
brings challenges, responsibilities and also opportunities. 
Progress has been made in building the single market in financial services, but we are not there yet.  
In some segments of the financial markets, such as retail banking, there is a long way to go to achieve 
a fully integrated market.  And recent experiences in relation to some cross-border acquisitions seem 
hardly  compatible  with  the  spirit  of  the  single  market.  We  face,  therefore,  several  challenges:  to 
safeguard  the  efficiency,  effectiveness  and  consistency  of  supervisory  action  in  more  global  and 
integrated financial markets; and to reduce the remaining obstacles to cross-border finance, both in 
terms  of  cross-border  consolidation  and  in  the  provision  of  products  and  services.  Some  of  these 
national  differences  have  developed  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  go  beyond  the  prudential  or 
supervisory sphere. Political initiatives to reduce regulatory inconsistencies would substantially support 
the supervisory convergence efforts. 
At the same time, there is a political objective to enhance the dynamism and competitiveness of the 
EU  economy  –  the  so-called  “Lisbon”  objective  –  and  an  efficient,  integrated  financial  market  is  an 
important part of achieving it. 
The  fact  is  that  if  we  are  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  European  integration,  and  meet  the  political 
objectives set in Lisbon, we need to find ways to ensure that the banking industry can operate with 
maximum  efficiency  and  also  that  supervision  is  not  unduly  burdensome  and  promotes  a  level  EU 
playing field.  But we need to do this while also ensuring that depositors are adequately protected and 
that financial stability is preserved.  In summary, the challenge is how to ensure both minimum gaps 
and minimum overlaps in supervision.  Much progress has already been made in the banking context, 
but it is necessary to go further. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 1
What should be the guiding principles for a European approach to dealing with these 
challenges? 
There are a range of views on how EU banking regulation and supervisory structures should face up 
to the challenges of the 21st century.  What’s more, these opinions are not static, which makes for a 
complex situation.   
Among the most ambitious perspectives are those which advocate a single EU banking or financial 
services supervisory authority.  Others – including the European Banking Federation – promote the 
idea  of a  “lead  supervisor”  approach, providing  banking groups with  a single  interlocutor which  has 
powers relating to the group as a whole.   
Both proposals raise significant political, legal and practical issues.  Yet it is clear that the status quo 
will not be sufficient in the future. We need to move forward. And we need arrangements that reduce 
compliance costs for banks and streamline their interaction with supervisory authorities if we are really 
to make progress in integration.   I think the key to success will be pragmatism, both on the part of the 
supervisory authorities and on the part of the industry.   
Let me highlight the principles that I believe should guide us in finding a way forward.  I will begin with 
four principles which could be classified as being on the prudent side of the debate. 
Firstly, I believe that we need an approach which ensures legal clarity for all concerned.  Banks need 
to know what requirements they should meet, on what basis and in which countries; supervisors need 
to know what activities they are responsible for and who they are accountable to; and depositors need 
to know where they can turn and on what basis if things go wrong. Informal arrangements between 
supervisory authorities can be extremely useful.  But they do need to be grounded on firm and clear 
legal settings and accountability mechanisms.   
Secondly, we must recognise the diversity of situations within the EU.  The European banking industry 
is far from homogenous.  Just focusing on the international aspects, let me mention two points: first, 
only  a  handful  of  the  thousands  of  banking  institutions  in  the  EU  can  be  considered  as  truly  pan-
European,  even  though  these  institutions  make  up  a  significant  part  of  the  banking  market.    In  the 
same vein, a significant proportion of banks in a number of the new EU member states are foreign-
owned.  Clearly, pan-European institutions are key to the EU’s position in the global system, and we 
must do everything we can to ensure they can play their role.   But we also need to be careful that any 
measures we take in the interests of promoting greater efficiency for international institutions do not 
impose undue expense on smaller institutions, and we must take a perspective that is acceptable for 
both home and host supervisors.   
My third point is linked to this, and concerns the need to observe the principle of subsidiarity, a key 
tenet of the EU which says that action should only be taken at EU level where national or local action 
cannot have the desired effect.  This principle is particularly relevant given the continued diversity of 
the  EU  banking  industry  and  consumers.    Supervision  is  best  conducted  close  to  the  markets  and 
institutions. 
Last but not least, I believe we need an approach which is realistic in the short to medium term.   It is 
essential that the industry keeps considering the issues and expressing its ideas, but I am afraid that 
unrealistic expectations can only lead us to an agonised debate which could polarise views and even 
hinder the progress that we need to make now in the crucial and urgent work of implementing Basel II, 
and international accounting standards. 
As I mentioned earlier, these were the more prudent principles that I wanted to mention.  But, as the 
19th century English writer Charles Caleb Colton said, “there is nothing more imprudent than excessive 
prudence”.    Therefore,  let  me  add  a  further  four  principles  that  go  more  in  a  more  progressive 
direction. 
Firstly, I think that the EU needs to be ambitious, and set an example.  I am convinced, and have said 
in many of my recent interventions, that the EU can and should go further, deeper and faster than the 
wider international community in finding greater consistency, convergence and efficiency in banking 
supervision. We should especially take advantage of the opportunities presented by Basel II and the 
fact  that  we  already  have  a  body  of  single  market  legislation  and  a  long  history  of  supervisory  co-
operation on which to build.  And if we can demonstrate that progress is possible among 25 countries 
that are still rather diverse, others will have more confidence to push ahead also. 
Secondly, we should recognise the legitimate concerns of the industry.  More efficient supervision is a 
necessary - although not sufficient - condition for a more integrated market.  We undoubtedly need a 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2005
greater degree of co-ordination between supervisors than hitherto, and we need greater consistency in 
supervisory practices.  As I said, we need a framework that rationalises the compliance burden and 
streamlines  the  interaction  between  supervisory  authorities.  We  need  banks  that  manage  risks,  not 
unnecessary supervisory requirements.  
Thirdly, we need an approach that uses the full range of tools at our disposal.  In other words, we 
should not just look for legislative solutions to the challenges that face us.  What we need is effective 
and timely implementation of the laws and regulations that exist, and convergence in their application.  
This comes through co-operation and information-sharing between supervisors.  
And let me also mention here the potential offered by supervisory transparency.  We have heard much 
about  market  discipline  in the  context  of  the  disclosure  requirements  that  will apply  to  banks  under 
pillar 3 of the revised Basel capital framework.  But I think that increased disclosure by supervisors, 
especially on a comparable basis, also has an important role to play, not only in helping us to monitor 
consistency of approaches across countries, but also in driving greater convergence through exerting 
a kind of market discipline for supervisors.  
Finally, allow me to put my Basel hat on for a moment. I think Basel II certainly offers its fair share of 
implementation challenges, but also provides us with by far the biggest opportunity to make progress 
in building a more consistent and efficient co-operative approach to supervision.   
I  have  mentioned  four  prudent  principles,  plus  another  four  more  forward-looking  ones.  Some  may 
emphasise  the  former,  while  others  may  prefer  to  move  faster.  My  own  view  is  that  there  is  some 
urgency in moving forward significantly. 
Building the European framework 
So let us now focus on the concrete steps that move in this direction.  I would like to separate these 
into  two  categories:  those  that  relate  to  the  regulatory  framework  and  those  that  pertain  to  the 
supervisory framework. 
The regulatory framework 
Let me begin with some reflections on the regulatory framework. 
Going  back  to  the  principles  I  highlighted  earlier,  I  believe  we  should  build  upon  the  regulatory 
framework  that  already  exists  in  the  EU.    Any  improvement  to  the  EU  framework  for  financial 
supervision should first seek to fully exploit the potential of the existing framework. In this respect, the 
concepts  and  responsibilities  of  home  and  host  supervisors  and  the  framework  for  consolidated 
supervision are well-embedded in the existing banking directives, and it makes a lot of sense for them 
to form the basis of the future approaches.   
Indeed, the directive to implement Basel II in the EU – the so-called capital requirements directive – 
contains  key  provisions  which  will  reinforce  the  role  of  the  consolidated  supervisor  in  relation  to 
applications to use the advanced approaches of the new capital framework.   
As I am sure you are all aware, these provisions will allow banking groups to make one application for 
approval in relation to the group as a whole, and will require the relevant supervisors to co-operate in 
trying  to  reach  a  common  agreement  on  the  application.    Should  it  prove  not  possible  to  reach 
agreement  within  six  months,  the  consolidated  supervisor  will  have  the  power  and  responsibility  to 
take the decision.   
This is a significant development in the regulatory framework, giving the consolidated supervisor the 
possibility to take decisions with an impact that reaches outside the national jurisdiction.  I am aware 
that  the  European  Banking  Federation  believes  that  full  consolidated  supervision  should  be 
determined  now  as  the  ultimate  objective  for  the  EU  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  but  I 
believe that we have to approach this carefully, and see how the new provisions work in practice in 
this more restricted area.   
I also think that it is important to recognise and respect the legitimate concerns of host supervisors.  
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  banking  systems  of  some  of  the  new  EU  member  states  are 
predominantly made up of incoming institutions.  We should ensure that host supervisors are able to 
access sufficient information on the institutions operating locally and, where necessary, in relation to 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 3
the wider group.  The capital requirements directive also includes provisions in this respect and notes 
the need to take account of the significance of the institution in local markets.   
Looking  at  the  wider  prudential  framework  let  me  mention  two  specific  areas  where  the  European 
Commission is currently reviewing the existing EU regulation. 
The first area relates to deposit guarantee schemes.  Although the deposit guarantee directive of 1994 
was  useful  in  setting  common  minimum  requirements  for  national  schemes,  the  current  level  of 
harmonisation is low, with different levels of protection and different structures in place across the EU.  
This is not only inefficient but may hinder further integration.  As many of you will already be aware, 
the  European  Commission  is  currently  undertaking  a  wide-ranging  review  of  Deposit  insurance 
arrangements, and I would encourage it to be ambitious in this respect. 
The second relates to the work being carried out by the Commission with the aim of ensuring that EU 
financial services legislation and supervisory practices do not pose barriers to cross-border mergers 
and  acquisitions.    Consolidation  processes  should  be  market-driven  phenomena  that  respond  to 
market needs, such as economies of scale, IT synergies, the benefits of diversification, access to a 
larger client base, etc. I think that supervisors do have a crucial but limited role to play in fulfilling their 
responsibility  to  ensure  that  banks  are  not  taken  over  by  shareholders  that  are  not  suitable  on 
prudential grounds.  But this is as far as we should go.  
The Supervisory framework 
Let me now turn to the supervisory framework.    
I believe that we need to think in terms of a European system of banking supervision.  I am not talking 
about a single European supervisory authority.  I don’t think the time has come for this, either at a 
conceptual  or  practical  level.    But  rather,  I  think  that  we  need  to  develop  the  existing  institutional 
system for European banking supervision in order to ensure that all of the possibilities for co-operation 
and convergence are fully taken advantage of.  The main policy objective at this stage should be to 
enhance  cross-border  supervisory  co-operation  in  order  for  supervisory  action  to  be  perceived  as 
unified.  
This system should be built on four levels. 
At  the  first  level,  we  have  the  competent  supervisor  of  each  banking  institution  (whether  this  is  the 
home or host supervisor in the context of the group), which will have to fulfil its responsibilities and 
accountabilities,  on  the  basis  of  the  powers  and  obligations  it  has  been  given  by  the  national 
parliament and legislators. 
The second  level  consists  of  bilateral co-operation  between  the supervisors  of  internationally  active 
institutions.    This  has  long  been  the  bedrock  of  effective  supervision  in  the  context  of  increasing 
internationalisation, and will continue to be essential in the future. 
Multilateral  co-operation  forms  the  basis  of  the  third  level.    This  is  an  aspect  that  has  become 
progressively more significant in recent times, and which will grow in importance in the coming years.  
Both bilateral and multilateral arrangements will be increasingly necessary in the context of Basel II, 
where, as we have already discussed, the consolidated supervisor will be responsible for co-ordinating 
the supervisory process in relation to assessing applications to use the advanced approaches.   
So far, I have been talking about what I refer to as “vertical” co-operation, in the sense it addresses the 
relationship between home and host supervisors in relation to specific institutions and groups.     
But there is also a horizontal aspect that will be crucial for the future.  This is supervisory convergence 
- the fourth level.  Greater consistency in supervision is essential in promoting consistent approaches 
across borders, and thereby a level playing field.  My view is that without convergence of supervisory 
practices  across  the  EU,  the  consolidated  or  lead  supervision  model  seems  likely  only  to  lead  to 
fragmentation, with different groups being supervised in potentially inconsistent ways.   
This  is  why  the  work  of  the  new  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors,  or  CEBS,  is  so 
important.    This  is  the  first  time  that  the  EU  has  had  a  committee  that  is  formally  charged  with 
promoting  co-operation  between  supervisors  and  convergence  in  supervisory  practices.    Danièle 
Nouy, who will speak shortly from her perspective as Vice-Chair of CEBS, is, of course, much better 
placed than me to talk about the work of this committee.  But I think that CEBS has already made 
excellent headway, and will undoubtedly be the driver of progress in the future.  And I’m sure that the 
industry will keep up the pressure to ensure that this is the case. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2005
I believe that we need to combine these four vertical and horizontal aspects – together with enhanced 
supervisory transparency at all levels – in order to have the most effective and efficient system.   
Conclusion 
In concluding my intervention today, I would be the first to admit that the ideas I have mentioned today 
are not revolutionary, but I believe that an evolutionary and balanced approach is the best way forward 
and provides the greatest chances of success. The flip-side of the coin in this evolutionary approach is 
that  the  responsibility  to  deliver  is  greater.  But  if  we  do  not  succeed  in  meeting  our  objectives,  we 
should not be afraid to explore other, more radical solutions. The costs of non integration is too high. 
I  would  also  like  to  re-emphasise  that  we  have  the  possibility  to  make  rapid  and  real  progress  in 
promoting an effective and efficient framework for European banking supervision. This should not only 
help us to achieve our goals within the EU, but could also promote greater convergence beyond the 
EU. 
Allow me to put my Basel hat on for a couple of final comments on related challenges of the Basel 
Committee.    At  a  more  global  level,  we  face  the  same  consistency  issue  in  the  implementation  of 
Basel  II,  and  as  I  said,  in  this  case,  Europe  can  lead  this  process,  we  in  Europe  have  more 
instruments to do it, and the example can be very helpful for the Basel process.  This is the first and 
most important challenge of the Basel Committee in the next few years. As part of this process we will 
adhere to the published schedule for our fifth quantitative impact study. And I believe that we already 
have the tools at our disposal to deal with any issues that arise from the QIS5 exercise, or that arise 
during this period of implementation.   
To be sure, a key element is not to add further details to Basel II, but rather to focus on achieving a 
quality implementation of the new Framework. Therefore, I do not anticipate any significant change to 
the Framework during the period bankers and regulators are tackling initial implementation challenges.  
But  the  main  challenge  is  the  cross  border  home  host  cooperation.  On  this  point  I  would  not 
underestimate the work and efforts that supervisors are devoting to this issue. One final related point. 
The staggered implementation, specially the timetable differences with EEUU raises transitional cross-
border  issues  that  will  need  to  be  managed  through  greater  collaboration  between  the  EU  and  US 
supervisors, but I can assure you that both sides are even more committed to this than before, and 
that our efforts will be redoubled in this respect.  Ultimately, I hope that this commitment and effort will 
promote even more effective implementation. 
A second related challenge is to enhance the cooperation with non-G10 supervisors. This has been 
one of the Committee’s priorities and  many significant steps have been taken and will be taken to 
improve the ownership of the standards and inclusiveness of the processes. 
For  example,  the  Committee  has  a  long-standing  working  group  that  includes  representatives  from 
sixteen non-member countries, and we have increased our interaction with this working group. This 
past July, the Committee met in joint session with this working group in Krakow, Poland to discuss, 
among other things, Basel II implementation issues.  
In addition, we encouraged non-G10 supervisory participation on working groups that are addressing 
issues  related  to  validation  and  operational  risk.  I  believe  that  this  dialogue  will,  over  time,  foster 
greater  consistency  among  Committee  and  non-Committee  members.  The  Committee  is  therefore 
committed to heightening this dialogue and will consider further ways to promote consistency. 
I  noticed  a  quote  on  the  cover  page  of  the  FBE’s  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  Green 
Paper  on  Financial  Services  Policy:  “time  passes  quickly,  we  can  not  save  it  or  buy  it,  but  we  can 
make it work and be fruitful”.  In the context of this speech I hope that you feel the past 20 minutes 
have passed quickly, have worked and been fruitful, and I wish you successful discussions for the rest 
of the day. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 84/2005 
 5
