Sir Andrew Large: Financial stability - managing liquidity risk in a global 
system 
Speech  by  Sir  Andrew  Large,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Fourteenth  City  of 
London Central Banking and Regulatory Conference, London, 28 November 2005. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Much  is  written  today  about  the  search  for  yield.  Much  is  said  about  the  factors  that  underlie  it: 
accommodative  monetary  policy;  savings  gluts;  and  financial  engineering  which  multiplies  the 
opportunities for increasing leverage. And much, too, is said about new instruments, such as those 
involving credit risk transfer, or new players, such as hedge funds, that trade them. 
However, my main concern today is not with the search for yield as such, nor with market innovations 
or new players. Rather, it is with the financial vulnerabilities to which they could give rise, and what 
can be done to mitigate those vulnerabilities. 
Because it seems to me that the search for yield also highlights some less benign aspects of today’s 
financial  system:  the  opacity  of  markets  in  some  new  instruments;  the  difficulty  of  knowing  the  real 
value  of  assets  and  contracts;  reliance  on  models  that  have  not  been  tested  in  the  full  range  of 
economic  conditions;  the  uncertainties  over  behaviour  of  new  participants  in  the  markets  should 
events  turn  adverse;  and  the  difficulty  we  have  in  judging  just  how  deep  markets  will  prove  to  be 
should a substantial number of investors decide simultaneously to try to realise their investments. 
On  a  more  practical  level,  there  is  no  lack  of  evidence  that  things  can  and  do  go  wrong.  We  have 
recently  seen  lack  of  operational  discipline  in  some  financial  markets  leading  to  documentation 
backlogs and to uncertainty over the enforceability of transfer of risks. We see more relaxed lending 
criteria in the LBO market, increased reliance on potentially illiquid instruments in trading strategies, 
and questionable quality of some IPO’s. We have seen specific examples of significant downgrades or 
outright failures such as GM/Ford, AHBR and, more recently, Refco and Delphi.  
One reaction to these episodes is that they show the market doing its work and are testimony to the 
effectiveness of market discipline. The fact that the financial system has coped with these problems 
may well also be testimony to the strengths of that system.  
On the other hand, might not these episodes be a potential sign that all is not well? The question is: 
are  vulnerabilities  mounting,  and  will  they  one  day  crystallise  when  a  bigger  shock  arrives  that  the 
market simply cannot absorb? 
The fact is, we just don’t know. And that is why we need to be particularly vigilant. 
Such  questions  lead  me  to  think  about  issues  relating  to  liquidity.  If  a  period  of  market  stress 
materialises, triggered by a sharp snap back in prices, it is critical that the financial system should be 
able to meet a temporary increase in the demand for cash without precipitating, in the vernacular, a 
‘market meltdown’. Liquidity is therefore the focus of my remarks today. By liquidity I mean two things. 
First, institutional liquidity: the continued ability of individual financial institutions to meet claims as they 
fall  due.  And  second,  market  liquidity:  the  depth  of  markets  for  the  sale  or  loan  of  assets  or  the 
hedging of the risks that underlie those assets. 
To set the scene, it is perhaps worth reflecting on how liquidity needs and processes may amplify the 
risks of instability—that is, their ability, in stressed conditions, to disrupt the functioning of the financial 
system generally, and the banking and payment systems specifically.  
The traditional route arises from the banking system’s role in maturity transformation between short 
term  deposits  and  long  term  loans.  Managing  this  mismatch  whilst  maintaining  the  confidence  of 
depositors is the essence of the business of banking. However, the presence of this maturity mismatch 
means  that  individual  banks  are  by  their  nature  fragile.  The  connections  between  banks,  and  the 
potential for doubts about one bank to spread to others, mean that the failure of one bank to manage 
its mismatch can potentially put at risk the financial system more widely. Bagehot in 1873 summed up 
this link between maturity mismatch and systemic risk: 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 1
 ‘Of the many millions in Lombard Street, infinitely the greater proportion is held 
by bankers or others on short notice or on demand; that is to say, the owners 
could ask for it all any day they please: in a panic some of them do ask for 
some of it. If any large fraction of that money really was demanded, our banking 
system and our industrial system would be in great danger.’ 
In Bagehot’s time, the role of the Bank of England was to act as guardian of the reserve of bullion that 
underpinned the credibility of the whole banking system. The technology may have changed, but in 
essence the role of the Bank today is one that Bagehot would recognize. Central bank money is the 
ultimate  settlement  asset.  And  banks  still  demonstrate  their  ability  to  meet  depositors’  demands  for 
repayment by holding a sufficient stock of high quality securities against which central banks—and in 
normal circumstances the markets—will lend. Confidence in the modern financial system is therefore 
underpinned by the preparedness of central banks to lend against such high quality security without 
question. 
Central banks have, therefore, a keen interest in developments that affect the demand for and supply 
of liquidity. It is not surprising that they try to limit the likelihood of events that might lead to excessive 
increases  in  demand  for  liquidity  or  constraints  on  its  supply,  and  also  try  to  have  in  place  the 
operational apparatus to respond to such developments, if felt necessary, at minimum cost. 
The  traditional  sources  of  liquidity  risk  for  banks  are  unusually  heavy  demands  from  depositors  for 
repayment  and  from  their  customers  to  draw  down  pre-committed  funding.  Today’s  environment 
encourages  us  also  to  recognise  disruption  to  markets  as  a  potential  trigger  for  such  extraordinary 
demand. If you think about the expansion of markets in which banks participate, both as principals and 
as intermediaries, and the fact that at times of stress investors would be likely to place a premium on 
“safe” assets and ultimately on cash, then it soon gets you back to thinking about the robustness of 
arrangements that enable banks to satisfy unexpected spikes in cash demand, perhaps in unexpected 
locations. Markets rely on this in order for them to function with confidence. 
How has the world changed? 
2. 
I  said  that  Bagehot  would  recognise  the  modern  role  of  central  banks.  However,  the  firms  that 
comprise  the  financial  system  are  much  altered  since  his  day.  So  I  should  like  to  make  a  few 
observations both about how this has affected firms’ own liquidity management, and crucially how the 
public authorities might react. 
Firstly, concentration in the global financial system has increased, with a relatively small number of 
global  firms—banks  and  non-banks—representing  a  significant  fraction  of  the  system.  These  firms 
often  employ  centralized  liquidity  management.  And  they  are  increasingly  strongly  interconnected, 
within and across borders, and via new markets for risk transfer as well as more traditional channels. 
Participation  in  risk  transfer  markets  does  more  than  just  create  new  links  between  firms:  it  also 
creates a new potential demand on firms’ liquidity in the form of margin calls. Moreover, this additional 
demand  may  be  positively  correlated  with  other  liquidity  risk  that  firms  face  in  the  event  of  market 
stress. 
Secondly, there are certain features of the prevailing financial and economic environment that give us 
pause for thought. Market prices are at historically unusual levels: real and nominal returns on risk free 
assets are low and credit spreads are tight, both in traditional and structured products. It is of course 
hard  to  say  definitively  the  extent  to  which  today’s  markets  are  merely  reflecting  changed 
fundamentals. But it is quite possible that some investors have unwittingly taken on higher levels of 
risk in pursuit of what they would consider to be “normal” levels of return. And it is certainly prudent to 
plan for the possibility of a sharp reversion of prices to historically more normal levels (or even beyond 
them,  given  the  tendency  of  markets  to  overshoot).  There  could  be  a  period  of  impaired  market 
liquidity  during  any  such  correction.  One  could  imagine  a  number  of  potential  catalysts  for  such  a 
correction, ranging from a geo-political event to some form of major operational disruption. 
The  Bank  concurs  with  the  widely  held  view  that  the  growth  of  markets  in  risk  transfer  should 
contribute to greater financial stability, by allowing a more efficient dispersion of risks. But the depth 
and reliability of the more recently developed markets in risk under stressed conditions has not yet 
been fully tested. Moreover, risk transfer markets can, and probably at present do make the ultimate 
destination of risks more opaque. This hampers our ability to assess the overall stability of the financial 
system, and, potentially, to react effectively in a crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2005
How have firms reacted to these changes? 
3. 
The banking industry has, not surprisingly, responded to these changes by paying greater attention to 
liquidity  risk  management.  And,  as  well  as  day-to-day  management,  banks  have  given  more 
consideration to how they would cope with extreme or ‘tail’ events.  
Banks have developed, or are at least in the process of developing, sophisticated scenario analyses, 
and  are  assessing  the  contingency  arrangements  that  would  be  required  to  respond  to  these 
scenarios.  It  is  certainly  encouraging  to  observe  the  determination  with  which  many  banks  are 
addressing liquidity risk, and it is at the same time noteworthy how efficiency drivers have led many 
banking groups to take a more centralised approach to liquidity management.  
But,  despite  the  progress  that  banks  are  making  in  addressing  liquidity  risk,  the  framework  that 
underpins their contingency plans makes a number of assumptions, particularly regarding access to 
funding markets. There seems, for example, to be a widespread view that, whatever has happened to 
a  firm’s  access  to  wholesale  unsecured  funding,  it  will  be  able  to  borrow  secured  against  good 
collateral.  Lying  behind  this  is  probably  an  expectation  that  national  authorities,  and  in  particular 
central banks, will be ready to provide liquidity against good collateral in the event of the failure of one 
or more of the markets for secured borrowing.  
Banks are also giving greater thought to the impact of an extreme event on the value of collateral and 
the proportion of that value that can be borrowed, as well as the sale value of any assets that they 
might  consider  liquidating.  The  assumptions  here  might  prove  to  be  optimistic  particularly  in 
circumstances  such  as  those  seen  in  1998,  when  extreme  events  led  to  one-way  markets  and  a 
vicious circle in which asset price falls did not lead to increased demand but rather to further increases 
in supply. It is for reasons such as these that the contingency planning that firms put in place needs to 
be sufficient. 
Banks  have  also  placed  increased  emphasis  on  identifying  potential  sources  of  liquidity  shocks. 
Products  which  entail  the  posting  of  margin,  such  as  derivatives,  can  result  in  significant  calls  on 
liquidity. 
Policy responses 
4. 
So what gaps does this leave, and what policy responses are therefore needed on top of firms’ own 
actions? There is scope for further work by the private sector on improving liquidity risk management. 
But there are also a number of issues for public authorities to address. 
The preparations that firms make are influenced by regulation. When balancing the costs and benefits 
of measures to mitigate risk, banks naturally have regard to the interests of their own shareholders. 
But  one  of  the  roles  of,  and  indeed  justifications  for,  regulation  is  to  ensure  that  firms  also  take 
sufficient account of the interests of others who would be adversely affected by their failure: their own 
borrowers and depositors, for example, but also the customers of other banks that would suffer losses 
if a particular bank were to get into difficulties. In other words, one purpose of regulation is to align 
private choices with public welfare maximisation. 
Hitherto, public authorities have placed much emphasis on capital requirements as a way of achieving 
this reconciliation. Indeed, one reason for imposing capital requirements is to limit the risk of liquidity 
problems, by giving the market a level of assurance over the solvency of a firm. But this emphasis on 
capital has perhaps overshadowed the importance of direct liquidity requirements. Analytically, liquidity 
is a more difficult area. But arguably the case for prudential liquidity requirements in some form is just 
as strong as for capital. Liquidity cushions are a first line of defence: in times of stress they can buy 
time,  and  where  organisations  are  solvent  they  can  help  to  prevent  liquidity  problems  turning  into 
solvency ones. I will return to this later. 
But besides regulation, the public authorities—specifically central banks—have a crucial role as the 
ultimate providers of liquidity. They therefore need to ensure that they are properly equipped to carry 
out this function. 
Avoiding or resolving liquidity problems is not just a matter of ensuring adequate aggregate liquidity; it 
also means ensuring that liquidity can be, and is, distributed effectively round the system. This was 
illustrated  by  the  events  of  9/11,  when  the  US  money  market  was  temporarily  unable  to  distribute 
liquidity  to  the  banks  that  needed  it.  On  that  occasion,  for  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  injected 
considerable liquidity,  more  than  $100bn,  via  a combination  of  daylight  overdrafts,  discount  window 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 3
lending, and general market support. 9/11 also highlighted the importance of central banks being able 
to lend directly to solvent institutions facing a liquidity crisis. Under stressed conditions, and with the 
associated uncertainties, attempts by a perfectly sound bank to borrow unusually large amounts from 
the  market,  even  against  good  quality  collateral,  have  the  potential  to  raise,  or  exacerbate,  doubts 
about that bank’s solvency. But a solvent bank that is in need of liquidity can safely reveal its need to 
the central bank without precipitating a crisis in market confidence; uniquely, the latter is not at risk of 
experiencing a run, and so will not overreact in an effort to protect its own balance sheet. 
In  many  countries  ‘automatic’  direct  liquidity  provision  against  pre-defined  acceptable  collateral  is 
hard-wired  into  the  operational  framework  for  monetary  policy  implementation  through  so-called 
‘standing facilities’. In the UK we are broadening the range of firms to whom we can supply liquidity in 
this  way.  This  implements  Bagehot’s  prescription  for  mitigating  systemic  risk,  that  the  central  bank 
should  as  far  as  possible  make  clear  in  advance  its  preparedness  to  provide  liquidity  in  stressed 
conditions. Referring to the central bank, he puts it thus: 
 ‘The holders of the cash reserve must be ready not only to keep it for their own 
liabilities, but to advance it most freely for the liabilities of others. They must 
lend to merchants, to minor bankers, to “this man and that man”, whenever the 
security is good.’ 
The picture becomes more complex in the case of global firms that manage liquidity centrally. Such 
firms have liquidity needs in multiple currencies and locations. They may find it costly to hold enough 
liquid assets in every market in which they operate, and hence potentially face a mismatch between 
the location of their liquidity needs and that of their liquid assets.  
In  response  to  this  several  central  banks,  notably  those  in  Switzerland,  Sweden,  the  UK,  and  the 
United  States,  have  taken  steps  to  allow  the  cross-border  use  of  collateral  in  some  or  all  of  their 
routine  lending  activities.  Others  have  taken  the  alternative  route  of  attempting  to  reduce  collateral 
costs for banks, and hence relax potential constraints, by accepting a range of less liquid and non-
marketable  assets,  while  still  controlling  the  credit  quality  of  the  assets  involved.  For  example,  the 
Eurosystem  accepts  a  wide  range  of  non-sovereign  debt  securities,  including  corporate  bonds  and 
asset-backed securities. The European Central Bank’s proposed ‘Single List’ will also include certain 
bank  loans;  indeed  these  are  already  eligible  in  some  member  countries.  Similarly,  the  Fed  has 
broadened the range of collateral accepted at the Discount Window. 
A working group commissioned by the Basel-based CPSS (Committee on Payment and Settlement 
Systems)  in  2004  has  examined  whether  existing  arrangements  would  prove  adequate  in  an 
emergency. It would appear that some of the infrastructure required to facilitate more extensive cross-
border use of collateral is already in place: links between securities settlement systems, for example. 
Nevertheless, central banks may need to put in place more cooperative and coordinated policies, such 
as the establishment of a framework for information-sharing. 
When  risks  do  crystallise  it  is  imperative  that  central  banks,  along  with  regulators  and  ministries  of 
finance, are well prepared so that they are able to respond in an effective manner. The CPSS working 
group  looked  at  preparations  that  are  needed  in  order  to  be  able  to  make  effective  use  of  existing 
infrastructure in a crisis. But it is equally important that central banks and regulators be in a position to 
make  the  decisions  necessary  for  resolution  of  a  crisis,  both  individually  and,  when  needed, 
collectively. 
This entails gathering data and intelligence on firms and markets, sharing it appropriately amongst all 
relevant  public  authorities,  understanding  the  systemic  conjuncture,  and  setting  up  national  and 
international  frameworks  for  coordination  of  decision  making.  I  could  give  an  entire  speech  about 
questions  in  these  areas,  and  current  and  potential  initiatives  to  address  them1.  However,  today  I 
would like to return instead to the subject of liquidity regulation. 
                                                      
1 One important pre-requisite is that the authorities have access to up-to-date and accurate information about financial firms, on 
which they can base shared assessments of the position of individual firms and the likelihood of a crisis affecting the financial 
system as a whole. The information needed includes, inter alia, a firm’s group structure, capital, liquidity asset holdings, large 
exposures, and its involvement in markets and in payment, clearing and settlement systems. This information can be collectively 
thought  of  as  a  ‘Fact Book’  on  a  firm.  In  some  countries  much  of  this  information  is  already  available.  The  FSA  recently 
published a paper outlining the information that the UK authorities collectively deem it necessary to have in a financial crisis, and 
asking for firms’ cooperation in making available a limited amount of additional information that is not already collected on a 
routine basis.  
4 
 BIS Review 79/2005
The potential willingness of the authorities to supply discretionary—as opposed to routine—liquidity in 
a  crisis  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  moral  hazard,  because  in  the  real  world,  faced  with  incomplete 
information,  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  identify  ex  ante  a  ‘pure’  liquidity  crisis.  By,  for  example, 
relaxing normal criteria on collateral quality authorities may move from the injection of liquidity to what 
is effectively the provision of risk capital. Firms may then be inclined to tailor their risk-taking to their 
own assessment of the probability of intervention, while at the same time the incentive for firms to hold 
adequate buffers of liquid assets is likely to be reduced. The gap between the amount of liquidity that 
a firm will choose to hold, and the optimal public choice will then widen. It is not surprising, then, that in 
most jurisdictions firms’ liquidity management is subject to standards imposed by regulation. 
Intervening in this way requires that the authorities be able to answer some difficult questions. There is 
the question of calibration: how much liquidity is ‘enough’ for any given firm? In other words, what is 
the optimal public choice of liquidity buffer? And for how long should a firm be expected to be able to 
survive without outside help? This is a much more difficult question for liquidity buffers than for capital, 
as  in  the  case  of  liquidity  it  is  not  sufficient  merely  to  analyse  the  structure  of  a  firm’s  assets  and 
liabilities.  The  firm  also  has  to  take  account  of  the  possible  ways  in  which  its  counterparties  and 
creditors may behave in a crisis. Moreover, in a liquidity crisis, there is feedback from the actions that 
a  firm  takes  to  meet  liquidity  needs—selling  assets  for  example—to  the  market’s  perception  of  its 
solvency and hence to the size of those very liquidity needs. Furthermore, it is arguable that buffers 
should vary to some extent with the level of risk that a firm brings to the financial system. Firms that, 
for example, are relatively large or opaque, or have more extensive connections to other parts of the 
financial system might be expected to meet higher standards under such a regime. 
The impact of liquidity standards on a firm’s relationship with its central bank, both in normal times and 
in crisis, also has to be considered. In many countries, the UK included, firms need to obtain central 
bank money in order to make payments to other banks in the real time gross settlement system and to 
settle  delivery  versus  payment  securities  transactions.  The  ability  to  obtain  central  bank  money—
liquidity—depends at all times on having access to sufficient quantities of high quality collateral. And 
such  collateral  is  of  course  amongst  the  best  forms  of  insurance  against  liquidity  problems.  So  the 
extent to which prudential liquidity standards require firms to hold collateral, and the precise way in 
such  requirements  are  calibrated,  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  economics  of  their  participation  in 
payment systems and in central bank operations to implement monetary policy. 
The  structural  and  conjunctural  developments  that  I  described  earlier  are  most  material  to  these 
questions.  On  calibration,  for  example,  greater  inter-linkages  between  firms  mean  that  the  external 
costs of failure—the costs that are not borne by the firm itself and are therefore unlikely to be taken 
into  account  in  its  own  planning—are  greater.  If  markets  on  which  firms  now  rely  for  some  of  their 
                                                                                                                                                                      
We also obtain a great deal of additional information in the course of our own market operations, through our involvement in 
payment systems and other infrastructure, through our counterparties and contacts, and in other ways. Intelligence of this sort 
allows us to understand the environment—the products, techniques, and markets—in which firms operate and how they and the 
markets in which they trade may behave in times of stress. It therefore supports analysis of how stress might spread and how 
the authorities can most effectively respond; and it helps to identify the appropriate channels for communicating this response. 
But  analysis  from  intelligence  can  also  provide  early  warning  of  symptoms  of  actual  or  incipient  stress;  for  example,  a  high 
degree of leverage coupled with crowded trades in markets that can be illiquid. 
The authorities then have time, where appropriate, to publicise any concerns so that firms can take action to prevent the risks 
from crystallising, and factor them into stress tests and scenario analysis. We provide such analysis regularly in our Financial 
Stability Review. And were a crisis to develop, an understanding  of the ‘systemic conjuncture’ is also required to enable the 
authorities to assess on a continuing basis the likely systemic impact, and to choose an appropriate policy response.  
As well as information exchange, strong co-ordination of decision making between central banks, regulators, and ministries of 
finance, is likely to be essential for effective crisis management. This is true both at a domestic and an international level. A first 
step is for the relevant national authorities to have clear, well established, processes for decision making and for communicating 
externally, and to ensure that these processes are well understood by all parties. In the UK, HMT, the Bank and the FSA have a 
published Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), established in 1997, which sets out a high-level framework for co-operation in 
the field of financial stability. 
Although there is no such agreement at an international level at an equivalent level of detail, a ‘Memorandum of Understanding 
on co-operation  between banking regulators, central banks, and finance ministries of the European Union in  Financial Crisis 
Situations’ was signed earlier this year. It is fair to say, however, that this represents only a first step. 
Finally, if the authorities decide to take measures to mitigate the systemic impact of a crisis—for example through emergency 
liquidity injection of one sort or another—it is vital that the central bank, supervisor and ministry of finance act, and are seen to 
act,  in  a  decisive  and  joined  up  way.  In  the  UK,  the  MOU  provides  for  strategic  management  of  a  crisis  at  meetings  of  a 
‘Standing Committee’, the members of which are senior representatives of HMT (who chair the meetings), the Bank, and the 
FSA. 
BIS Review 79/2005 
 5
liquidity  became  fragile,  then,  all  else  being  equal,  firms  would  be  more  vulnerable  to  liquidity 
problems. 
This  argues  for  the  authorities  in  all  jurisdictions  to  review  whether  the  liquidity  standards  that  they 
currently impose are still appropriate, given the nature of firms and their activities. But globalization 
also means that there is a case to look again at consistency of liquidity standards across jurisdictions. 
As  central  banks  or  regulators  we  are  each  seeking  to  achieve  a  high  level  of  soundness  in  our 
respective  financial  systems.  But  the  soundness  of  any  of  the  global  firms  that  are  a  major  part  of 
those systems is a function of the standards imposed on the group and its major subsidiaries in many 
jurisdictions. 
None  of  this  necessarily  argues  for  full  harmonization  of  liquidity  standards  in  the  way  that  capital 
standards  have  been  harmonized.  But  each  jurisdiction  inevitably  relies  to  a  degree  on  liquidity 
standards  imposed  elsewhere  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  potentially  systemically  significant  firms. 
Central banks and regulators need at least, therefore, to come to a common understanding of what 
they  are  individually  seeking  to  achieve  with  liquidity  regulation.  Are  we,  for  example,  seeking  with 
such regulation to limit the likelihood of crisis, or the impact of a crisis should one arise, or both? What 
sort of liquidity problems are envisaged in the regulation? Most importantly, we should seek a common 
understanding of the dividing line between ex ante insurance, and ex post resolution. 
Conclusion 
5. 
This  is  my  last  Financial  Stability  speech  as  Deputy  Governor  and  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with 
several thoughts. 
First, I can’t help feeling that it is at times such as this, when we have a relatively benign environment, 
that we should seek to address difficult and contentious issues of the kind I have been discussing. It is 
certainly  true  that  the  risk  transfer  markets  and  the  financial  system  have  coped,  with  remarkable 
success, and with few signs of instability, with the various events and shocks in recent years. But we 
need  to  be  sure  that  we are not complacent  in  placing  trust  in  the  ability  of  the  financial system  to 
continue to absorb shocks smoothly. 
Second, policy makers have found it hard to discuss lender of last resort issues because they can so 
quickly  raise  the  spectre  of  moral  hazard:  by  giving  too  many  clues  to  their  likely  response  to 
instability, policy makers fear undermining market discipline and so making crises more likely. Equally, 
public  policy  makers  should  recognise  the  distinction  between  clarity  about  processes—where 
transparency to my mind can only be positive for confidence—and transparency about how decisions 
might  be  reached  in  a  particular  case,  where  constructive  ambiguity  remains  important  as  a 
mechanism  to  reinforce  market  discipline.  On  the  other  side  of  the  fence,  banks  and  financial 
institutions have made impressive strides in coping with these realities, but may be reluctant to move 
explicitly  to  transparent  best  practice  standards.  Maybe  this  is  for  fear  of  giving  up  competitive 
advantage, or maybe it is a fear that regulators might seek to impose unwelcome prescription in how 
they manage liquidity risks.  
Third,  my  message  today  is  that  both  public  and  private  sectors  would  be  wise  to  overcome  these 
inhibitions in the interest of developing mechanisms for providing liquidity in a manner that is fit for 
purpose in today’s globalised world, and recognises the new environment and systemic conjuncture. 
In  the  case  of  private  entities,  they,  to  my  mind,  could  show  greater  enthusiasm  and  leadership  in 
coming up with sets of best practice standards, in the knowledge that failure in one institution could be 
severely damaging for others.  
I  say  this  in  the  knowledge  that,  in  the  case  of  the  public  authorities,  debate on  all  these  issues  is 
rising  rapidly  up  the  agenda,  not  just  in  London  where  the  FSA  and  ourselves  have  a  shared 
responsibility,  but  in  other  major  financial  centres  as  well.  Progress  on  understanding  all  of  these 
difficult  issues  can  be  made  through  ongoing  informal  dialogue  amongst  the  central  banks  and 
regulators that are most concerned with our largest financial institutions. I am encouraged that there 
are a number of informal groups who are undertaking work in this area. These feed into official groups 
such  as  the Financial  Stability  Forum  where  the  vital  connection  between  the public  and  private 
sector can be made. 
These are stimulating and fascinating issues, and I confidently expect them to occupy people’s minds 
for many years to come. 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2005
