David Dodge: Monetary policy report 
Speech  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor of  the  Bank of  Canada, at  a  press conference  following  the 
release of the Monetary policy report, Ottawa, 20 October 2005.  
 This morning, we released our October Monetary Policy Report. In the report, we said that the global 
and Canadian economies have continued to grow at a solid pace, and our economy now appears to 
be  operating  at  full  production  capacity.  Past  and  recent  movements  in  energy  prices  and  in  the 
exchange rate for the Canadian dollar, along with competitive pressures from China and other newly 
industrialized economies, are giving rise to significant ongoing adjustments in the Canadian economy. 
Given  these  adjustments  and  the  slow  growth  of  productivity  in  recent  years,  the  Bank  has  slightly 
reduced its estimate of potential output growth for 2005 and 2006. 
The  Bank  projects  that  the  economy  will  grow  in  line  with  production  potential  through  2007,  with 
growth averaging 2.8 per cent this year, 2.9 per cent in 2006, and 3.0 per cent in 2007.  
With the economy operating at capacity and with higher energy prices, pressures on consumer prices 
are  somewhat  stronger  than  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update. 
Assuming energy prices evolve in line with currently prevailing futures prices, CPI inflation is projected 
to average near 3 per cent through the middle of 2006, before returning to the 2 per cent target in the 
second half of next year. Core inflation should remain below 2 per cent in coming months, returning to 
2 per cent by mid-2006. 
The Bank raised its key policy interest rate to 3 per cent on 18 October. In line with our outlook, some 
further  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  will  be  required  to  maintain  a  balance  between  aggregate 
supply and demand over the next four to six quarters, and to keep inflation on target. Short-term risks 
to  this  projection  appear  to  be  balanced.  But  as  we  look  further  out  to  2007  and  beyond,  we  see 
increasing  risks  that  the  unwinding  of  global  economic  imbalances  could  involve  a  period  of  weak 
world economic growth.  
The Bank will continue to assess the adjustments and underlying trends in the Canadian economy, as 
well as the balance of risks, as it conducts monetary policy to keep inflation on target over the medium 
term. 
 
   1/1 
