Ishrat Husain: Pakistan’s development challenges for the coming decade: how 
can overseas Pakistanis help? 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Pakistani 
Professionals Forum, Toronto, Canada, 1 October 2005. 
 Let  me  thank  the  Pakistani  Professionals  Forum  of  Canada  for  inviting  me  to  address  this  august 
gathering. It is indeed a privilege and honour to be present here this evening and interact with such a 
istinguished audience. The topic which I would like to address today s: How the overseas Pakistanis 
can help Pakistan’s development challenges in the coming decade. 
Pakistan  has  been  able  to  turn  around  its  economy  during  the  last  six  years  from  a  situation  of 
imminent default in the late 1990s to the current status of a dynamic, vibrant emerging economy - one 
of  the  fastest  growing  in  Asia.  Pakistan  has  successfully  re-established  its  access  to  international 
capital  markets  and  its  sovereign  bond  is  trading at  a  price  that is  not  enjoyed  even  by  investment 
grade countries. We have voluntarily said good-bye to the International Monetary Fund as the country 
has regained its economic sovereignty. 
Unlike  the  popular  notion  that  the  September  11  has  benefited  the  economy,  the  fact  is  that 
dependence on foreign assistance has been reduced to the extent that it is now less than 10 percent 
of the entire foreign exchange earnings. The external debt ratio – one of the main indicators of the 
country’s  dependence  on  the  others  –  has  sharply  declined  from  over  50  percent  to  30  percent  of 
GDP.  More  importantly,  despite  all  the  various  shocks,  such  as  the  recent  oil  price  shock,  the 
economy has remained resilient and has withstood these difficult times without any serious disruption 
to  the  market  stability.  The  abolition  of  quotas  on  textile  exports  under  the  WTO  regime  and  the 
withdrawal of preferential tariff arrangements by the European Union have not adversely affected our 
textile industry. 
Pakistan’s  share  in  the  highly  competitive  world  export  market  has  in  fact  risen  during  the  last  few 
years. In a survey of doing business in 150 countries around the world carried out by the World Bank 
this year, Pakistan has clearly emerged as one of the top ten reformers in the world. Its ranking in 
order  of  an  enabling  business  environment  was  60  compared  to  116  for  India.  This  shows  that  we 
have come a long way from a highly bureaucratic, controlled and regulated economy to a market and 
business friendly, liberal and deregulated private sector oriented economy. 
But having made these impressive achievements, the road ahead of us is still arduous and torturous. 
The imperatives of globalized economy demand that we should remain agile, dynamic and capable of 
competing  with  the  rest  of  the  world  while  taking  care  that  one  third  of  Pakistan’s  population  living 
below the poverty line is uplifted. The difficulty is that our labor force is poorly trained and our social 
indicators  are  so  weak  that  we  stand  at  number  137th  in  the  country  rankings  of  the  Human 
Development  Index.  One  half  of  our  population  is  still  illiterate,  the  access  to  healthcare  is  limited, 
mortality rates of infants and women are relatively high, the enrollment and retention ratios among our 
school-going  population  are  low,  and  the  number  of  students  and  the  quality  of  our  science  and 
technical expertise are way behind other Asian countries. 
In  other  words,  we  have  many  difficult  challenges  to  tackle  before  we  can  compete  with  other 
countries  in  the  global  economy.  The  good  news  is  that  if  we  are  able  to  do  so  successfully,  the 
incidence  of  poverty  will  also  fall.  In  my  studies  of  China  and  India’s  development  in  the  recent 
decades, what struck me most was the important role played by the overseas Chinese and overseas 
Indians. We have an estimated 3 million overseas Pakistanis concentrated mainly in North America, 
Saudi  Arabia  and  the  Gulf  and  the  United  Kingdom.  We  are  extremely  grateful  to  them  for  their 
invaluable  assistance  in  the  country’s  turnaround  by  sending  their  remittances  officially  through  the 
banking channels. Had we not received this large flow of remittances every year in the past four years, 
it would have been difficult to accumulate the foreign exchange reserves to the level we have today. 
We could neither have reduced our dependence on foreign assistance nor have been in a position to 
finance our growing trade deficit. So I wish to publicly acknowledge the role of the overseas Pakistanis 
who have helped us by sending remittances to their families through the banking channels. I hope that 
this amount will continue to expand as more Pakistanis find jobs in countries such as Malaysia and 
Korea, their incomes rise in the Middle East in proportion to the rise in oil revenues and as remittances 
are diverted from informal to banking channels. 
   1/4 
This  is  only  one  of  the  examples  in  which  overseas  Pakistanis  have  made  a  very  important 
contribution. But as I address you – the Pakistani professionals settled in Canada -- I would like to 
take the opportunity of spelling out various ways in which you and other overseas Pakistanis can help 
the country in meeting the difficult challenges ahead of us. 
Most  of  the  speeches  delivered  at  gatherings  such  as  this  are  normally  at  a  highly  abstract  and 
generalized level appealing to your sense of patriotism and urging you to help the country in a vague 
manner.  But  I  wish  to  deviate  from  this  tradition  as  I  would  like  to  make  ten  specific  and  concrete 
proposals  for  your  consideration  and  through  this  forum  to  the  larger  community  of  overseas 
Pakistanis all over the world. Each proposal is targeted at a different segment of this group and you 
can  pick  and  choose  according  to  your  own  personal  preferences  and  interests.  Some  of  these 
proposals are doable in the near future but others will take some time to crystallize. The purpose of 
presenting these proposals before you is to provoke some further thinking, debate and discussion. It 
will be quite understandable that some of these ideas are rejected after thoughtful evaluation but even 
if a couple of these ideas survive and are implemented, my purpose would have been achieved. 
First, the country is faced with a shortage of skilled manpower that is in high demand for sustaining the 
growing economy. While we have hundreds of thousands of educated unemployed, we have at the 
same  time  vacancies  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  in  different  skill  categories.  We  would 
therefore like you to help fill in this gap by setting up institutions of learning for imparting vocational 
training  and  technical  and  science  education  ranging  from  universities,  colleges,  post-high  school 
institutes  to post-primary and secondary  school apprentice workshops.  The  curriculum,  content,  the 
pedagogical tools and testing methods in these institutions should be designed and delivered in such 
a manner that the employers compete with each other to hire the products of these institutions. The 
Government  is  encouraging  private-public  partnership  in  this  area  and  has  a  number  of  existing 
physical  facilities  that  can  be  used  for  this  purpose.  The  Federal  Government  has  formed  an 
independent authority for technical and vocational education and you should approach this body with 
your specific proposals.  
Second, groups of enlightened overseas Indians and Chinese have not only established institutions of 
higher learning in their countries of origin such as the Indian Business School at Hyderabad set up in 
collaboration  with  Kellog  School  at  Northwestern  University  and  Carnegie-Mellon  but  they  are  also 
helping the existing institutions of learning and healthcare. Some of you, I know, are helping Aga Khan 
University or Shaukat Khamam Hospital but we need more of such quality institutions dispersed all 
over  the  country.  We  need  them  not  only  in  Karachi,  Lahore  and  Islamabad  but  we  need  them  in 
Peshawar, Quetta, Hyderabad, Sukkur, Bahawalpur, Multan, Sialkot, Faisalabad. Those of you who 
belong to these areas owe it to your hometowns to get together and help some of these educational 
and healthcare institutions at these places acquire eminence in the delivery of these services. Your 
involvement will also help improve the governance and management structures of these institutions 
which are badly in need of reform. 
Third, many among you are highly respected researchers and innovators who are at the cutting edge 
of  their  disciplines.  We  would  like  you  to  provide  intellectual  leadership  in  designing,  organizing, 
collaborating  in  practical-oriented  scientific  research  and  applying  the  results  of  this  research  to 
enhance agriculture and industrial productivity. The link between academic research and the industry 
in Pakistan is quite weak and the billions of rupees being invested in research establishments are not 
producing the kind of benefits that are needed to boost the productivity and efficiency of our industry. 
Some  of  you  can  help  in  strengthening  these  linkages  by  applying  the  business  models  that  have 
successfully worked elsewhere. 
Fourth, the outsourcing of services in China and India was initiated by a group of overseas nationals of 
these countries working in multinational firms. They acted as the conduit and honest brokers between 
the  foreign  firms  and  the  host  country  firms  because  they  had  the  intimate  knowledge  of  the 
multinational firms’ requirements and the understanding, contacts and knowledge of the capabilities of 
the firms in their countries of origin. In many cases, they advised the recipient firms as to how to go 
about writing contracts, developing quality assurance methods, and the means for delivery on time, 
etc. 
I am sure we have a large reservoir of Pakistanis working in the multinationals and there are now well 
established  firms  in  Pakistan  who  can  cater  to  their  outsourcing  needs  according  to  international 
standards. What is missing is the link between the two and I would encourage you to work on this 
missing link even on a fairly modest scale to begin with. 
   2/4 
Fifth, as the cotton textile industry in North America and Europe is no longer competitive, there is a 
great scope for formation of joint ventures in which the local companies in Canada and the US provide 
design,  technology,  marketing,  services  while  the  actual  production  is  carried  out  in  the  low  cost 
factories of Pakistan and the final output is shipped to North America. This is a win-win situation for 
both parties as the dying textile firms in North America will be able to retain some jobs while Pakistan 
will  enhance  its  labor  intensive  exports  and  provide  employment  to  a  large  pool  of  unskilled  labor 
force.  The  management  consultancy  firms  and  investment  banks  in  which  overseas  Pakistanis  are 
serving can help identify such opportunities. 
Sixth, the organizations of overseas Pakistanis can set up scholarship funds to enable some talented 
young  Pakistanis,  who  cannot  otherwise  afford,  to  study  for  advanced  degrees  in  Science, 
Engineering  and  technology  at  the  top  elite  universities  in  North  America.  There  is  always  an 
apprehension that these scholars, if they are good, will not return to Pakistan upon completion of their 
studies.  But  there  is  no  harm  if  they  acquire  practical  experience  in  their  fields  as  today’s  world  is 
characterized  by  brain  circulation  rather  than  brain  drain.  The  attractive  prospects  in  Pakistan  will 
sooner or later take them back and this investment in human development will never be wasted. I will 
very  much  hope  that  the  organizations  of  overseas  Pakistanis  such  as  yours  will  give  a  serious 
consideration to this suggestion. 
Seventh, in this age and day, we have to play by the practices and rules of the countries we have 
chosen  as  our  new  home.  As  you  know  better  than  I  do,  think  tanks  play  an  important  role  in 
influencing public policy in Canada and the U.S. Some Pakistani businessmen have taken the lead in 
establishing Pakistan Fellowship Funds at the School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS), John 
Hopkins University and the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, D.C.. This initiative has proved 
successful as is evident from the number of seminars, conferences held and working papers, policy 
briefs, op-ed columns that have appeared on Pakistan’s development issues in the U.S. in the last two 
years.  I  suggest  that  similar  ventures  should  be  encouraged  in  other  think  tanks  in  the  U.S.  and 
Canada.  These  think  tanks  can  be  our  powerful  allies  in  influencing  opinion  makers  in  the  media, 
parliaments, academia, governments, political parties in responding to their concerns about Pakistan 
and inprojecting a realistic image of our country. 
Eighth, those among you, who are medical professionals and are also enterprising and willing to take 
risks, should consider setting up in the private sector, modern hospitals of world standards in Pakistan. 
These  hospitals  can  attract  patients  from  the  western  countries  and  the  Middle  East  for  surgical 
procedures  and  other  quality  services  at  costs  which  are  a  fraction  of  those  charged  in  developed 
countries.  I  emphasized  the  word  ‘enterprising’  because  these  hospitals  have  to  be  run  on  a 
commercial basis offering five star hotel facilities, meet and receive facilities at the airports and cater 
to  other  needs  of  the  patients  and  their  families.  Such  hospitals are  operating  successfully  in  other 
developing  countries  and  I  do  not  see  any  reason  as  to  why  they  cannot  be  replicated  in  Pakistan 
given the large pool of Pakistani medical practitioners. The banks and financial institutions are willing 
to  provide  debt  finance  for  such  ventures  and  equity  finance  can  also  be  raised  through  public 
offerings. What is required is getting together top notch medical professionals working in concert with 
the top class business and finance managers and hospital administrators. 
Ninth, since the introduction of Oxley-Sarbanes legislation in the United States and similar stringent 
laws  and  regulations  elsewhere,  the  profession  of  chartered  accountancy  has  become  extremely 
lucrative.  There  is  an  overall  shortage of  qualified accountants  in  all  parts of  the  world.  Those who 
have qualified from the Institute in Pakistan are in heavy demand in U.K. and the Midddle East as they 
have  established  a  good  track  record.  The  limiting  factor  in  producing  more  accountants  as  I 
understand from my interaction with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Pakistan, is the shortage 
of qualified faculty. Some of you practicing or actively engaged in this field may consider the possibility 
of  helping  meet  this  shortage  by  offering  your  services  to  teach  at  the  Institute  for  short  periods  of 
time.  I  am  sure  in  this  way,  we  will  be  able  to  produce  a  large  pool  of  quality  accountants  whose 
services can be exported abroad or utilized at home. 
Tenth,  the  tourism  industry  has  not  taken  off  in  Pakistan  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including  the 
negative perception  that  the  country  is a  dangerous place  to  visit.  On  the other  hand, we  have  the 
most  beautiful  places  which  would  interest  the  eco-tourists  as  well  as  the  heritage  tourists.  The 
Northern  areas  and  the  KaraKorum  range  offer  the  potential  for  those  interested  in  eco-tourism. 
Mountaineering,  tracking,  etc.  while  Taxila,  Harappa  and  Moenjodaro  are  the  bright  spots  for  the 
heritage tourists particularly those having a penchant for the Buddhist and ancient civilizations. For the 
Mughal monuments located in Lahore, the tour itinerary for India can be extended to include these 
   3/4 
monuments.  Those  associated  with  the  leisure  and  hospitality  industry  here  can  help  in  organizing 
group tours and also investing in the supporting infrastructure – tourist lodges, hotels, transport, etc. 
I have presented the above examples as simply illustrative of the many opportunities which exist for 
the overseas Pakistanis to explore and exploit. In my view, you are in a relatively better position to 
exploit  some  of  these  opportunities  as  compared  with  the  foreigners  because  you  have  a  better 
understanding of the cultural milieu in which we operate. You have a more realistic appreciation of the 
constraints  which  we  face  but  at  the  same  time  you  are  in  a  better  position  to  help  in  getting  the 
problems resolved. 
I hope that some of you would give serious consideration to some of the proposals I have put forth this 
evening.  On  our  part,  we  can  assure  you  that  the  Government  is  willing  to  assist  you  in  all  ways 
possible to get these ideas implemented. 
 
   4/4 
