Lucas Papademos: Banking supervision and financial stability in Europe  
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  conference 
organised by the European Banking Federation, “Supervision of international banks: Is a bank crisis 
still possible in Europe?”, Brussels,  28 October 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to this conference. I am very pleased to participate in this panel discussion. 
Our subject today – the future of banking supervision in Europe – is topical and important. It is and will 
remain a key area of financial services policy in the EU over the coming years. Effective and efficient 
banking  supervision  is  essential  both  to  promote  financial  integration  and  to  safeguard  financial 
stability.  From  a  financial  integration  perspective,  the  main  priority  is  to  remove  any  supervisory 
obstacles  to  cross-border  finance,  notably  via  enhanced  supervisory  cooperation  and  convergence. 
Other  panellists  will  certainly  address  these  issues  in  some  detail.  In  my  speech,  I  will  focus  on 
potential challenges for EU banking supervision from a financial stability perspective and assess the 
existing institutional arrangements in this regard. 
Challenges to banking supervision and financial stability  
I.  
Let me start by pointing to some developments in the banking sector which may pose challenges to 
current financial stability arrangements. As we are all aware, the financial integration process – in the 
EU as well as on a global level – has involved a substantial increase in cross-border banking. Four 
developments can be mentioned in this respect. First, banks have considerably expanded their cross-
border banking activities in Europe, especially in the wholesale and capital markets. For example, in 
2005 cross-border interbank loans account for 30% of total interbank loans and the share of cross-
border bank holdings of non-bank securities in the total holdings of such securities by banks is more 
than  45%;  in  1997,  however,  both  figures  stood  at  around  20%.  Second,  a  number  of  large  and 
complex  institutions  spanning  several  jurisdictions  have  emerged.  Some  of  them  are  akin  to  pan-
European players. The 14 largest of these cross-border banking groups already account for almost 
one-third  of  total  banking  assets  in  the  EU.  Third,  large  foreign  establishments  with  a  significant 
market  share  in  host  countries  have  become  more  prevalent,  especially,  but  not  exclusively,  in  the 
new Member States. Finally, cross-border banking groups are increasingly centralising key business 
functions such as credit risk and liquidity management, often cutting across separate legal entities in 
different countries. 
The growing prominence of cross-border banking has important financial stability implications. On the 
one hand, cross-border banking broadens and deepens banking markets, increases liquidity and risk 
sharing  and  thus  strengthens  the  overall  resilience  of  the  European  financial  system.  On  the  other 
hand,  national  financial  systems  may  be  increasingly  exposed  to  common  risks,  and  financial 
disturbances may be transmitted more easily across borders. Against this background, it is essential to 
ensure  that  the  EU  framework  for  financial  stability  is  fully  prepared  to  respond  to  the  greater 
possibility that risks may be cross-border in nature or in origin. This calls for (i) enhanced interplay 
between  home  and  host  authorities,  especially  with  regard  to  significant  foreign  entities  in  host 
countries, and (ii) the development of effective arrangements for dealing with large and complex EU 
banking groups.  
Policy initiatives 
II. 
What has been done so far to strengthen the EU financial stability framework in order to achieve these 
objectives?  Such  a  framework  comprises  arrangements  for  banking  supervision,  financial  stability 
monitoring,  crisis  management  and  deposit  insurance.  In  the  area  of  banking  supervision,  two 
important  policy  initiatives  have  recently  been  taken  to  enhance  home-host  cooperation  between 
supervisors  and  to  strengthen  cross-border  arrangements  for  the  supervision  of  large  and  complex 
banking groups. The first policy measure is the improved legal framework for supervisory cooperation 
regarding  banking  groups  with  foreign  subsidiaries,  introduced  by  the  recently  adopted  Capital 
Requirements  Directive  (CRD).  In  particular,  the  CRD  entrusts  the  consolidating  supervisor  with 
   1/2 
coordination responsibilities. It also strengthens and clarifies the requirements for information sharing 
and  cooperation  between  all  authorities  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  group  entities.  This 
improved  framework  should  promote  and  facilitate  effective  supervisory  cooperation,  especially  for 
large  groups  that  are  active  in  several  countries.  The  second  important  policy  measure  is  the 
extension of the Lamfalussy framework to include the banking sector and the related activities of the 
Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS)  to  promote  supervisory  cooperation.  The 
forthcoming  CEBS  guidelines  for  supervisory  cooperation  will  provide  concrete  guidance  for  the 
effective  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  revised  legal  framework  for  cross-border  banking 
groups. This will also increase the effectiveness of the arrangements for supervisory cooperation with 
regard to cross-border banks that have a significant number of foreign branches in host countries.  
I would also like to remind you briefly that important initiatives have been taken to enhance the other 
public policies safeguarding financial stability. For example, in the area of financial stability monitoring, 
the Economic and Financial Committee’s recently established Financial Stability Table has played an 
important  role  in  forming  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  risks  to  financial  stability  in  the  EU.  This 
work  has  been  strongly  supported  by  the  Eurosystem,  notably  via  the  ESCB  Banking  Supervision 
Committee’s  annual  report  on  EU  banking  sector  stability  and  the  biannual  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review  of  the  euro  area  financial  system.  With  regard  to  crisis  management,  the  adoption  of  the 
Memoranda of Understanding on cooperation between central banks, banking supervisors and, more 
recently,  ministries  of  finance,  has  been  a  major  accomplishment.  Work  to  carry  out  simulation 
exercises to test these arrangements is already underway. 
Alternative approaches 
III.  
While  the  progress  achieved  is  widely  acknowledged,  some  market  participants  have  nevertheless 
called  for  a  more  integrated  institutional  approach,  particularly  in  the  area  of  banking  supervision. 
Specifically,  the  introduction  of  a  “lead  supervisor”  for  cross-border  banking  groups  has  been 
proposed.  This  lead  supervisor  would  not  only  be  responsible  for  the  prudential  supervision  of  all 
group entities during normal times, but would also coordinate and take the final decision on possible 
emergency and crisis management measures concerning the group. While the panel discussion this 
afternoon  will  offer  us  the  opportunity  to  debate  the  possibility  of  a  more  integrated  supervisory 
framework in detail, I would like to share with you at this stage some thoughts on this matter.  
The  development  of  European  financial  markets  is  manifestly  a  highly  dynamic  process.  The 
supervision  and  management  of  this  process  requires  close  monitoring  and  careful  analysis  of  the 
current trends. It also requires all responsible authorities to assess, on an ongoing basis, whether the 
existing  institutional  arrangements  remain  appropriate  and  whether  they  are  likely  to  cope well  with 
future  challenges.  Keeping  an  open  mind  certainly  complements  our  attitude  of  considering  with 
caution some of the ideas that call for fundamental institutional changes. Several reasons underlie our 
position.  
First,  we  consider  that  the  arrangements  for  supervisory  cooperation  have  been  considerably 
enhanced by the strengthened legal framework for supervisory cooperation and the introduction of the 
Lamfalussy  approach.  If  fully  exploited  by  all  stakeholders,  the  new  arrangements,  by  promoting 
supervisory  convergence  and  cooperation,  should  enable  us  to  effectively  address  the  financial 
stability challenges lying ahead. The present institutional set-up should therefore be given adequate 
time to show its effectiveness before alternatives are considered.  
Second,  any  fundamental  revisions  of  the  existing  supervisory  arrangements  which  challenged  the 
basic principle of national responsibility and accountability would have a number of political, legal and 
practical  implications.  Moreover,  such  changes  would  affect  not  only  banking  supervision,  but  also 
other public policies safeguarding financial stability, notably crisis management and deposit insurance. 
In  order  to  deal  with  these  complex  matters  effectively,  it  would  be  necessary  to  analyse  all  these 
aspects  very  carefully  so  as  to  ensure  the  consistency,  credibility,  legal  certainty  and  political 
legitimacy  of  the  EU  framework  for  financial  stability.  It  is  vital  that  the  overall  effectiveness  and 
efficiency of the EU institutional arrangements are not endangered and that no concerns arise from a 
financial stability perspective. Therefore, the ECB favours an evolutionary, rather than a revolutionary, 
approach to the further development of the EU framework for banking supervision. Nevertheless, if the 
existing  arrangements  prove  in  practice  to  be  insufficiently  effective  in  addressing  the  challenges 
associated  with  the  changing  financial  landscape,  consideration  should  be  given  to  new  ideas  that 
would help us to develop the EU supervisory framework further. 
   2/2 
