David Dodge: Economic and financial efficiency – the importance of pension 
plans 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  l'Association  des  MBA  du 
Québec (AMBAQ), Montréal, 9 November 2005. 
 Over  the  past  year,  I  have  spoken  a  number  of  times  on  the  topic  of  efficiency,  and  why  it  is  so 
important for Canadian policy-makers to keep in mind the goal of an efficient financial system. Today, I 
want  to  talk  about  Canada's  system  of  pension  plans  and  how  they  contribute  to  the  efficiency  of 
financial markets and of the economy as a whole. 
Before  I  talk  specifically  about  pensions,  let  me  begin  with  a  few  words  about  financial  system 
efficiency in general. What exactly do I mean by efficiency? An efficient financial system is one that 
helps to allocate scarce economic resources to the most productive uses, in the most effective way. 
An  efficient  financial  system  reduces  the  misallocation  or  waste  of  economic  resources.  This  is 
important because, by making our financial system as efficient as possible, we maximize our chances 
of generating sustained economic growth and prosperity. 
At the Bank of Canada, we contribute to the goal of an efficient financial system in various ways. Our 
monetary  policy  aims  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  By  doing  so,  we  enhance  the 
confidence  of  Canadians  in  the  value  of  their  money,  thus  reducing  their  need  to  spend  resources 
either anticipating or coping with inflation. We also contribute to efficiency through our role as overseer 
of  major  payments,  securities,  and  foreign  exchange  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  and  by 
providing  liquidity  in  times  of  financial  stress.  By  reducing  risks  to  the  safety  and  stability  of  the 
financial  system,  we  increase  certainty  about  the  robustness  of  the  system,  which  also  supports 
efficiency. Our semi-annual Financial System Review promotes awareness of financial system issues. 
As  well,  the  Bank  works  actively  with  financial  market  participants  and  regulators  to  develop  and 
promote efficiency. And we conduct research that helps inform the decisions of policy-makers in terms 
of promoting this goal. 
In previous speeches, I've spoken about the need to support the efficiency of our financial institutions. 
Canadian  policy-makers  need  to  develop  a  framework  that  continues  to  provide  incentives  for 
innovation and efficiency by encouraging competition. At the same time, Canadian financial institutions 
may be able to find efficiency gains through economies of scale, which could flow across the economy 
in the form of lower-cost business and retail lending. However, other relevant public policy questions 
include  foreign  ownership  and  concerns  about  the  concentration  of  market  power  among  very  few 
players.  Striking  a  balance  between  all  these  interests  is  not  a  simple  task.  But  we  should  keep  in 
mind  that  the  level  of  competition  can  be  maintained  or  enhanced  by  new  entrants  into  the 
marketplace or by the threat of new entrants. 
I've also spoken about the need to promote efficiency in the regulation of securities markets. Efficiency 
dictates  that  Canada  should  have  uniform  securities  laws  and  regulations  based  on  principles  that 
apply to everyone. The question is how to apply these laws and regulations in a tiered way to take into 
account  the  differing  needs  of  issuers.  All  major  provincial  jurisdictions  deal  with  issuers  that  vary 
greatly in terms of size and complexity—whether issuers are large, complex firms that want access to 
international capital markets, "mid-cap" firms that choose to access only Canadian capital markets, or 
small speculative resource firms that have historically relied on Canadian equity markets for financing. 
And  the  needs  of  investors  are  similar  from  one  jurisdiction  to  another.  So  while  the  application  of 
rules needs to take into account the size and complexity of firms, there is no need for different rules 
based solely on the province or territory of the issuer or investor. 
Today, I want to bring Canada's pension system into the picture. Obviously, the health of the pension 
system is extremely important from the perspective of the people who rely on it for their retirement 
income. It is also important from the perspective of economic and financial market efficiency. A report 
to G-10 deputies published in September emphasized that pension funds have already become the 
largest institutional investor class among G-10 countries. It also noted that retirement savings and the 
related capital flows will have an increasingly important influence on financial markets. 
Here  in  Canada,  policy-makers  need  to  think  about  how  our  pension  system  can  contribute  to 
efficiency. There is a need for long-term investment in critical infrastructure to support Canada's future 
   1/5 
production capacity. And there are pools of pension capital that, given their very long-term investment 
horizon, can be invested in this manner. I will come back to this issue in a future speech. But in the 
balance of my remarks today, I want to look at the pension system itself and discuss the incentives 
under which these large pools of capital operate. We must allow these pools to be accumulated and 
invested so that they not only maximize returns to support future pensioners, but also maximize the 
future growth of the economy's production capacity. 
Canada's pension system and risk 
There  are  essentially  three  pillars  that  make  up  Canada's  pension  system.  The  first  is  government 
income support: the Old Age Security (OAS) and Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) program. The 
second pillar is public pensions: the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans (CPP/QPP). The third pillar is 
private pensions, consisting of tax-deferred retirement savings plans (RRSPs) run by individuals, and 
employer-sponsored pension plans. Statistics Canada data show that through the 1990s, income from 
the third pillar grew in importance, rising from 18 per cent to close to 30 per cent of retirement income. 
By  comparison,  income  from  the  first  pillar—the  OAS/GIS—edged  down  from  30  per  cent  to  27  
per cent during that decade, while income from the CPP/QPP rose from about 16 per cent to about 20 
per cent. Returns on other personal investments made up most of the balance of retirement income. 
Of these sources of pension income, the OAS/GIS is not relevant to this discussion, since it is funded 
out  of  current  federal  government  revenues  and  is  not  backed  by  a  pool  of  dedicated  assets.  The 
other pillars are composed of three pools of capital with combined assets of more than $1 trillion at the 
end  of  2003.  Expressed  in  very  rough  percentages,  the  CPP/QPP  pool  was  the  smallest,  with  less 
than 10 per cent of the total, while assets held in RRSPs accounted for about 35 per cent. By far the 
largest pool was employer-sponsored pension plans, at about 55 per cent of the total. 
In  virtually  all  cases,  employer-sponsored  pensions  take  the  form  of  either  defined-benefit  or  
defined-contribution  plans.  A  defined-benefit  pension  plan  promises  a  guaranteed,  fixed  stream  of 
retirement income. The pension is based on the employee's work history and is often expressed as a 
percentage of the employee's salary. In contrast, pension benefits from a defined-contribution plan are 
not  
pre-determined. They depend on the actual amount of contributions made on behalf of the individual 
employee and on the actual rate of return realized on those contributions. 
An efficient financial system distributes various risks to those who are best able to bear them. And the 
efficiency of these three pools of capital largely boils down to how they handle two principal types of 
risk. The first of these is return risk. This refers to the fact that the value of the pension that can be 
purchased at the time of a person's retirement depends largely on the conditions that exist just at the 
point  of  retirement.  This  risk  is  handled  in  different  ways  by  different  types  of  pension  plans.  For 
example, a defined-benefit pension plan mitigates this risk by pooling the assets of all contributors. 
This pooling helps to protect the ability of a sponsor of a defined-benefit plan to pay the pensions of all 
plan members, even those who retire one day after a stock market crash, or at a time when the return 
on long-term bonds is particularly low. 
The other type of risk is longevity risk. In a defined-benefit pension plan, this risk is transferred to the 
sponsor of the plan—usually the employer—who is responsible for making up any shortfall that could 
arise from pensioners living longer on average than expected. 
By pooling these risks, pension funds generate important benefits in terms of economic efficiency. By 
transferring risk from individuals to collectives, pension funds help achieve a more efficient allocation 
of  savings.  Pension  funds—particularly  the  very  large  ones—tend  to  have  sophisticated  asset 
managers. These large funds have the incentive and the ability to invest pools of contributions across 
appropriately  varied  asset  classes.  Further,  they  invest  over  very  long  time  horizons,  so  they  can 
finance large investment projects at competitive rates of return. All of this contributes significantly to 
economic efficiency by transferring risk to those investors that are best able to bear it. 
Let's  now  turn  to  the  three  large  pools  of  capital  in  Canada's  pension  system,  and  consider  their 
implications for the efficiency of financial markets and for the economy as a whole. 
First,  let  me  talk  about  the  CPP  and  the  QPP.  While  these  plans  are  not  fully  funded,  as  private 
pension plans must be, many of the principles of the CPP and QPP are the same as those used by 
well-structured  defined-benefit  pensions.  The  benefits  are  linked  to  the  earnings  history  of  each 
member. The assets of the plans are managed by the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board and 
   2/5 
the  Caisse  de  dépôt  et  placement  du  Québec,  with  the  aim  of  maximizing  their  long-run  returns. 
Contributions  are  invested  broadly,  thus  supporting  the  efficiency  of  financial  markets  and  of  the 
economy as a whole.  
Now let's turn to private pension plans and look first at individual and group tax-deferred RRSPs. This 
component  of  Canadians'  retirement  income  has  many  of  the  same  characteristics  as  a  defined-
contribution pension. By deferring taxes, RRSPs provide an appropriate incentive for saving. In recent 
years, just under one-third of taxpayers have contributed to their RRSP in any given year, and close to 
two-thirds  of  Canadians  who  filed  a  tax  return  contributed  to  a  plan  between  1993  and  2001.  The 
increasing use of RRSPs has encouraged the development of financial products that allow individuals 
to diversify their risk. Of course, this source of income is subject to return risk, since an individual's 
portfolio could fall sharply in value just before planned retirement.1  
Research in the United States2 has shown that individuals tend to be risk averse in terms of the assets 
they  hold  in  individual  retirement  accounts,  and  in  terms  of  how  they  allocate  assets  in  
defined-contribution pension plans when they have the opportunity to do so. Individuals tend to invest 
too much in investment-grade bonds, money market instruments, and large-cap equities relative to the 
portfolio  that  would  maximize  their  expected  pension.  And,  understandably,  the  older  they  get,  the 
more  risk  averse  they  become.  So  the  proportion  of  the  pool  of  savings  from  individual  and  group 
RRSPs  and  from  other  defined-contribution  plans  that  is  allocated  to  riskier,  less-liquid  and  
longer-dated  assets  is  likely  to  be  quite  small  compared  with  that  of  defined-benefit  plans.  This 
difference  in  the  risk  appetite  of  individual  savers  with  RRSPs  and  that  of  the  sponsors  of  
defined-benefit plans has an important effect on the functioning of Canadian capital markets. I'll come 
back to that point in a moment. 
Now let's look at the third pool of capital—employer-sponsored pensions. I want to spend a bit more 
time discussing these plans because there are policy concerns here that need to be addressed with 
some urgency. 
For  decades,  the  vast  majority  of  this  pool—in  terms  of  assets—has  been  held  in  defined-benefit 
plans.  These  plans  can  be  attractive  to  individuals  because  they  mitigate  longevity  risk  and  return 
risk.3  Defined-benefit  plans  also  have  important  positive  attributes  for  efficiency.  I  mentioned  earlier 
the way in which defined-benefit plans support economic efficiency by allowing for a better allocation 
of savings. But there are also efficiency gains for financial markets. The managers of defined-benefit 
pension  plans  have  both  the  ability  and  desire  to  invest  in  the  kinds  of  assets  that  the  average 
individual  investor  might  not  normally  consider.  Pension  managers  have  superior  knowledge  of 
financial  markets  and  of  the  associated  risks  that  makes  them  willing  to  invest  in  alternative  asset 
classes and to engage in arbitrage between markets.4 All of these activities make financial markets 
more complete and, so, enhance their efficiency.  The size and sophistication of pension plans also 
lead  them  to  be  actively  interested  in  good  corporate  governance,  thus  contributing  to  market 
discipline, which supports overall market efficiency. 
The decline in defined-benefit pensions 
In  recent  years,  defined-benefit  pension  plans  have  been  in  decline.  The  number  of  Canadians 
covered by defined-benefit plans has fallen by roughly 5 per cent since 1992. While the large majority 
of  employer-sponsored  plans  are  still  of  the  defined-benefit  variety,  defined-contribution  plans  have 
grown  significantly.  We  have  seen  many  employers  either  collapse  their  defined-benefit  plans  or 
restrict  new  entrants  into  the  plans.  We  have  also  seen  increasing  deficits  in  many  defined-benefit 
pension plans. 
                                                      
1   The ability of individuals with RRSPs to use a Registered Retirement Income  Fund rather than a life annuity does allow 
more sophisticated retirees to mitigate this risk somewhat. 
I am not aware of any Canadian research on this topic. But it is a reasonable assumption that these results would apply to 
Canada. 
2  
3   But many defined-benefit plans lack portability, which lessens their attractiveness. 
4   Arbitrage  refers  to  a  trading  strategy  that  tries  to  take  advantage  of  differences  in  prices  for  the  same  asset  trading  on 
different exchanges. 
   3/5 
While part of the decline in defined-benefit plans comes from developments in the economy and the 
labour  force, part  is  also due  to  the  incentives  under  which  these  plans  operate.  Let  me elaborate. 
Defined-benefit plans should operate so that the expected value of all benefits to be paid out equals 
the expected value of all contributions plus the expected returns on investments. But when the actual 
value  of  one  of  these  variables  differs  from  the  expected  value,  the  sponsor  of  the  plan  takes  on 
responsibility for making up any difference. 
What  would  make  a  sponsor  accept  this  responsibility?  One  reason  would  be  if  sponsors  could 
mitigate  the  risk  of  worse-than-expected  outcomes  by  being  allowed  to  benefit  from  better-than-
expected outcomes. But while there is no question that the sponsor is responsible for any deficit in the 
plan,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  the  sponsor  benefits  from  any  surplus  that  may  be  generated.  The 
question of who "owns" a surplus in a defined-benefit plan has been before many different courts at 
different levels and in different jurisdictions in recent years. While the precise answer depends on the 
specific wording of the rules of any given pension plan, in general, provincial and federal pension law 
has evolved so that employees have increasingly been given rights to pension surpluses, even though 
employees typically bear none of the responsibility for any deficit.  
A further distortion of incentives arises in those cases where the pension plan contributions are held in 
trust  and  administered  by  a  trustee.  Currently,  most  pension  plan  trusts  are  set  up  so  that  the 
employees  are  beneficiaries  of  the  trust.  Beginning  in  the  1980s,  successive  court  decisions  have 
established that sponsoring firms may gain exclusive access to a surplus in a pension plan trust only if 
the trust is set up in such a way as to permit the sponsoring firm to gain exclusive access. 
If  defined-benefit  plans  are  to  survive,  grow,  and  provide  a  source  of  funding  for  long-term,  riskier 
assets, it is important that Canadian policy-makers consider taking steps to rebalance the incentives 
for sponsors to operate defined-benefit plans. Let me mention a few of the things that could be done. 
First, the provincial and federal governments need to make appropriate adjustments to their pension 
laws so that the sponsors of defined-benefit pension plans are responsible for all residual risks to the 
pension  plan—both  outcomes  that  lead  to  deficits  and  outcomes  that  lead  to  surpluses.  Let  me  be 
clear. I am not saying that firms should be given unambiguous sole ownership of pension surpluses, 
but rather that sponsors should have that ownership. There are a handful of pension funds—such as 
the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan—where both the employer and employees are joint sponsors, and 
share ownership of any surpluses, as well as responsibility for any deficits.  
The  second  step  would  be  to  consider  rebalancing  the  tax  treatment  of  employer  contributions. 
Currently,  in  most  circumstances,  employers  are  not  allowed  to  deduct  contributions  to  a  defined-
benefit pension plan if the going-concern valuation of the plan is more than 110 per cent of expected 
future liabilities. This has certainly added to the bias against sponsors allowing surpluses to build up in 
their pension plans. 
Third,  there  are  issues  with  Canadian  accounting  standards  for  pensions  in  terms  of  valuation  that 
have been posing challenges since they were adopted in 1999. For one thing, changes in the annual 
discount  rate  used  to  value  pension  liabilities  can  result  in  large  swings  in  the  amount  reported  as 
pension expenses. For another thing, periodic actuarial valuations of defined-benefit plans also flow 
through firms' income statements. Both of these issues lead to volatility in reported earnings, which 
investors do not like. So, accounting standards have become another reason for employers to avoid 
defined-benefit pension plans. 
I have just listed three of the most serious problems facing sponsors of defined-benefit pension plans. 
Of  course,  there  are  other  issues  as  well.  Nevertheless,  addressing  these  three  issues  would  be 
helpful in getting the incentives right, so that defined-benefit plans can remain actuarially sound. This 
would  significantly  reduce  the  risk  that  pension  contributions  would  be  insufficient  to  cover  future 
liabilities should sponsor firms go bankrupt. That said, sponsor bankruptcy remains a risk for members 
of private sector plans, and some form of risk-sharing arrangement is desirable. There are a number of 
options as to how to pool this risk, including encouraging the creation of plans sponsored by multiple 
employers. However,  I  would  argue  against  the  use  of  pension  benefit  guarantee  funds, since  they 
significantly  raise  the  risk  of  "moral  hazard,"  and  further  increase  the  bias  against  employers 
sponsoring defined-benefit plans. 
   4/5 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Canada's pension plan system is crucial to our future, not only because it will sustain 
us in our retirement, but also because it supports the efficiency of our financial markets and our overall 
economy in important ways. Defined-contribution and defined-benefit pension plans, RRSPs, and the 
CPP and QPP all have a role to play. 
But as we have seen, one important part of our pension system—defined-benefit plans—has been in 
relative  decline.  This  relative  decline  represents  a  transfer  of  return  risk  and  longevity  risk  to 
individuals, who are less able to bear or manage them. This transfer has a negative impact on overall 
economic efficiency and could ultimately represent a significant threat to the ability of pension funds to 
finance the long-term investments that will maximize our economy's future potential growth. 
The task of establishing proper incentives is a difficult one, and I have touched on only some of the 
issues today. But policy-makers cannot avoid these difficult issues, and the stakes are too high for us 
to get it wrong. For the sake of efficiency and for the future health of our economy, we must get the 
analysis right, and then we must act. 
 
   5/5 
