Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia’s fast-changing financial landscape  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 26th Annual Dinner 
2005 of The Association of Merchant Banks, Kuala Lumpur, 3 December 2005. 
 I am pleased to be here tonight on this special occasion of the 26th Annual Dinner of the Association 
of Merchant Banks in Malaysia. 
The year 2005 is a particularly significant year for the merchant banking industry in particular and for 
the financial sector more generally. While this decade has seen significant changes taking place in our 
financial  landscape  that  followed  from  the  restructuring,  consolidation,  greater  investment  in 
technology, deregulation, liberalisation and changes in the regulatory environment, the year 2005 has 
seen an intensification of the pace of change in the financial sector. Let me take this opportunity to 
discuss  the  macroeconomic  environment  which  these  changes  are  occurring,  and  discuss  further 
some of the more recent changes that are taking place in the financial system. 
Our economy has been able to continue to benefit from the favourable external environment as the 
global  economy  demonstrates  its  robustness  in  an  environment  of  high  oil  prices  and  rising  global 
interest  rates.  On  the  domestic  front,  our  overall  performance  was  further  reinforced  with  the 
expanding domestic demand. Latest indicators suggest that the growth momentum remains firmly on 
track, with an improved growth of 5.3% in the third quarter. The outturn for the year as a whole is now 
expected to be in the range of 5 - 6%. There is also greater optimism now that the prospects for this 
growth momentum will be sustained in 2006. 
Of significance is the continued strength of private sector activity. Household consumption increased 
by 10.4%, while real gross fixed capital formation increased by 9.6% in the third quarter. Reflecting 
Malaysia's  structural  transformation  toward  a  skilled-  and  knowledge-based  economy,  the  services 
sector has become increasingly important, now accounting for 58% of GDP, compared to only 47% in 
1990. Indeed, more than 50% of the growth in the third quarter emanated from the services sector. 
Growth  has  remained  strong  in  both  the  traditional  services  sub-sectors  as  well  as  in  new  growth 
areas  such  as  shared  services  and  the  information  and  communication  technology  industry.  This 
structural  transformation  of  the  economy  has  also  been  reflected  in  the  pattern  and  the  quality  of 
foreign  direct  investment,  with  a  shift  away  from  capital-  and  labour-intensive  projects  towards  the 
higher value added, skills and knowledge-intensive services industries.  
In  the  manufacturing  sector,  the  electronics  industry  is  expected  to  benefit  from  the  uptrend  in  the 
global electronics cycle, while commodity prices are forecast to remain high, supporting export growth 
as well as private consumption. Sustained demand for new uses for palm oil, in particular for bio-diesel 
production is a positive development. Private investment is expected to also increase substantially in 
2006, driven by high levels of capacity utilization and strong revenue and earnings growth.  
The year 2006 will witness the release of two important policy documents: the Ninth Malaysia Plan and 
the Third Industrial Masterplan. The Plans will outline the key policy directions over the next several 
years to enhance Malaysia's long-term growth prospects, including: (i) the role of agriculture and the 
nascent  biotechnology  industry;  (ii)  moving  up  the  value  chain  in  the  manufacturing  sector;  (iii)  the 
increasing  importance  of  services,  especially  business  and  shared  services,  including  outsourcing; 
and  (iv)  the  importance  of  education  in  developing  the  human  resources  needed  to  achieve  the 
development objectives. 
An important strength of our economy for several decades now, is its flexibility, that is the ability for 
resources to shift to new areas of comparative advantage in response to changing conditions and new 
opportunities in the global economy. In particular, there is a high degree of labour and capital mobility. 
Significant  investments  in  training  and  education  have  allowed  labour  to  adjust  and  become  more 
mobile. This has played a large part in enabling rapid industrialisation and in shifting to higher value 
added activities. Capital has also shown greater mobility, expanding the potential for the economy to 
adjust.  Malaysia  has  also  actively  identified  and  develop  new  sources  of  growth,  leveraging  on  its 
resource advantages and new technologies to move up the value chain. There have also been greater 
moves toward removing rigidities and transitioning toward greater market orientation and competition.  
Turning now to monetary policy, Bank Negara Malaysia's determination of interest rate policy is based 
on the requirements of the domestic economy. Specifically, monetary policy seeks to balance the risks 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 1
between economic growth and inflation over the medium-term. As the risk of slower growth has now 
diminished, while the rate of inflation is expected to remain at current levels for some time, this has 
prompted a monetary policy response. The Overnight Policy Rate was increased by 30 basis points to 
3%  on  30  November.  In  our  monetary  policy  statement,  it  was  indicated  that  at  the  new  level,  the 
Overnight Policy Rate is still below its neutral level, meaning that monetary policy is still supportive of 
economic activity. It is not indicative of any plans for further increases in the interest rates. Any further 
changes in the Policy Rate would be determined by our assessment on the balance of risks between 
growth and inflation, going forward. 
Let me now turn to the financial sector. The financial sector in general, and the banking industry in 
particular, have an important role to play to ensure that our economy continues to have this flexibility 
by providing the enabling environment and facilitating the process. This requires a financial sector that 
has its own dynamism and agility to proactively respond to the changing requirements of the economy.  
The Malaysian financial sector continues to evolve progressively in response to developments in both 
the domestic and external environment. As we transition from the first phase of the Financial Sector 
Masterplan into the second phase of the plan, significant developments have already taken place. In 
this  year  in particular,  we are seeing  a  strengthening  of  the  international  dimension  of  our financial 
sector. This essentially serves to strengthen our economic and financial inter-linkages with the global 
economy. 
Some  notable  developments  in  this  direction  include  the  liberalisation  of  the  foreign  exchange 
administration rules earlier this year to allow for greater flexibility and efficiency in foreign exchange 
transactions as well as to increase foreign participation in issuing ringgit papers in our bond market 
and  thus  contribute  to  contribute  toward  enhancing  the  depth  of  the  market.  Another  major 
development this year was the move to a managed float exchange rate regime for the ringgit. This is 
essentially to better position the nation to respond and benefit from the structural changes occurring in 
the region and the global economy.  
Other further developments to strengthen our international integration include the increase in foreign 
participation in our domestic financial system. This includes the issuance of new licences for foreign 
Islamic banks to operate in Malaysia, the issuance of new stock-broking licences to foreign players as 
well as increases in the permitted foreign interest in our Islamic subsidiaries and investment banks. All 
this will serve to enhance the international integration of the domestic financial system. The launch of 
the  ABF  Malaysian  Bond  Index  Fund  is  also  aimed  at  promoting  greater  integration  among  the 
regional bond markets. 
On the domestic front, the year 2005 marks a significant milestone for the merchant banking industry. 
In March this year, the new framework for investment banking was unveiled, paving the way for the 
further rationalisation of domestic capital market intermediaries. As you may recall, the objectives of 
the  framework  are  twofold:  to  facilitate  internal  rationalisation  of  the  merchant  bank,  stockbroking 
company and discount house within the same financial group; and to promote the rationalisation of the 
discount  house  and  universal  broker  industries.  This  integration  is  expected  to  promote  a  more 
competitive  and  dynamic  financial  system,  enhance  efficiency  and  strengthen  the  potential  to 
capitalise  on  expanded  business  opportunities,  both  locally  and  abroad,  thereby  strengthening  the 
competitive position of the new entity. Foreign equity participation in investment banks has also been 
liberalised, from 30% to 49%, as part of the overall efforts to strengthen their linkages globally and to 
enhance the transfer of specialised skills and expertise in the investment banking industry. 
Moving  forward,  the  competitive  pressures  are  expected  to  intensify  in  the  investment  banking 
industry.  With  the  extension  of  the  investment  bank  framework  to  universal  brokers,  17  investment 
banks  may  emerge  from  the  rationalisation  exercise.  Amid  this  more  competitive  and  challenging 
environment,  the  ability  of  the  investment  banks  to  thrive  will  no  longer  depend  on  factors  such  as 
asset  and  capitalization  levels,  but  on  their  capacity  and  capability  to  manage  and  utilise  their 
resources in the most efficient and effective manner.  
Of  importance  is  the  need  for  merchant  banks  to  continuously  review  their comparative  advantage, 
business  focus  and  organisational  structure  to  strengthen  their  strategic  and  operational  agility  to 
respond proactively to the competition and maintain their market niche. In this regard, investment in 
human capital and expertise is essential to deliver customised and unique value propositions. With the 
entry  of  new  players  into  the  industry,  it  is  expected  that  staff  mobility  within  the  industry  could 
increase.  The  challenge  for  merchant  banks  will  be  to  continuously  train  and  retain  their  pool  of 
expertise.  
2 
 BIS Review 83/2005
The transformation of merchant banks into investment banks will also bring about new risks as well as 
a multitude of new opportunities. The placement of banking and capital market activities under one 
roof entails wider risks which need to be addressed to ensure that they do not pose undue risks to 
safety  and  soundness.  Safeguards  and  Chinese  walls  are  essential  to  manage  conflict  of  interest 
situations within the investment banks.  
As  capital  market  intermediaries,  investment  banks would  also  need  to  carefully  manage  issues  on 
investor protection and the need to promote fair, efficient and transparent markets. The principles of 
fair market practice to promote investor confidence and ensure the protection of their interests need to 
be embodied in investment banking operations. Reputation and trust are indeed valued assets and the 
cornerstone of banking business. As investment banks originate more complex financial solutions to 
meet the needs of the more discerning and sophisticated wholesale customers, they also need to be 
mindful  of  the  importance  of  preserving  trust  and  personal  reputation  in  business  practices.  In  this 
regard, focus will be accorded to strengthen the overall market conduct of investment banks, as any 
lapses in market conduct can have widespread implications on their reputation. The emphasis will be 
on  promoting  greater  market  discipline  to  drive  the  performance  of  investment  banks.  Disclosure-
based initiatives will be continued to ensure that consumers and investors have access to appropriate 
information to allow them to make well-informed investment decisions. 
The changes in the merchant banking landscape will also bring a host of new opportunities. In this 
regard,  offshoring  represents  an  important  avenue  for  merchant  banks  to  diversify  their  business 
potential  and  income  stream.  The  strengthened  capacity  of  merchant  banks  arising  from  the 
transformation  process  will  open  new  lucrative  business  opportunities,  especially  abroad.  Merchant 
banks  would  need  to  capitalise  on  these  opportunities  to  strengthen  their  presence  beyond  the 
domestic  borders,  particularly  in  areas  where  they  have  the  niche  and  capabilities  to  compete  with 
their  counterparts  abroad.  Cross-border  deals  are  no  longer  the  exception  but  the  norm.  This  is 
especially  so  with  the  liberalisation  of  the  foreign  exchange  administration  rules  which  provides 
broader  opportunities  for  corporations  to  invest  abroad.  A  greater  degree  of  awareness  of  global 
developments  and  adoption  of  international  best  practices  will  thus  enhance  the  capacity  and 
capabilities of merchant banks to excel in their ventures abroad.  
At  the  same  time,  the  liberalisation  of  foreign  equity  participation  in  investment  banks  opens 
opportunities for investment banks to explore tie-ups and joint ventures with foreign parties to leverage 
on their expertise and distribution network to help Malaysian investment banks leapfrog in their areas 
of competitive advantage. Given the intensity of the competitive pressures, investment banks may not 
have  the  luxury  to  grow  organically.  The  onset  of  increased  competition  will  determine  the  pace  of 
enhancements that investment banks must make to remain relevant and compete meaningfully in a 
more challenging operating environment. 
Finally,  let  me  also  mention  a  further  area  in  the  financial  sector  that  is  experiencing  significant 
change,  namely,  the  profound  global  growth  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  Islamic  finance  is 
practised in over 60 countries across the world. Assets of Islamic banks and Islamic assets of window-
based conventional banks gross to over USD400 billion. Islamic mutual funds exceed USD300 billion. 
Islamic sovereign and corporate sukuk has breached the USD15 billion mark. The issuance of Islamic 
bonds or sukuk is expected to top USD10 billion for this year alone. The global market capitalisation of 
Dow Jones Islamic index is well over USD10 trillion. Most of this growth was experienced in the recent 
decade  with  the  demand  for  Islamic  financial  assets  continuing  to  increase.  Also  in  demand  are 
Shariah compliant hedging instruments to meet the needs of both investors and issuers.  
The  expansion  of  Islamic  finance  and  demand  for  Islamic  financial  assets  promise  exciting 
opportunities for innovative and enterprising merchant bankers. Such opportunities are available not 
only in Malaysia but also in the region and globally. The time is opportune for tapping into the Islamic 
finance market.  
Malaysia  has  had  a  head  start  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  While  we  have  the  largest  Islamic 
banking  market  in  the  world,  the  largest  Islamic  capital  market  and  largest  takaful  market,  still  the 
potential generated by the unprecedented growth in the global Islamic finance industry is yet to be fully 
harnessed by the players in the Malaysian financial sector. As Islamic financial products increase in 
sophistication, a higher level of competencies, skills and structuring abilities of the merchant banking 
community would be needed. If Malaysia could emerge as a supplier of these high-end services, the 
nature of merchant banking would change significantly. 
On the part of the Government, major initiatives have been taken to create the enabling environment 
and create resources for the next phase of development of Islamic banking and finance. These include 
BIS Review 83/2005 
 3
our efforts to build Shariah expertise, promotion of convergence of Shariah understanding, promoting 
and  hosting  IFSB,  the  international  Islamic  standard  setting  body  and  more  recently  work  is  being 
undertaken  to  streamline  the  regulatory  regime  for  Islamic  banking  and  Takaful.  These  cumulative 
efforts are aimed at promoting a more conducive environment for enhancing Malaysia's position as a 
hub for Islamic finance. Law reform work on these matters has already begun and is expected to be 
completed  by  next  year.  Work  is  also  already  underway  to  establish  an  international  centre  for 
education  in  Islamic  finance  to  produce  the  professionals  and  expertise  that  is  vital  for  the  global 
development of Islamic finance.  
Conclusion 
The year has therefore been marked by significant developments on several fronts. Going forward, we 
need to build on the successes to fully maximise the potential benefits. In this dynamic environment, it 
is the cumulative efforts of the industry that will allow this hard-earned progress to yield sustainable 
results.  We  now  stand  at  the  threshold  of  the  development  of  the  financial  sector.  The  merchant 
banking  industry  will  need  to  confront  the  emerging  challenges  squarely  and  seize  the  new 
opportunities  that  will  emerge  with  its  new  intermediation  structure.  There  will  also  be  an  important 
need to stay alert on the emerging domestic and global trends and to be aligned to be well positioned 
to respond to the new emerging environment and thus sustain the effectiveness of the performance 
and contribution of the sector to the economy. 
On that note, let me take this opportunity to wish you all a very happy new year, and a productive and 
successful year ahead.  
4 
 BIS Review 83/2005
