Jaime Caruana: Basel II progress 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Institute  of  International 
Bankers Breakfast Dialogue with Government Officials, Washington DC, 26 September 2005. 
 Thank you very much. It is an honour to be here once again for a productive dialogue with members of 
the  Institute  of  International  Bankers,  and  it  is  equally  an  honour  to  be  on  a  panel  with  such 
distinguished colleagues from the United States and the United Kingdom.  
I will keep my remarks as brief as possible so that we can have plenty of time for your questions and 
comments. It will probably come as no surprise that I will focus my remarks this morning on the same 
topic that I discussed with you last year: the new framework for capital adequacy, or Basel II.  
As you are probably aware, the Basel Committee published the Basel II Framework in June last year. 
At  that  time,  the  Committee  indicated  that  while  the  Framework  was  mostly  complete,  several 
important technical matters still needed further work. Specifically, the Committee determined that more 
work was necessary with regard to (1) elements of the trading book and the treatment of so-called 
double-default  effects  for  hedged  transactions;  and  (2)  the  estimation  of  loss  given  default  during 
periods of economic downturn.  
Over the ensuing months, members of the Committee and several of its working groups engaged in 
intensive work with industry participants—many of whose institutions are represented here today—to 
develop  practical  and  prudent  solutions  in  these  areas.  In  addition,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  we 
worked very closely with our colleagues in the International Organization of Securities Commissions in 
the areas of trading book and double-default. In July this year, the Committee issued guidance in both 
areas.  
With  the  publication  of  these  documents  on  trading  book/double-default  and  downturn  LGDs,  the 
Committee  has  concluded  the  policy  development  stage  of  Basel  II.  The  industry  has  voiced  the 
opinion that, while it could be possible to continue refining the Framework, it is more important that 
there  be  a  pause  to  allow  banks  to  implement  the  Framework.  I  very  much  support  this  view.  Our 
priority now should be to achieve high-quality implementation.  
A good example of how we, industry and regulators can collaborate, without the need to add additional 
rules, is what we did in the case of low-default portfolios. Several types of portfolios may have low 
numbers of defaults or a bank may not have sufficient loss experience of its own (e.g. portfolios of 
exposures to sovereigns, banks, insurance companies or highly rated corporates).  
The  industry  was  concerned  that  the  lack  of  sufficient  statistical  data  in  some  portfolios  and  the 
resulting  difficulty  in  backtesting  risk  parameters  would  result  in  LDPs  being  excluded  from  IRB 
treatment. We have published a newsletter clarifying our view. We have made it clear that a relative 
lack of historic data should not automatically preclude portfolios from use of the IRB approaches and 
that  relatively  sparse  data  might  require  increased  reliance  on  alternative  data  sources  and  
data-enhancing  tools.  These  alternative  data  sources  and  data-enhancing  tools  are  mentioned  in  a 
non-prescriptive manner in this newsletter.  
I  would  like  to  spend  the  remainder  of  my  time  this  morning  discussing  this  implementation  stage. 
Specifically, I would like to discuss three aspects of implementation that I believe will be of interest to 
internationally active banks: (1) the forthcoming quantitative impact study, or QIS 5; (2) the work of the 
Accord Implementation Group; and (3) the role of non-G10 supervisors in Basel II implementation. 
 What I will not discuss, however, is individual countries’ approaches to implementing Basel II. A great 
deal of work is under way in a wide range of countries to implement Basel II through legislation and/or 
regulation, and while I believe this work is proceeding quite well, my colleagues on this panel are in 
the best position to address specific questions about national implementation since this is a matter for 
national supervisors.  
QIS 5  
Turning  now  to  implementation,  the  Basel  Committee  has  announced  that  it  will  conduct  a  fifth 
quantitative impact study beginning next month and running until the spring next year. The purpose of 
   1/3 
this  study  is  to  evaluate  the  calibration  of  the  Framework  and  assess  the  impact  of  the  recently 
published guidance on trading book, double-default and downturn LGDs.  
While  this  exercise  will  require  considerable  effort  on  the  part  of  both  banks  and  supervisors,  the 
Committee  believes  it  is  essential  to  have  recent  and  high-quality  data  in  order  to  facilitate 
implementation. And the earlier this exercise is conducted, the more time there will be to reflect on the 
results and consider any necessary recalibration of the Framework.  
The United States and Germany have conducted QIS4 studies and the former is currently studying the 
results. On 13 July 2005 we published the necessary package for the QIS5 (Fifth Quantitative Impact 
Study instructions and Workbook).  
I believe that with QIS we will have sufficient information to allow us to make a careful analysis of the 
impact  of  Basel  II,  and  we  have  the  tools  at  our  disposal  to  make  any  necessary  changes  to  the 
calibration.  
Accord Implementation Group  
The  second  area  of  implementation  I  would  like  to  discuss  is  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee’s 
Accord Implementation Group, or AIG. The AIG is chaired by Nick Le Pan, whom many of you know 
as the Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada and who is also the Vice Chairman of the 
Basel Committee. As Nick discussed at the IIB’s annual conference here in Washington in March, the 
AIG plays a critical role in trying to ensure consistency of implementation of Basel II across borders.  
As representatives of international banks, I know that consistent cross-border implementation of Basel 
II is a high priority not only because you want supervision to reflect as much as possible the manner in 
which your organisations are managed, but also because you may be concerned about supervisory 
burden. Let me assure you that it is also in the best interest of supervisors that we try to minimise as 
much as possible any duplication of effort and make the most of our limited resources.  
Having said that, I should also be clear that Basel II will never be implemented with 100% consistency 
across  borders,  just  as  Basel  I  is  not  currently  implemented  with  100%  consistency.  There  are 
important differences in laws, financial markets and supervisory practices, among others, that make it 
impractical to expect that Basel II will look exactly the same in every country.  
The role of the AIG, then, is to share information and promote—not mandate or enforce—consistency 
in implementation of Basel II. It is clear that there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach to implementing the 
new Framework. Rather, implementation should be  tailored to the specific circumstances of a bank 
and the jurisdictions it operates in.  
It  seems  to  me  that  to  enhance  consistency  we  need  to  work  on  improving  vertical  co-operation, 
namely home-host issues, and also horizontal co-operation, that is to say convergence of practices. 
We think that the bottom-up approach is the most efficient and less prescriptive method of achieving 
these goals.  
In this regard, one of the primary methods the AIG uses to promote cross-border co-operation is to 
encourage home supervisors of the 50 or 60 largest internationally active banks in Basel Committee 
member countries to engage in practical outreach to host supervisors and the bank to open clear lines 
of communication and co-operation. While these outreach efforts were initially considered to be “case 
studies”,  they  have  since  evolved  into  actual  implementation  planning.  Since  one  of  the  most 
important aspects of this planning is the bank’s own Basel II implementation rollout plan, it is important 
that internationally active banks not only have such a plan in place, but also that this plan should be 
communicated  within  the  bank,  especially  to  subsidiaries  that  are  significant  in  the  context  of  the 
overall bank or of a particular market.  
This cross-border work has accelerated over the past year, but the Committee recognises that more 
must be done in order to foster greater consistency. We will continue to work with groups like the IIB to 
identify  high-priority  implementation  issues  for  the  industry,  and  we  will  also  continue  to  encourage 
home  and  host  country  supervisors  to  develop  detailed,  practical  implementation  plans  that  are 
tailored to each bank’s unique circumstances.  
   2/3 
Outreach to non-G10  
The third area of implementation that I would like to address is outreach to supervisors outside Basel 
Committee  member  countries,  especially  since  the  IIB  has  actively  encouraged  the  Committee  to 
promote consistent standards for cross-border implementation.  
For  many  banks,  perhaps  the  ideal  situation  would  be  one  in  which  they  could  adopt  the  same 
approach  in  every  jurisdiction  in  which  it  operates.  The  widest  possible  adoption  of  Basel  II  would 
certainly  have  the  benefit  of  reducing  supervisory  burden  for  banks,  but  it  would  have  benefits  for 
supervisors as well. Because Basel II fosters enhanced risk management, more effective supervision, 
greater transparency and financial stability, I believe that it is in many countries’ best interest to adopt 
the new Framework.  
Having  said  that,  however,  we  also  have  to  recognise  that  countries  are  in  varying  states  of 
preparedness  to  adopt  Basel  II.  When  I  talk  with  my  fellow  supervisors,  I  therefore  emphasise  the 
benefits  of  Basel  II,  but  I  also  encourage  them  to  get  the  basics  right  and  not  jump  into  Basel  II 
implementation before they are ready. Even so, I believe that it can be extremely useful for countries 
to  start  implementing  already  some  of  the  principles  behind  pillars  2  and  3  of  the  framework  as 
preparation for the formal transition.  
This dialogue takes many forms. In addition to the informal discussions that I and my fellow Committee 
members have with our non-Committee member colleagues, we also have several formal mechanisms 
in place. For example, the Committee has a long-standing working group that includes representatives 
from sixteen non-member countries, and we have increased our interaction with this working group. In 
July  this  year,  the  Committee  met  in  joint  session  with  this  working  group  in  Krakow,  Poland  to 
discuss, among other things, Basel II implementation issues.  
In  addition,  the  AIG  has  encouraged  non-G10  supervisory  participation  in  working  groups  that  are 
addressing issues related to validation and operational risk. The AIG has also engaged in encouraging 
work with non-G10 supervisors to consider principles for information sharing among home and host 
supervisors. I believe that this dialogue will, over time, foster greater consistency among Committee 
and non-Committee members. The Committee is therefore committed to heightening this dialogue and 
will consider further ways to promote consistency. 
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions and comments. 
 
   3/3 
