Ardian Fullani: Preconditions for inflation targeting in Albania (opening 
speech) 
Greeting  speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Open  Forum 
“Preconditions for Inflation Targeting in Albania”, Tirana, 1-2 December 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to the Open Forum “Preconditions for Inflation Targeting in 
Albania”. I am extremely pleased and proud that I have the honor to welcome so many distinguished 
national and international guests.  
For the Bank of Albania it is the first time to organize an event of this character and with so many 
distinguished guests. I am very grateful that you accepted my invitation and warmly welcome you. I 
look forward to hearing your comments on the proposals that Bank of Albania will be presenting today 
and tomorrow. There will be ample time to hear all your comments and to exchange ideas on Albanian 
policies.   
Our main theme in this Forum is concerned with the principal objective of the central bank. According 
to  our  central  bank  law  The  principle  objective  of  Bank  of  Albania  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price 
stability. The regime we are going to discuss here for achieving this objective is Inflation Targeting.  
Our present formal monetary policy regime is called a heterodox Monetary Targeting. But within the 
central bank we use even different names for it. Some call the monetary regime a “two pillar” approach 
as  it  has  features  of  Monetary  and  Inflation  Targeting.  Often  also,  the  current  regime  is  already 
referred to as Inflation Targeting.  
Under the present monetary policy regime Bank of Albania adheres to a monetary program. Monetary 
policy  aims  at  administering  the  money  supply  and  interest  rates  with  the  view  of  achieving  price 
stability  in  the  short  to  medium  term.  The  exchange  rate  is  freely  floating.  Bank  of  Albania  is 
considering to move to a fully fledged Inflation Targeting regime. Based on available information today, 
we consider this regime to be a good choice. We envisage moving smoothly to this new framework 
within a realistic time frame. I say here deliberately smoothly. Many steps have to be made gradually 
in time. Furthermore we have to analyze carefully all the new information that will become available to 
us. 
The main reasons for adopting Inflation Targeting concern (more) transparency and (more) credibility. 
The central bank wants to move to a more transparent monetary policy regime with a strong anchoring 
of expectations over the medium term. According to Bank of Albania, Inflation Targeting is considered 
to be the appropriate monetary policy regime for Albania in these respects. In our current conduct of 
monetary  policy  we  follow  rules  but  also  take  discretion.  A  regime  that  provides  well-defined  and 
unambiguous objectives would bring us more “constrained discretion”. 
The discussions today and tomorrow will focus on the conditions that we have to meet before formally 
launching  Inflation  Targeting.  Here  in Albania we are  aware  that  essential  requirements  have  to  be 
fulfilled for obtaining a successful IT regime. Some of these preconditions do not depend on Bank of 
Albania, such as the fiscal stance. Other preconditions do not only depend on Bank of Albania, such 
as structural reforms or deepening of the financial system. During these two days I hope to find out on 
which of the listed preconditions for Albania we share the same views, and where our views differ.  
Next  to  this  open  discussion  on  the  conditions  for  a  successful  monetary  policy  regime,  there  is 
another  important  reason for  our  gathering  here.  By means  of  this  Forum  the  central  bank  adds  to 
transparency and contributes to the enhancement of the cooperation within the region. I refer here to 
the region in a broad sense. Bank of Albania finds good relations with neighboring countries extremely 
important.  Coordinated  efforts  to  meet  conditions  and  requirements  that  are  set  internationally  are 
paramount for Albania and the Balkan region to attain the deserved place on the European map. They 
will bring economic and social prosperity to the Albanian people and other people in the region. 
Albania is a relatively small country and for that reason we have to remain modest. But at the same 
time I can honestly say that I am proud, extremely proud, that the central bank of Albania can help in 
opening the way to a further and hopefully rapid convergence of Albania with Europe and other, more 
developed countries. Better communication lines between Bank of Albania, regional central banks and 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
international organizations will pave the way for a further development of commercial banks and other 
institutions. Ultimately a solid bridge will be built between Albania and the outside world, entailing a 
soundly developed financial system, a sustainable economic rate of growth and higher welfare levels 
for Albania.  
In order to have productive discussions I wish to emphasize the open character of our meeting here. 
The Forum is deliberately called an Open Forum. I will appreciate any comments that can contribute to 
the further institutional building of the central bank of Albania up to the highest international standards. 
Only a discussion free in spirit – or as we say in Albanian “i hapur” – can bring us closer to each other 
at the same high levels. 
Now coming to the end of this speech, I wish you all some fruitful but at the same time pleasant days 
here in Tirana. I am sure that our representatives of Bank of Albania will present their main views in a 
transparent way and I look forward to the discussion that will be started by the Panel Members.  
I now give the floor to the Chairman for starting the Open Forum.  
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
