Irma Rosenberg: The property market, the economic situation and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  seminar  on  the 
property and rental market, Karlstad, 11 November 2005.   
Picture to this speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank website, www.riksbank.com. 
 Thank you for your invitation to come to Karlstad and participate in this seminar on the property and 
rental market. To begin with, I intend to speak about the property market and why it is important for us 
at  the  Riksbank  to  monitor  how  it  is  developing.  Then  I  will  discuss  the  economic  situation 
internationally and in Sweden and give my view on inflation prospects and monetary policy.  
The property market 
Developments in the property market are important both in view of the Riksbank's function to promote 
financial stability and of the monetary policy objective to maintain price stability. On account of that we 
regularly monitor the situation in both the commercial property market and the housing market. That 
the property market is significant for the Riksbank’s stability analysis is due to the clear linkages that 
exist  with  the  financial  sector.  The  most  important  is  that  property  companies  are  major  borrowers 
from the banks. Moreover, a large proportion of bank lending is secured on commercial and residential 
property.  So  if  problems  were  to  arise  in  the  property  market,  they  could  spill  over  to  the  financial 
sector. One example of when this happened was during the banking crisis at the start of the 1990s. 
During the years 1992-93, fully 40 per cent of the banks’ loan losses stemmed from the commercial 
property market.  
Let me begin by discussing how I view the developments in the commercial property market and then 
move  on  to  the  analysis  of  the  housing  market.  Because  the  two  markets  have  shown  completely 
different developments in recent years.  
The commercial property market 
The equity market decline in 2000 was accompanied by a weakening in demand for office premises, 
and rents and prices for commercial property began to fall as the number of vacancies rose. In recent 
years, turnover of properties has risen again. Presently, the drop in prices seems to have decreased 
and in some regions prices have even risen. Even though it is difficult to determine whether there has 
been a definite turnaround yet in the price developments for commercial property, such a turnaround 
can be expected to come when demand for labour recovers more clearly. Vacancy levels are still high, 
though, which means that rents have not yet risen more generally. In the long run, a rise in property 
prices should be accompanied by an increase in rental income, since rental income is the underlying 
return on property investment.  
The situation today differs considerably from the conditions seen at the time of the property crisis in 
the early 1990s, when property prices had risen rapidly over a long period without any corresponding 
upswing in rental income. At that time the price increases were driven instead by expectations that 
prices  would  continue  to  rise  strongly  in  the  future.  When  it  eventually  became  evident  that  these 
expectations were not going to materialise, the prices fell quickly. Such speculative elements do not 
appear to exist today. At the same time, property companies’ earnings and debt-servicing ability are 
good. As things stand today, the property sector will hardly cause any large loan losses for the banks 
and so it does not constitute a threat either to the stability of the financial system.  
Housing prices and household debt 
Over  the  past  one  to  two  years  we  in  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  have  devoted  quite  a  bit  of 
attention to the house market, where a rapid rise in prices has gone hand in hand with an increase in 
household debt. But it is important to distinguish between the conclusions we have come to regarding 
   1/6 
the significance for financial stability and the discussions we have had in connection with our monetary 
policy decisions. I will come back to this. 
That house prices have risen rapidly in Sweden and many other countries can hardly have escaped 
anyone’s attention. In Sweden, house prices in the past ten years have more than doubled, and the 
upswing  has  been  especially  strong  in  metropolitan  areas.  Increasing  house  prices  have  been 
accompanied  by  an  accumulation  of  household  debt.  Due  to  the  fall  in  interest  rates,  households’ 
interest costs have dropped, despite the rise in debt. In historical terms, households’ interest costs are 
currently  very  low.  That  the  low  interest  rates  have  increased  households’  ability  to  take  on  bigger 
loans is one cause of the upturn in house prices. During the summer and autumn, the rate of increase 
in house prices appears to have been dampened somewhat in certain areas, but the rate of increase 
is still high. Monthly data show that the annual rate of growth for the whole country during the period 
July to September was 10 per cent.  
The  developments  in  Sweden  are  by  no  means  exceptional.  Internationally,  there  are  examples  of 
countries which have seen sharper rises in house prices, such as Australia and the UK. But there are 
also examples of countries where the rate of increase has been lower, such as Germany. Recently, 
however,  the  international  situation  has  become  more  mixed  in  that  house  price  inflation  in  some 
countries, e.g. Australia and the UK, has slackened considerably whereas in others, including the US, 
it has continued to pick up. In Australia and the UK, the rate of house price increases dropped when 
the central banks there raised key interest rates, although this occurred with a slight lag in Australia. In 
the  US,  the  rate  of  increase  has  continued  upwards  in  spite  of  rises  in  nominal  short-term  market 
interest rates. Longer-term rates, however, have not risen to the same extent since the Federal Funds 
rate began to be raised. Because it is more common for US households to fix the interest rate on their 
home  loans  for  very  long  periods,  they  are  mainly  affected  by  changes  in  long-term  interest  rates. 
Moreover, the pick-up in inflation in the US has meant that real rates of interest have not increased in 
line with the rises in the Federal Funds rate.  
Estimates  at  the  Riksbank  suggest  that  the  upswing  in  Swedish  house  prices  to  date  is  largely 
attributable  to  rising  incomes,  low  interest  rates  and  low  construction  activity.  Since  house  prices 
began to increase in the mid-1990s, nominal disposable incomes have risen by around 40 per cent 
and interest rates have dropped sharply. In 1996 the average nominal mortgage rate for households 
was just over 9 per cent. In June this year it was a little less than 4 per cent. Meanwhile, construction 
of new homes has been very low, even though low interest rates and rising prices have meant that 
construction has picked up relatively well in recent years.  
My assessment is that so far there are no indications of any significant overvaluation of house prices 
on average in the country at current interest rate levels. Furthermore, Sweden essentially has no buy-
to-let market, i.e. a market in which private investors buy homes solely with a view to letting them. That 
limits  speculation  in  housing.  The  apparent  absence  of  any  marked  overvaluation  in  the  country 
overall does not mean of course that house prices in some parts of the country or in some submarkets 
have not been driven up more than is justified in the long term.  
The  fact  that  the  price  increases  can  be  explained  relatively  well  by  rising  incomes,  lower  nominal 
interest rates and low construction activity does not rule out the possibility that the rate of increase 
could slow down, or that prices could even fall in the future. The developments in these explanatory 
factors normally follow the business cycle. However, the adjustment should be less drastic than in a 
situation when prices have soared in a way that cannot be attributed to developments in underlying 
factors.  
At present, it is especially important to remember that interest rates are low in historical terms and that 
they  therefore  very  probably  can  be  expected  to  rise  in  the  period  ahead.  To  get  an  idea  of  what 
constitutes a reasonable level for interest rates in the long term, one can look at countries that have 
had a floating exchange rate and low inflation for a longer time than Sweden. In the US and Germany, 
for instance, key interest rates have normally fluctuated between two and six per cent. When you have 
a regime with a successful inflation targeting policy I think that you normally can expect interest rates 
in this range. That also makes it clear that today’s repo rate of 1.5 per cent is uniquely low. So it is 
important  that  both  households  and  mortgage  institutions  take  account  in  their  estimates  of  the 
possibility that interest rates will be higher in the future than at present. That also means that the rate 
of increase in house prices cannot be expected to remain as high in the long term as it is today.  
 The consequences of this assessment of house price developments differ somewhat depending on 
which  of  the  Riksbank’s  two  tasks  we  are  talking  about.  As  regards  payment  system  stability,  i.e. 
financial stability, I do not believe that house prices and household debt pose any threat at present. 
   2/6 
The  bulk  of  lending  to  households  comprises  loans  secured  on  housing.  A  home  is  part  of  a 
household’s wealth and if the value of a home or apartment were to fall, it naturally would mean that 
the homeowner’s ability to pay would decrease. But the household’s income is not tied to the value of 
its home, and as long as the household is able to meet its borrowing costs, it does not represent a 
threat to the banks and the payment system.  
Both  higher  incomes  and  lower  interest  payments  have  resulted  in  a  good  ability  to  pay  in  the 
household sector at present. Household data estimates that the Riksbank previously has presented in 
its Financial Stability Report show that most indebted households have good margins to cope with a 
loss of income or rises in interest rates in the future.1  Naturally, that does not mean that individual 
households  could  not  run  into  problems  when,  for  example,  interest  rates  increase.  For  the  banks, 
though, it means that credit risk in the household sector as a whole is low. Past experience also shows 
that the household sector seldom causes the banks to incur large loan losses. Not even during the 
deep  crisis  at  the  start  of  the  1990s,  when  house  prices  fell  steeply,  were  losses  on  loans  to  the 
household sector a significant share of banks’ total loan losses.  
From  the  point  of  view  of  monetary  policy,  the  consequences  of  rising  house  prices  and  high  debt 
levels are partly different. House prices influence, via wealth effects, households’ decisions regarding 
saving and consumption and thereby also demand in the economy overall. For indebted households, 
the  scope  for  consumption  is  also  affected  if  the  share  of  their  income  used  for  interest  payments 
changes.  This  is  something  we  have  to  take  account  of  when  forecasting  economic  growth  and 
inflation.  
If interest rates rise, interest expenditure as a share of disposable incomes will increase, which tends 
to  dampen  consumption  demand.  That  is  exactly  what  you  want  to  achieve  if  monetary  policy  is 
tightened.  What  happens  to  house  prices  is  more  uncertain.  In  the  UK  and  Australia,  for  instance, 
house  price  inflation  moderated,  as  I  mentioned,  when  the  central  banks  there  began  to  raise  key 
interest rates, but there has not been a general fall in house prices. In a scenario where the central 
bank begins to raise key interest rates to slow down a strong economy and market interest rates follow 
these upwards, it is plausible that the adjustment in house prices may be relatively soft, with a rate of 
increase that is dampened or levels off. But even a moderation of the rate of increase in house prices 
could  help  to  reinforce  the  tightening  impact  on  household  consumption.  Historically,  households’ 
consumption ratio, i.e. the share of households’ disposable incomes that is used for consumption, has 
been fairly well-correlated with changes in the value of household wealth (see Figure 1).2  Since the 
equity  market  decline  in  2000  this  relationship  has  been  somewhat  less  clear,  but  it  nonetheless 
suggests that house price inflation may only need to slow for the consumption ratio to drop.  
The risks of a more dramatic downward adjustment in house prices would increase if economic activity 
were to weaken relatively sharply and household incomes were to fall as a result. Naturally, this could 
make itself particularly hard felt if the developments in house prices and debt beforehand had taken off 
far too quickly and households had taken on more debt than they can manage in the long run. In that 
case, we could witness a more drastic adjustment that would drive the economy into a deeper and 
more protracted slump that would be difficult for economy policy to manage. This is a risk scenario that 
the Riksbank’s Executive Board has devoted some attention to in recent years. It is also a risk that 
individual households have reason to take into account when they are about to take on new loans. So 
these  mechanisms  are  something  that  we  have  to  take  into  account  when  we  make  our  monetary 
policy decisions.  
The current economic situation 
International economic activity still firm 
International economic growth was high last year. In the latest Inflation Report in October, we noted 
that  the  slowdown  in  international  economic  activity  earlier  this  year  appeared  to  have  been 
temporary. The oil price had turned out considerably higher than we previously expected, however, 
prompting us to sharply revise up our oil price forecast. This was expected to contribute to an increase 
                                                      
1   See Financial Stability Report 2005:1. 
2  
Inflation Report 2005:3, page 43. 
   3/6 
in international price pressures and to a slight moderation of growth. These effects were forecast to be 
relatively limited, however. The picture of relatively firm economic growth abroad in the coming years 
was thus broadly unchanged. Consequently, Swedish export markets also were estimated to grow at a 
firm pace in the next few years.  
In the US, the hurricanes and oil price increases in recent months have contributed to dampening the 
economy  somewhat.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  estimates  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  industrial 
production  has  been  held  back  a  couple  of  percentage  points  in  August  and  September  overall. 
However,  preliminary  National  Accounts  data  for  the  third  quarter  point  to  continued  firm  growth. 
Households  and  companies  have  continued  to  boost  their  consumption  and  investment  at  a  fairly 
stable  rate.  The  purchasing  managers  index  for  both  the  manufacturing  sector  and  the  services 
sectors in October indicate relatively firm developments at the beginning of the fourth quarter as well. 
Elsewhere in the world, too, there have been a number of positive economic signals. In October, the 
purchasing managers index rose in several European countries and in Japan. The German IFO index 
also  showed  a  positive  trend  in  October.  In  the  UK,  however,  the  recent  economic  slowdown  has 
continued, as shown, among other things, by preliminary GDP data for the third quarter.  
Inflation  abroad  has  turned  out  somewhat  higher  recently  than  we  anticipated  in  the  latest  Inflation 
Report.  In  the  US,  inflation  rose  sharply  in  September,  to  almost  five  per  cent.  Excluding  energy 
prices,  though,  it  is  still  at  roughly  two  per  cent.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  again  raised  the  federal 
funds rate at its latest monetary policy meeting, bringing it up to 4 per cent, i.e. 3 percentage points 
higher than when the monetary tightening cycle was begun in June 2004.  
In the euro area and some other countries, too, inflation has picked up more than anticipated recently. 
Here as well the upswing mainly seems to be associated with the direct impact of high energy prices. 
However, there are no real signs as yet that the high energy prices are going to have second-round 
effects on prices more generally in the economies abroad.  
To  sum  up,  recent  data  suggest  that  international  economic  activity  is  developing  in  line  with  the 
assessment in the latest Inflation Report. That implies continued firm growth this year and the coming 
two  years.  Meanwhile,  it  seems  that  inflation  in  the  OECD  area  will  be  somewhat  higher  than  we 
previously expected owing to the higher energy prices. Naturally, there are risks associated with the 
international  economic  performance  and  thus  that  inflation  could  deviate  from  our  main  scenario. 
However, in my opinion the risk outlook, like the main scenario, has not changed to any significant 
extent either since we published our latest Inflation Report in October.   
New interest rate assumption as basis for forecast 
Before I discuss the outlook for the Swedish economy, I would like to make some comments on the 
new repo rate assumption that was introduced in the Riksbank’s forecast in October. The forecast in 
the Inflation Report’s main scenario is now based on the assumption that the repo rate will develop in 
line with financial market expectations, as reflected in implied forward interest rates. In addition, the 
forecast horizon has been lengthened by one year so that the forecasts extend three years ahead.  
Such  an  interest  rate  assumption  has  several  advantages.  One  is  that  it  normally  gives  a  more 
realistic  picture  of  future  monetary  policy.  That  makes  it  easier  to  evaluate  our  forecasts.  It  also 
becomes easier to compare our forecasts with those of other forecasters. The longer forecast horizon 
makes it clearer how inflation is being influenced by various temporary shocks. The reasons for the 
changes  are  to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  set  of  data  for  monetary  policy  and  to  improve  the 
pedagogical aspect of the monetary policy message. It is important to point out that the changes in 
methods  do  not  entail  any  fundamental  change  in  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  Our 
interest  rate  decisions  will  continue  to  be  guided  by  the  ambition  that  inflation  normally  should  be 
returned to target within two years.  
The new repo rate assumption is a technical forecasting assumption, which should not be interpreted 
as  the  Riksbank’s  stance  regarding  which  interest  rate  path  it  considers  to  be  most  desirable.  The 
interest rate path that underpinned the forecast in the October Inflation Report was judged to imply a 
reasonable development of inflation in the coming years. Our conclusion was that if this development 
were to continue in line with our assessment at the time, the repo rate would need to be raised in the 
period ahead. At the same time, we pointed out that there also were different conceivable paths for the 
future repo rate that could give roughly the same outcome for inflation.  
   4/6 
Growth in the swedish economy continuing to strengthen 
For the Swedish economy, too, it was concluded in the Inflation Report that the economic upswing 
appeared to have gained impetus again after the slowdown at the start of the year. Compared with the 
previous assessment, GDP growth and resource utilisation were forecast to be somewhat higher in 
the years ahead, largely owing to more expansionary economic policy. All in all, the assessment was 
that growth would be relatively firm in the Swedish economy in the coming years.  
The  recent  years’  high  productivity  growth  has  partly  laid  the  foundation  for  this  development. 
Companies have been able to boost output with their present workforces, which has improved their 
cost  situation  and  held  back  price  increases  in  the  economy.  The  low  inflation  rate  has  enabled 
monetary policy to be expansionary for a comparatively long period. In addition, the high productivity 
and  relatively  good  profitability  is  anticipated  to  create  scope  for  comparatively  favourable  wage 
growth  in  the  period  ahead.  This  means  that  there  are  good  prospects  for  firm  growth  in  domestic 
demand over the coming years. Expansionary fiscal policy will also help to boost domestic demand, 
while more robust growth in Swedish export markets will contribute to stronger exports. 
New  information  broadly  supports  the  picture  of  a  continued  improvement  in  economic  activity  in 
Sweden.  The  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research’s  (NIER)  latest  business  tendency  survey 
provides  a  relatively  bright  picture  of  economic  conditions  in  most  of  the  surveyed  industries.  The 
confidence  indicator  has  risen  for both the  manufacturing  and  construction  industries as  well  as  for 
trade  and  services  industries.  New  orders  in  manufacturing  have  picked  up,  mainly  in  the  export 
market but there has also been a clear improvement in the domestic market. Monthly data for foreign 
trade  in  goods  also  indicate  an  increasingly  bright  picture  for  exports.  Like  the  developments 
elsewhere in the world, the Swedish purchasing managers index for October also showed a positive 
development. New data for retail sales point to continued relatively strong rises. At the same time, the 
NIER’s  consumer  survey  for  October  provides  somewhat  mixed  signals.  Households  have  become 
slightly  less  optimistic  about  the  Swedish  economy  and  unemployment,  while  their  expectations 
regarding their own finances have improved.  
As regards the labour market, we noted in the October Inflation Report that there were signs of an 
improvement in the situation. The strengthening of domestic demand and the announced measures in 
the  Budget  Bill  were  judged  to  lay  the  foundation  for  a  rise  in  employment  in  the  period  ahead. 
However, the change in methods in the labour force surveys means that developments in the labour 
market are particularly hard to interpret at present. Employment growth appears perhaps to have been 
somewhat stronger than we expected in October. Developments in the number of new job vacancies 
and  redundancy  notices  also  point  to  an  upturn  in  the  labour  market.  In  addition,  the  NIER’s  latest 
quarterly  business  tendency  survey  contained  a  number  of  positive  signals  regarding  companies’ 
hiring plans.  
Taken together, the new information that we have received about the Swedish economy also indicates 
a development well in line with our forecast in the Inflation Report in October.  
Inflation and monetary policy 
Inflation in the Swedish economy has been low since the end of 2003. According to the most recent 
data, for September, annual inflation in terms of the CPI and UND1X stood at 0.6 per cent and 1.0 per 
cent, respectively.3  As we observed in the Inflation Report, the low inflation can be explained in large 
measure  by  favourable  supply  conditions  –  strong  competition  and  fast  productivity  growth  –  and 
relatively low resource utilisation. At the same time, imported inflation has been restrained because 
the share of imports coming from low-cost countries has risen. Imported inflation has also been held 
back by the previous strengthening of the krona.  
Developments in the krona exchange rate are one of all the factors that we have to consider when we 
forecast inflation. It is also one of the few areas where the performance since October has deviated 
considerably from what we expected at the time. Allow me therefore to comment briefly on the krona 
exchange  rate.  For  a  succession  of  years  the  Riksbank  has  been  predicting  that  the  krona  will 
                                                      
3   CPI data for October will be released today, 11 November. 
   5/6 
strengthen. This forecast has been very accurate up to the beginning of this year even though there 
have  been  some  large  short-term  deviations  on  the  way  (see  Figure  2).  During  the  current  year, 
however, the krona has weakened relatively sharply. In the markets, the focus at present seems to be 
very much on interest rate differentials in relation to abroad. Personally, I find the weakening of the 
krona  somewhat  surprising  given  that  underlying  factors  such  as  the  real  economy,  the  relative 
inflation rate and so on point to the opposite. For that reason, we also expected in October that there 
would be an appreciation in the period ahead. I have difficulty seeing any reason for us now to change 
that assessment in our main scenario. But a weaker krona is a risk that we have to take into account. 
Were the krona exchange rate to remain weak, it would of course have implications for the inflation 
forecast.  
In October, as before, we forecast that inflation would rise gradually in the period ahead. Resource 
utilisation was expected to pick up both in Sweden and abroad. We predicted that productivity growth 
would  slacken  somewhat  and  that  cost  pressures  would  gradually  become  higher.  Substitution  in 
favour of cheaper imported goods was expected to continue, but rising global resource utilisation was 
estimated  to  mean  that  global  price  pressures  nevertheless  would  increase  slightly  on  the  whole. 
Against that background, our assessment was that UND1X inflation would rise from today’s low level 
and  be  close  to  the  target  a  couple  of  years  ahead.  In  my  opinion,  the  information  that  has  been 
received since October suggests that our assessment of inflation prospects at that time is holding up 
well so far. We in the Executive Board will convene for our next monetary policy meeting at the start of 
December. At that time, we will also have to factor in the information that has been released up to 
then. 
 
   6/6 
