Toshihiko Fukui: Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
and the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Osaka, 29 September 2005. 
 Introduction  
Today I plan to focus on recent developments in economic activity and prices and the basic 
thinking behind the Bank of Japan's conduct of monetary policy.  
The current situation and the outlook for economic activity and prices  
The Japanese economy has recently emerged from a pause that started during the summer 
of 2004 and continues to recover. The current economic expansion has lasted three years 
and  eight  months  as  of  this  September,  based  on  the  Cabinet  Office's  reference  dates  of 
business cycles, thus recording the third longest expansion phase in the post-World War II 
period. The economy is expected to continue to recover, albeit at a moderate pace.  
Real GDP growth has been strong so far this year with a large annualized increase from the 
previous quarter of 5.8 percent in January-March 2005, followed by a 3.3 percent increase in 
the  April-June  quarter,  although  it  either  remained  unchanged  or  dipped  slightly  over  the 
three quarters from April-June 2004.  
This favorable performance can be attributed to the stronger-than-expected domestic private 
demand, such as business fixed investment and private consumption, along with moderate 
export  growth  due  to  the  expansion  in  overseas  economies.  In  this  environment,  positive 
effects stemming  from  the  increased  corporate  profits  have  gradually spread  to  household 
income, feeding back to the corporate sector via the increase in private consumption: in other 
words, there is a positive interaction between the corporate and household sectors. Industrial 
production is on the increase with the completion of adjustment in IT-related sectors.  
Overall,  the  current  economic  recovery  appears  moderate  in  pace,  but  sustainable.  The 
economy  is  thus  unlikely  to  fall  into  recession  due  to  domestic  factors.  In  the  corporate 
sector,  profitability  has  substantially  improved,  as  the  adjustment  in  excess  capacity  and 
employment  has  finally  come  to  an  end.  According  to  Financial  Statements  Statistics  of 
Corporations  by  Industry,  current  profits  of  Japanese  firms  have  increased  for  three 
consecutive years from fiscal 2002, with both profits and the ratio of current profits to sales 
for fiscal 2004 exceeding those during the height of the bubble era. In fiscal 2005, profits are 
forecast  to  grow  for  the  fourth  consecutive  year,  signifying  buoyancy  in  corporate 
performance.  
Backed by high corporate profitability, business fixed investment is growing steadily in a wide 
range of industries. Still, given the historically high levels of profits and cash flow, the current 
level  of  business  fixed  investment  appears  too  modest.  This  cautious  corporate  behavior 
contributes  to  the  mild  and  long-lasting  recovery.  However,  as  the  economy  continues  to 
recover and the business outlook becomes brighter, an increasing number of firms are likely 
to  start  earmarking  more  cash  flow  for  business  fixed  investment,  the  wellspring  of  their 
future  profits,  with  their  focus  on  maximizing  corporate  value.  We  will  examine  the 
robustness  of  business  conditions,  by  using,  for  example,  the  results  of  the  September 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  which  will  be  released  in 
early October.  
   1/4 
Now turning to the household sector, the employment and income situations appear to be 
improving steadily after a prolonged period of difficulty, as a result of firms' efforts to reduce 
excesses  in  the  workforce  and  personnel  expenses.  The  number  of  employees  has  been 
increasing since last year. More recently, the number of full-time employees has begun to 
increase,  while  the  rise  in  the  number  of  part-time  employees,  who  were  more  in  demand 
when corporate restructuring was in full swing, has slowed. Regular payments are steadily 
increasing and bonus payments for this summer have also increased.  
Given such improvement in the employment and income situations, private consumption has 
been  firm,  and  is  on  an  upward  trend,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  Although  sales  of 
automobiles and sales at department stores were slightly weak in July and August, this was 
mainly in reaction to the substantial increase in sales during the April-June quarter, and the 
upward trend in private consumption remains intact.  
Of course, risk factors do exist and ought to be taken into account in assessing an economic 
outlook. We should pay attention to the protracted surge in crude oil prices and its possible 
effect on overseas economies, including that of the United States.  
Crude oil prices, which have been rising for the past few years, marked a record high around 
the end of August. Rises in crude oil prices entail the risk of deceleration of world economic 
growth as a result of declines in the real purchasing power of non-oil producing countries. So 
far, however, the world economy continues to expand at a robust pace and shows no sign of 
this risk materializing. There are several reasons for this. First, the recent rises in crude oil 
prices  have  not  been  caused  by  oil  production  capacity  constraints.  Rather,  they  are  to  a 
large  extent  attributable  to  an  expansion  of  demand  mainly  in  emerging  countries,  whose 
economies  have  enjoyed  rapid  growth.  Second,  rises  in  oil  prices  tend  to  cause  income 
transfer  to  oil-producing  countries  through  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  of  non-oil 
producing countries, thereby boosting the purchasing power of the former. The critical point 
in this regard is how the increased income is spent. Judging from the recent rise in Japanese 
exports to oil-producing countries and other evidence, it seems that a mechanism of income 
reflow from oil-producing countries to non-oil producing countries is in fact operating.  
In addition, it should be stressed that the recent crude oil hike has not led to a rise in a broad 
range of categories in consumer prices nor a heightening of inflationary expectations in major 
countries, and as a result, there has been no need for a rapid tightening of monetary policy. 
This  can  be  explained  by  factors  such  as  the  increased  credibility  of  monetary  policy  in 
countries  pursuing  price  stability,  and  also  the  expansion  of  supply  of  low-priced  products 
flowing into the global market as a result of entry of emerging countries. Long-term interest 
rates  remain  at  low  levels  in  major  economies  as  a  result  of  stable  prices  and 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  The  pervasive  low  interest  rate  environment  has  laid  the 
foundation of world economic growth, as seen, for example, in the U.S. economy, where low 
mortgage interest rates have boosted housing prices and this in turn has been supporting an 
increase in household expenditure.  
If crude oil prices remain high, we should keep close watch for any sign of a rise in inflation 
expectations or rapid tightening of monetary policy, leading to deceleration in world economic 
growth. In this context, we should also assess the negative effects of the hurricane which hit 
the United States late last month and has caused devastating damage to the oil production 
facilities and refineries in the area.  
Based on the above economic outlook, I will elaborate on price developments. The corporate 
goods  price  index  continues  to  rise,  mainly  reflecting  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices,  and  this 
uptrend is expected to continue for the time being.  
With regard to the consumer price index (CPI), the change in the core CPI, which excludes 
fresh  food,  is  hovering  slightly  below  zero  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  It  is  likely  to 
become zero or slightly higher toward the end of the year since the negative contribution of 
rice  prices and  the  reduction  in electricity  and  telephone charges  is expected  to  dissipate. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  increase  thereafter,  as  the 
   2/4 
Japanese economy is likely to continue growing at above its potential rate, causing the gap 
between supply and demand to shrink further, and also the recent uptrend in wages is likely 
to exert upward pressures on prices.  
financial  system  stability  and  an  accommodative  corporate 
The bank's conduct of monetary policy  
Based  on  the  above  assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices,  I  will  explain  the  Bank's 
thinking on the conduct of monetary policy.  
The  Bank  has  been  implementing  the  quantitative  easing  policy  to  achieve  sustainable 
economic growth under price stability. The framework consists of two key elements. First, the 
Bank  provides  ample  liquidity  to  the  money  market  far  in  excess  of  required  reserves. 
Second, the Bank is firmly committed to maintaining such ample provision of liquidity until the 
year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable 
basis. This framework underpins expectations, based on inflation projections among market 
participants,  that  the  quantitative  easing  policy  will  continue  for  some  time.  As  a  result, 
market  interest  rates  remain  steady  at  low  levels,  including  those  with  relatively  longer 
maturities.  
With regard to the first element, the Bank's provision of ample liquidity greatly contributed to 
maintaining 
financing 
environment by responding to precautionary demand for liquidity of financial institutions when 
there  were  strong  concerns  about  financial  system  stability.  Since  then,  concerns  about 
financial system stability have largely subsided, as evidenced by the smooth implementation 
of  the  full  removal  of  blanket  deposit  insurance  in  April  2005.  As  a  result,  the  quantitative 
easing policy is effectively becoming closer to a maintenance of zero interest rates. In the 
current situation, the quantitative easing policy contributes to maintaining an accommodative 
financial environment by stabilizing market interest rates, thus allowing firms to continue to 
enjoy low funding costs.  
As  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  maintain  the  quantitative 
easing  policy  based  on  the  commitment  mentioned  earlier  since  the  core  CPI  is  still 
registering a slight year-on-year decline.  
The  Bank  formulated  this  commitment  when  it  introduced  the  quantitative  easing  policy  in 
March  2001.  At  the  time,  following  the  bursting  of  the  global  IT  bubble,  and  the  resultant 
sharp  fall  in  aggregate  demand,  the  economy  had  fallen  into  recession  and  prices  were 
declining. The Bank decided to employ an unprecedented measure, linking its commitment in 
terms of policy duration to the observed CPI, to create further monetary easing effects even 
under zero interest rate conditions.  
Thereafter in October 2003, the Bank clarified its commitment to maintaining the quantitative 
easing policy. Specifically, the Bank specified two conditions. First, the year-on-year rate of 
increase in the core CPI must register zero percent or above over a few months. Second, the 
prospective  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  must  not  be  zero  percent  or  below. 
These  two  conditions,  as  necessary  conditions  for  terminating  the  policy,  constitute  a  firm 
commitment: in other words, the Bank commits itself to continuing the policy until they are 
fulfilled. At the same time, the Bank made it clear that these two conditions are not sufficient 
conditions  in  the  sense  that  the  Bank  will  not  necessarily  make  an  automatic  decision  to 
terminate the policy as soon as they are fulfilled. To put it in a nutshell, the Bank will decide 
whether to terminate the policy by examining developments in economic activity and prices 
and judging whether the situation justifies asserting that the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI is registering zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis--in other words, whether 
the commitment has effectively been fulfilled as a whole.  
Of  course,  the  timing  of  terminating  the  quantitative  easing  policy  crucially  depends  on 
developments in economic activity and prices. Based on the projections regarding economic 
   3/4 
activity  and  prices  mentioned  earlier,  the  probability  of  terminating  the  policy  is  likely  to 
gradually increase over the course of fiscal 2006.  
At that juncture, the Bank will shift the operating target for money market operations back to 
short-term  interest  rates  from  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank. 
Since, as I pointed out earlier, the quantitative easing policy is effectively becoming closer to 
a maintenance of zero interest rates, a change in the policy framework itself does not imply 
an  abrupt  change  in  monetary  policy.  Although  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy 
obviously  depends  on  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  an  accommodative 
financial  environment  is  likely  to  be  maintained,  as  long  as  upward  pressures  on  prices 
continue  to  be  to  a  large  extent  contained  and  the  economy  follows  a  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth  path,  as  projected  in  the  April  2005  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and 
Prices.  
Conclusion  
The  Japanese  economy  has  emerged  from  a  pause  and  continues  to  recover,  albeit  at  a 
moderate  pace.  The  Bank  is  determined  to  carry  out  monetary  policy  so  as  to  support 
private-sector initiatives, and thereby realize sustainable economic growth and stable prices. 
 
   4/4 
