Alan Greenspan: Economic flexibility 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the National Italian American Foundation, Washington DC, 12 October 2005. 
 It is a pleasure once again to speak before the National Italian American Foundation. I have long since 
been awarded the status of honorary Italian, for which I am sincerely appreciative. 
In my more than eighteen years at the Federal Reserve, much has surprised me, but nothing more 
than the remarkable ability of our economy to absorb and recover from the shocks of stock market 
crashes,  credit  crunches,  terrorism,  and  hurricanes--blows  that  would  have  almost  certainly 
precipitated deep recessions in decades past. This resilience, not evident except in retrospect, owes 
to a remarkable increase in economic flexibility, partly the consequence of deliberate economic policy 
and partly the consequence of innovations in information technology. 
A couple of weeks ago, I outlined to a convention of fellow economists how I believe this all came 
about. I should like to share some of those views with you this morning. 
For  this  country's  first  century  and  a  half,  government  was  only  peripherally  engaged  in  what  we 
currently  term  the  management  of  aggregate  demand.  Any  endeavor  to  alter  the  path  of  private 
economic  activity  through  active  intervention  would  have  been  deemed  inappropriate  and,  more 
important,  unnecessary.  In  one  of  the  more  notable  coincidences  of  history,  our  Declaration  of 
Independence  was  signed  the  same  year  in  which  Adam  Smith  published  his  Wealth  of  Nations. 
Smith's  prescription  of  letting  markets  prevail  with  minimal  governmental  interference  became  the 
guiding philosophy of American leadership for much of our history. 
With  a  masterful  insight  into  the  workings  of  the  free-market  institutions  that  were  then  emerging, 
Smith  postulated  an  "invisible  hand"  in  which  competitive  behavior  drove  an  economy's  resources 
toward their fullest and most efficient use. Economic growth and prosperity, he argued, would emerge 
if governments stood aside and allowed markets to work. 
Indeed,  within  a  very  few  decades,  free-market  capitalism  became  the  prevailing  stance  of  most 
governments' economic policy, even if it was often implemented imperfectly. This framework withstood 
the conceptual onslaughts of Robert Owen's utopians, Karl Marx's communists and later, the Fabian 
socialists. 
The  free-market  paradigm  came  under  more-vigorous  attack  after  the  collapse  of  the  world's  major 
economies  in  the  1930s.  As  the  global  depression  deepened,  the  seeming  failure  of  competitive 
markets  to  restore  full  employment  perplexed  economists  until  John  Maynard  Keynes  offered  an 
explanation that was to influence policy practitioners for generations to come. He argued that, contrary 
to the tenets of Smith and his followers, market systems did not always converge to full employment. 
They often appeared to settle at an equilibrium in which significant segments of the workforce were 
unable  to  find  jobs.  In  the  place  of  Smith's  laissez-faire  approach  arose  the  view  that  government 
action was required to restore full employment and to rectify what were seen as other deficiencies of 
market-driven outcomes. 
A  tidal  wave  of  regulation  soon  swept  over  much  of  the  American  business  community.  Labor 
relations,  securities  markets,  banking,  agricultural  pricing,  and  many  other  segments  of  the  U.S. 
economy became subject to the oversight of government. 
The  apparent  success  of  the  economy  during  World  War  II,  which  operated  at  full  employment  in 
contrast  to  the  earlier  frightening  developments  during  the  Depression  years,  led  to  a  considerable 
reluctance to fully dismantle wartime regulations when the hostilities came to an end. 
However,  cracks  in  the  facade  of  government  economic  management  appeared  early  in  the  
post-World War II years, and those cracks continued to widen as time passed. At the macro level, the 
system of wage and price controls imposed in the 1970s to deal with the problem of inflation proved 
unworkable  and  ineffective.  And  at  the  micro  level,  heavy  regulation  of  many  industries  was 
increasingly seen as impeding efficiency and competitiveness. By the early 1980s, the long-prevalent 
notion  that  the  centrally  planned  economy  of  the  Soviet  Union  was  catching  up  with  the  West  had 
begun to be discredited, though it was not fully discarded until the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 
exposed the economic ruin behind the Iron Curtain. 
   1/6 
Starting in the 1970s, U.S. Presidents, supported by bipartisan majorities in the Congress, responded 
to the growing recognition of the distortions created by regulation, by deregulating large segments of 
the transportation, communications, energy, and financial services industries. The stated purpose of 
this  deregulation  was  to  enhance  competition,  which  had  come  to  be  seen  as  a  significant  spur  to 
productivity  growth  and  elevated  standards  of  living.  Assisting  in  the  dismantling  of  economic 
restraints was the persistent, albeit slow, lowering of barriers to cross-border trade and finance. 
As a consequence, the United States, then widely seen as a once-great economic power that had lost 
its  way,  gradually  moved  back  to  the  forefront  of  what  Joseph  Schumpeter,  the  renowned  Harvard 
professor, had called "creative destruction"--the continual scrapping of old technologies to make way 
for the innovative. In that paradigm, standards of living rise because depreciation and other cash flows 
of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent technologies are marshaled, along with new 
savings,  to  finance  the  production  of  capital  assets  that  almost  always  embody  cutting-edge 
technologies. Workers, of necessity, migrate with the capital. 
Through  this  process,  wealth  is  created,  incremental  step  by  incremental  step,  as  high  levels  of 
productivity  associated  with  innovative  technologies  displace  less-efficient  productive  capacity.  The 
model  presupposes  the  continuous  churning  of  a  flexible  competitive  economy  in  which  the  new 
displaces the old. 
As the 1980s progressed, the success of that strategy confirmed the earlier views that a loosening of 
regulatory  restraint  on  business  would  improve  the  flexibility  of  our  economy.  No  specific  program 
encompassed  and  coordinated  initiatives  to  enhance  flexibility,  but  there  was a  growing  recognition 
that  a  market  economy  could  best  withstand  and  recover  from  shocks  when  provided  maximum 
flexibility. 
Beyond  deregulation,  innovative  technologies,  especially  information  technologies,  have  contributed 
critically to enhanced flexibility. A quarter-century ago, for example, companies often required weeks 
to discover the emergence of inventory imbalances, allowing production to continue to exacerbate the 
excess.  Excessive  stockbuilding,  in  turn,  necessitated  a  deeper  decline  in  output  than  would  have 
been  necessary  had  the  knowledge  of  the  status  of  inventories  been  fully  current.  The  advent  of 
innovative information technologies significantly shortened the reporting lag, enabling flexible real-time 
responses to emerging imbalances. 
Deregulation and the newer information technologies have joined, in the United States and elsewhere, 
to  advance  flexibility  in  the  financial  sector.  Financial  stability  may  turn  out  to  have  been  the  most 
important contributor to the evident significant gains in economic stability over the past two decades. 
Historically, banks have been at the forefront of financial intermediation, in part because their ability to 
leverage offers an efficient source of funding. But in periods of severe financial stress, such leverage 
too often brought down banking institutions and, in some cases, precipitated financial crises that led to 
recession or worse. But recent regulatory reform, coupled with innovative technologies, has stimulated 
the development of financial products, such as asset-backed securities, collateral loan obligations, and 
credit default swaps, that facilitate the dispersion of risk. 
Conceptual  advances 
financial  products,  along  with 
improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs 
of,  and  expanded  the  opportunities  for,  hedging  risks  that  were  not  readily  deflected  in  earlier 
decades.  The  new  instruments  of  risk  dispersal  have  enabled  the  largest  and  most  sophisticated 
banks, in their credit-granting role, to divest themselves of much credit risk by passing it to institutions 
with  far  less  leverage.  Insurance  companies,  especially  those  in  reinsurance,  pension  funds,  and 
hedge funds continue to be willing, at a price, to supply credit protection. 
These increasingly complex financial instruments have contributed to the development of a far more 
flexible, efficient, and hence resilient financial system than the one that existed just a quarter-century 
ago.  After  the  bursting  of  the  stock  market  bubble  in  2000,  unlike  previous  periods  following  large 
financial  shocks,  no  major  financial  institution  defaulted,  and  the  economy  held  up  far  better  than 
many had anticipated. 
If we have attained a degree of flexibility that can mitigate most significant shocks--a proposition as yet 
not  fully  tested--the  performance  of  the  economy  will  be  improved  and  the  job  of  macroeconomic 
policymakers will be made much simpler. 
Governments  today,  although  still  far  more  activist  than  in  the  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth 
centuries, are rediscovering the benefits of competition and the resilience to economic shocks that it 
in  pricing  options  and  other  complex 
   2/6 
fosters. We are also beginning to recognize an international version of Smith's invisible hand in the 
globalization of economic forces. 
Whether  by  intention  or  by  happenstance,  many,  if  not  most,  governments  in  recent  decades  have 
been relying more and more on the forces of the marketplace and reducing their intervention in market 
outcomes.  We  appear  to  be  revisiting  Adam  Smith's  notion  that  the  more  flexible  an  economy,  the 
greater  its  ability  to  self-correct  after  inevitable,  often  unanticipated  disturbances.  That  greater 
tendency toward self-correction has made the cyclical stability of the economy less dependent on the 
actions  of  macroeconomic  policymakers,  whose  responses  often  have  come  too  late  or  have  been 
misguided. 
It is important to remember that most adjustment of a market imbalance is well under way before the 
imbalance  becomes  widely  identified  as  a  problem.  Individual  prices,  exchange  rates,  and  interest 
rates, adjust incrementally in real time to restore balance. In contrast, administrative or policy actions 
that await clear evidence of imbalance are of necessity late. 
Being able to rely on markets to do the heavy lifting of adjustment is an exceptionally valuable policy 
asset.  The  impressive  performance  of  the  U.S.  economy  over  the  past  couple  of  decades,  despite 
shocks that in the past would have surely produced marked economic contraction, offers the clearest 
evidence of the benefits of increased market flexibility. 
We weathered a decline on October 19, 1987, of a fifth of the market value of U.S. equities with little 
evidence  of  subsequent  macroeconomic  stress--an  episode  that  hinted  at  a  change  in  adjustment 
dynamics. The credit crunch of the early 1990s and the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000 
were  absorbed  with  the  shallowest  recessions  in  the  post-World  War  II  period.  And  the  economic 
fallout from the tragic events of September 11, 2001, was moderated by market forces, with severe 
economic weakness evident for only a few weeks. Most recently, the flexibility of our market-driven 
economy has allowed us, thus far, to weather reasonably well the steep rise in spot and futures prices 
for oil and natural gas that we have experienced over the past two years. The consequence has been 
a far more stable economy. 
 Flexibility  is  most  readily  achieved  by  fostering  an  environment  of  maximum  competition.  A  key 
element  in  creating  this  environment  is  flexible  labor  markets.  Many  working  people,  regrettably, 
equate labor market flexibility with job insecurity. 
Despite  that  perception,  flexible  labor  policies  appear  to  promote  job  creation,  not  destroy  it.  An 
increased  capacity  of  management  to  discharge  workers  without  excessive  cost,  for  example, 
apparently increases companies' willingness to hire  without fear of unremediable mistakes. The net 
effect, to the surprise of most, has been what appears to be a decline in the structural unemployment 
rate in the United States. 
Protectionism in all its guises, both domestic and international, does not contribute to the welfare of 
American workers. At best, it is a short-term fix at a cost of lower standards of living for the nation as a 
whole. We need increased education and training for those displaced by creative destruction, not a 
stifling of competition. 
A consequence of our highly competitive, rapidly growing economy is that the average American will 
hold  many  different  jobs  in  a  lifetime.  Accordingly,  education  is  no  longer  the  sole  province  of  the 
young.  Significant  numbers  of  workers  continue  their  education  well  beyond  their  twenties.  Millions 
enroll in community colleges in later life, for example, to upgrade their skills or get new ones. It is a 
measure of the dynamism of the U.S. economy that community colleges are one of the fastest growing 
segments of our educational system. 
 Moving  forward,  I  trust  that  we  have  learned  durable  lessons  about  the  benefits  of  fostering  and 
preserving a flexible economy. That flexibility has been the product of the economic dynamism of our 
workers and firms that was unleashed, in part, by the efforts of policymakers to remove rigidities and 
promote competition. 
Although the business cycle has not disappeared, flexibility has made the economy more resilient to 
shocks  and  more  stable  overall  during  the  past  couple  of  decades.  To  be  sure,  that  stability,  by 
fostering  speculative  excesses,  has  created  some  new  challenges  for  policymakers.  But  more 
   3/6 
fundamentally, an environment of greater economic stability has been key to the impressive growth in 
the standards of living and economic welfare so evident in the United States. 
Y V Reddy: Banks and corporates as partners in progress 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  FICCI-IBA 
Conference on ‘Global Banking: Paradigm Shift’, Mumbai, 7 October 2005. 
 Friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for giving me the opportunity to be with you and deliver the valedictory 
address  at  the  FICCI-IBA  Conference  on  ‘Global  Banking  :  Paradigm  Shift’.  It  is  noteworthy  that 
eminent persons from diverse areas of expertise and experience have participated in the Conference; 
and quite a few of them are from global bodies such as, BIS and central bankers or banking regulators 
from Mauritius, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, U.K. and U.S.A. It is difficult to add significantly to 
the  erudite  discussions  that  have  already  taken  place.  I  am  well  aware  that  I  will  be  disappointing 
some analysts here by not giving my views on the macro-economic front and policy leads. This is a 
conscious choice as the formal announcement of the Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy is due in 
about a couple of weeks. Any meaningful statement by me on monetary policy would militate against 
the emergence of a collegiate approach to monetary policy which is our avowed objective.  
I had some difficulty in choosing a subject for this address since the three Deputy Governors and one 
Executive Director of the Reserve Bank India (RBI) have spoken at this Conference on almost all the 
relevant aspects and I also happen to fully agree with them. But the uniqueness of this Conference, in 
being sponsored by a Chamber of commerce and industry, and the banks’ association, warrants some 
deliberation. Perhaps, it would be appropriate to dwell on certain aspects of how the banks and the 
corporates can nurture and strengthen their mutually rewarding partnership while also contributing to 
the progress of our economy. 
At  the  outset,  let  me  briefly  recount  the  strengths  of  our  banks  and  our  corporates,  as  also  the 
challenges  faced  by  them.  The  performance  of  and  outlook  for  the  banking  sector  in  India,  as 
evidenced  by  the  movement  in  Bankex  relative  to  BSE  Sensex  in  the  recent  years,  appear  to  be 
positive. Both, the public and the private sector banks have gained in their equity prices and market 
capitalisation.  The  interest  of  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  in  the  Indian  banking  sector  is 
considerable  and  it  is  widely  believed  that  their  exposure  to  this  sector  is  at  the  top,  amounting  to 
about  one-sixth  of  their  total  exposure  to  India.  The  study  of  ‘India’s  Top  20  Banks’  by  the  
S&P/  CRISIL,  released  this  week,  documents  the  steady  improvement  as  well  as  their  operating 
resilience and preparedness for Basel II. The Report lists the challenges, the most important being the 
risk-management  and  consolidation.  RBI  expects  to  release  the  Report  on  Trends  and  Progress  in 
Banking in a couple of months, which, I hope, will add further comfort to the analysts of our banking 
sector.  
Indian  corporates  have  demonstrated  that  some  of  them  are  world-class  with  noticeable  overseas 
acquisitions; and the global as well as domestic expectations from their entrepreneurship are perhaps 
unprecedented. S&P / CRISIL have also published a report on "Indian Top 50 Corporates" this week, 
which is candid in assessing the strengths of India’s corporate sector along with possible challenges. 
As a central banker, I was struck by a remark in the Introduction to the Report. The Report appreciates 
the  overall  financial  profiles  of  the  top  50  corporates  and  describes  them  as  currently  ‘strong’  to 
‘adequate’  but  comments  that  the  companies  choosing  to  debt-finance  their  growth  could  face 
challenges.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  joint  efforts  of  the  banks  and  the  corporates  in  India  could 
perhaps be an imperative for meeting the challenges ahead.  
The relationship of the banker and corporate borrower in India has come a long way from the days of 
highly regulated economy. During the last two decades, there has been a sea change in the outlook of 
the banks as well as the corporates towards each other. While the balance sheets of banks are now 
stronger and their operations far more transparent, their lending practices too are better attuned to the 
requirements of various categories of borrowers. The corporates, on their part, have shown a greater 
sense of responsibility in the use and repayment of the borrowed funds. A noteworthy aspect is that 
   4/6 
under  current  guidelines  relating  to  External  Commercial  Borrowings,  Indian  corporates  have  been 
able to borrow significant amounts from overseas directly, based on their own credit standing.  
In this context, it would be useful to recall some of the important policy initiatives of the RBI relevant to 
bank-corporate relationship. Dr. Rangarajan’s monetary policy of April 1997 announced a package of 
measures  permitting  multiple  banking  arrangements  for  the  corporates  and  providing  greater 
operational freedom to the banks. Dr. Jalan’s policy pronouncements followed through this initiative 
with  development  of  the  money  market,  move  towards  universal  banking  and  above  all,  urging  the 
banks and corporates to put in place sound risk-management systems – particularly for market risks. 
In 2003, RBI issued a Fair Practices Code to be followed by the banks which aimed at making them 
more  responsive  to  the  borrowers  and  enhancing  the  confidence  of  borrowers  in  the  banks  as  a 
source of funds. The procedure for declaring borrowers as "wilful defaulters" has been streamlined so 
as to afford full opportunity to the corporates to present their viewpoint before so classifying them.  
Recent  developments  that  warrant  a  careful  redesign  of  the  bank-corporate  relationship  include 
financing by multiple banks, through several instruments including investments, and access to a wider 
choice of sources of finance for corporates such as capital markets and external financing. Since such 
choices nudge towards transaction-based banker-customer relationship, these could impinge on the 
access to the information required by the bankers for financial assessment as also on the ability of 
corporates to get an assured and appropriately priced financial package. Perhaps there is a need for 
supplementing transaction-based relationship between banks and corporates with a more active and 
meaningful dialogue between them. I am sure such meetings do take place even now, but it is worth 
exploring whether the process needs to be strengthened. In this regard, there may be an advantage in 
industry  bodies  like  FICCI  and  IBA  embarking  upon  a  review  of  the  existing  practices  of  dialogues 
between  the  banks  and  their  corporate  borrowers  to  ensure  and  enhance  trust,  transparency  and 
timeliness – the three "t"s of banking. Such a review could perhaps also promote healthy competition 
amongst banks and add to the comfort of the corporates too.  
The Corporate Debt Restructuring Mechanism (CDRM), which became operational since March 2002, 
is another platform for banker-corporate interface. Its efficacy is evident in the fact that well over one 
hundred  cases  have  been  approved  for  restructuring  under  this  system.  The  CDRM  was  reviewed 
recently by a Special Group and we expect to bring out, in a couple of weeks, the revised operational 
guidelines for improvements in the CDRM to make the restructuring smoother for genuine cases. 
Another  area  of  common  interest  to  the  banks  and  the  corporates  is  the  risk  management.  The 
lenders  and  investors  have  an  obvious  interest  in  accurately  assessing  a  firm’s  risk-management 
performance, apart from its underlying financials, so as to understand the risks assumed by the firm 
and  those  it  has  hedged  or  transferred  to  others.  While  the  banks’  risk  exposures  and  their  risk-
management  strategy  is  usually  an  item  of  public  disclosure,  there  is  a  corresponding  need  for 
corporates too to make adequate disclosures regarding their risk exposures, specially to derivatives 
and  foreign  exchange.  This  would  enable  the  banker  to  assess  the  risk  profile  of  the  corporate 
accurately  and  to  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  various  financial  products  on  offer.  While  these 
disclosures could be made mandatory through the Accounting Standards – on which, I understand, 
ICAI  is  working  –  it  would  be  desirable  if  the  corporates  adopt  such  disclosures  voluntarily,  sooner 
than later, in their own as well as the system’s interest. 
It is useful for the bankers to track the changing dynamics of the pattern of corporate financing. The 
equity base of the corporate sector, relative to debt, seems to have increased, and many corporates 
are  currently  cash  surplus,  presumably  to  meet  their  investment  commitments.  Besides,  the 
corporates also have access to other funding sources, especially external commercial borrowings and 
domestic  and  global  capital  markets.  The  Development  Finance  Institutions  have  substantially  got 
subsumed  in  the  banking  sector  and  banks  are  increasingly  functioning  as  universal  banks.  Banks’ 
lending  to  households,  be  it  through  consumer  credit  or  housing  loans,  has  been  increasing  in  the 
recent  past  along  with  increases  in  lending  to  priority  sectors.  It  may,  therefore,  be  worthwhile  for 
banks,  especially  those  with  long  history,  to  review  their  systems  and  procedures  for  lending  and 
extending other forms of support to the corporates. An area of concern, in terms of public perception, 
is that there is under-pricing of credit risk for private sector corporates while there could be overpricing 
of risks in lending to agriculture as well as small and medium enterprises. There is merit in reviewing 
the  current  procedures  and  processes  of  pricing  of  credit,  perhaps  through  a  well  structured  
segment-wise analysis of costs at various stages of intermediation in the whole credit cycle.  
   5/6 
We also notice that several corporates are active in treasury management. Hence, they need to be 
well-equipped  to  identify,  measure,  manage  and  control  the  risks  especially  when,  often,  they  are 
counterparties to the treasury transactions of the banks. 
Regulatory framework for banks is gradually encouraging banks to assess and manage the risks on 
their own while regulation focuses on the adequacy and robustness of the systems in vogue in the 
banks for the purpose. The share of corporates in the lending by the banks, however, does not reflect 
the full range of the banks’ exposure to them as it does not capture significant exposure to corporates 
through investments in bonds and other instruments. More important, banks’ overall exposure would 
also include the non-funded exposures through credit substitutes and derivatives transactions which 
have grown significantly over the last few years. The continuing close linkage between the balance 
sheet  of  banks  and  of  the  corporate  sector  is,  thus,  clearly  evident  but  only  the  nature  of  
bank-corporate interaction is getting diverse and wider. A regulator’s comfort, therefore, lies not only in 
satisfaction  about  the  quality  of  risk-management  in  the  banks  but  also  in  the  banks’  level  of 
understanding  of  risk-management  by  their  corporate  clients.  In  a  sense,  there  is  an  element  of 
delegated supervision to be exercised by the banks over the corporates. In this background, a closer 
ongoing  dialogue  across  a  wider  spectrum  in  a  spirit  of  partnership  between  the  banks  and  the 
corporates adds to the comfort of the regulator.  
Consistent  with  the  theme  of  the  conference,  it  is  essential  to  ponder  over  the  implications  of  the 
paradigm  shift  in  global  banking  for  the  bank-corporate  relationship.  There  are  differences  across 
countries in the role and functioning of banks vis-à-vis the corporates. For example, the Anglo-Saxon, 
the  European  and  the  Japanese  practices  do  vary  though  there  is  some  evidence  of  elements  of 
convergence  with  the  emerging  importance  of  trans-national  corporates,  global  banks  as  well  as 
financial  intermediaries  and  increasing  global  financial  integration.  In  the  bank-dominated  financial 
systems, such as in India, banks support corporates not only by direct lending, but also through their 
positions  in  money,  debt,  equity  and  derivatives  markets.  Further,  the  industrial  progress  involves 
entrepreneurship,  inevitably  entailing  some  measurement  and  management  of  implicit  risks.  As  the 
partners  in  progress,  the  banks  are  now  called  upon  not  only  to  manage  the  risks  in  lending  but 
increasingly,  to  also  assess  the  risks  involved  in  the  business  to  which  they  are  lending.  In  this 
background,  the  case  for  a  more  intense  dialogue,  to  the  extent  of  some  partnering,  becomes 
stronger.  
Let me conclude by complimenting the organisers for the excellent Conference; the participants who 
met me deeply appreciated the high quality deliberations at this truly global gathering.  
Thank you. 
 
   6/6 
