Klaus Liebscher: The European monetary union and the euro - a contribution 
to international stability 
Welcome address by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Academic 
Ceremony - Awarding of the Academic Degree of Master of Laws, Vienna, 10 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome all of you in the OeNB and to participate in your Academic 
Ceremony of awarding the Academic Degree of Master of Laws. Not only do I personally consider the 
Postgraduate Program in International Tax Law of the Vienna University of Economics and Business 
Administration as one of the centrepieces of post gradual education, but due to its uniqueness and 
international  orientation,  it  became  a  worldwide  renowned  and  exclusive  program  offering  ample 
opportunities to its graduates. My sincere congratulations to you, the graduates! 
In  this  context  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Vienna  University  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration for its never ceasing enthusiasm to develop and further an outstanding education for its 
graduates – the core for the future, not only in Austria but also in all the countries its graduates will find 
their vocation. I am pleased to say that, not only as the Governor of the OeNB but also in my function 
as  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  University  Board  of  the  Vienna  University  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration. 
The  year  2005  is  for  you  but  also  for  Austria  a  memorable  one.  We  are  celebrating  the  60th 
anniversary  of  the  Second  Republic,  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Austrian  State  Treaty  and 
independence as well as ten years of EU membership. Especially the ten years of EU membership 
have marked the landscape decisively. The momentum supplied by the driving forces of the European 
integration was impressive. Already, the Single European Market had aimed at removing obstacles to 
the free movement of goods, services, people and capital in Europe. The next step along the road of 
political and economic integration was 1999 the creation of European Monetary Union (EMU) and the 
introduction  of  the  euro.  Together  with  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  in  2004  to  now  25 
Member States we can look back on a remarkable development. 
In Austria EU membership contributed not only to solid economic growth, to a significant consolidation 
of public finances and to price stability, but also to structural changes securing Austria its position in a 
competitive environment. A number of reforms would have to come about anyway but EU membership 
was a catalyst for many of them. Let me mention here the tax reform as well as the improvements 
undertaken in the pension-, health- and administrative systems. Measured by GDP per capita figures, 
Austria now ranks third in the EU right behind Luxembourg and Denmark. The goods exports-to-GDP 
ratio in Austria grew from 24% in 1995 to 38% in 2004 and foreign direct investments increased in 
recent  years  from  12%  to  22%  of  GDP.  In  addition,  the  average  (CPI)  inflation  rate  fell  from 
approximately 2.8% in the decade before EU membership to some 1.7% thereafter and at 5.1%, the 
unemployment rate is one of the lowest in the EU. Just recently Austria’s reform efforts were cited as a 
positive example by the IMF and the OECD in the course of their annual consultations on the Austrian 
economy.  
As  others  have  already  observed,  the  euro  was  a  quantum  leap  in  the  direction  of  creating  an 
economic area without internal frontiers. EMU marked the end of a Europe fragmented by monetary 
differences as the euro became the single currency of more than 300 million people with an economic 
weight roughly equal to the USA. The euro quickly turned into the second most widely used currency 
and  is  now  a  key  currency  for  the  monetary  policies  of  many  countries.  As  for  its  important 
international dimension, the stabilizing influence of the euro on the international financial system was 
already successfully demonstrated after the tragic events of September 11, 2001.  
Given  the  size  and  the  economic  clout  of  the  euro  area  it  came  as  no  surprise  that  EMU  actually 
generated  a  zone  of  stability  that  is  even  larger  than  the  euro  area  itself.  This  can  be  seen  most 
distinctly in those countries closest to the euro area such as the new Member States of the EU and the 
countries currently conducting accession negotiations with the European Union. The stabilizing effects 
of  the  euro,  however,  go  beyond  providing  an  anchor  in  the  exchange  rate  regimes  of  the  new 
Member States. Since they have to implement the convergence criteria foreseen by the Treaty on the 
   1/3 
European Union in order to ultimately adopt the euro, this has so far led to an impressive record of 
macroeconomic stability as well as exchange rate stability on their way to EMU.  
The firm commitment of the euro system – as the European Central Bank and the 12 National Central 
Banks  from  the  Member States  of  the  euro  area  are  called  –  to  pursuing  price stability  as  its  main 
objective remains a key factor behind market confidence in the euro as a global and stable currency. 
Since  the  euro  system  became  responsible  for  monetary  policy  in  1999,  the  primary  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability  has  been  successfully  pursued.  Inflation  volatility  has  stabilized  –  the 
average inflation rate being around 2% over the past years – in spite of major inflationary shocks and 
although  oil  prices  have  quadrupled  and  the  economic  environment  is  difficult  right  now,  inflation 
expectations still remain low. This reflects the high confidence of the public as well as the financial 
markets in the euro.  
However, in the light of ample liquidity and very low interest rates in the euro area, strong vigilance 
with regard to upside risks to price stability is warranted. 
The  success  story  of  EMU  is  based  on  the  efficient  interaction  of  three  pillars:  a  stability  oriented 
monetary  policy,  sustainable  sound  public  finances  and  dynamic  structural  policies.  In  short,  these 
three pillars are the foundation of economic stability and growth, hence fostering unity and peace in 
the euro area. 
All in all, however, some encouraging structural reforms notwithstanding, the high degree of monetary 
stability achieved stands in contrast to the as yet insufficient flexibility and dynamism of some euro 
area  economies.  The  latter  phenomenon  explains  why  the  success  of  EMU  has  not  been 
accompanied by higher real growth.  
This  brings  me  to  the  importance  of  sustaining  sound  public  finances.  Sound  fiscal  policies  are 
fundamental  to  the  success  of  economic  and  monetary  union  and  they  are  prerequisites  for 
macroeconomic stability, growth and cohesion in the euro area.  
In the mid to late 1990s, euro area Member States made considerable progress in consolidating their 
fiscal positions as they sought to meet the convergence criteria for adoption of the euro. Since 1999, 
however,  fiscal  performance  has  been  rather  mixed.  Initially  a  relatively  favourable  economic 
environment  masked  this  development,  but  in  the  context  of  the  economic  slowdown  that  began  in 
2001, fiscal balances soon deteriorated. At the same time the rules and procedures of the Stability and 
Growth Pact were not always implemented in a rigorous manner. Presently six out of twelve euro area 
Member States are subject to excessive deficit procedures and only a small number of Member States 
has succeeded in achieving and maintaining close to balance or in surplus budgetary positions. This 
increasing  reluctance  to  follow  agreed  rules  and  procedures  eroded  confidence  in  the  EU  fiscal 
framework and intensified criticisms of the Stability and Growth Pact that have been voiced ever since 
its inception.   
Against this background, political agreement was reached in March 2005 on the reform of the Stability 
and Growth Pact. I will not deny that I am seriously concerned about the weakening of the Stability 
and Growth Pact and its implications on the future development of public finances and the confidence 
in the fiscal framework. The implementation of excessive deficit procedures and fiscal surveillance in 
the  coming  months  will  now  serve  as  a  test  of  the  new  framework’s  effectiveness  and  renewed 
progress towards achieving sound medium-term budgetary positions. Let me emphasize, that it should 
be of the highest priority, especially if combined with a comprehensive economic reform strategy! 
With a view to the third pillar, EU policy makers are well aware of the importance of structural reforms 
and they did commit to action when the European Council adopted the Lisbon strategy five years ago. 
Some  encouraging  structural  reforms  notwithstanding  –  let  me  mention  here  as  examples  the 
liberalisation  of  the  electricity  market  and  the  progress  in  pension  and  labour  market  reforms  –  the 
Lisbon strategy fell short of its initial goals.  
Even if we consider the time lag between the implementation of reforms and their taking the intended 
effects, the increase in potential growth was disappointing. In addition it has obviously proven difficult 
to  communicate  the  benefits  of  long-term  growth  effects  of  structural  reforms  to  the  general  public. 
Social and economic progress often entails significant changes in the life of individuals, with risks as 
well as benefits. These legitimate worries need to be taken seriously and addressed appropriately.  
As  a  new  start  for  the  Lisbon  strategy,  in  spring  2005  the  European  Commission  presented  the 
“Community Lisbon Programme” focusing on two principal tasks – delivering stronger, lasting growth 
and  more  and  better  jobs.  The  idea  is to  modernise  our  economy  in  order  to  secure  the  European 
   2/3 
social  model  in  the  face  of  increasingly  global  markets,  technological  change,  environmental 
pressures, and an ageing population – a difficult challenge ! But we need to invest more in the young 
people,  education,  research  and  innovation.  We  also  need  to  further  open  markets,  to  invest  in 
modern  infrastructure  and  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  develop  a  skilled  and  entrepreneurial 
workforce. Some of the policy actions will take time to show visible effects, others will deliver early 
benefits.  In  all  cases  they  must  be  approached  with  a  strong  sense  of  urgency  and  collective 
responsibility of all the Member States of the European Union. 
Due to the recent enlargement of the EU the necessity of ongoing structural reforms became more 
stringent also for the old Member States. Moreover, the new Member States demonstrated in many 
areas  that  even  unpopular  reforms,  like  pension  reforms,  can  be  accomplished  when  tackled  right. 
Increased competition from within and the will to further the competitiveness of the EU as a whole are 
surely  very  nice  side  effects  of  the  enlargement  and  an  incentive  to  take  the  revival  of  the  Lisbon 
strategy seriously. 
Although EMU represents a highly successful achievement it cannot be considered as the end-point of 
the European integration process.Apart from the necessity to successfully maintain and foster stability 
and  growth,  Europemust  also  meet  the  challenge  of  the  recent  geographic  expansion  of  ten  new 
Member States, which is of immense historical magnitude. The Maastricht Treaty was negotiated by 
12 countries. We are now 25, and virtually already 27. Hence, in Europe a unique “vertical” economic 
and political transformation and a geographic “horizontal” expansion of an immense significance are 
intertwined. The need to accommodate and integrate 458 million European fellow citizens will certainly 
keep us on our toes.  
I consider it also part of the ongoing process that we will be faced with difficult moments from time to 
time, the European Constitution being one example. In my opinion a temporary setback on the way to 
a  more  comprehensive  European  Union  will  in  no  way  stop  the  process.  It  might  just  sharpen  our 
awareness  for  striving  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  widening  and  deepening  the  EU,  as 
integration is the driving force for securing peace and welfare in Europe, also for the next generations.   
With my renewed congratulations and the best wishes for your personal future, I thank you for your 
attention. 
 
   3/3 
