David Dodge: Our approach to monetary policy - inflation targeting 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Regina Chamber of Commerce, 
Regina, Saskatchewan, 12 December 2005.  
 I  am  happy  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  in  Regina  during  Saskatchewan's  centennial  year. 
Throughout  2005,  the  people  of  Saskatchewan  have  been  celebrating  the  many  remarkable 
contributions  that  this  province  and  its  citizens  have  made  to  Canada.  Gerald  Bouey  and  Gordon 
Thiessen, two of my predecessors as Governor, are examples of individuals with deep Saskatchewan 
roots who have made great contributions to the Bank and to our country. As this province turns 100, 
you can be proud not only of your history, but also of your modern, increasingly diversified economy 
that positions Saskatchewan for success in the future. 
This year also marks the 70th anniversary of the creation of the Bank of Canada, and we too have 
taken the time to celebrate our contributions to Canada. At such times, while it is appropriate to look 
back  and  celebrate  history  and  accomplishments,  it  is  also  a  good  opportunity  to  look  forward  and 
think  about  where  we  are  headed.  In  this  spirit,  I'd  like  to  talk  to  you  today  about  one  of  our  main 
responsibilities; that is, the conduct of monetary policy. I want to recount a bit of the Bank's history and 
talk about how we developed our current framework for conducting monetary policy. At the Bank of 
Canada,  we  strongly  believe  that  targeting  inflation  is  the  best  way  for  us  to  fulfill  our  mandate  to 
Canadians.  I  also  want  to  look  forward  a  bit,  and  talk  about  the  future  of  inflation  targeting,  as  we 
prepare to renew our inflation-targeting agreement with the federal government next year. 
The Bank's mandate 
Let me begin with a brief discussion of the Bank's legislative mandate. The preamble to the Bank of 
Canada Act instructs us to "regulate credit and currency in the best interest of the nation." It goes on to 
say  that  the  Bank  should  mitigate  "fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production,  trade,  prices  and 
employment,  so  far  as  may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of  monetary  action,  and  generally  .  .  . 
promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." 
So the question is, How can the Bank best provide the conditions for sustainable economic growth, 
bearing in mind the words in our mandate: "so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary 
action"? Over time, it has become clear that the best way for monetary policy to promote sustainable 
economic  growth  is  to  anchor  expectations  about  the  future  purchasing  power  of  money.  In  other 
words, it is important for Canadians to have confidence that the value of their money will not be eroded 
over time. Focusing on domestic price stability is the best contribution that monetary policy can make 
to economic stability and sustainable long-term growth. 
After  the  bitter  inflationary  experiences  of  the  1970s,  it  became  clear  that  central  banks  needed  to 
focus on achieving low inflation. But monetary authorities around the world were struggling to figure 
out how best to do this. At the Bank of Canada, we were trying to determine how to achieve price 
stability  in  a  way  that  would  allow  us  to  accomplish  three  things:  first,  as  I  just  said,  we  wanted  to 
anchor  Canadians'  expectations  about  the  future  purchasing  power  of  their  money;  second,  we 
wanted  an  operational  framework  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy;  and  third,  we  wanted  an 
approach that would help markets, politicians, and the Canadian public to understand what we were 
doing, and what actions they could expect from us.  
Throughout the 1980s, we at the Bank worked to come up with such an approach. By 1991, we had 
decided  that  targeting  inflation  was  the  best  way  to  achieve  high,  sustainable  growth  in  output  and 
employment. And so the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed on a series of explicit targets 
for inflation. To be clear, however, inflation targeting is not an end in itself. Rather, as I said, it is the 
best means of fulfilling our commitment to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canadians. 
The Canadian version of inflation targeting 
Once the Bank and the government agreed on the concept of inflation targeting, we needed to make 
some choices to put the concept into practice. Like many other central banks, we chose a target for 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 1
the annual rate of inflation. Initially, our focus was on reducing the rate of inflation, which was running 
at more than 5 per cent annually in 1991. The target was set to bring inflation down gradually - first, to 
the 3 per cent midpoint of a 2 to 4 per cent target range by the end of 1992, and then to the 2 per cent 
midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range by the end of 1995. The target has remained there since then. Let 
me take you through some of the other key decisions that we made in 1991, and the rationale behind 
our choices, as we set out the details of our framework. 
First of all, why did we choose the consumer price index (CPI) as our measure of inflation? The key 
reason is that the CPI is the measure of inflation most familiar and relevant to Canadians. Choosing a 
well-known indicator as a target makes it easier to explain our actions and to be accountable. 
Second, why do we have a range? This is because there are some components of the CPI - such as 
some energy and food items - whose prices tend to move a lot, both up and down. These movements 
can cause large fluctuations in the index. If we tried to target inflation too precisely, we would then be 
adjusting our policy interest rate sharply and frequently, which would lead to greater instability in the 
economy. Having a range reflects the inherent volatility of the CPI. But to be clear, the range is not a 
zone of indifference - we do aim to achieve the 2 per cent target. 
Another concern is that this volatility can obscure the underlying trend of inflation. So for operational 
purposes,  we  use  a  measure  of  core  inflation.  This  measure  strips  out  eight  of  the  most  volatile 
components of the CPI and the effect of changes in indirect taxes on the rest of the items. In this way, 
core inflation provides a better forward-looking indicator of the trend of inflation.  
Finally, since today's monetary policy actions only affect future inflation, we needed to choose a time 
frame  in  which  to  achieve  our  target.  From  the  beginning,  we  said  that  if  inflation  was  pushed  off 
target, we would conduct monetary policy so as to return inflation to target over a period of 18 to 24 
months. This is because research has suggested that historically it takes 12 to 18 months for changes 
in interest rates to have most of their impact on output, and 18 to 24 months to have most of their 
impact on prices. Of course, there is always uncertainty about the lags involved, and I'll have more to 
say about this later on. 
Before I move on, I want to emphasize three points about our inflation-targeting framework. The first is 
that we operate in a symmetric way, and we make it clear to everyone that we do so. By this, I mean 
that we worry just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about it rising above target. 
When  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  pushes  the  Canadian  economy  against  the  limits  of  its 
capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the 
economy. And when the economy is operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to 
fall below target, the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate growth. Paying close attention to signs 
that inflation is moving away from our target - in either direction - promotes timely action. This is how 
we  keep  the  economy  operating  near  its  full  capacity  and  thus  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable. 
The second point I want to stress is that having an inflation target as an anchor is very helpful in terms 
of  the  Bank's  accountability.  If  inflation  persistently  deviates  from  the  target,  we  are  committed  to 
explaining the reasons why, what we will do to return it to target, and how long we expect the process 
to take. 
The third point is that any central bank that runs an independent monetary policy and targets inflation 
must allow its currency to float. It is simply not possible for a central bank to successfully control both 
the domestic and external values of its currency at the same time. We have only one instrument - our 
policy interest rate - so we can have only one target. Thus, with inflation as our target, we naturally 
operate with a floating currency. 
Canada's experience under inflation targeting 
Now, let me quickly review our record with inflation targeting. As we look at inflation and economic 
growth  in  Canada  since  1991,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  benefits  we  had  hoped  would  come  from 
inflation targeting have, in fact, materialized. We expected inflation to become more stable - and it did 
so, sooner than we had anticipated. Since settling on the 2 per cent target for inflation at the end of 
1995,  actual  inflation  has  averaged  very  close  to  2  per  cent.  And  it  has  remained  within  the  1  to 
3 per cent target range, with only rare exceptions. We expected our credibility to increase and inflation 
expectations to become well anchored - and this has also happened. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2005
We also thought that inflation targeting would help the economy to avoid the exaggerated "boom-bust" 
cycles of previous decades - and it has. The business cycle is still with us, but economic volatility has 
diminished. By keeping inflation close to the target, monetary policy has helped to keep the economy 
operating near its potential.  
Finally, and very importantly, our transparent framework has allowed markets and analysts to better 
predict how we will react to different economic outcomes. Within the Bank, too, focusing on inflation 
has brought increased discipline and clarity to our monetary policy decision process.  
Canada was the second country after New Zealand to adopt explicit inflation targets. But over the past 
decade and a half, about 20 other central banks have also adopted this framework. Some, like the 
central  banks  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Sweden,  are  from  advanced,  industrialized  economies. 
Others, such as the central banks of Chile and Brazil, are from emerging-market economies. In every 
case,  inflation  targeting  has  been  a  success:  inflation  rates  have  been  reduced,  and  central  banks 
have  generally  been  able  to  hit  their  targets.  Inflation  has  become  less  persistent  where  inflation 
targeting is practiced, and it is reasonable to assume that well-anchored inflation expectations are a 
good part of the reason why. 
Given  this  success,  it  seems  likely  that  other  countries  will  join  the  ranks  of  inflation  targeters  in 
coming years - indeed, just last week the central bank of Turkey announced that it will move to formal 
inflation targeting next year. Inflation targeting is also being discussed in the United States where Ben 
Bernanke, Alan Greenspan's designated successor at the Federal Reserve, has been an enthusiastic 
proponent.  
However,  some  have  argued  that  inflation  targeting  is  too  limiting  an  approach,  and  that  it  can 
constrain a central bank's ability to act or to apply judgment in the case of extraordinary events. But 
this  has  not  been  our  experience  in  Canada.  For  example,  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  9/11 
terrorist  attacks,  we  lowered  interest  rates  quickly  and  decisively  to  underpin  confidence.  When  a 
major loss of confidence did not materialize, we were able to reverse course in fairly short order and 
withdraw some of that monetary stimulus. Our inflation-targeting framework did not restrict our ability 
to act. Indeed, because our framework is transparent, financial markets were able to appreciate why 
we made these rapid rate adjustments. 
The Bank of Canada focuses on inflation at the national level. This can lead to suggestions that some 
of Canada's regions may not have the appropriate policy for their particular circumstances. We hear 
these comments more often during times such as these, when economic prospects and growth rates 
vary from sector to sector and - because of the geographic concentration of sectors in Canada - also 
from  region  to  region.  These  comments  reflect  a  fairly  common  misunderstanding  about  monetary 
policy.  Remember  that  in  any  market  economy,  adjustments  are  always  taking  place.  Markets  and 
prices send clear signals that indicate how economic resources should be allocated, shifting resources 
to rapidly growing sectors from slower-growing ones. Because our monetary policy targets inflation for 
the country as a whole, it does not try to mask these important price signals - nor should it. To do so 
would impede the adjustment process and, ultimately, lead to lower economic growth. 
But this does not mean that we ignore what is happening on a regional basis - far from it. Indeed, the 
information  we  receive  from  our  five  regional  offices,  and  from  our  Business  Outlook  Survey,  is  an 
important input to our monetary policy deliberations. Our job is to add up what is going on across the 
country  and  to  conduct  monetary policy  so  that  we  achieve our inflation  target  for  the  country  as  a 
whole. 
The future of inflation targeting 
Despite our success to date with inflation targeting, I shouldn't leave you with the impression that this 
somehow  represents  the  end  of  monetary  policy  history.  Prudent  policy-makers  should  always  be 
striving to find better ways of getting things done. As I said at the beginning, our agreement with the 
federal government is up for renewal next year. So at the Bank, we have been busy thinking about 
those elements of our framework that we would not want to change, as well as others where changes 
might be considered. 
From the Bank's point of view, the basic arrangement of aiming inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 
1 to 3 per cent target range has served Canadians well, along with the use of the total CPI as the 
target,  and  a  measure  of  core  inflation  for  operational  purposes.  The  Bank  will  also  continue  to 
recognize the importance of communications and transparency. Inflation targeting does a good job of 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 3
anchoring  expectations,  but  it  works  better  when  a  central  bank  communicates  well.  I  expect  that 
these basic elements of our framework will remain in place.  
This  is  not  to  say  that  we  haven't  examined  these  elements.  Indeed,  we  have  asked  ourselves  if 
2 per cent  is  the  right  target.  When  we  last  renewed  the  inflation-targeting  agreement  in  2001,  we 
looked  closely  at  this  issue.  At  the  time,  our  research  could  not  convincingly  demonstrate  that  the 
benefits  of  moving  to  a  lower  target  would  outweigh  the  costs.  More  recent  research,  while  still 
inconclusive, provided a little more support for a lower target. Of course, we will continue to look at this 
question, but the evidence would have to be quite compelling before the target would be changed. 
Another issue that we continue to examine is whether we should target the actual level of prices rather 
than the inflation rate. Let me explain what I mean. Had the annual rate of inflation been exactly 2 per 
cent since 1995, when we settled on that figure as our target, the consumer price index would have 
risen from a level of 102.8 in December 1994 to 127.6 in October of this year. The actual price level for 
October was 128.5 - a minimal difference, as it turns out. But in the future, it is possible that we could 
get a series of shocks that moved inflation predominantly in one direction, either up or down. And so, 
the price level could move significantly away from where it would have been if we had hit the 2 per 
cent target exactly over a period of years. Under price-level targeting, monetary policy would be set so 
as  to  offset  those  deviations  from  the  desired  price  level.  But  under  inflation  targeting,  those  past 
price-level  movements are  essentially forgotten;  they  would  not  change  the conduct  of  policy  going 
forward. Economic theory tells us that, over the longer term, having certainty about the future price 
level would yield somewhat greater benefits than just having certainty about the future rate of inflation. 
But to date, it has not been possible to conclusively measure the costs and benefits of targeting the 
price level versus targeting the inflation rate. We are still working at building better analytical tools and 
methods  to  examine  these  questions,  and  we  will  continue  to  look  at  new  evidence  as  it  becomes 
available down the road. 
Another  issue  that  we  are  looking  at  is  the  appropriate  time  frame  for  returning  inflation  to  target 
following various kinds of shocks. As I said before, we now conduct monetary policy with the goal of 
bringing inflation to target within an 18- to 24-month time frame. But there are questions as to whether 
this  time  frame  is  appropriate  for  every  type  of  unexpected  development  that  could  affect  inflation. 
There could be reasons to look at adjusting the time frame in response to inflationary pressures from 
major movements in asset prices - be they real estate, equity prices, or the exchange rate. Given the 
success we have had to date in dealing with various shocks within an 18- to 24-month horizon, we 
should not change that horizon lightly. But as inflation targeting and the global economy evolve, we 
will  need  to  continue  considering  the  appropriate  time  horizon  and  some  of  the  other  issues  I 
discussed today. The Bank of Canada remains committed to conducting and encouraging research in 
these and other important areas. 
Conclusion 
I want to conclude by emphasizing a few key points. Despite the issues I've just raised, the economic 
record  of  the  past  15  years  shows  that  inflation  targeting  has  served  Canada  well.  The  Bank's 
symmetric approach of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable has laid the groundwork for solid, 
sustainable  growth  in  output  and  employment.  With  inflation  targeting,  monetary  policy  is  more 
focused, our communications are clearer, and inflation expectations are more solidly anchored. As we 
look forward, it is important that we maintain an anchor to keep monetary policy focused. From my 
perspective, inflation targeting is the best anchor we've seen.  
4 
 BIS Review 85/2005
