Y V Reddy: Banks and corporates as partners in progress 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  FICCI-IBA 
Conference on ‘Global Banking: Paradigm Shift’, Mumbai, 7 October 2005. 
 Friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for giving me the opportunity to be with you and deliver the valedictory 
address  at  the  FICCI-IBA  Conference  on  ‘Global  Banking  :  Paradigm  Shift’.  It  is  noteworthy  that 
eminent persons from diverse areas of expertise and experience have participated in the Conference; 
and quite a few of them are from global bodies such as, BIS and central bankers or banking regulators 
from Mauritius, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, U.K. and U.S.A. It is difficult to add significantly to 
the  erudite  discussions  that  have  already  taken  place.  I  am  well  aware  that  I  will  be  disappointing 
some analysts here by not giving my views on the macro-economic front and policy leads. This is a 
conscious choice as the formal announcement of the Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy is due in 
about a couple of weeks. Any meaningful statement by me on monetary policy would militate against 
the emergence of a collegiate approach to monetary policy which is our avowed objective.  
I had some difficulty in choosing a subject for this address since the three Deputy Governors and one 
Executive Director of the Reserve Bank India (RBI) have spoken at this Conference on almost all the 
relevant aspects and I also happen to fully agree with them. But the uniqueness of this Conference, in 
being sponsored by a Chamber of commerce and industry, and the banks’ association, warrants some 
deliberation. Perhaps, it would be appropriate to dwell on certain aspects of how the banks and the 
corporates can nurture and strengthen their mutually rewarding partnership while also contributing to 
the progress of our economy. 
At  the  outset,  let  me  briefly  recount  the  strengths  of  our  banks  and  our  corporates,  as  also  the 
challenges  faced  by  them.  The  performance  of  and  outlook  for  the  banking  sector  in  India,  as 
evidenced  by  the  movement  in  Bankex  relative  to  BSE  Sensex  in  the  recent  years,  appear  to  be 
positive. Both, the public and the private sector banks have gained in their equity prices and market 
capitalisation.  The  interest  of  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  in  the  Indian  banking  sector  is 
considerable  and  it  is  widely  believed  that  their  exposure  to  this  sector  is  at  the  top,  amounting  to 
about  one-sixth  of  their  total  exposure  to  India.  The  study  of  ‘India’s  Top  20  Banks’  by  the  
S&P/  CRISIL,  released  this  week,  documents  the  steady  improvement  as  well  as  their  operating 
resilience and preparedness for Basel II. The Report lists the challenges, the most important being the 
risk-management  and  consolidation.  RBI  expects  to  release  the  Report  on  Trends  and  Progress  in 
Banking in a couple of months, which, I hope, will add further comfort to the analysts of our banking 
sector.  
Indian  corporates  have  demonstrated  that  some  of  them  are  world-class  with  noticeable  overseas 
acquisitions; and the global as well as domestic expectations from their entrepreneurship are perhaps 
unprecedented. S&P / CRISIL have also published a report on "Indian Top 50 Corporates" this week, 
which is candid in assessing the strengths of India’s corporate sector along with possible challenges. 
As a central banker, I was struck by a remark in the Introduction to the Report. The Report appreciates 
the  overall  financial  profiles  of  the  top  50  corporates  and  describes  them  as  currently  ‘strong’  to 
‘adequate’  but  comments  that  the  companies  choosing  to  debt-finance  their  growth  could  face 
challenges.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  joint  efforts  of  the  banks  and  the  corporates  in  India  could 
perhaps be an imperative for meeting the challenges ahead.  
The relationship of the banker and corporate borrower in India has come a long way from the days of 
highly regulated economy. During the last two decades, there has been a sea change in the outlook of 
the banks as well as the corporates towards each other. While the balance sheets of banks are now 
stronger and their operations far more transparent, their lending practices too are better attuned to the 
requirements of various categories of borrowers. The corporates, on their part, have shown a greater 
sense of responsibility in the use and repayment of the borrowed funds. A noteworthy aspect is that 
under  current  guidelines  relating  to  External  Commercial  Borrowings,  Indian  corporates  have  been 
able to borrow significant amounts from overseas directly, based on their own credit standing.  
In this context, it would be useful to recall some of the important policy initiatives of the RBI relevant to 
bank-corporate relationship. Dr. Rangarajan’s monetary policy of April 1997 announced a package of 
   1/3 
measures  permitting  multiple  banking  arrangements  for  the  corporates  and  providing  greater 
operational freedom to the banks. Dr. Jalan’s policy pronouncements followed through this initiative 
with  development  of  the  money  market,  move  towards  universal  banking  and  above  all,  urging  the 
banks and corporates to put in place sound risk-management systems – particularly for market risks. 
In 2003, RBI issued a Fair Practices Code to be followed by the banks which aimed at making them 
more  responsive  to  the  borrowers  and  enhancing  the  confidence  of  borrowers  in  the  banks  as  a 
source of funds. The procedure for declaring borrowers as "wilful defaulters" has been streamlined so 
as to afford full opportunity to the corporates to present their viewpoint before so classifying them.  
Recent  developments  that  warrant  a  careful  redesign  of  the  bank-corporate  relationship  include 
financing by multiple banks, through several instruments including investments, and access to a wider 
choice of sources of finance for corporates such as capital markets and external financing. Since such 
choices nudge towards transaction-based banker-customer relationship, these could impinge on the 
access to the information required by the bankers for financial assessment as also on the ability of 
corporates to get an assured and appropriately priced financial package. Perhaps there is a need for 
supplementing transaction-based relationship between banks and corporates with a more active and 
meaningful dialogue between them. I am sure such meetings do take place even now, but it is worth 
exploring whether the process needs to be strengthened. In this regard, there may be an advantage in 
industry  bodies  like  FICCI  and  IBA  embarking  upon  a  review  of  the  existing  practices  of  dialogues 
between  the  banks  and  their  corporate  borrowers  to  ensure  and  enhance  trust,  transparency  and 
timeliness – the three "t"s of banking. Such a review could perhaps also promote healthy competition 
amongst banks and add to the comfort of the corporates too.  
The Corporate Debt Restructuring Mechanism (CDRM), which became operational since March 2002, 
is another platform for banker-corporate interface. Its efficacy is evident in the fact that well over one 
hundred  cases  have  been  approved  for  restructuring  under  this  system.  The  CDRM  was  reviewed 
recently by a Special Group and we expect to bring out, in a couple of weeks, the revised operational 
guidelines for improvements in the CDRM to make the restructuring smoother for genuine cases. 
Another  area  of  common  interest  to  the  banks  and  the  corporates  is  the  risk  management.  The 
lenders  and  investors  have  an  obvious  interest  in  accurately  assessing  a  firm’s  risk-management 
performance, apart from its underlying financials, so as to understand the risks assumed by the firm 
and  those  it  has  hedged  or  transferred  to  others.  While  the  banks’  risk  exposures  and  their  risk-
management  strategy  is  usually  an  item  of  public  disclosure,  there  is  a  corresponding  need  for 
corporates too to make adequate disclosures regarding their risk exposures, specially to derivatives 
and  foreign  exchange.  This  would  enable  the  banker  to  assess  the  risk  profile  of  the  corporate 
accurately  and  to  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  various  financial  products  on  offer.  While  these 
disclosures could be made mandatory through the Accounting Standards – on which, I understand, 
ICAI  is  working  –  it  would  be  desirable  if  the  corporates  adopt  such  disclosures  voluntarily,  sooner 
than later, in their own as well as the system’s interest. 
It is useful for the bankers to track the changing dynamics of the pattern of corporate financing. The 
equity base of the corporate sector, relative to debt, seems to have increased, and many corporates 
are  currently  cash  surplus,  presumably  to  meet  their  investment  commitments.  Besides,  the 
corporates also have access to other funding sources, especially external commercial borrowings and 
domestic  and  global  capital  markets.  The  Development  Finance  Institutions  have  substantially  got 
subsumed  in  the  banking  sector  and  banks  are  increasingly  functioning  as  universal  banks.  Banks’ 
lending  to  households,  be  it  through  consumer  credit  or  housing  loans,  has  been  increasing  in  the 
recent  past  along  with  increases  in  lending  to  priority  sectors.  It  may,  therefore,  be  worthwhile  for 
banks,  especially  those  with  long  history,  to  review  their  systems  and  procedures  for  lending  and 
extending other forms of support to the corporates. An area of concern, in terms of public perception, 
is that there is under-pricing of credit risk for private sector corporates while there could be overpricing 
of risks in lending to agriculture as well as small and medium enterprises. There is merit in reviewing 
the  current  procedures  and  processes  of  pricing  of  credit,  perhaps  through  a  well  structured  
segment-wise analysis of costs at various stages of intermediation in the whole credit cycle.  
We also notice that several corporates are active in treasury management. Hence, they need to be 
well-equipped  to  identify,  measure,  manage  and  control  the  risks  especially  when,  often,  they  are 
counterparties to the treasury transactions of the banks. 
Regulatory framework for banks is gradually encouraging banks to assess and manage the risks on 
their own while regulation focuses on the adequacy and robustness of the systems in vogue in the 
banks for the purpose. The share of corporates in the lending by the banks, however, does not reflect 
   2/3 
the full range of the banks’ exposure to them as it does not capture significant exposure to corporates 
through investments in bonds and other instruments. More important, banks’ overall exposure would 
also include the non-funded exposures through credit substitutes and derivatives transactions which 
have grown significantly over the last few years. The continuing close linkage between the balance 
sheet  of  banks  and  of  the  corporate  sector  is,  thus,  clearly  evident  but  only  the  nature  of  
bank-corporate interaction is getting diverse and wider. A regulator’s comfort, therefore, lies not only in 
satisfaction  about  the  quality  of  risk-management  in  the  banks  but  also  in  the  banks’  level  of 
understanding  of  risk-management  by  their  corporate  clients.  In  a  sense,  there  is  an  element  of 
delegated supervision to be exercised by the banks over the corporates. In this background, a closer 
ongoing  dialogue  across  a  wider  spectrum  in  a  spirit  of  partnership  between  the  banks  and  the 
corporates adds to the comfort of the regulator.  
Consistent  with  the  theme  of  the  conference,  it  is  essential  to  ponder  over  the  implications  of  the 
paradigm  shift  in  global  banking  for  the  bank-corporate  relationship.  There  are  differences  across 
countries in the role and functioning of banks vis-à-vis the corporates. For example, the Anglo-Saxon, 
the  European  and  the  Japanese  practices  do  vary  though  there  is  some  evidence  of  elements  of 
convergence  with  the  emerging  importance  of  trans-national  corporates,  global  banks  as  well  as 
financial  intermediaries  and  increasing  global  financial  integration.  In  the  bank-dominated  financial 
systems, such as in India, banks support corporates not only by direct lending, but also through their 
positions  in  money,  debt,  equity  and  derivatives  markets.  Further,  the  industrial  progress  involves 
entrepreneurship,  inevitably  entailing  some  measurement  and  management  of  implicit  risks.  As  the 
partners  in  progress,  the  banks  are  now  called  upon  not  only  to  manage  the  risks  in  lending  but 
increasingly,  to  also  assess  the  risks  involved  in  the  business  to  which  they  are  lending.  In  this 
background,  the  case  for  a  more  intense  dialogue,  to  the  extent  of  some  partnering,  becomes 
stronger.  
Let me conclude by complimenting the organisers for the excellent Conference; the participants who 
met me deeply appreciated the high quality deliberations at this truly global gathering.  
Thank you. 
 
   3/3 
