Rakesh Mohan: Human development and state finances  
Speech  by  Mr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  inaugural 
session of the 3rd Programme on “Human Development and State Finances”, Mumbai, 7 November 
2005. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be amidst officials of the State Governments who are instrumental in implementing 
government  policies  that  aim  to  improve  economic  and  social  welfare.  In  India,  bulk  of  the 
responsibilities pertaining to expenditure in social services including education and health are placed 
in the domain of the State Governments. Thus, the nature of state finances has important implications 
for improving human development in India. In this context, the theme of today’s discussion ‘Human 
Development and State Finances’ is very topical as well as relevant.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  bears  a  special  relationship  with  the  State  Governments  in  its 
multiple role as the banker, debt manager and fiscal adviser. The interactions between the RBI and 
the State Governments have been stronger through the interface provided by the bi-annual Finance 
Secretaries’ Conference organised by the Reserve Bank since 1997. This Conference has provided a 
common platform to discuss all aspects concerned with the fiscal affairs of the States and facilitated 
the  evolution  of  a  consensual  approach  on  various  key  issues  through  active  participation  of  State 
Government officials. Some of the outcomes include setting up of Consolidated Sinking Funds (CSF) 
for debt servicing, constitution of Guarantee Redemption Funds (GRF) to meet guarantee obligations, 
setting  of  Ways  &  Means  Advance  (WMA)  limits  for  States,  fixing  limits  for  guarantees,  and  most 
recently, enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility Legislation (FRL).  
In  this  forum,  in  two  earlier  occasions,  my  colleague  Deputy  Governor  Shyamala  Gopinath  had 
focused on the broad contours of human development and state finances while Deputy Governor Shri 
V. Leeladhar had dwelt on certain critical aspects of human development in the Indian context. Today I 
will first discuss the importance of economic growth for human development, poverty eradication and 
overall  social  welfare;  second,  I  will  briefly  give  an  overview  of  the  performance  on  the  human 
development at both the national level and  across the states; third, I will review  the stylized facts 
relating  to  finances  of  the  State  Governments  as  they  relate    to  their  impact  on  expenditure  in  the  
social sector; fourth, I will mention some of the new initiatives taken by the Government both at the 
Centre and States’ level  for accelerating human development in India; and  finally, I will touch upon 
some further policy options.    
Economic growth and human development 
The concept of human development signifies improvement in the quality of life of the people in terms 
of  various  health  and  educational  indicators.  Through  betterment  of  health,  education  and  skills, 
human development creates human capabilities that can then lead to productivity enhancement and 
acceleration in economic growth. In a broader sense, human development also implies improvements 
in terms of human rights and participation and freedom of choice. The credit for bringing special focus 
to human development  can mainly be attributed to the noted  economist Mahbub Ul Haq. He was 
instrumental  in  the  evolution  of  the  Human  Development  Index  (HDI),  which  has  emerged  as  a 
composite measure of development across the countries. The HDI is an index measuring the basic 
dimensions of human development, namely, long and healthy life, education and decent standard of 
living.  Indian  economist  and  Nobel  laureate  Amartya  Sen  has  also  made  valuable  contributions 
towards the formulation of HDI. According to the Human Development Report, 2005, published by the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), all the countries (177 in total) are categorized into 
three broad groups, such as, (i) High Human Development, (ii) Medium Human Development, and (iii) 
Low Human Development. India is placed in the group of Medium Human Development countries and 
ranks at 127 amongst total of 177 countries in 2005.  
High  economic  growth  facilitates  reduction  of  poverty.  Growth  in  production  of  goods  and  services 
leads  to  growth  in  incomes  and,  hence,  to  poverty  eradication.    As  might  therefore  be  expected, 
acceleration of economic growth in India has led to a marked reduction in poverty in recent decades. 
Compared to average economic growth rate of close to 3.5 per cent in the first three decades since 
   1/7 
Independence,  the  Indian  economy  moved  to  a  higher  growth  trajectory  experiencing  an  average 
growth rate of around 6 per cent during 1980s and 1990s, and in the most recent period, the growth 
rate has been hovering around 7 per cent. More importantly, per capita income growth has witnessed 
a spectacular rise to about 5.5 per cent in the recent years as against a rise of around 1 – 1.3 per cent 
in the three decades after Independence. Reflecting this there has been significant decline in poverty 
in India. Between 1977-78 and 1999-2000, the proportion of people living below the poverty line (BPL) 
came down from 51.3 per cent to 26.1 per cent. In absolute numbers, the reduction has been from 
about 330  million to 260 million during the comparable period.  
It is important to note that with lower economic growth of the first three decades it was not possible to 
reduce the high levels of poverty that had existed in India for generations. However, the foundations of 
modern  economic  growth  were  laid  in  that  period  and  we  have  observed  significant  growth 
acceleration since the 1980s.  It is being increasingly recognized that eradication of poverty requires 
achievement  of  higher  growth  as  it  is  only  higher  economic  growth  that  can  reduce  poverty  and 
provide  sustainable  economic  security.  No  distribution  can  take  place  when  there  is  nothing  to 
distribute.  
Human capital enhancement is essential to productivity growth.  As higher physical capital investment 
takes place labour productivity is also enabled to grow.  But such productivity can grow even faster 
with  corresponding  or  even  faster  growth  in  human  capital  investment.    Thus,  per  capita  income 
growth is accelerated significantly by improvement in human development all round.  Hence, we have 
a positive sum game: economic growth enables human development, and human development itself 
contributes  to  the  acceleration  of  economic  growth.  Furthermore,  for  its  own  sake,  in  terms  of 
augmenting people’s own potential, human development is important.  
Performance in human development: an overview  
Key  indices  of  human  development  relate  to  measures  of  health  and  education.  Life  expectancy  at 
birth in India has grown from about 32 years in 1951 to 62 years in 1996. In 2003, it was 63 years. The 
literacy rate in India also witnessed significant improvement since independence from 18 per cent in 
1951 to 52 per cent in 1991, and further to 65 per cent in 2001. In 2003, life expectancy index for India 
at 0.64 was close to the world average of 0.70. The education index at 0.61 and GDP index at 0.56  
were however farther away from the world averages of 0.77 and 0.75, respectively.   
A perusal of the human development indicators across the States in India reveals that life expectancy 
does not exhibit significant variation across the States. In 2001-06, life expectancy at birth for males 
(all India average of around 64 years) varied from 59 years in Assam and Madhya Pradesh to around 
70 years in Kerala and Punjab. For most of the States, the life expectancy at birth for males was in the 
range of 62 to 67 years. For the same period, life expectancy at birth for females (all India average of 
around 67 years) varied from 58 years in Madhya Pradesh, 60 years in Orissa to 72 years in Punjab 
and 75 years in Kerala. For most of the States the life expectancy at birth for females was in the range 
of  64  to  70  years.    However,  the  National  Human  Development  Report  (NHDR)  has  revealed  wide 
disparities  in  the  level  of  human  development  across  the  States.  States  like  Bihar,  Uttar  Pradesh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Orissa had HDI close to just half of that of Kerala in 1981 (Table 1). 
The situation has improved since then. Besides Kerala, among the major States, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra,  and  Haryana  have  done  well  on  HDI.  In  general,  HDI  is  better  in  smaller  States  and 
Union  Territories.  In  terms  of  the  pace  of  development,  Tamil  Nadu,  Rajasthan,  Madhya  Pradesh, 
West Bengal and Bihar improved their HDI significantly in the 1980s. In the 1990s this momentum was 
maintained  in  Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh while it appeared to slow down in other 
less  developed  States.  Nevertheless,  state-wise  analysis  in  the  NHDR  indicated  a  decline  in  such 
regional  disparity  during  the  last  two  decades.  Further  convergence  can  take  place  alongwith 
substantial  improvement  in  the  national  human  development  index  if  efforts  are  focused  on  those 
states  that  have  low  levels  of  measured  HDI.    Strengthened  policy  measures  and  improvement  in 
health, education and other aspects of rural development in these states will contribute greatly to the 
overall improvement in human development in the country.    
It must be noted that inequalities across the States on HDI are less than the income inequalities in 
terms of per capita SDP (Graph 1).  At a fundamental level, there is no conflict between economic 
growth and human development. Economic growth implies an improvement in the material well being 
of  the  people  including  better  health,  education  and  sanitation.  However,  the  effect  of  economic 
growth on human development may be muted if the growth is not well distributed  across all sectors 
   2/7 
and geographical areas. Even in a particular sector, the distribution of benefits of growth amongst all 
stakeholders in a just way is also important.  
2001-
Rank 
1981-
Rank 
2001-
Value 
1991-
Value 
1981-
Value 
Table 1:  Human Development Index for India – Combined 
1991-
Rank 
9 
10 
15 
6 
5 
7 
1 
9 
10 
15 
4 
5 
6 
1 
0.416 
0.386 
0.367 
0.479 
0.509 
0.478 
0.638 
0.377 
0.348 
0.308 
0.431 
0.443 
0.412 
0.591 
0.298 
0.272 
0.237 
0.360 
0.360 
0.346 
0.500 
States 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Assam 
Bihar 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Karnataka 
Kerala 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Maharastra 
Orissa 
Punjab 
Rajasthan 
Tamil Nadu 
Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal 
All India 
Source: National Human Development Report, 2001, Planning Commission, New Delhi  
 
0.394 
0.523 
0.404 
0.537 
0.424 
0.531 
0.388 
0.472 
0.472 
0.328 
0.452 
0.345 
0.475 
0.347 
0.466 
0.314 
0.404 
0.381 
0.245 
0.363 
0.267 
0.411 
0.256 
0.343 
0.255 
0.305 
0.302 
13 
4 
12 
2 
11 
3 
14 
8 
14 
3 
11 
2 
12 
7 
13 
8 
   10 
14 
15 
6 
5 
7 
1 
12 
4 
11 
2 
9 
3 
13 
8 
Human development Index and Income Across States - 1991
Graph 1
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
x
e
d
n
I
 
t
n
e
m
p
o
l
e
v
e
D
n 
a
m
u
H
6
5
4
3
2
1
 
s
e
t
a
t
S
 
t
e
N
a
t
i
p
a
c
 
r
e
P
  
.
s
R
(
 
t
c
u
d
o
r
P
 
c
i
t
s
e
m
o
D
)
d
n
a
s
u
o
h
T
HDI
Series3
State Domestic Product
 Source: National Human Development Report 2001, Planning Commission, New Delhi 
 
It  turns  out  that  the  economically  less  developed  States  are  also  the  ones  with  low  HDI  and 
economically better off States are the ones with relatively better performance on HDI. However, the 
relation between the HDI and the level of development does not show any correspondence among the 
middle-income States in the country. In this category of States, some States like Kerala, have high 
attainments of HDI, at the same time, there are States like Andhra Pradesh, or even West Bengal, 
where HDI values are not as high. 
   3/7 
Finances of state governments and social sector expenditure 
Progress  on  human  development    requires  adequate  provision  of  funds.  State  Governments  are 
responsible  for  most  public  expenditures  for  the  provision  of  social  services  including  health  and 
education.  Furthermore,  the  States  are  responsible  for  most  infrastructure  services  except  for 
telecommunications,  civil  aviation,  railways  and  major  ports.  They  are  also  responsible  for  law  and 
order. Thus, the ability of the States to spend on social services has important implications for human 
development.    
As  widely  documented,  States  have  experienced  significant  fiscal  stress      since  1998-99  due  to  a 
variety  of  factors.  While  factors  like  5th  Pay  Commission  recommendations,  decline  in  Central 
transfers,  increase  in  committed  expenditure,  such  as,  interest  payments  and  pensions,  and  low 
economic growth rate account for the acuteness of the ailment, there are also underlying structural 
reasons for the persistence of fiscal deterioration. As evident from Table 2, average revenue deficit of 
all  States combined  as  a percentage of  GDP  more than  doubled  from  0.71  during  1990-95  to  1.65 
during  1995-2000.    It  increased  further  to  2.41  per  cent  during  2000-04.  Similar  movement  was 
exhibited by the gross fiscal deficit (GFD) as well. This has had a significant deleterious impact on the 
States’  social  expenditures  including  on  education  and  health.  Developmental  expenditure  as  a 
percentage  of  GDP  had  declined  from  9.92  per  cent  during  1990-95  to  8.97  per  cent  during  
1995-2000. Expenditure on social services in general and education and health in particular witnessed 
a fall as a percentage of GDP during the second half on the 1990s as compared to the first half. The 
fall  in  States’  expenditure  on  education  and  health  due  to  fiscal  deterioration  impeded  their  role  in 
promoting human development.  
 
Table 2:   
Deficit Indicators and Social Expenditure of States 
(As Percentage of GDP)
RD
GFD
2.82
3.45
4.28
4.00
3.21
0.71
1.65
2.41
1.44
0.75
Education
Expenditure
2.62
2.59
2.67
2.47
2.39
Health
Expenditure
0.81
0.75
0.71
0.69
0.70
Social 
Services
Expenditure 
4.88
4.84
4.98
5.08
4.94
Developme
 Period 
ntal
 
Expenditure
1990-95 
9.92
1995-2000 
8.97
2000-04 
9.35
2004-05 RE 
10.18
2005-06 BE 
9.35
RE: Revised Estimates,        BE: Budget Estimates 
Notes: RD: Revenue Deficit,    GFD: Gross Fiscal Deficit  
Education includes Sports, Art and Culture Health includes Family Welfare 
 
With  active  initiatives  of  the  States  towards  fiscal  correction  and  consolidation,  some  signs  of 
improvements  have  been  visible  in  state  finances  in  the  recent  period.    The  revenue  deficit  as  a 
percentage of GDP came down to 1.44 in 2004-05 (RE) which is budgeted to further decline to 0.75 
per cent in 2005-06. Similarly, GFD as a percentage of GDP was reduced to 4.00 per cent in 2004-05 
from the average of 4.28 per cent in 2000-2004 and is budgeted to  decline further to 3.21 per cent in 
2005-06.  With  improvement  in  state  finances,  there  is  a  reversal  of  the  trend  of  developmental 
expenditure  also.  The  ratio  of  developmental  expenditure  to  GDP  increased  to  10.18  per  cent  in  
2004-05  compared  to  an  average  of  9.35  per  cent  during  2000-04.  States’  expenditure  on  social 
services witnessed similar movement during the comparable period. However, expenditures on health 
and education as a percentage of GDP, during 2004-05, still remain below the level of the 1990s and 
early 2000s. In 2005-06, development expenditure and social expenditure of the States as percentage 
of GDP are budgeted to be lower than the previous year.  
New initiatives   
The Union Budget 2005-06 has provided a special focus on enhancing human capital investment in 
the country in an accelerated manner.  Particular emphasis has been given to significant increases in 
   4/7 
allocations to the flagship schemes of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), National Rural Health Mission 
(NRHM),  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme  (EGS),  Rural  Electrification,  and  the  like.  Sarva  Shiksha 
Abhiyan  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  Government’s  support  in  basic  education  for  all  children.  The 
allocation  for  this  programme  has  been  enhanced  to  Rs.  7,156  crore  in  2005-06  as  against  Rs.  
3,057 crore in the previous year’s budget. A non-lapsable fund called ‘Prarambhik Shiksha Kosh’ has 
been created for funding this programme. NRHM envisages strengthening primary health care through 
grass root level public health interventions based on community ownership. Total allocations for the 
Department of Health and the Department of Family Welfare will be enhanced from Rs. 8,420 crore in 
the current year to Rs. 10,280 crore in the next year when NRHM will be launched. Increase in the 
funding is envisaged to finance NRHM and its components like training of health volunteers, providing 
more medicines and strengthening the primary and community health centre system. The allocation 
for the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) has also been enhanced significantly. 
The  Union  Budget  2005-06  also  proposed  launching  of  a  massive  rural  electrification  programme 
beginning in 2005-06 with the objective of covering  1,25,000 villages in five years with high emphasis 
on the deficient States. Similarly, higher allocations have been made for provision of drinking water 
and sanitation facilities in rural habitations. Furthermore, a corpus of Rs 8,000 crore was provided in 
the current year for the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund for improving the basic infrastructure in 
the rural India. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) was launched in December 2000 
as a 100 per cent centrally sponsored scheme to provide rural connectivity. It is funded by the diesel 
cess  in  the  central  road  fund  and  through  borrowings  from  domestic  financial  institution  and 
multilateral funding agencies.   Without appropriate connectivity, it is difficult to bring about the kind of 
improvements envisaged for human development. 
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  following  the  recommendations  of  the  Twelfth  Finance  Commission 
(TFC), it has been decided by the Government of India to provide specific grants for education and 
health to those States which are unable to spend adequately in these sectors because of deficiencies 
in  fiscal  capacity.  TFC  has  recommended  specific  grants  amounting  to  Rs  10,171  crore  to  eight 
States1  for education and Rs 5,887 crore to seven States2 for health over its award period of 2005-10. 
The  grants  for  both  the  sectors  are  an  additionality  over  and  above  the  normal  expenditure  to  be 
incurred by the States in these sectors. Furthermore, it recommended specific grants to local bodies 
amounting  Rs.  25,000  crore  meant  to  improve  basic  amenities,  viz.,  water  supply,  sanitation,  solid 
waste  management,  etc.  which  are  expected  to  improve  the  quality  of  life  both  in  rural  and  urban 
areas. 
As  regards  States’  initiatives,  many  States  have  embarked  upon  the  path  of  fiscal  correction  and 
consolidation  in  the  recent  period.  Increase  in  the  Central  transfers  in  the  light  of  TFC 
recommendation  has  a  comforting  impact  on  State  finances.  With  the  debt  relief  benefits  linked  to 
enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Legislation  (FRL)  by  the  TFC,  there  has  been  increasing 
incentive to observe fiscal discipline. As of now, while 15 States have already enacted FRL, 2 States 
have  introduced  the  Bill  and  2  more  States  have  proposed  to  introduce  FRL  Bill  in  their  respective 
Budget for 2005-06.  As all the states put into effect fiscal improvement measures, their ability to make 
focused expenditures on health, education, nutrition and rural infrastructure will increase substantially.  
Policy options 
For sustained social sector development, it is important that the high growth rate of the economy is 
maintained  over  a  sustained  period.  Similarly,  macroeconomic  stability  in  terms  of  lower  inflation  is 
also critically important to protect the poor and vulnerable segment of the population. It is here that the 
role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  Monetary  Policy  becomes  important.  In  addition,  prudent  fiscal 
management through expenditure prioritization and revenue augmentation is also essential. Thus, the 
recent initiatives by the State Governments to enact FRL is a welcome move.  
As I have been emphasizing in many of my writings and speeches, widespread and bold imposition of 
user charges on all non-merit goods is very important for revenue augmentation of the States. The 
                                                      
1   Assam, Bihar, Jharkland, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
2   Assam, Bihar, Jharkland, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. 
   5/7 
pattern and organization of provision of public services in India has been done in such a way that the 
public has got used to not paying economic charges for these services. This includes key services, 
inter alia, power, water supply, irrigation and transport. The larger consumers of these services are 
typically  the  better  off.    Thus,  appropriate  levy  of  user  charges  also  promotes  better  income 
distribution. Moreover, by strengthening the finances of the agencies that supply these services, it also 
enhances their capacity to improve and expand services and to serve the less well off.  According to 
one estimate, the hidden subsidies on these non-merit goods amount to as much as 10.7 per cent of 
GDP  on  an  annual  basis.  The  combined  fiscal  deficit  of  the  Centre  and  States  in  recent  period  is 
around 2 to 3 percentage points lower than this as a percentage of GDP. This highlights the need for 
augmenting revenue from user charges. However, it can be noted that with the poor quality of public 
services provided in India, the public is loath to pay higher charges. Hence, imposition of higher user 
charges has to be accompanied by perceptible improvements in the quality of services.   
Apart  from  the  above,  rural  connectivity  plays  a  critical  role  for  higher  human  development  index. 
Evidence suggests that the states like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Goa, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh that 
have  invested  heavily  in  the  provision of  better  rural  connectivity  are  also  better  placed  in  terms  of 
human  development.  Thus,  better  rural  infrastructure  and  connectivity  is  necessary  to  accomplish 
developmental programmes related to human development. The direct benefits of rural development 
and connectivity in terms of better roads, electrification and communication also enable the doctors, 
health workers, and teachers to stay in the villages. Such personnel, who have with great effort and 
difficulty,  educated  themselves  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  stay  in  habitations  that  lack  basic 
infrastructure  and  connectivity.  They  obviously  have  aspirations  for  their  own  children  and  families.  
Investment in social sectors like health and education is unlikely to be successful unless accompanied 
by  complementary  investment  in  rural  infrastructure.    The  indirect  benefits  of  better  communication 
would  be  in  terms  of  better  dissemination  of  information  on  all  aspects  of  agricultural  products, 
particularly that on agricultural prices. Farmers suffer greatly from the large difference between market 
prices  of  agricultural  products  and  farm  level  prices  due  to  large  transportation  costs  and  lack  of 
information.  Thus,  better  rural  connectivity  in  terms  of  both  transportation  and  communication,  will 
promote  better  price  discovery  and  help  in  improving  farmers’  income  and,  hence,  their  human 
development.  The extension of institutional credit, be it through banking institutions or microfinance 
institutions,  will  also  be enabled  by  better  rural connectivity.    The  improvement  in  farmers’   income 
from  better  rural  connectivity  will  itself  improve  their  credit  worthiness  leading  to  lower  applicable 
interest rate and further improvements in incomes and human development.   
Besides,  physical  connectivity,  economic  empowerment  of  the  vast  segment  of  our  population  who 
have  hitherto  remained  financially  excluded  is  an  important  issue  for  human  development.  The 
programme of linking Self Help Groups (SHGs) with the banking system has emerged as the major 
micro-finance programme in the country. At present, micro-finance institutions (MFIs) depend on the 
banks  including  commercial  banks,  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  and  cooperative  banks  to  obtain 
finance according to the guidelines issued by the RBI. There is an increasing emphasis to promote 
MFIs    which  provide  small-scale  credit  and  other  financial  services  to  low  income  households  and 
small  informal  businesses.  Empowering  MFIs  will  facilitate  their  role  as  intermediary  between  the 
lending banks and the beneficiaries. The Union Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech 2005-06, has 
prescribed that the commercial banks should appoint MFIs as the ‘banking correspondents’ to provide 
transaction services on their behalf.  
In response, RBI appointed an Internal Group on Rural Credit and Micro-finance to look at the broad 
aspects of increasing “financial inclusion” and promoting MFIs. I am glad, indeed, that the Principal 
and the faculty of this College, have been associated with the preparation of the report which is now 
being closely examined for implementation.  
The report has recognised both the supply and demand side constraints and circumstances that has 
made mass scale financial inclusion elusive. Pragmatically appreciating that the large-scale expansion 
of physical infrastructure supported by multifarious policy initiatives could not accelerate the inclusion 
of a vast majority of rural population into the ambit of formal financial institutions, the report suggested 
that if “financial inclusion” is to be made a reality, we need to leverage socially active organizations 
and persons to work with people, particularly those with small means, empower them and bring them 
closer to financial services provided by the formal financial institutions on the one hand. On the other, 
these  agencies  and  persons  can  be  harnessed  to  bring  aggregation  of  quantities  so  that  the 
constraints of reaching large numbers of dispersed, far-flung and socio-economically disadvantaged 
clientele is minimized.  To translate this into action, the report has suggested that banks may use the 
services of  the “Business Facilitators” to bring people and the banks together without having to handle 
   6/7 
cash and the “Business Correspondents”  who will bring them together and will also handle cash for 
providing  doorstep  services.  NBFCs,  NGO-MFIs,  Section  25  Companies,  Cooperative  societies, 
corporate entities, post-offices, etc. can be identified as possible correspondents while even informal 
entities like farmers’ clubs, NGOs, cooperatives, Rural Kiosks, socially conscious individuals, etc. can 
work as the facilitators. 
All of us at RBI and our Governor, in particular, have appreciated the suggestions and we hope that 
the banks will use these avenues to accelerate the process of financial inclusion. 
Before I conclude let me compliment CAB, UNDP and the Planning Commission for very thoughtfully 
designing the programmes mainly for the State Government officials who are at the cutting edge of 
human development initiatives. 
The programme on “Human Development and State Finances” covers substantially the whole gamut 
of human development and financing issues. All of you will have the opportunity to hear and interact 
with  well-known  academicians  and  practitioners  like  Shri  Sridharan,  Dr.  Seeta  Prabhu,  Prof.  J  B  G 
Tilak, Prof. D K Srivastava, Dr. Amarjeet Sinha  besides UNDP Administrator, Dr. Kemal Dervis, Shri 
Jayant Patil, Finance Minister, Government of Maharashtra and other experts in the high power panel 
discussion scheduled in Mumbai. I will also urge you to use this programme as a platform to interact 
among  yourselves  and  share  experiences  as  seldom  you  have  an  occasion  when  so  many 
development practitioners come together at one place and get also to hear from so many renowned 
people. I am sure this programme will help you realize the importance of your role in the process of 
the country’s development and reinvigorate you intellectually and emotionally to seize the opportunity 
to realize the Millennium Development Goals of the UN and human development goals of the Tenth  
Five Year Plan.  
I wish your deliberations in the programme a grand success.   
 
   7/7 
