Alan Greenspan: Economic outlook 
Testimonial by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 3 November 2005.  
 Mr  Chairman,  when  I  last  appeared  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  in  early  June,  economic 
activity appeared to be reaccelerating after a slowdown in the spring. The economy had weathered a 
further run-up in energy prices over the winter, and aggregate demand was again strengthening. Real 
gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 3 1/2 percent at an annual rate over the first half of 
the year, and subsequent readings on activity over the summer were positive. By early August, the 
economy  appeared  to  have  considerable  momentum,  despite  a  further  ratcheting  up  of  crude  oil 
prices; pressures on inflation remained elevated. 
As  you  know,  the  economy  suffered significant  shocks  in  late summer  and early autumn.  Crude  oil 
prices moved sharply higher in August, bid up by growth in world demand that continued to outpace 
the  growth  of  supply.  Then  Hurricane  Katrina  hit  the  Gulf  Coast  at  the  end  of  August,  causing 
widespread  disruptions  to  oil  and  natural  gas  production  and  driving  the  price  of  West  Texas 
Intermediate crude oil above $70 per barrel. Because of a lack of ready access to foreign supplies, 
natural gas prices rose even more sharply. At the end of September, with the recovery from the first 
storm barely under way, Hurricane Rita hit, causing additional damage and destruction--especially to 
the  energy  production  and  distribution  systems  in  the  Gulf.  Most  recently,  Hurricane  Wilma  caused 
widespread power outages and property damage across the state of Florida. These events are likely 
to exert a drag on employment and production in the near term and to add to the upward pressures on 
the general price level. But the economic fundamentals remain firm, and the U.S. economy appears to 
retain important forward momentum. 
Of  course,  the  higher  energy  prices  caused  by  the  hurricanes  are  being  felt  well  beyond  the  Gulf 
Coast region. Those higher prices resulted from the substantial damage that occurred to our nation's 
energy production and distribution systems. Of the more than 3,000 oil and gas production platforms 
in  the  paths  of  Katrina  and  Rita,  more  than  100  were  destroyed,  and  an  additional  50  suffered 
extensive damage. Of the 134 manned drilling rigs operating in the Gulf, 8 were lost, and an additional 
38 were either set adrift by the storms or were badly damaged. At present, both oil and natural gas 
production  in  the  Gulf  are  operating  at  less  than  50  percent  of  pre-Katrina  levels.  Since  the  first 
evacuations  of  oil  and  gas  facilities  were  ordered  before  Katrina,  cumulative  shortfalls  represented 
almost 4 percent of the nation's annual production of crude oil and 2 percent of our output of natural 
gas. 
The combination of flooding, wind damage, and a lack of electric power also forced many crude oil 
refineries and natural gas processing plants to shut down. The restoration of production at the affected 
natural  gas  processing  facilities  has  proceeded  particularly  slowly,  in  part  because  of  the  lack  of 
natural  gas  feedstocks  and  infrastructure  problems.  Most  refineries,  however,  will  be  back  on  line 
within the next month or so, though a few may take longer. 
In the interim, a greater output of refined petroleum products in other areas of the country and much 
higher imports, especially of gasoline, are making up for the production shortfalls in Gulf refining. The 
temporary  lifting  of  some environmental  regulations and  the suspension  of  the  Jones  Act  facilitated 
those adjustments. In addition, refiners have shifted the mix of production toward more gasoline and 
less heating oil and jet fuel. That shift has had benefits in the short run, though the longer it continues, 
the  greater  the  possibility  of  upward  pressure  on  distillate  fuel  oil  prices  during  the  winter  heating 
season. 
Releases  from  the  nation's  Strategic  Petroleum  Reserve  relieved  much  of  the  upward  pressure  on 
crude  oil  prices,  and  imports  of  refined  products  responded  rapidly  to  ease  the  price  pressures 
stemming  from  the  loss  of  refinery  production  in  the  Gulf.  As  a  consequence,  the  nationwide  retail 
price of gasoline for all grades has declined 60 cents per gallon from its peak of $3.12 per gallon in the 
week of September 5. Motorists appear to have economized on their driving, and gasoline demand 
appears to be off a bit. However, it will take time and an appreciable increase in the fuel economy of 
our stock of motor vehicles to fundamentally change the amount of motor fuel used on our nation's 
highways. 
   1/3 
The far more severe reaction of natural gas prices to the production setbacks that have occurred in 
the Gulf highlights again the need to expand our nation's ability to import natural gas. In contrast to the 
fall in crude oil prices and the sharp narrowing of refinery margins during the past two months, natural 
gas prices have remained high. Moreover, judging from elevated distant futures prices, traders expect 
natural gas prices to edge lower but to stay high for the foreseeable future. This expectation largely 
reflects a natural gas industry in North America that is already operating at close to capacity and our 
inability to import large quantities of far cheaper, liquefied natural gas (LNG) from other parts of the 
world. At present, natural gas supplies appear to be sufficient to meet the near-term demands--even 
with some ongoing shortfall in Gulf production. However, a colder-than-average winter would stress 
this market, and prices will likely remain vulnerable to spikes until the spring. 
U.S. imports of LNG have been constrained by inadequate global capacity for liquefaction, as well as 
by  environmental  and  safety  concerns  that  have  restricted  the  construction  of  new  LNG  import 
terminals  in  the  United  States.  In  2002,  such  imports  accounted  for  only  1  percent  of  US  gas 
consumption.  Despite  the  major  effort  to  expand  imports,  the  Department  of  Energy  forecasts  LNG 
imports this year at only 3 percent of gas consumption. Canada, which has recently supplied one-sixth 
of our consumption, cannot expand its pipeline exports significantly in the near term, in part because 
of the role that Canadian natural gas plays in supporting increasing oil production from tar sands. 
The disruptions to energy production have noticeably affected economic activity. We estimate that the 
storms  held  down  the  increase  in  industrial  production  0.4  percentage  point  in  August  and  an 
additional 1.7 percentage point in September. 
Except  for  the  hurricane  effects,  readings  on  the  economy  indicate  a  continued  solid  expansion  of 
aggregate demand and production. If allowance is taken for the effects of Katrina and Rita and for the 
now-settled machinist strike at Boeing, industrial production rose at an annual rate of 5-1/4 percent in 
the  third  quarter.  That's  up  from  an  annual  pace  of  1-1/4  percent  in  the  second  quarter,  when  a 
marked slowing of inventory accumulation was a restraining influence on growth. 
The  September  employment  report  showed  a  loss  of  35,000  jobs.  However,  an  upward  revision  to 
payroll gains over the summer indicated a stronger underlying pace of hiring before the storms than 
had been previously estimated. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that employment growth in 
areas not affected by the storms was in line with the average pace over the twelve months ending in 
August. 
Retail  spending  eased  off  in  September,  likely  reflecting  the  effects  of  the  hurricanes  and  higher 
gasoline prices. Major chain stores report a gradual recovery over October in the pace of spending, 
though light motor vehicle sales declined sharply last month, when some major incentives to purchase 
expired. 
The longer-term prospects for the U.S. economy remain favorable. Structural productivity continues to 
grow at a firm pace, and rebuilding activity following the hurricanes should boost real GDP growth for 
a while. More uncertainty, however, surrounds the outlook for inflation. 
The past decade of low inflation and solid economic growth in the United States and in many other 
countries  around  the  world  has  been  without  precedent  in  recent  decades.  Much  of  that  favorable 
performance is attributable to the remarkable confluence of innovations that spawned new computer, 
telecommunication,  and  networking  technologies,  which,  especially  in  the  United  States,  have 
elevated  the  growth  of  productivity,  suppressed  unit  labor  costs,  and  helped  to  contain  inflationary 
pressures. The result has been a virtuous cycle of low prices and solid growth. 
Contributing to the disinflationary pressures that have been evident in the global economy over the 
past decade or more has been the integration of in excess of 100 million educated workers from the 
former  Soviet  bloc  into  the  world's  open  trading  system.  More  recently,  and  of  even  greater 
significance,  has  been  the  freeing  from  central  planning  of  large  segments  of  China's  750  million 
workforce.  The  gradual  addition  of  these  workers  plus  workers  from  India--a  country  which  is  also 
currently  undergoing  a  notable  increase  in  its  participation  in  the  world  trading  system--would 
approximately  double  the  overall  supply  of  labor  once  all  these  workers  become  fully  engaged  in 
competitive world markets. Of course, at current rates of productivity, the half of the world's labor force 
that  has  been  newly  added  to  the  world  competitive  marketplace  is  producing  no  more  than  one 
quarter of world output. With increased education and increased absorption of significant cutting-edge 
technologies, that share will surely rise. 
   2/3 
Over the past decade or more, the gradual assimilation of these new entrants into the world's free-
market trading system has restrained the rise of unit labor costs in much of the world and hence has 
helped to contain inflation. 
As  this  process  has  unfolded,  inflation  expectations  have  decreased,  and  accordingly,  the  inflation 
premiums  embodied  in  long-term  interest  rates  around  the  world  have  come  down.  The  effective 
augmentation of world supply and the accompanying disinflationary pressures have made it easier for 
the Federal Reserve and other central banks to achieve price stability in an environment of generally 
solid economic growth. 
But this seminal shift in the world's workforce is producing, in effect, a level adjustment in unit labor 
costs. To be sure, economic systems evolve from centrally planned to market-based only gradually 
and, at times, in fits and starts. Thus, this level adjustment is being spread over an extended period. 
Nevertheless, the suppression of cost growth and world inflation, at some point, will begin to abate 
and, with the completion of this level adjustment, gradually end. 
These  global  forces  pressing  inflation  and  interest  rates  lower  may  well  persist  for  some  time. 
Nonetheless, it is the rate at which countries are integrated into the global economic system, not the 
extent  of  their  integration,  that  governs  the  degree  to  which  the  rise  in  world  unit  labor  costs  will 
continue to be subdued. Where the global economy is currently in this dynamic process remains open 
to question. But going forward, these trends will need to be monitored carefully by the world's central 
banks. 
 I  want  to  conclude  with  a  few  remarks  about  the  federal  budget  situation,  which--at  least  until 
Hurricanes  Katrina  and  Rita  struck  the  Gulf  Coast--was  showing  signs  of  modest  improvement. 
Indeed,  tax  receipts  have  exhibited  considerable  strength  of  late,  posting  an  increase  of  nearly  15 
percent  in  fiscal  2005  as  a  result  of  sizable  gains  in  individual  and,  even  more,  corporate  income 
taxes.  Thus,  although  spending  continued  to  rise  rapidly  last  year,  the  deficit  in  the  unified  budget 
dropped to $319 billion, nearly $100 billion less than the figure for fiscal year 2004 and a much smaller 
figure  than  many  had  anticipated  earlier  in  the  year.  Lowering  the  deficit  further  in  the  near  term, 
however, will be difficult in light of the need to pay for post-hurricane reconstruction and relief. 
But even apart from the hurricanes, our budget position is unlikely to improve substantially further until 
we restore constraints similar to the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990, which were allowed to lapse in 
2002. Even so, the restoration of paygo and discretionary caps will not address the far more difficult 
choices that confront the Congress as the baby-boom generation edges toward retirement. As I have 
testified  on  numerous  occasions,  current  entitlement  law  may  have  already  promised  to  this  next 
generation of retirees more in real resources than our economy, with its predictably slowing rate of 
labor force growth, will be able to supply. 
So long as health-care costs continue to grow faster than the economy as a whole, as seems likely, 
federal spending on health and retirement programs would rise at a rate that risks placing the budget 
on an unsustainable trajectory. Specifically, large deficits will result in rising interest rates and an ever-
growing  ratio  of  debt  service  to  GDP.  Unless  the  situation  is  reversed,  at  some  point  these  budget 
trends will cause serious economic disruptions. 
We  owe  it  to  those  who  will  retire  over  the  next  couple  of  decades  to  promise  only  what  the 
government can deliver. The present policy path makes current promises, at least in real terms, highly 
conjectural. If fewer resources will be available per retiree than promised under current law, those in 
their later working years need sufficient time to adjust their work and retirement decisions. 
Crafting a budget strategy that meets the nation's longer-run needs will become ever more difficult and 
costly  the  more  we  delay.  The  one  certainty  is  that  the  resolution  of  the  nation's  demographic 
challenge will require hard choices and that the future performance of the economy will depend on 
those choices. No changes will be easy, as they all will involve setting priorities and making tradeoffs 
among valued alternatives. The Congress must determine how best to address the competing claims 
on our limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of 
policy changes but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and private 
saving. The benefits of taking sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future. 
 
   3/3 
