Xiang Junbo: Combatting money laundering and terrorist financing in China 
Speech by Mr Xiang Junbo, Deputy Governor of the People’ s Bank of China, at the high level seminar 
on AML and combatting terrorist financing, Beijing, 22 September 2005. 
 Money laundering is always accompanied by criminal activities generating economic gains and to our 
society, the damage is obvious. Money laundering not only destroys the fairness and equality principle 
of  market  economy,  disturbs  orderly  competition,  damages  reputations  and  normal  operations  of 
financial institutions, threatens the soundness and safety of financial systems, but also becomes the 
source of corruption and erodes the social fundamental institutions. To be more troublesome, money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing  have  interlaced with  each  other  and  threatened  global security.  A 
series of terrorist attacks in the last four years have already rung the alarm bell. Money laundering and 
terrorist financing have already threatened and challenged seriously the human society, sustainable 
development in the 21st century. 
Currently, international community has made considerable progress in combating money laundering 
and terrorist financing. For example, the United Nation (UN) has issued several legal documents in 
this  regard,  including  the  United  Nation  Convention  Against  Illicit  Traffic  in  Narcotic  Drugs  and 
Psychotropic  Substances,  the  International  convention  for  the  Suppression  of  the  Financing  of 
Terrorism,  the  United  Nation  Convention  Against  Transnational  Organized  Crime  and  the  United 
Nation Convention Against Corruption etc. On July 29, 2005, the UN Security Council issued the UN 
Security  Council  Resolution  1617,  which  “urges  all  member  countries  to  implement  the  Forty 
Recommendations on money laundering and 9 Special Recommendations on terrorist financing of the 
Financial Action Task Force on Money laundering (FATF)”. FATF and its regional organizations have 
been  set  up  successively.  Many  countries  have  already  issued  and  implemented  anti-money 
laundering and terrorist financing laws in succession. But, we have to note that, money laundering, 
terrorist  financing  and  those  serious  criminal  activities  supported  by  them,  such  as  drug  trafficking, 
smuggling, population trafficking and corruption, and terrorist attacks are still rampant and threaten the 
safety,  stability  and  prosperity  of  human  society.  According  to  the  UN  Report  of  the  Secretary-
General’s High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, lack of international cooperation is 
one of the fundamental drawbacks that international communities cannot respond effectively to money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  In  recent  years,  China  has  made  great  efforts  in  preventing, 
cracking  down  and  punishing  of  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  activities  and  therefore 
achieved  obvious  progress.  Now,  I  would  like  to  brief  you  the  situation  in  China  about  combating 
money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Before that, I would like to explain the special role of the People’s Bank of China (PBC) in anti-money 
laundering.  In  May  2003,  in  line  with  the  need  of  anti-money  laundering  development,  the  State 
Council  designated  the  PBC  as  the  leading  government  department  for  anti-money  laundering  in 
China. In December 2003, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress (NPC) revised 
the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the People’s Bank of China and accordingly, PBC is 
legally responsible for directing and deploying anti-money laundering work in the financial system and 
monitoring funds movement in anti-money laundering.  
 
I.  
Chinese  government  pays  high  attention  to  anti-money  laundering  and  strengthens 
international cooperation with an open and practical attitude 
The stance of Chinese government towards money laundering and terrorist financing is always clear 
and firm. With regard to money laundering, the Chinese government insists on cracking down all kinds 
of  money  laundering  activities,  supports  the  establishment  of  a  unified  anti-money  laundering 
standards by international communities and is ready to develop bilateral and multilateral international 
cooperation. After “ 9.11” attack in 2001, President Hu Jintao mentioned that, “ terrorist financing is the 
key fund sources and bases for terrorists and terrorism organizations to exist, develop and conduct 
terrorist  activities.  To  succeed  in  anti-terrorism,  we  must  contain  and  eliminate  terrorist  financing 
activities.” Therefore, China has signed consecutively on the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in 
Narcotic  Drugs  and  Psychotropic  Substances,  the  UN  Convention  Against  Transnational  Organized 
   1/5 
Crime and the UN Convention Against Corruption. After the “9.11” incident, the Chinese government 
promoted the UN Resolutions 1368 and 1373 on anti-terrorism financing and signed on important legal 
documents  on  international  anti-terrorism  financing,  such  as  the  International  convention  for  the 
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and Shanghai Convention on Terrorism, Extremism and 
Separatism. 
The Chinese government is supportive to the establishment of international cooperation framework in 
anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing. In February 2004, China officially applied to join the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF). In February and October 2004 consecutively, the PBC wrote to 
the Chairman of FATF and expressed its commitment to follow the FATF anti-money laundering and 
anti-terrorist financing recommendations. In January 2005, 33 members of FATF unanimously agreed 
to  accept  China  as  an  observer.  Currently,  China  is  making  great  efforts  to  obtain  FATF  official 
membership.  In  October  2004,  China,  as  the  funding  member  country  and  together  with  Russia, 
Kazakhstan,  Tajikistan,  Kyrghizstan  and  Belarus,  established  the  Euro-Asian  Group  on  Combating 
Money-laundering  and  Financing  of  Terrorism  (EAG),  which  became  the  key  component  of 
international cooperation in anti-money laundering and terrorist financing.  
Chinese government is practical with regard to strengthening international cooperation in criminal law 
implementation. China has collaborated with other countries in police affairs cooperation, information 
exchange,  case  investigation  and  illegal  gains  retrieving  and  criminals  arresting.  China  set  up 
cooperation relations successively with above 40 countries through 70 agreements, MOUs or Meeting 
Minutes  in  police  cooperation  and  combating  criminals.  China  also  reached  agreements  with  5 
countries including the USA, Canada and Thailand to bilaterally dispatch police liaison officers. China 
also signed agreements on criminal judicature with 26 countries and agreements with 18 countries on 
bilateral  extradition,  including  Russia,  Thailand,  and  the  Republic  of  Mongolia  etc.  Since  1998, 
Chinese  police  has  assisted  foreign  counterparts  in  investigating  on  20  terrorist  financing  related 
clues, and helped counterparts from the USA, Canada and Great Britain etc investigate and collect 
evidences  in  China.  Since  2001,  China  has  disclosed  suspicious  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing name lists for more 50 times in accordance with the UN 1267 committee and other countries’ 
requirements.  
II. 
China has  established  comparative  complete  legal  system  in  anti-money  laundering 
and terrorist financing in line with the fundamental principle of “ruling by law” 
Article  120(I)  and  Article  190  of  the  current  Criminal  Law  in  China  defined  terrorist  financing  and 
money-laundering crime as criminal acts. Money-laundering crime in China has its special features. 
First, on the basis of the defined money-laundering crime act, both natural person and legal person 
are  treated  as  the  criminal  offenders;  second,  punishment  of  money-laundering  crime  also  cover 
laundering  illegal  gains  from  oversea  upstream  criminal  acts;  third,  although  there  are  only  four 
different upstream criminal acts, there are totally 27 different crimes within them, including smuggling, 
trafficking,  production  of  narcotic  drugs  and  illegal  possession  of  psychotropic  substances,  illegal 
cultivation  of  drug  plants,  organizing,  leading  and  participating  in  mafias,  weapon  and  ammunition 
smuggling,  counterfeit  currency  smuggling,  cultural  relic  smuggling,  precious  metal  and  jewelry 
smuggling  ,  organizing,  leading  or  participating  in  terrorist  organizations  etc;  fourth,  criminal 
punishments  of  money  laundering  include  maximum  10  year  imprisonment,  detention,  property 
confiscation and criminal fines. 
With  regard  to  administrative  methods  for  preventing,  combating  money-laundering  and  terrorist 
financing,  the  fundamental  institutions  recommended  by  international  communities,  such  as  due 
diligence,  suspicious  transaction  identification,  transaction  record-keeping,  cross  border  capital 
movements  control,  are  all  embodied  in  Chinese  legal  system.  For  example,  Provisional  Rules  for 
Cash Management, issued by the State Council in October 1988, stipulates strictly the cash use in 
circulation. Administrative Rules for Cross-border Transfer of National Currency, issued by the State 
Council  in  January  1993,  stipulates  the  reporting  and  maximum  management  system,  forbids 
transferring and remitting RMB abroad through regular mails without permission. Now the upper limits 
of  RMB  to  be  taken  abroad  is  20,000  yuan  each  time  per  person.  Rules  for  Authentic  Name  of 
Individual Deposit Account, issued by the State Council in April 2000, deny the validity of anonymous 
account  existence.  In  January  2003,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  issued  the  Rules  for  Anti-money 
Laundering Efforts by Financial Institutions, Administrative Rules for the Reporting of Large-Value and 
Suspicious  RMB  Payment  Transactions  and  Administrative  Rules  for  the  Reporting  of  Large-Value 
and Suspicious Foreign Exchange Transactions by Financial Institutions, which stipulate that financial 
   2/5 
institutions  should  establish  sound  internal  control  system  in  anti-money  laundering,  report  timely 
large-value and suspicious transactions (including 46 standards about suspicious reports for domestic 
and foreign currency transactions), keep records of clients documents and transactions for at least 5 
years.  At  current,  the  PBC  is  organizing  personal  resources  to  amend  in  full  scale  the  
above-mentioned  three  rules.  The  revised  rules  will  focus  on  the  scientific  and  information-oriented 
supervision of anti-money laundering and effective control of the working cost of financial institutions 
to  prevent  and  control  money  laundering.  In  August  2003,  the  State  Administration  of  Foreign 
Exchange  (SAFE)  and  the  General  Administration  of  Customs  jointly  issued  the  Provisional 
Administrative Rules for Transfer of Foreign Currency, which stipulates that people entering China with 
foreign  exchange  cash  with  value  over  USD5000  should  provide  written  report  to  the  customs  and 
people  traveling  abroad  with  foreign  exchange  cash  with  value  over  USD5000  should  apply  for 
permission beforehand.  
With the development of anti-money laundering and the expansion of international collaboration, legal 
institutions  and  government  agencies  have  reached  consensus  on  stipulating  special  anti-money 
laundering law. On March 22, 2004, Budgetary Work Committee of the NPC Standing Committee held 
the anti-money laundering law drafting meeting, participated by 17 government departments, including 
the People’s Supreme Court, the People’s Supreme Prosecutor, Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of 
Finance and the People’s Bank of China. Now, the drafting anti-money laundering law is underway 
and it will be presented to the legislative body in proper time for deliberation. Besides, other relevant 
departments have finished the drafting of anti-terrorism law, with anti-terrorist financing being one of 
the important contents.  
III.  
On the basis of completion of anti-money laundering organizational framework, China 
is exploring to establish effective anti-money laundering mechanism 
At  central  government  level,  the  main  government  agencies  concerned  with  anti-money  laundering 
tasks are the PBC, the General Administrative of Customs, the General Administration of Taxation, 
China  Banking  Regulatory  Commission  (CBRC),  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  (CSRC), 
China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC), and the SAFE etc. Right now, the PBC, the Ministry 
of Public Security and the SAFE have already set up special anti-money laundering organization, and 
the General Administration of Customs, the General Administration of Taxation, CBRC, CSRC, and 
CIRC appointed special units to fulfill anti-money laundering functions respectively. 
In  terms  of  improving  anti-money  laundering  organizational  framework,  the  PBC  set  up  Anti-money 
Laundering  Bureau  in  September  2003  to  be  responsible  for  the  administration  of  anti-money 
laundering  work  nationwide,  and  supervise  financial  institutions  to  improve  their  internal  control 
systems  in  anti-money  laundering  and  implement  relevant  anti-money  laundering  regulations.  In  
April  2004,  the  PBC  established  Anti-money  Laundering  Monitoring  and  Analysis  Center  to  receive 
and analyze anti-money laundering information for both RMB and foreign currencies. Till July 2004, all 
domestic  commercial  banks  have  established  anti-money  laundering  steering  group  and  relevant 
working  organizations,  with  anti-money  laundering  positions  in  financial  institutions  amounting  to 
91,313, anti-money laundering staff amounting to 92,743. 
With regard to the establishment of effective anti-money laundering cooperation mechanism, the PBC 
took the initiative to establish the anti-money laundering joint ministerial conference and the financial 
supervisory departments’ anti-money laundering collaboration mechanism.  The Agenda joined by the 
People’s Supreme Court, the People’s Supreme Persecutor, the Secretariat of the State Council, the 
Ministry  of  Public  Security,  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Ministry  of 
Justice, CBRC, CSRC and CIRC etc, totaling 23 departments, targets to coordinate nationwide anti-
money laundering work, strengthen policy coordination, law enforcement cooperation and information 
exchange,  direct  nationwide  anti-money  laundering  efforts  under  the  steering  of  the  State  Council, 
stipulate  important  guidance  and  policies  relevant  to  anti-money  laundering  and  international 
cooperation  policy  measures,  coordinate  different  departments  and  motivate  the  whole  nation  to 
conduct  ant-money  laundering.  Recently,  the  second  meeting  of  the  Joint  Ministerial  Conference 
passed the Preparation Plan for FATF Evaluation in principle, and relevant preparations have been 
already initiated in full scale. Financial supervisory departments’ anti-money laundering collaboration 
mechanism joined by CBRC, CSRC, CIRC and the SAFE, targets to project, plan, collaborate financial 
institutions’ efforts in anti-money laundering as well as the banking, securities, insurance and foreign 
exchange supervisory department’s anti-money laundering functions to reduce duplicate supervision 
and avoid blind area in supervision. Till June 2005, 12 provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities 
   3/5 
and  cities  with  independent  budget  have  already  formed  anti-money  laundering  collaboration 
mechanism among relevant agencies.  
IV.  
High attentions were paid to the role of financial institutions in anti-money laundering, 
and anti-money laundering supervision and funds monitoring have achieved evident 
results  
From  April  2004  to  December  2004,  the  PBC  has  conducted  special  examination  on  anti-money 
laundering  by  the commercial banks.  According  to  the  examination  results,  most commercial  banks 
have established internal control system of anti-money laundering and fulfilled obligations related to 
clients’  identity  verification,  transaction-record  keeping  and  large-value  and  suspicious  transaction 
reporting. The PBC also punished 72 main reporting banks of commercial banks involving total fines 
up to RMB 1.7 million yuan due to their incomplete internal control systems of anti-money laundering 
or  misreporting  of  suspicious  transactions.  The  examination  played  active  role  in  understanding 
commercial  banks  implementation  of  anti-money  laundering  regulations  and  enhanced  commercial 
banks emphasis on anti-money laundering. At the same time, the examination accumulated precious 
experiences for supervision over non-banking financial institutions and other high risky areas in money 
laundering, such as real estate, precious metal and jewelry distribution, and cultural relic auction.  In 
2005, the PBC continued the special examination on commercial banks’ anti-money laundering of the 
provincial  level.  In  2006,  the  PBC  will  expand  anti-money  laundering  examination  to  securities 
companies and insurance companies. 
Since the establishment of the China Anti-money Laundering Monitoring and Analysis Center, it has 
networked with 17 commercial banks in data reporting. Its cumulative number of suspicious activities 
reports in both RMB and foreign currencies posted 654,400, amounting to RMB248.023 billion yuan 
and  USD76.92  billion  and  covering  provinces,  autonomous  regions  and  municipalities  across  the 
nation. By means of identification, analysis, investigation on suspicious activities reports, increasingly 
more  money  laundering  related  cases  were  referred  to  departments  of  public  security  for  further 
investigation.    According  to  incomplete  statistics,  since  April  2004,  the  PBC  and  the  SAFE  have 
altogether  referred  more  than  1,500  clues  to  departments  of  public  security  at  various  levels.  In 
particular,  they  helped  solve  51  cases,  involving  RMB3.096  billion  yuan  and  USD460  million  and 
relating to various fronts of money laundering activities like underground banking, overseas gambling, 
money laundering through investment, smuggling, illegal purchase and sale of foreign exchange etc. 
At present, the PBC is trying to expand data coverage, complete data reception standards, regulate 
data  reporting  procedure,  and  improve  data  analysis  skills.  At  the  same  time,  PBC  is  conducting 
research on central data base network and collaborating with current data bases, for example, credit 
registration system, payment and settlement system, banking accounts management system etc. The 
PBC  explores  actively  to  establish  data  searching  and  verification  platform  for  public  security, 
customs,  taxation  agencies,  industrial  and  commercial  administrations  to  improve  efficient  use  of 
suspicious  transaction  information.  The  PBC  stands  ready  to  sign  with  relevant  law  enforcement 
agencies of other countries and regions the Memorandum of Understanding on information exchange 
to challenge the new trend with increasingly more international and cross-border crimes. 
In summary, anti-money laundering and combating terrorist financing in China developed rapidly with 
evident  achievements  and  met  the  requirements  of  FATF  40  plus  9  recommendations.  However,  
anti-money laundering and combating terrorist financing still face with the serious challenges from the 
changing  society,  rapid  national  economic  development,  advancement  of  science  and  technology, 
frequent  international  capital  movement  and  continuous  financial  business  innovation  and  need  to 
strengthen and improve legal system, organizational framework, supervision by law and international 
cooperation. In the near future, our main tasks are: 
1. 
Continue  to  improve  anti-money  laundering  legal  system  by  stipulating  Anti-money 
Laundering Law, initiating revision procedures to the Criminal Law, speeding up legislation of 
the  Anti-terrorism  Law,  amending  Provisional  Rules  for  Cash  Management,  Rules  for 
Financial Institutions Anti-money Laundering and stipulating anti-money laundering rules for 
securities and insurance industries. 
Improve  departmental  collaboration  mechanism,  strengthen  anti-money  laundering  and 
terrorist  financing  research,  publicity  and  training  to  improve  participation  by  the  whole 
society and different departments. 
2. 
   4/5 
Strengthen  the  development  of  the  China  Anti-money  laundering  Monitoring  and  Analysis 
Center  to  detect,  distinguish  suspicious  criminal  information  in  time  and  cracking  down 
seriously  and  strictly  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  activities,  in  particular, 
underground banking criminal activities. 
Continue to conduct anti-money laundering examination and expand examination scope to 
securities  and  insurance  companies  to  encourage  the  “first  protection  line”  function  of 
financial institutions in anti-money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Strive to join the FATF as a full member and strengthen cooperation with other countries and 
regions  within  bilateral  or  multilateral  frameworks  based  on  equal  and  mutual  beneficial 
principles  in  information  exchange,  training,  investigation  assistance,  property  seizure  and 
criminal suspects extradition and repatriation.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
    5/5 
