Zhou Xiaochuan: Financial cooperation between China and Europe 
Address  by  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  First  China-Europe 
Financial Services and Regulation Roundtable Conference, Shanghai, 28 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning. 
On  behalf  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express my  warm 
welcome  to  all  the  guests  and  delegates  to  attend  the  first  China-Europe  Financial  Services  and 
Regulation Roundtable Conference co-sponsored by the People’s Bank of China and the European 
Commission. 
The  Roundtable  conference  not  only  provides  a  good  opportunity  for  China  and  Europe  to  have 
high-level dialogue about financial services and regulation, but also creates a new platform for further 
cooperation in this regard. We will exchange our views sincerely about financial services and financial 
markets regulation, the challenges brought by globalization trend, international cooperation and other 
issues   of our mutual interests in a very pleasant atmosphere.  
The  conference  was  held  in  Shanghai  because  it  is  the  financial  center  of  China  harboring  a  large 
number of domestic and foreign financial institutions. On 10 August 2005, The People’s Bank of China 
established  the  Shanghai  Head  Office.  The  event  of  the  first  China-Europe  Financial  Services  and 
Regulation  Roundtable  Conference  in  Shanghai  holds  great  significance  for  the  development  of 
Shanghai  as  a  financial  center,  as  well  as  financial  exchange  and  cooperation  between  China  and 
Europe. 
In the recent years, economic and trade relations between China and Europe have been strengthened 
gradually. The ancient “Silk Road” tied China and Europe closely more than 2000 years ago. Since the 
reform  and  opening-up,  China  has  registered  an  average  annual  GDP  growth  rate  of  9.4  percent, 
while on the other side of the Euro-Asia continent, the European Union has gradually developed into 
an organization comprising 25 member countries. In 2004, the enlarged European Union became the 
largest  trading  partner  of  China,  China  became  the  second  largest  trading  partner  of  the  European 
Union and the bilateral trade volume reached over USD170 billion, increasing by 33.6 percent. As of 
end-December 2004, the European Union had nearly 20 thousand enterprises invested in China with 
the contractual value of capital reaching USD75.38 billion. China has benefited much from the EU in 
the  process  of  economic  cooperation  in  terms  of  capital,  technology  and  advanced  management 
experience.  At  the  same  time,  the  rapid  development  of  Chinese  economy  also  provided  many 
chances for the EU countries. 
After its accession to the WTO, China has stepped up reform and opening-up of the financial industry. 
RMB exchange rate regime has been reformed, market-oriented interest rate reform has been steadily 
promoted, financial institutions’ restructuring has been deepened gradually and the capital adequacy 
level  of  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  has  been  increased  markedly.  Moreover, 
China  has  strengthened  its  efforts  on  preventing  financial  risks  and  maintaining  financial  stability, 
introduced modern financial management skills, qualified personnel, products and modern corporate 
mechanisms and advanced financial innovation. 
Along  with  the  strengthened  economic  and  trade  relations  between  China  and  Europe  and  the 
acceleration  of  China’s  financial  system  reform,  bilateral  financial  relations  have  been  improved 
further. First, institutions from both sides increased their presence in each other’s side. At present, 52 
banks  from  the  EU  have  established  branches  and  representative  offices  in  China,  including 
HSBC Holding,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  from  the  UK,  Société  Générale  and  Natexis  Banque 
Populaires  from  France,  Deutsche  Bank,  Bayerische  Landesbank  from  Germany,  Bank  of  Rome, 
UniCredito Italiano from Italy, ING Bank from Netherlands, KBC Bank N.V. and Fortis Bank S.A./N.V. 
from Belgium. Moreover, there are non-banking financial institutions invested by German institutions in 
China, such as Siemens Finance Company, Volkeswagen Auto Finance Company.  At the same time, 
Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China,  Bank  Of  China,  China  Construction  Bank,  Bank  of 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
Communications  have  established  branches  and  representative  offices  in  Frankfurt,  London,  Paris, 
Luxemburg,  Amsterdam,  Milan  and  Budapest  etc.  Besides,  cooperation  in  insurance  industry  was 
advanced positively. For example, Groupama-Gan, Allianz, Allianz-Volkswagen Life Insurance, Koln 
Reinsurance, Royal Sun Alliance Insurance from the European countries have already had joint-stock 
or solely-owned insurance companies. People’s Insurance Co. Ltd. of China and China Life Insurance 
Co. Ltd. established 5 insurance companies, 1 insurance brokerage companies and 1 insurance agent 
companies  in  the  UK,  Germany  and  Luxemburg  respectively.  As  to  the  securities  industry,  12 
securities companies from the European Union established 19 representative offices in China. At the 
same time, some joint-stock securities firms and fund management firms were established in China. 
For example, Xiangcai Securities Ltd. of China and Credit Lyonnais Securities Asia jointly established 
the China Euro Securities Ltd., Xiangcai Securities Ltd., and ING Bank jointly established the Xiangcai 
Hefeng  Fund  Management  Co.  Ltd.,  Bank  of  Communications  and  Schroders  Group  from  the  UK 
jointly established the Bank of Communications & Schroders Fund Management Co. Ltd., Deutsche 
Bank  AG  bought  equities  of  Harvest  Fund  Management  Co.Ltd.  and  Belgian  company  invested  in 
Fushi Fund Management Co.Ltd in Shanghai etc.  Second, China and Europe have made a series of 
great progress in financial strategic cooperation. HSBC holding became the strategic investor of the 
Bank of Communications; Royal Bank of Scotland became the strategic investor of the Bank of China; 
BNP  Paribas  invested  in  the  Nanjing  Commercial  Bank  and  became  its  strategic  investor; 
Bausparkasse  Schwabisch  Hall  AG  and  China  Construction  Bank  together  established  the 
Sino-German  Bausparkasse  in  Tianjin.  Third,  financial  cooperation  between  China  and  Europe  via 
Hong Kong is in even greater scale. As the frontline of China to open up to the outside world, Hong 
Kong  has  35  licensed  banks  from  the  European  Union,  such  as  BNP  Paribas  Peregrine,  Deutsche 
Bank, among the 167 licensed banks under the HKMA regulation and 126 licensed securities future 
traders,  consulting  companies,  asset  management  companies  and  other 
financial 
intermediaries held by European shareholders among the total licensed financial intermediaries under 
the supervision of Hong Kong Securities Regulatory Commission. Furthermore, there are 1422 funds 
authorized  by  the  Hong  Kong  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  to  operate  in  Hong  Kong  are 
registered in Europe. At end-2004, net assets of those European funds reached over USD500 billion. 
Financial  development  between  China  and  Europe will  bring  not  only  new  challenges  but also  new 
opportunities for both sides to strengthen cooperation in financial services and regulation. China and 
Europe have already set up bilateral financial services cooperation projects before, and the People’s 
Bank  of  China  as  well  as  the  China  banking,  securities  and  insurance  regulatory  authorities,  have 
conducted  and  benefited  from  broad  business  exchange  and  collaboration  with  their  European 
counterparts.  In  future,  both  sides  will  continue  to  strengthen  exchange,  understanding  and 
cooperation to promote further development of their bilateral relations. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  China  is  making  efforts  to  deepen  financial  reform  and  improve  financial 
market openness. In particular, after the WTO accession, China is conducting financial opening-up in 
line  with  the  WTO  commitments.  The  Third  Plenum  of  the  16th  CPC  Central  Committee  held  in 
October  2003  pointed  out  that,  China  will  boost  opening-up  in  full  scale,  improve  institutional 
protection  of  opening-up,  advance  the  facilities  of  trade  and  investment,  introduce  more  and  more 
advanced technology, management experiences and qualified personnel, strengthen the capability to 
participate  in  international  collaboration  and  competition,  develop  service  trade  and  continue  to 
implement  the  “going  out”  strategy.  The  just  concluded  Fifth  Plenum  of  the  16th  CPC  Central 
Committee in October further stressed that, China will promote globalization and facility of trade and 
investment,  continue  to  open  up  services  markets  and  accumulate  the  inward  transfer  of  modern 
service industry from other countries in an orderly way and support qualified enterprises to invest in 
overseas market. 
In  such an environment,  we  fully  believe  that  the  prospects of  financial cooperation  between  China 
and Europe will be much brighter in the days to come.  
Finally, I wish the Roundtable Conference a complete success. 
Thank you. 
licensed 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2005
