David Dodge: Promoting economic integrity 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the RCMP management retreat, 
Ottawa, 25 October 2005.  
 Thank you, and good evening. When Commissioner Zaccardelli asked me to speak at this retreat, I 
was  glad  to  accept.  In  fact,  I'm  honoured  to  be  part  of  this  inception  of  the  RCMP's  new  strategic 
priority - Economic Integrity. 
It's not surprising that the Bank of Canada is interested in promoting economic integrity. After all, the 
Bank of Canada Act mandates us, as far as possible within the scope of monetary policy action, to 
"promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada."  
We are committed to promoting the economic well-being of this country and its citizens. We do this 
through our monetary  policy,  through  our role  as  the  federal  government's  banker,  and  through  the 
issuance of Canada's paper currency. And we constantly work to promote confidence in a sound, safe 
financial system.  
A few years ago, your Commissioner coined the phrase "Safe Homes, Safe Communities". Your new 
strategic priority adds a third element to this phrase - "A Safe Economy". More than ever before, the 
law-enforcement community has a critical role to play in strengthening and preserving the security and 
economic interests of Canada. Now more than ever, the Bank of Canada, the RCMP, and other police 
agencies across Canada are working together to achieve this goal.  
Good policing is economic policing  
A focus on promoting a safe economy is not new for the RCMP and other police agencies. It is part of 
everyday policing - providing a safe place for citizens to live and work.  
But what do we mean by safety in our economy? For those of us involved in the nation's finances, it 
means preventing activities that undermine Canadians' confidence in their economy. It means fighting 
against the counterfeiting of currency and goods, credit card fraud, identity theft, money laundering, 
and so on. And it means preventing the erosion of confidence in our financial markets. 
Public  companies  need  capital  to  invest  and  create  jobs.  Governments  need  capital  to  build 
infrastructure.  Investors  provide  capital  on  the  expectation  that  it  will  be  put  to  good  use  and  yield 
good returns.  In  turn,  investors  rely  on these returns  to  finance  their  own needs,  their homes,  their 
retirement, and the education of their children. All of this activity will not take place unless the players 
are confident that they will be treated fairly, and that they operate on a level playing field.  
We know that all investments are subject to some risk of loss - that is the nature of markets. Properly-
functioning financial markets price investments according to their degree of risk and their economic 
merit.  But  these  markets  can  only  function  properly,  and  price  appropriately,  if  the  information  on 
which  they  function  is  correct.  If  there  is  misinformation  and  deception  -  or  the  suspicion  of  fraud  - 
markets cannot work efficiently.  
Let me explain further. When there is fraud, the market is operating on incorrect information. Clearly, 
that can result in private losses for individual investors who acted on the wrong information. But it can 
also cause a general loss in confidence - a loss which affects the economy as a whole. In the absence 
of trust that information is correct, the market cannot function, and society as a whole is the poorer for 
it.  That's  why  we  have  accounting  standards,  securities  regulations,  and  laws  prohibiting  economic 
crime.  There  are  significant  social  benefits  of  a  properly  functioning  market.  And  there  are  severe 
social costs of a market that functions poorly.  
Economic  crime  erodes  the  faith  of  Canadian  and  foreign  investors  in  the  integrity  of  our  financial 
systems, our currency, our governments, our businesses, and our products. These crimes undermine 
the financial health and reputation of our country. They are far from victimless. Ultimately, we are all 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 1
victims of these crimes, as they erode confidence in the financial system. And it takes a long time and 
a lot of effort and investment to re-establish public confidence once it is lost. 
That's why we have to view economic crime as every bit as serious as certain crimes of violence. It is 
true that fraud is less physically dangerous than an armed robbery. But its social damage is every bit 
as  severe.  Both  types  of  crime  undermine  the  trust  that  people  have  in  their  society.  That's  why  a 
computer hacker who steals from a company is just as much a criminal as a bank robber who steals 
from a bank branch. And an illegal inside trader that has hijacked a million dollars from the pockets of 
investors is no less a criminal than the thief who commits an armed robbery. In all of these cases, the 
specific loss of property is exacerbated by a more widespread loss of confidence. 
Let's  look  at  an  example  that's  closer  to  home  for  the  Bank  of  Canada  -  paper  currency,  our  one 
tangible product. When an individual gets stuck with a fake bill, the amount he or she loses may be 
very  small.  But  again,  it  is  the  aggregate  impact  that  matters.  Cash  transactions  still  account  for  a 
large percentage of our economy, and the use of cash continues to grow every year. If people lose 
faith in their currency, the economic and social costs are immense. The impact of the Windsor $100 
counterfeits  a  few  years  back  is  a  lasting  reminder  of  those  costs.  Maintaining  the  public's  trust  in 
Canada's paper money is a job that the Bank takes very seriously.  
Many police agencies are already working, either implicitly or explicitly, to protect economic integrity. 
You've been fighting the economic components of conventional crime - such as the laundering of the 
proceeds  from  drug  sales  -  as  well  as  economic  crime  itself  -  such  as  fraud,  counterfeiting,  and 
computer hacking. By improving your ability to fight these specific economic crimes, you improve your 
ability to fight all crime.  
In  matters  of  personal  and  public  safety,  police  organizations  have  known  for  a  long  time  that 
enforcement  cannot  be  effective  without  active  cooperation  from  citizens  and  communities. 
Enforcement  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  improve  safety  in  our  homes  and  in  our  streets.  Prevention, 
education, and community initiatives all have their role to play. Police officers also rely on the help of a 
broad  range  of  complementary  experts:  psychologists,  lawyers,  community  workers,  public  health 
officers, and so on.  
That  spirit  of  cooperation  is  just  as  vital  when  it  comes  to  protecting  economic  integrity.  No  one 
policing  agency  can  fight  alone  against  terrorist  financing,  money  laundering,  counterfeiting,  or 
financial  market  fraud.  This  has  become  especially  true  in  recent  years,  because  of  the  growing 
sophistication  of  financial  instruments  and  trading  technologies.  It's  now  much  easier  to  hide  one's 
own identity, or to steal someone else's, using Internet and other anonymous networks. And it's easier 
to confuse people with ever more complex financial schemes. 
The  good  news  is  that  we've  already  seen  how  effective  the  police  can  be  when  they  mount  a 
sustained and coordinated effort to reduce these types of crime. Integrated Proceeds of Crime Teams 
have made it increasingly difficult for criminals to profit from their illegal activities. The launch of the 
Integrated  Market  Enforcement  Teams  in  2002  has  helped  boost  public  confidence  in  our  capital 
markets. These are still early days, but the work of these teams is being noticed.  
The Bank is solidly behind this integrated approach to enforcing laws against economic crime. Special 
teams  have  the  skills  and  resources  needed  to  conduct  complex  investigations  leading  to  the 
successful  prosecution  of  these  so-called  "professional  criminals."  This  year,  you  developed  the 
National Counterfeit Enforcement Strategy. As a result of this initiative, it appears that we may soon 
have  specialized  Integrated  Counterfeit  Enforcement  Teams  (ICETs)  in  place,  to  fight  the  serious 
threat posed by currency counterfeiting. Be assured that my colleagues and I applaud and strongly 
support these vital efforts.  
However,  I  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  generate  support  and  funding  for  these  new  initiatives.  I 
understand how frustrating it must be to investigate these complicated crimes without adequate and 
skilled resources or support. And I understand the frustration of police who spend time and resources 
investigating these offences, only to see the criminals walk away with little punishment because the 
social costs of their crimes aren't always fully recognized. That's why the Bank is working with the law 
enforcement community on training materials and legal tools to help prosecutors present their cases 
more effectively. 
Further  progress  will  require  a  coordinated  effort  and  a  multidisciplinary  approach.  Vocal 
championship  by  leaders  from  the  public  and  private  sectors  is  needed  if  Canadians  and  their 
governments are to appreciate and support investment in specialized enforcement teams and more 
effective prosecutions and sentencing. As Governor of Canada's central bank, it is my responsibility 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2005
and my intention to do all that I can to increase awareness of the importance of protecting economic 
integrity.  That  is  why  the  Bank  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  committed  to  partnering  with  law-
enforcement authorities and other participants in the legal system.  
Challenges in protecting economic integrity  
You and the Bank of Canada share a compelling objective: Making Canada a safe place to earn a 
living, to do business, and to invest. So, what challenges do we face in this regard?  
Canada has a strong financial system, low and stable inflation, and a healthy economy. Our regulatory 
and  governance  structures  are  sound,  and  they  are  evolving  to  meet  the  challenges  of  new 
technology. So are Canada's bank notes - they now contain some of the best security features in the 
world 
But there is evidence that Canada is at risk of becoming a safe haven for opportunistic criminals who 
deal in white collar crime. This may be because we have lacked an adequately resourced enforcement 
regime  and  strong  sentencing  precedents.  It  may  also  be  because  there  is  a  perception  that  our 
markets may not be as safe as they should be, and a perception that our enforcement is not as tough 
as it ought to be. So we're battling on two fronts: we need to thwart these opportunistic criminals, and 
we must be seen to be doing so.  
Another challenge is also a traditional strength of Canada's economy, and that is its openness. This 
openness  has  helped  us  to  become  one  of  the  world's  great  trading  nations,  and  a  model  of 
multiculturalism. Canada is seen as an attractive place for people to live, to invest, to do business, and 
to  trade  with.  But,  as  I've  said,  this  open  economy  makes  us  a  target  for  international  economic 
criminals.  That's  why  we  need  more  effective  public  and  private  sector  governance  and  sound 
regulatory and enforcement practices to nurture strong businesses and sound financial systems. 
A third challenge is the need to ensure that our laws are current and that the judiciary is well-informed. 
The mere detection of crime - not to speak of its prosecution - is now a very sophisticated activity. It 
requires accountants, actuaries, commercial lawyers, financial specialists, and computer experts. Most 
importantly,  it  needs  skilled  investigators  who  are  able  to  collect,  analyze,  and  assemble  complex 
evidence. And it requires informed prosecutors who are able to effectively marshal this evidence in the 
courtroom.  
To meet these three challenges, we need to continue to work efficiently together - across specialties 
and institutions. No single institution can gather and manage all the experts who have to cooperate in 
this new environment.  
Police know their role in fighting economic crime. But manufacturers, issuers of high-value instruments 
(such as currency, securities, and passports), and financial institutions also have key roles to play. We 
must make our products and services as secure as possible. And we must do this while remaining 
profitable or, in the case of public sector institutions, cost effective. Now more than ever, this entails 
considerable expenditure to create and deploy highly sophisticated, reliable, and easy-to-use products 
and services. Our new Canadian Journey series of bank notes is a good example of the effort that we 
are making in this regard.  
As organizations make these investments, they must put even greater emphasis on security, quality, 
and service. They must be audited and supervised to the highest standards. Regulators, overseers, 
users,  boards  of  directors,  the  legal  community,  and  the  general  public  all  have  a  stake  in  the 
outcome.  
Tracking down the bad guys and collecting the evidence is the responsibility of the RCMP and other 
law enforcement agencies. Bringing a strong case to court for the Crown rests with the prosecutors. 
By  working  together,  we  can  hope  for  sentencing  that  reflects  the  importance  of  the  crime.  But 
achieving that goal requires active collaboration. That is easy to say, but devilishly tough to achieve. 
Knowledge  sharing  is  difficult  even  within  a  homogeneous  organization.  Sharing  information  and 
expertise across separate and independent organizations is even harder. But it is critical if we are to 
succeed. 
The  RCMP's  creation  of  the  strategic  priority  of  Economic  Integrity  is  a  tremendous  step  towards 
achieving that goal, for two reasons. First, this initiative is the vehicle by which your internal resources 
can be mobilized. The IMETs are an excellent example of this and I'm confident that the ICETs will be, 
too. Second, this initiative will become the conduit for sharing knowledge, information, and resources 
BIS Review 87/2005 
 3
with  other  partners,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada.  Through  a  well-organized  partnership,  we  can 
succeed in our goal of enhancing and preserving the economic integrity of our country. On behalf of 
the Bank of Canada - and I'm sure that I speak for securities commissions and other market regulators 
on this - let me say that we appreciate your efforts, and that you have our full and enthusiastic support.  
Conclusion 
Everybody  in  this  room  is  committed  to  making  Canadians  secure,  in  their  homes,  in  their 
communities, and in their business and working lives. As we do so, it is imperative that we continually 
remind ourselves that crime extends beyond the physical. Economic crime is harder to investigate and 
to prosecute. But it is every bit as damaging to the well-being of Canadians, and it is just as important 
to fight it with all of our effort.  
That's  why  I applaud  your  decision  to make  economic  integrity a  strategic  priority.  And  I  renew  the 
Bank of Canada's commitment to work together with the RCMP and all enforcement agencies to help 
make  the  Canadian  economy  a  safer  place  for  investors,  for  businesses,  and  for  all  of  our  fellow 
citizens. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2005
