Glenn Stevens: Asian financial co-operation 
Address by Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Asian Economic 
Panel  hosted  by  the  Lowy  Institute  for  International  Policy  and  the  ANU  Centre  for  Applied 
Macroeconomic Analysis, Sydney, 14 October 2005.  
 It is a pleasure to take part in this Asian Economic Panel meeting, amid such a distinguished group of 
scholars  and  colleagues  from  the  Asia  Pacific  region.  For  this  brief  session,  I  would  like  to  offer  a 
perspective on financial co-operation in Asia.  
Following the financial crisis which engulfed east Asia in 1997-98, many observers concluded that the 
region lacked effective mechanisms for co-operative responses to shocks, and particularly lacked a 
set  of regional  institutional  arrangements  which could  withstand  the  vagaries of  international  capital 
flows. There were some avenues for co-operation or regional channels for assistance – some regional 
partners contributed to packages to assist Thailand, Indonesia and Korea for instance. But these were 
generally organised on an ad hoc basis, and in the context of IMF programs rather than any regional 
framework.  More  importantly,  they  could  not  directly  address  the  underlying  vulnerabilities,  such  as 
under-developed local capital markets, small financial systems and economies relative to the potential 
size of capital flows, weak banking systems and the like.  
That  underlying  dissatisfaction,  coupled  with  disillusionment  over  the  response  of  the  global 
institutions, lies behind the attempts to do more to build up regional financial architecture since then.  
With that background, I'd like to address three questions. First, what do we mean when we use the 
term  'regional  co-operation?'  Second,  I  will ask how  much has  been achieved?  And  third, where  to 
from here?  
What does 'co-operation' mean?  
Strictly  speaking,  we  should  distinguish  between  co-operation,  co-ordination  and  integration.  These 
are, of course, not the same, though they arguably lie on a continuum of engagement: it is one thing to 
co-operate, but to co-ordinate involves, as well as co-operation, a greater degree of commitment to 
adjust  policies,  while  integration  involves,  in  extremis,  a  degree  of  co-operation  and  commitment 
sufficient actually to cede sovereignty over one or more arms of policy.  
Taking that spectrum as a reference point, we can distinguish six, progressively stronger, degrees of 
financial co-operation between countries.  
First, is the sharing of information. This sounds straightforward enough but it actually takes a lengthy 
period of regular contact among senior officials, policy-makers, academics and so on to develop the 
sort  of  constructive  and  frank  sharing  of  information  that  is  really  the  foundation  for  genuine 
engagement. Sharing of information is more than just the exchange of facts and figures; it is learning 
about how other economies work, about how other policy-makers think, and about which approaches 
in the other countries have worked, which did not, and why. In a crisis, there must be timely sharing of 
market intelligence. Most important, if there is ever to be any prospect of collective action in response 
to regional problems, there has to be a shared analysis of what the problem is. The capacity to form 
that sort of analysis does not exist naturally; it has to be developed.  
The second degree of co-operation is having a set of arrangements to lend money in times of trouble. 
When one or more countries face the pressure of capital outflow, with associated downward pressure 
on their exchange rates, the idea is that these agreements provide a sense of mutual support which 
could increase market confidence. Generally, such arrangements increase the availability of resources 
to a country under pressure, though by a limited amount. Funds are usually available with conditions, 
at the discretion of the lender and with most of the risk remaining with the borrower.  
Going the next step involves joint work on improving the operation of local financial infrastructure. 
This  can  be  viewed  as  harmonisation  (i.e.  as  a  mild  form  of  co-ordination)  which  facilitates  people 
managing  their  affairs  across  national  boundaries  more  efficiently.  This  could  potentially  involve 
everything  from  listing  requirements,  tax  treatment,  arrangements  for  supervision  of  financial 
institutions, and so on. But policies are still made at national level and it is not necessary to have a 
   1/4 
goal of harmonisation per se to think this sort of work is useful: it might simply be an effective device 
for improving the functioning of the individual local economies.  
The fourth degree of co-operation would be based on some agreed common goals, most likely some 
sort  of  regional  effort  to  stabilise  exchange  rates.  Here  we  are  definitely  talking  about  a  form  of 
policy  co-ordination.  In  the  pre-EMU  European  context,  there  was  a  mutual  obligation  to  defend 
regional parities. This system was silent, notably, about the situation where all European currencies 
rose or fell together against the dollar.  
In  principle,  this  would  leave  monetary  policy  remaining  focussed  on  domestic  objectives.  One  can 
then  distinguish  a  fifth  degree,  in  which  that  constraint  is  dropped  and  it  is  explicit  that  domestic 
policies  will  be  adjusted  to  help  achieve  exchange  rate  goals  agreed  between  the  countries  –  a 
stronger form of co-ordination. The gold standard was such an arrangement, under which domestic 
objectives were subordinated to the collective objective of maintaining external stability.  
The sixth, and most extensive, form of co-operation is where individual countries cede control over 
an arm of policy to an international body, which conducts that policy in pursuit of a collective goal. In 
the  monetary  sphere,  this  would  be  monetary  union,  as  in  the  Euro  area,  conducted  by  a  regional 
central  bank,  and  with  a  highly  integrated  payments  system:  a  strong  form  of  financial  integration 
which, it is sometimes argued, could foster broader economic integration.  
What has Asia been doing?  
Within that framework, we can then ask: what has Asia been doing since the crisis of the late 1990s? 
The answer, essentially, is that it has been doing more of numbers 1 and 2 of the above, which were 
both occurring prior to the crisis. In addition, a lot more attention is being paid to number 3.  
There were various exercises in information sharing already in operation before the crisis, but these 
have intensified. ASEAN has a history of several decades, and ASEAN+3 has built on that to become 
an important forum. In the central banking world, the EMEAP1 group has been meeting regularly since 
1991, but the scale of that work has grown significantly in recent years. There are regular meetings of 
finance ministry officials, numerous bilateral contacts, and of course meetings of the more academic 
variety, as you are having here today. There are more and more regional meetings and conferences. I 
simply re-iterate the point that the value of this will be maximised if we keep in mind the need to find, 
ultimately, a shared analysis of regional issues. That has to be a foundation of genuine co-operation.  
On the second form of co-operation, lending money in times of trouble, there has also been progress. 
Prior  to  the  Asian  crisis,  there  was  a  network  of  US  dollar  repurchase  agreements  between  the 
EMEAP central banks. This was basically a symbolic exercise in the early days of Asian financial co-
operation,  around  1996;  the  arrangements  were  not  activated  during  the  crisis.  Prior  even  to  that, 
there was the network of foreign exchange swaps between the ASEAN countries which dated back to 
the mid 1970s, though these were small in size and had not been used since 1992.  
After the crisis there was, of course, the Chiang Mai Initiative, a  series of bilateral foreign currency 
swaps  of  considerably  larger  size,  under  which  a  central  bank  would  offer  US  dollars  or  its  own 
currency  to  another  central  bank  in  exchange  for  a  corresponding  amount  of  that  other  country's 
currency. The nature of such swaps is that no foreign currency risk is run by either country in the swap 
itself: the rate for the reverse transaction is contracted in advance. Of course if the borrowing country 
sells the borrowed foreign exchange in order to support its own currency, it is then running a foreign 
exchange risk and the country initially supplying the funds is running a credit risk.  
The  CMI  swaps  are  mostly  quite  conditional  –  only  a  small  portion  of  the  money  can  be  accessed 
without there being an IMF program in place in the borrowing country. That proportion is to be raised, 
but  even  then  the  bulk  of  the  funds  will  still  be  conditional.  The  overall  size  of  the  lines  is  being 
increased,  and  there  is  discussion  about  a  collective  activation  arrangement,  as  opposed  to  the 
current one where the parties to each bilateral line presumably negotiate over activation.  
                                                      
1   Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks. 
   2/4 
This  is  certainly  a  useful step  towards  financial co-operation,  and  has  considerable  symbolic  value. 
But  it  remains  exclusively  a  lending  facility,  where  the  additional  resources  available  to  a  country 
under  pressure  can  only  be  used  by  taking  considerable  risk.  There  is  no  obligation  on  the  other 
countries to make market purchases of the weakening currency. Moreover, the CMI swap network has 
not yet been tested, and it is probably only workable when one or two countries come under pressure. 
If a number of countries are simultaneously experiencing pressure from capital markets, it would be 
only natural to expect a degree of reluctance to take on any additional obligations in defence of their 
neighbours. Hence, there still seems to be a perceived need for a large degree of self-insurance in the 
region (i.e. accumulation of large reserves of foreign currency).  
Efforts have also been made to accelerate the development of financial infrastructure. Work under 
the  banner  of  APEC  (Asia-Pacific  Economic  Co-operation)  is  seeking  to  promote  securitisation  and 
credit guarantee markets. The ASEAN+3 group is working towards the issuance of local currency debt 
by the multilateral institutions, with some success so far.  
The Asian Bond Funds 1 and 2, initiated by the regional central banks, have made good progress. The 
idea here is essentially to work out how to set up cross-border mutual-fund type structures to invest in 
bonds issued by regional governments and quasi-government authorities, and to show the way with a 
modest  amount  of  central  bank  money.  This  is  painstaking  work.  It  involves  such  things  as  the 
development  of  customised  bond  market  indexes,  and  efforts  to  remove  the  various  small 
impediments  that  individual  countries  have  managed,  perhaps  unintentionally,  to  put  in  the  way  of 
investors.  As  just  one  example,  the  Pan-Asia  Index  Fund  component  of  the  ABF2  is  domiciled  in 
Singapore,  but  listed  in  Hong  Kong,  the  first  time  that  has  been  done  in  Asia.  This  involved  the 
relevant authorities working towards mutual recognition of their respective regulatory frameworks.  
ABF2 is a good example of the way a regional initiative can put the spotlight on local barriers to well-
functioning local markets and exert some pressure for their removal.2 Indeed, to my mind, the value of 
these initiatives has been less the 'integration' aspect than the progress made in enabling eight local 
bond  markets  to  function  more  effectively  for  foreign  and  domestic  investors  and,  not  least,  for  the 
governments and other borrowers of those countries. A well-functioning local-currency bond market 
allows  a  government  much  more  economic  policy  flexibility  than  can  be  experienced  when  tied  to 
foreign currency borrowing.3 And eight well-functioning, modest-sized, local bond markets amount to 
the same thing as a 'regional market' for most practical purposes.  
So in terms of developing the resilience of the region to the vagaries of international markets, there is 
value in increasing the capacity to provide financial support once a crisis hits. But I would argue there 
is more value in building financial infrastructure,  through the activities in type 3 co-operation, which 
can make national systems more resilient in the face of shocks.  
Where to from here?  
What  then  of  the  future?  In  particular,  what  about  steps  4  to  6?  Is  there  any  serious  prospect  of 
countries  undertaking  these  higher  levels  of  co-operation,  or  more  correctly  co-ordination  and  even 
integration, any time soon?  
There have been various calls for a common exchange rate policy, usually based around targeting a 
common basket, though to my knowledge there is no action plan currently available. One problem is 
that the interests of the countries are in some respects still rather divergent, not least because of the 
very different levels of economic development around Asia. There are a number of countries – China 
not least among them – whose prospective rates of productivity growth over the decades ahead will 
surely mean a substantial increase in their real exchange rate. Yet there are some others, such as 
Singapore  or  Hong  Kong,  who  have  already  largely  completed  their  productivity  catch-up  with  the 
                                                      
2   For a good discussion of this, see Guonan Ma and Eli Remolona (2005), 'Opening Markets Through a Regional Bond Fund: 
Lessons from ABF2', BIS Quarterly Review, June 2005, pp. 81–92 (at http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0506g.pdf). 
3   Unhedged  foreign  currency  debt,  as  was  prominent  in  1997,  means  that  a  fall  in  the  currency  pushes  up  debt  servicing 
costs for the government, local corporates and banks, but a rise in interest rates to assist the exchange rate has the same 
adverse  effect.  Policy-makers  can  then  face  a  currency  crisis  and  a  banking  crisis  simultaneously.  A  government  which 
borrows in its own currency and encourages private borrowers to do the same has more options when its exchange rate 
comes under downward pressure. 
   3/4 
advanced economies, and the associated real exchange rate appreciation. The idea that these two – 
who, of course, have very different exchange rate regimes at present, but both quite successful ones – 
would  easily  find  an  acceptable  exchange  rate  linkage  with  the  others  is  not  one  that  is  intuitively 
obvious. This point is strongest for these two cases, but I suspect it generalises further around the 
region.  
Moreover, most countries appear to me to remain determinedly focussed on the US dollar exchange 
rate. In other words, Asia is unlike pre-EMU Europe. The prime motivation for the European countries' 
exchange rate policies was to build monetary and financial stability inside Europe, rather than to follow 
a particular export-led growth model. In Asia, it is still the other way around: countries want financial 
and monetary stability, but they seem to want this within a US dollar zone. Presumably this is because 
they  still  place  primacy  on  the  export-led,  FDI-enabled,  model  of  economic  growth,  with  focus  on 
exports to outside the region.  
Another  difference  with  Europe  is  that  there  is  not  a  large  bastion  of  economic  stability  within  the 
region which is the obvious anchor for a currency arrangement. Until the mid 1990s, Japan might have 
been that country. But then Japan experienced a decade of stagnation, deflation, and concerns over 
financial sector solvency. Its government finances are also in a parlous state. Hence it seems unlikely 
that Japan could any time soon become the anchor currency of an Asian exchange rate system. The 
obvious  potential  candidate  in  the  long  run  is  China,  but  China  does  not  presently  maintain  a 
convertible currency and does not have a forty-year record of economic and monetary stability the way 
Germany did by the end of the 1980s.4 And, as noted above, China has its own adjustments to make 
for some time ahead, in which others in the region might not want to share.  
Hence it seems unlikely, to me, that an Asia-wide exchange rate policy is likely any time soon. Most 
likely exchange rate policies will continue to be made with reference to the US dollar for a while yet. 
To  the  extent  there  is  'co-ordination'  it  will  be  accidental,  as  a  result  of  similar  activities  by  various 
countries directed towards managing exchange rates against the US dollar – with an eye, of course, 
on what their neighbours are doing. It would follow from this that the likelihood of a system of closer 
co-ordination  in  which  domestic  policies  are  allowed  systematically  to  be  affected  by  regional 
exchange rate concerns is pretty small.  
It further follows that the prospect for monetary union is quite remote indeed. Apart from the likelihood 
that  some  countries'  real  exchange  rates  will  need  to  move  a  lot  over  the  next  twenty  years  to  an 
extent that could be painful under a system of irrevocably fixed nominal rates, monetary union is a 
political  as  well  as  an  economic  decision.  Indeed,  for  Europe,  it  was  overwhelmingly  a  political 
decision (which is not to say it was wrong). You would all be able to judge better than I but my guess 
is  that  Asia's  political  leaders  are  nothing  like  ready  to  make  such  a  decision  involving  ceding 
sovereignty to a supra-national institution.  
That is not to say that there is not a lot of worthwhile co-operative work to be done. On the contrary, I 
think that there is much value to be gained by pursuing type 3 co-operation: working on making the 
financial infrastructure reasonably consistent, well understood and easy to use for investors across the 
region. The reason for this is only partly to foster cross-border activity; it is also, in my view, because it 
is in the interests of each of these countries to have well-functioning (local currency-based) markets. 
This is much less glamorous than talking about regional exchange rate initiatives, but for some time 
ahead at least, is likely to have more pay-off.  
I do not wish to speak against sensible thought being given to more ambitious ideas. Preparations for 
joint  exchange  rate  policies  or  monetary  union  take  a  long  time.  To  make  an  informed  decision  at 
some (distant) future time, then, a lot of work would have to be done in the interim, and there is little 
harm in doing some over the coming decade. But we should take care that such work does not draw 
too many resources away from efforts in some of the less exciting areas which will have a concrete 
and timely pay-off. 
 
                                                      
4   Germany’ s longer-run record, of course, was much more problematic: three hyper-inflations in the first half of the twentieth 
century was probably what seared into the collective German psyche the need for monetary stability. 
   4/4 
