Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Central Bank of Norway,Trondheim, 10 October 2005. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  speech  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Norway’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
21 September, Inflation Report 2/05 and on previous speeches.  
The charts in pdf-format 
 can be found on the Central Bank of Norway’s website. 
 Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation. This is also the most important 
contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the long term. Low and 
stable inflation provides the economy with a nominal anchor. This contributes to predictability for those 
taking decisions about saving and investment today, although the result depends on how the economy 
develops  in  the  future.  In  addition,  we  will  seek  to  prevent  unduly  wide  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment in the short and medium term. In the long term, output in an economy is determined by 
the supply of labour, capital and technology.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and variable lags. This means we must look ahead 
when setting interest rates. I would therefore like to comment briefly on our assessment for the next 
three  years,  based  on  the  analyses  in  the  most  recent  Inflation  Report  published  in  June  (Inflation 
Report 2/05) and updates at the most recent monetary policy meetings.  
The economic situation 
The Norwegian economy is in an upturn and is now expanding at a brisk pace. Inflation remains low, 
but has edged up since last year. The risk of a fall in the level of prices and markedly lower inflation 
expectations has diminished. At the same time, there appears to be little risk that inflation will rapidly 
move up to a level that is too high.  
The interest rate reductions through 2003 and into 2004 have resulted in low real interest rates. For a 
period, the real interest rate has been considerably lower than normal. The low level of interest rates is 
supporting the high activity level in the Norwegian economy.  
The economic upturn is broad-based. At the beginning of the recovery, activity was primarily fuelled by 
private  consumption,  traditional  exports  and  petroleum  investment.  In  addition,  growth  in  mainland 
fixed investment has gradually gained considerable momentum.  
Monetary policy easing and low inflation have resulted in strong growth in household real disposable 
income.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment  have  risen  sharply.  House  prices  have 
continued to rise. Debt growth remains high.  
The economic upturn has continued this year. High petroleum investment, the international upturn and 
higher  commodity  prices  have  boosted  output  and  earnings  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Statistics 
Norway’s  business  tendency  survey  indicates  continued  favourable  prospects  for  Norwegian 
manufacturing. Activity is expected to increase in service industries and the construction sector in the 
near term.  
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  now  appears  to  be  close  to  a  normal  level.  In 
manufacturing,  capacity  utilisation  is  close  to  its  historical  average.  According  to  Norges  Bank’s 
regional  network,  about  40  per  cent  of  companies  will  have  some  or  considerable  difficulty  in 
increasing production.  
Even though growth in the Norwegian economy has been high for a long period, substantial pressures 
have not yet emerged in the labour market. The rise in the number of employed in the first half of the 
year was fairly modest in relation to output growth. This may be due to lagged effects of the sharp fall 
in sickness absence through 2004. In many companies, the large increase in available person-hours 
was probably not fully utilised immediately. A considerable share of output growth may be the result of 
improved utilisation of company workforces. According to the quarterly national accounts, employment 
rose  by  0.5  per  cent  from  the  first  half  of  last  year  to  the  same  period  this  year.  Measured  by  the 
Labour  Force  Survey  (LFS),  the  number  of  employed  rose  by  12,  000  from  May  to  June  and  by  a 
further 2, 000 from June to July.  
   1/7 
The use of foreign labour has increased in the year that has passed since the enlargement of the EU. 
The scope is relatively moderate, but appears nonetheless to have reduced bottleneck tendencies in 
some  industries  where  demand  has  increased  sharply.  Traditionally,  many  workers  from  our 
neighbouring  countries  have  contributed  when  the  labour  market  in  this  country  has  been  tight.  In 
2001, close  to  30,  000  persons  resident  in  Sweden were  employed  in Norway  for  all  or  part  of  the 
year. Swedes who have registered as residents in Norway come in addition.  
An increased supply of labour from new EU member states to Norwegian enterprises may lead to a 
higher-than-normal increase in potential output for a period.  
Many  of  the  foreign  workers  work  for  a  shorter  period  in  Norway  without  being  employed  in  a 
Norwegian  enterprise.  Examples  include  foreign  contractors  and  self-employed  in  the  construction 
industry who carry out various building projects in Norway, as well as others who carry out other types 
of projects. Aker Kværner, for example, has contracted 300 consultants in India who are working from 
India  on  the  Ormen  Lange  project  in  the  western  part  of  Norway.  An  increase  in  the  use  of  these  
short-term  contracts  will  appear  as  an  increase  in  Norway’s  service  imports,  which  contributes  to 
increasing the supply of goods and services without drawing on domestic resources.  
Protectionist measures may dampen the impact on the Norwegian economy of an increased supply of 
labour  from  the  new  EU  member  states.  The  transitional  rules  from  1  May  last  year  stipulate  that 
foreign workers shall have Norwegian wages and working conditions. At the same time, resources and 
appropriations for the supervision and control of foreign workers’ wages and working conditions have 
been increased. As a result, foreign suppliers of services are losing much of their competitive edge in 
relation to Norwegian enterprises.  
The  latest  Directorate  of  Labour  figures  show  that  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  was  3.4  per 
cent in September. This is in line with  the developments we envisaged in the June Inflation Report 
(2/05). Statistics Norway’s Labour Force Survey (LFS), however, presents a somewhat less favourable 
picture of unemployment.  
Registered  unemployment  is  on  the  decline  in  all  regions.  It  took  some  time  before  unemployment 
began to decline in Central Norway, but during the last half year it has fallen substantially.  
The industry structure in Trøndelag is very similar to that of the country as a whole. Nord-Trøndelag is 
the country’s third largest agricultural county and employment in the primary industries is high. Even 
though the industry structure in the Trøndelag counties is not significantly different from the rest of the 
country,  this  region  is  nonetheless  struggling  with  relatively  high  unemployment,  even  in  periods  of 
solid economic growth. Statistics Norway recently published a study that showed that the mobility in 
the  labour  market  was  lower  in  this  region  than  in  the  country  as  a  whole.1  Companies  have,  for 
example, not been inclined to recruit recent graduates. This is an important challenge for the regional 
labour market authorities.  
Information  from  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  is  important  for  Norges  Bank’s  analysis  of  the 
Norwegian economy. Information about the state of the Norwegian economy is available earlier than 
information provided by official statistics, and it is useful to have closer contact with the labour market 
and business and industry throughout the country.  
According  to  the  most  recent  reports,  the  economic  situation  in  Central  Norway  is  favourable.  The 
companies  that  are  participating  report  stable  employment  and  solid  growth  in  all  industries.  The 
activity level is high in both manufacturing and construction, but growth is expected to level off. The 
supply  of  skilled  labour  is  a  constraint  on  the  growth  potential.  The  investment  rate  is  stable  and 
moderate. Enterprises in the region envisage a slight rise in prices in the period ahead.  
Inflation  decelerated  markedly  from  summer  2003  and  continued  to  fall  in  the  beginning  of  2004. 
Consumer  price  inflation  has  subsequently  picked  up,  albeit  at  a  gentle  pace.  In  August,  the  
year-on-year rise in consumer prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-
ATE) was 1.3 per cent. Adjusted for the interest rate’s direct effect on house rents, the year-on-year 
rise in the CPI-ATE may be estimated at 1.5 per cent in August. The CPI rose by 1.9 per cent in the 
same period.  
                                                      
1   Stambøl, L.S. (2005): Arbeidsmarkedsmobilitet i like og ulike regionale arbeidsmarkeder (Labour market mobility in similar 
and different labour markets), Økonomiske Analyser 4/2005, Statistics Norway. 
   2/7 
Prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  rose  by  2.1  per  cent  in  the  twelve  months  to 
August  this  year.  Higher  capacity  utilisation  is  providing  the  basis  for  higher  margins  in  some 
industries. Service prices, which showed little rise last year, have increased again this year. In many 
industries, including the airline industry, where price competition is strong, low profitability has led to 
an increase in prices. High oil prices have also resulted in increased prices, for example for transport 
services.  
On  the  basis  of  the  pay  increases  agreed  upon  in  this  year’s  wage  settlement,  combined  with  the 
estimates for wage drift and wage carry-over, annual wage growth is projected at around 3½ per cent 
this year. Lower-than-projected wage growth may be related to the fact that there were few signs of 
improvement  in  labour  market  conditions  prior  to  this  year’s  wage  settlement.  Lower-than-projected 
consumer price inflation last year may also have contributed. Low wage growth will in turn contribute 
to curbing the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services.  
Prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  have  continued  to  fall.  The  decline  in  prices  may  reflect  high 
productivity  growth  in  the  production  of  some  goods  and  large  investments  to  increase  production 
capacity,  particularly  in  China.  This  has  led  to  strong  competition  and  a  low  rise  in  prices  for 
internationally  traded  goods.  The  shift  in  imports,  for  example  clothing  imports,  towards  low-cost 
countries seems to be substantial again this year.  
Structural changes in world trade have been important for the Norwegian economy, not least for the 
rise  in  prices  for  imported  goods  and  services.  The  shift  in  imports  towards  low-cost  countries  has 
come gradually. We have expected that the import pattern would gradually become more stable, but if 
the shift continues, the price-dampening effects of increased imports from low-cost countries in Asia 
and Central and Eastern Europe may persist longer than assumed.  
The  change  in  China’s  exchange  rate  regime  in  July,  with  a  2  per  cent  revaluation  of  the  Chinese 
currency, may over time have an impact on price developments for imported consumer goods.  
The global economy 
Economic growth among trading partners appears to be somewhat lower this year than in 2004. In the 
years ahead, growth is expected to be relatively stable.  
The outlook for growth in different regions indicates that the imbalances in the global economy, with a 
large deficit in the US and large surpluses in a number of other countries, will persist.  
There  are  particularly  large  imbalances  both  in  the  US  balance  of  trade  and  current  account. 
Persistent  trade  deficits  have  pushed  up  US  foreign  debt  to  a  high  level.  This  is  partly  due  to  the 
federal budget deficit. Moreover, US households have a high level of consumption and a low level of 
saving. This may be related to a more rapid rise in the US population than in other OECD countries. 
This suggests in isolation that saving in the US is somewhat lower and investment somewhat higher, 
but the impact is now considerably greater than implied by demographic factors alone.  
The imbalances may persist, and may increase. International capital markets are deep and liquid with 
an ample supply of credit for US borrowers. So far, there is no indication that the US has problems in 
financing its deficit. If creditors begin to fear a fall in prices and withdraw from the market, substantial 
corrections may nevertheless be triggered. This may lead to higher interest rates and perhaps also a 
fall in US equity markets that spills over to other countries’ financial markets. In that case, the dollar 
will also depreciate.  
The  household  debt  burden  in  the  US  may  be  another  source  of  instability  if  households  abruptly 
reduce both housing demand and consumption.  
Strong demand in the US has sustained growth in the world economy. We assume that growth will 
slow  somewhat  in  the  US  in  the  period  ahead.  A  more  pronounced  downturn  cannot  be  ruled  out, 
however. An abrupt and pronounced downturn might fairly rapidly lead to declining growth in the entire 
OECD area.  
The US is not the only source of trade imbalances. They also reflect very low growth in continental 
Europe  and  largely  export-based growth  in  Asian  countries.  Therefore,  countries  other  than  the  US 
must  also  contribute  in  order  to  prevent  a  decline  in  world  economic  growth.  With  limited  domestic 
growth capacity and high unemployment, many industrial countries are poorly equipped to cope with a 
weaker dollar and lower demand from the US. The challenges are perhaps particularly demanding in 
   3/7 
some large European countries, whereas it appears that the Japanese economy is becoming more 
self-driven.  
There is also a risk that large imbalances in world trade and low employment in Europe will trigger 
protectionism, which could reduce growth capacity even further. A pronounced slowdown in growth in 
the  entire  OECD  area  is  also  likely  to  lead  to  markedly  slower  growth  in  China  and  emerging 
economies in Asia because exports are an important driving force behind growth in the region. This 
could lead to an appreciable fall in prices for oil and other commodities and weak developments in the 
shipping  industry.  Just  as  Norway  has  benefited  strongly  from  the  sharp  international  upswing  in 
recent years, the Norwegian economy could be affected by such a downturn.  
The recent change in China’s exchange rate regime and the revaluation of the Chinese currency by  
2 per cent will probably not cause substantial changes in the imbalances in world trade. At the same 
time, daily fluctuations of 0.3 percentage point between the yuan and the dollar are now possible. This 
allows  for  considerable  variation  and  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  more  pronounced  changes  in  the 
same direction will gradually occur. So far, the Chinese authorities have maintained a stable course.  
It will probably be appropriate for both China and other Asian countries to shift more of their production 
towards domestic markets, which will reduce the large current account surpluses as well as curb the 
build-up of the official foreign exchange reserves. As part of this adjustment, the relative cost level will 
gradually increase.  
Very high growth in demand for oil is one of the factors behind record high oil prices. In the first half of 
this  year,  the  price  of  Brent  Blend  fluctuated  for  the  most  part  between  USD  45  and  USD  55  per 
barrel. Oil prices have risen further this past summer and gradually rose to more than USD 60 per 
barrel. In the last few days, prices have been falling.  
Oil futures have also increased 
Little excess production capacity in OPEC countries, combined with the prospect of lower production 
in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the same time, there are prospects of 
continued strong growth in demand in important oil-importing countries, such as China and a number 
of other emerging economies.  
Rising or persistently high oil prices may gradually dampen growth among our most important trading 
partners. The slowdown may occur gradually and will not necessarily be very pronounced, but there 
are now growing concerns that high oil prices may result in higher inflation and inflation expectations.  
High oil prices have a different impact in Norway than in oil-importing countries. A rise in oil prices 
improves our terms of trade. Other countries perceive this as an externally imposed tax.  
As a result of persistently high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high, investment in 
the  petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment  intentions  survey  for  the 
petroleum sector points to very high growth.  
The scale and spillover effects of petroleum investment are highly uncertain. The last time petroleum 
investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than had been 
assumed.  At  the  same  time,  the  rest  of  the  Norwegian  economy  was  experiencing  an  upturn.  The 
unexpected  increase  in  petroleum  investment  contributed  to  substantially  stronger-than-projected 
economic  growth.  If  oil  prices  rise  further  or  remain  at  the  current  high  level  for  a  long  period, 
petroleum investment may again reinforce the cyclical upturn more than projected.  
Monetary policy and the outlook for the Norwegian economy 
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/05 are based on a baseline scenario where the key rate shadows 
forward interest rates up to 2007, and then rises somewhat more rapidly. The krone exchange rate is 
assumed to shadow the forward exchange rate, which remains broadly unchanged over the next three 
years.  
Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is expected to increase this year and next and exceed 
its normal level. There are prospects that inflation will gradually pick up and be close to 2½ per cent at 
the  three-year  horizon.  Since  the  publication  of  the  June  Inflation  Report,  prices  for  domestically 
produced consumer goods have risen slightly less than expected. At the same time, oil prices have 
been somewhat higher than assumed. Energy prices are pushing up consumer price inflation.  
   4/7 
New  information  since  the  publication  of  the  June  Inflation  Report  does  not  provide  grounds  for 
changing  the  assessment  of  developments  in  the  real  economy.  Growth  among  trading  partners 
seems on the whole to be approximately as expected in the June Inflation Report, but the risk of more 
sluggish developments has increased, according to the IMF and the OECD. High oil prices may result 
in somewhat higher inflation abroad than previously projected.  
The  objectives  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  the  target  of  2.5  per  cent  and  anchoring  inflation 
expectations imply a continued low interest rate.  
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  expectations  that  high  output  growth  will  persist.  The  objective  of 
stabilising developments in output may, in isolation, imply a higher interest rate. Inflation is gradually 
picking  up.  High  capacity  utilisation  may  generate  a  continued  sharp  rise  in  property  prices  and 
household  borrowing.  This  could  be  a  source  of  instability  in  demand  and  output  in  the  somewhat 
longer run.  
The  Executive  Board’s  assessment  in  the  June  Inflation  Report  was  that  the  interest  rate  may 
gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – be brought up towards a more normal level if economic 
developments  are  approximately  as  projected  in  the  Report.  Such  an  interest  rate  path  was 
considered to provide a reasonable balance between the objective of stabilising inflation at target and 
the objective of stabilising growth in output and employment. It was the Executive Board’s assessment 
that the sight deposit rate should lie in the interval 1¾ - 2¾ per cent in the period up to the publication 
of the next Inflation Report on 2 November.  
Following  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  21  September,  the  Executive  Board  stated  that 
developments in output, demand and underlying inflation had been consistent with the projections in 
the  June  Inflation  Report.  The  Executive  Board  also  stated  that  its  monetary  policy  strategy  and 
assessments indicate that the interest rate should be gradually increased in the period ahead. One 
option was to increase the interest rate at this meeting, but the Executive Board found it appropriate to 
leave the interest rate unchanged.  
Household credit growth 
Monetary policy easing through 2003 and into 2004 has resulted in low real interest rates. Short-term 
real interest rates may now be considerably lower than the level that implies long-term balance in the 
economy – the neutral real interest rate. A low real interest rate, and expectations of a continued low 
real  interest  rate,  will  contribute  to  stimulating  activity  even  after  the  effects  of  the  interest  rate  fall 
unwind.  
Although the projections are based on rising real interest rates, the real interest rate will be lower than 
the neutral rate during the entire period. The monetary policy stance is therefore expansionary. So far, 
the  effects  do  not  appear  to  be  stronger  than  expected,  but  we  have  little  experience  of  such  low 
interest rates. How quickly prices and wages will react when growth in output and employment picks 
up is uncertain. There is also a risk that an interest rate that is kept low for a longer period may lead to 
expectations  of  a  persistently  low  interest  rate.  This  may  involve  a  risk  that  capacity  utilisation  will 
remain high and that inflation will eventually overshoot the target.  
Household debt has increased at a faster pace than income over the past ten years. Norges Bank’s 
calculations indicate that debt growth may largely be due to the sharp rise in house prices in recent 
years. Higher house prices have a fairly prolonged effect on household debt growth. Even though the 
rise in house prices is expected to slow, credit growth will therefore remain high for a fairly long period. 
Given the assumptions underlying our projections, it is likely that debt will continue to grow at a faster 
pace than disposable income through the entire projection period.  
The household debt burden has increased over the past year and is now record high. The interest rate 
burden  is,  however,  relatively  low.  A  normalisation  of  interest  rates  will  increase  households’  net 
interest expenses, but according to the projections the interest burden will not be higher than it was at 
the  end  of  the  1990s.  Households  will  be  vulnerable  if  unexpected  disturbances  result  in  
higher-than-expected interest rates.  
Challenges ahead 
Petroleum activities give us an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it also 
presents us with many challenges.  
   5/7 
First,  our  petroleum  resources  are  part  of  our  national  wealth.  When  oil  is  extracted  and  sold, 
petroleum wealth is transformed into financial assets. This wealth belongs not only to our generation, 
but  also  to  future  generations.  It  is  reasonable  to  distribute  our  petroleum  wealth  equitably  among 
generations.  
The  size  of  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  also  varies  considerably.  If  petroleum  revenues 
were  to  be  used  as  they  accrue,  this  would  lead  to  wide  fluctuations  in  demand  in  the  Norwegian 
economy. Cyclical fluctuations would be much more pronounced.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues will have an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business 
and industry. The level of and fluctuations in the use of petroleum revenues will have a considerable 
impact on the exchange rate and thus on growth in the regions with extensive export activities.  
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  long-term 
considerations in the use of petroleum revenues. In March 2001, the fiscal rule and new guidelines for 
monetary  policy  were  introduced.  The  fiscal  rule  implies  that  the  central  government  budget  deficit 
shall be equivalent over time to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. The new 
guidelines for economic policy received broad support in the Storting.  
The  rule  specifying  that  only  the  real  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  is  to  be  used  means  that  the 
capital in the Fund shall not be depleted. The capital in the Petroleum Fund will increase as long as 
there  is  a  positive  cash  flow  (to  the  central  government)  from  petroleum  activities.  When  the 
conversion from petroleum wealth to financial assets has been completed, the objective will still be to 
restrict withdrawals so that the real value of the Fund’s capital is maintained - in principle, indefinitely.  
The Petroleum Fund functions as a buffer against movements in the krone exchange rate when oil 
prices  vary.  The  cash  flow  from  an  increase  in  oil  prices  will  accrue  to  the  Fund  and  be  invested 
abroad. In this way, the Fund contributes to limiting an appreciation of the krone and maintaining a 
stable  exchange  rate.  At  times,  it  seems  that  participants  in  the  foreign  exchange  market 
underestimate the Petroleum Fund’s buffer mechanism.  
Since the summer of 2004, the krone, measured by the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI), 
has appreciated by about 5 per cent. The chart shows the exchange rate and the price of oil since 
1999. There does not appear to be any clear relationship between the nominal exchange rate and oil 
prices over time. The krone has appreciated in periods with high oil prices, but the same has occurred 
when oil prices have been low.  
The correlation between the oil price and the krone exchange rate has varied over time. Since inflation 
targeting was introduced in March 2001, the average correlation has in fact been zero. This result is 
worth noting and indicates that the export of capital via the Petroleum Fund has protected the nominal 
exchange rate from price fluctuations in the oil market. Therefore, there is cause for some optimism 
concerning the possibility of shielding the mainland economy from the effects of swings in oil prices. In 
the long run, however, petroleum revenues and their use will affect the level of costs in Norway.  
An increase in oil prices may generate expectations of higher use of petroleum revenues in the future, 
particularly  if  high  oil  prices  are  expected  to  persist.  Such  expectations  may  exert  appreciation 
pressures on the krone. It may also generate expectations of higher returns in the Norwegian stock 
market than in foreign markets, which also can and has contributed to an appreciation of the krone. 
Our assessment is that developments in oil prices and an increased cash flow have been responsible 
for the appreciation of the krone since the spring of 2004.  
We  are  approaching  a  peak  in  petroleum  production  in  Norway  and  must  expect  a  substantial 
reduction  in  the  next  decades.  In  addition,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  associated  with  future 
petroleum  production.  In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  overestimate  projections  for 
production a couple of years ahead. It is especially demanding to estimate production for the many 
large fields that have reached maximum capacity.  
The  fiscal  rule  provides  a  long-term  anchor  for  fiscal  policy.  It  provides  a  stable  framework  that 
contributes to curbing some of the fluctuations in the Norwegian economy.  
Nonetheless, the use of petroleum revenues in the Norwegian economy has been increasing over the 
past  few  years.  Petroleum  investment  has  increased  significantly.  In  addition,  the  government  uses 
more  of  the  petroleum  revenues  than  before.  Growth  in  public  expenditure  started  to  accelerate  in 
1997 after having been low in the mid-1990s. Spending growth has also been fairly strong in recent 
years, but perhaps somewhat slower than earlier.  
   6/7 
The fiscal rule for the budget implies that the government can use 4 per cent of the Fund over time. 
This year, around 6 per cent is being used. The deviation partly reflects an unexpected shortfall in tax 
revenues in recent years. The government budget deficit is the difference between total revenues and 
total  expenditure.  They  each  account  for  about  half  of  total  GDP  in  Norway.  Even  small  deviations 
from  expenditure  and  revenue  projections  can  have  a  major  impact  on  the  deficit.  Exchange  rate 
changes will also lead to fluctuations in the value of the Petroleum Fund. For these reasons alone, the 
use  of  petroleum  revenues  may  in  periods  deviate  from  the  4  per  cent  rule.  Spending  was  also 
increased in response to the economic downturn. We can, therefore, safely affirm that the fiscal rule 
has been normative for fiscal policy.  
Together with the fiscal rule, the monetary policy guidelines provide the framework for economic policy 
in Norway. The various components of economic policy have varying effects. This is why they have 
different functions:  
• 
Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment.  
The central government budget – growth in public expenditure – influences the krone and 
the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium  term.  Government 
expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  
Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how well and how 
efficiently we utilise our labour resources and other economic resources. 
  There is also an interaction:  
• 
In its budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the effects of 
the  budget  on  the  Norwegian  economy  and  will  therefore  take  account  of  interest  rate 
effects. In this way, they avoid a situation where growth in public expenditure and the interest 
rate push the economy in different directions.  
With  a  known  monetary  policy  response  pattern,  the  parties  to  the  centralised  income 
settlements can take interest rate effects into account when wage increases are negotiated.  
Moreover, the parties to public sector negotiations can take into account that the higher pay 
increases are, the fewer people that can be paid over government budgets. The interaction 
here became clear when public sector employment fell after the expensive wage settlement 
in 2002. 
  The value of the Petroleum Fund, measured as a percentage of GDP, will rise in the years ahead. On 
the  other  hand,  Norway,  like  many  other  countries,  is  facing  substantial  fiscal  challenges.  The 
expected dependency ratio, i.e. the ratio of persons over the age of 67 to persons aged 20 to 66, will 
rise sharply in the years ahead. The National Insurance Scheme’s spending on old age and disability 
pensions, based on current social security rules, is increasing. The return on the Petroleum Fund can 
only  cover  a  small  portion  of  higher  pension  expenditure.  According  to  Ministry  of  Finance 
calculations, a funding requirement equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP will still not be covered in 2060 
given an oil price of NOK 230 (at constant prices) or around USD 35 per barrel. This is a relatively high 
estimate in terms of average prices in the last ten years, but at the same time oil futures are now far 
higher than this.  
Increased saving today may be a way to address this challenge, but this is not enough in itself. In the 
long term, the most important factor will be how we manage our national wealth.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
   7/7 
