Ishrat Husain: Islamic financial services industry - the European challenges 
Keynote address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Islamic Financial 
Services  Forum  organised  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  and  the  Central  Bank  of 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 8 November 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First and foremost, I wish to commend the Islamic Financial Services Board and the Central Bank of 
Luxembourg for organizing this Forum and providing me with this opportunity to share my thoughts 
and experience with this august gathering. 
In view of the growing interest in Islamic Finance, it is incumbent upon us to outline the distinguishing 
features and delineate the unique characteristics that make it attractive to a segment of the consumers 
and investors all over the world. 
What  is  Islamic  Finance?  There  are  at  least  three  characteristics  which  makes  it  different  from  the 
conventional  debt  finance.  First,  it  prohibits  riba  or  interest,  or  in  other  words  a  fixed  and  pre-
determined rate of return to be paid on the deposits or to be received from the borrowers. The rate of 
return is variable and determined by the profit and loss that the bank makes during a given period and 
the returns on assets depend on the particular mode and purpose of financing, i.e. Murabaha (trade 
finance), Mudaraba (profit sharing), Musharaka (partnership), Ijara (leasing), etc. 
Second,  Islamic  Finance  does  not  allow  undertaking  or  financing  the  antisocial  and  unethical 
businesses  such  as  gambling,  prostitution,  alcoholic liquor,  nightclubs  and  narcotics.  These are  the 
main  channels  used  for  money  laundering,  terrorism  financing  and  organized  crimes,  etc.  Islamic 
banks are prohibited from opening accounts or provide financing to persons or institutions involved in 
such activities. In this respect, it is clearly ahead of the recent surge in ethical finance and socially 
responsible finance that are becoming quite popular in the Western world. Islamic financial institutions, 
because of their active involvement and knowledge of the nature of businesses of their clients, are in a 
better position to detect and prevent the channeling of depositors’ money for financing highly risky but 
equally  remunerative  anti-social  activities.  The  financing  it  provides  is  mostly  asset-based,  whereby 
the Islamic bank knows the actual utilization of its funds. 
Third, Islamic Finance has to be compliant with the basic percepts of Shari’ah, the legal code of Islam 
which is based on the principles of justice, fair dealings and harmony through equitable distribution of 
wealth.  Islam  is  deadly  opposed  to  exploitation  of  an  individual  or  institution  by  the  other  for 
selfaggrandizement.  Riba  or  usury  is  considered  exploitative  by  its  construct  and  is  therefore 
prohibited.  The  equitable  distribution  dimension  of  Islamic  Finance  is  therefore  an  add-on  that  is 
clearly absent from the conventional modes of financing. 
If  we  examine  these  properties  of  Islamic  Finance,  it  becomes apparent  that  these  will  appeal  to  a 
large number of individuals and institutions whose set of beliefs and faith conform to these principles. 
It is not necessary that only the Muslims can subscribe to this particular mode of financing but the fact 
that it is being widely accepted and adopted in different parts of the world including Europe attests to 
its intrinsic value and strength. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Islamic  financial  services  industry  is  the  fastest  growing  component  of  the  financial  services 
industry, with an annual rate of growth ranging between 15 to 20 per cent. At least 70 countries all 
over  the  world  have  some  or  other  form  of  Islamic  financial  services  available  in  their  territorial 
jurisdictions. It is instructive to note that almost all major multinational banks such as Citigroup, HSBC, 
BNP Paribas, UBS, Credit Agricole, Standard Chartered, etc. are offering these services. 
Why  are  these  services  spreading  so  fast?  I  can  think  of  several  possible  reasons.  First,  there  are 
around 15 million Muslims residing in non-Islamic countries in Europe, mostly in France, Germany and 
the  UK.  Islamic  Finance  is  effectively  contributing  towards  penetration  of  financial  services  and 
inclusion of this particular target group which previously avoided using existing banking facilities due to 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 1
their  faith.  The  members  of  the  Islamic  community  in  Europe  that  was  not  benefiting  from  the 
conventional  banking  on  religious  grounds  are  now  participating  through  this  particular  mode  in 
conformity with their beliefs. This group naturally provides the scale for the financial services industry 
to build upon. 
Second, there are investors who in their quest for diversifying their portfolios are looking for new asset 
classes,  new  instruments  and  new  products  with  low  correlation  with  the  existing  asset  classes  or 
products. Islamic financial products cater to this particular need and have, therefore, become attractive 
to that investors group. 
Third, there is a growing trend, particularly among the younger population to show unethical or socially 
irresponsible  investment  funds  and  businesses.  Many  funds  have  emerged  that  are  exclusively 
devoted to meet the specifications of investments in ethical products or socially responsible services. 
Islamic  Finance  conveniently  fits  into  this  food  chain  because  of  its  natural  affinity  and  congruence 
with its end-use restrictions. 
Fourth, in this world where we have all become increasingly cautious and careful about possible risks 
arising from money-laundering and terroristfinancing, Islamic financial institutions enjoy a head start in 
mitigating  these  risks.  Unlike  conventional  banks  which  rely  on  documentary  evidence  and  usually 
have  impersonal,  arms-length,  passive  relationships  with  the  majority  of  their  clients,  Islamic  banks 
have  more  stringent  Know-Your-Customer  requirements.  The  reason  for  this  difference  is  quite 
commonsensical.  Conventional  banks  rely  on  a  fixed  pre-determined  return  framework  and  are, 
therefore less concerned about the character and credibility of their clients. They are often, more pre-
occupied with the underlying securities and assets. On the other hand, Islamic banks are engaged in a 
quasi-partnership  profit-loss  sharing  framework  and  therefore  have  to  know  their  clients,  their 
businesses,  as  well  as,  their  sources  and  uses  of  funding  in  order  to  satisfy  themselves  about  the 
authenticity and legitimacy of their counterparties. Thus, they would be in a much better position to 
detect, prevent and disengage quickly from suspicious transactions compared to conventional banks. 
In addition to normal audits, Islamic banks have to conduct Shari’ah review of their transactions for 
ensuring  Shari’ah  compliance.  This  review  will  catch  any  funds  mobilized  or  used  for  haram 
(prohibited)  activities.  This  unique  feature  of  Islamic  Finance  as  possible  prevention  of  money  –
laundering has not yet been widely disseminated and its potential not fully recognized. 
The  Financial  Services  Authority  of  the  UK,  whom  I  consider  an  extremely  conservative  and 
competent  regulatory  agency,  after  considering  all  the  pros  and  cons,  has  finally  embraced  Islamic 
banking  and  issued  the  first  ever  licence  to  the  Islamic  Bank  of  Britain  which  is  now  operational. 
Further, they have authorized Islamic investment funds which are a welcome move. In Germany, one 
of the State Governments has raised funds by issuing an Islamic suck. In the UAE, a number of long 
term infrastructure projects were financed by Islamic financial institutions as the relative advantages of 
Islamic modes of finance outweighed the costs in comparison to the conventional modes. 
Naturally, if there is so much rapid growth, a question that should arise in everybody’s mind is: what is 
happening  on  the  legal,  regulatory,  accounting  and  auditing  and  governance  fronts  of  Islamic 
Finance?  Are  these  keeping  pace  with  this  growth  and  are  we  making  sure  that  the  supporting 
infrastructure  are  in  place  to  avoid  any  pitfalls  or  hazards  in  the  future?  This  is  quite  a  legitimate 
concern and I would like to share with you as to what is actually happening on these fronts. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Several  of  us  –  the  Governors  of  the  Central  Banks  of  Islamic  countries  –  worked  closely  with  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for many years and ultimately formed the Islamic Financial Services 
Board  (IFSB)  whose  headquarters  is  in  Kuala  Lumpur,  Malaysia.  This  Body  is  working  on  the 
development of prudent and transparent standards and codes by introducing new or adapting existing 
international  standards  consistent  with  Shari’ah  principles.  I  am  sure  the  Secretary-General  of  the 
IFSB would be in a better position to inform you more about the activities of this Body. However, I am 
satisfied that the work it has initiated through various working groups on Risk management, Capital 
Adequacy,  Corporate  Governance,  Transparency  and  Market  Discipline,  as  well  as  Supervisory 
Review Process, is proceeding well and we expect the end products to be rigorous and of high quality. 
This institution, in our view, will economize on scarce expert resources, come up with a consensus 
view after rigorous debate and research and create uniformity and standardization of Islamic products 
and services across countries. 
The second important body which I have also been  associated with is the Accounting and Auditing 
Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI), which has so far issued over 50 accounting, 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2005
auditing, governance and Shari’ah standards for Islamic financial institutions. Islamic banking practices 
are becoming an integral part of the leading accountancy firms of the world – the Big Four – and many 
other  countries  and  are,  thus,  being  disseminated  through  their  national  affiliates  and  consultancy 
services. 
In  the  last  few  years,  a  number  of  other  bodies  dealing  with  different  components  of  the  Islamic 
financial  infrastructure  have  been  formed  and  are  beginning  to  take  shape.  They  are,  of  course,  at 
different  stages  of  evolution  but  together  they  form  the  necessary  complements.  The  Islamic 
Development  Bank  (IDB)  must  be  given  credit  for  taking  the  lead  in  establishing  the  International 
Islamic  Financial  Market  (IIFM)  which  is  working  on  the  development  of  liquidity  management 
instruments and markets for Islamic financial institutions and more recently, the International Islamic 
Rating  Agency  (IIRA)  which  will  provide  credit  rating,  Shari’ah  rating  and  Corporate  Governance 
Rating to Islamic financial institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I now turn to the example of Pakistan where we have vigorously introduced Islamic Banking in its true 
letter and spirit. We considered it totally imprudent to dislocate the entire financial system by directing 
substitution of the on-going banking by Islamic banking in one-go by a certain given deadline. Instead, 
we decided that we should provide a level playing field and afford opportunity for Islamic banking to 
co-exist  with  conventional  banking.  We  believed  that  the  choice  should  be  left  to  the  individual 
consumer whether they would like to switch over to Islamic banking or stick with their existing banks. 
The endeavor of the government and the Central Bank was to ensure that there was no discrimination, 
preference – overt or convert – policy biases in favour of one system or the other. If, over time, the 
majority  of  the  consumers  decide  to  opt  for  Islamic  banking,  the  whole  system  will  naturally  be 
transformed and the end point will be reached. 
In our view, it is not the responsibility of the Government or the Central bank to impose their will or 
dictate  choices  to  the  people.  We  have,  therefore,  opened  up  the  banking  system  by  allowing:  (a) 
establishment of stand-alone Islamic banks; (b) setting up of subsidiaries of banks for Islamic banking; 
or (c) setting up of full-fledged Islamic Banking branches of the banks. The initial response has been 
overwhelming and hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis who had never done any banking in their lives 
are now asking for more Islamic banks or branches in their areas. 
In the very first year, Islamic banking segments have captured 1.6% of the total assets of the banking 
system and the rate of growth is extremely fast. In the basis of the current trends, we project that the 
Islamic  banks  will  attain  about  10%  of  the  market  share  in  the  next  few  years.  The  State  bank  of 
Pakistan  has  developed  a  market-based  regulatory  framework  including  a  high-powered  Shari’ah 
Board to provide guidance on the Shari’ah compliance aspects of the business and regulations. The 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan (ICAP) has prepared accounting standards for Islamic 
modes of finance which are being implemented. These standards are based on the AAOIFI Standards 
and  are  compatible  with  the  International  Accounting  Standards.  We  have  developed  innovative 
products such as Islamic Export Refinance Scheme in consultation with the Islamic banking industry 
for it to remain competitive with other banks. 
Despite these positive developments which I have sketched above, I will be remiss in my duties if I do 
not put forth the enormous challenges in Islamic Finance and let me tell you there are many. 
  (a) Fund Mobilization: 
The ways in which Islamic banks can and do mobilize funds are all non-conventional and, in 
some ways, new to the regulators. Several issues and questions arise in the minds of regulators 
confronted  with  the  task  of  supervising  and  regulating  Islamic  banks.  Some  methods  for 
mobilizing  funds,  for  example,  would  require  asset-management  instead  of  the  conventional 
concept  of  fund  management.  This  is  an  area  where  the  Central  Banks  do  not  have  either 
adequate expertise or much knowledge. 
(b) Nature of Contracts: 
The use of non-conventional contracts to offer products for financial services can create a whole 
range of issues concerning corporate governance standards, sources of new risks and how to 
manage them, as well as how to make Islamic banks conform to the market discipline already 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 3
created for conventional banks. For example Risk profiles of some financial products may be 
quite distinct and do not seem to have been addressed by Basel II. The new dimensions of risk 
emerge on both assets as well as liabilities sides of Islamic banks’ balance sheet. On the asset 
side, Islamic banks will use contracts such as Ijarah, Murabaha, Istisna’a and Salam which have 
more complex implications towards risk management than that of products on the asset side of 
the  conventional  banks’  balance  sheet.  On  the  liabilities  side,  Islamic  banks  will  be  offering 
profit-sharing investment accounts to the depositors. These depositors are assumed to share 
the profits and losses of the bank, but neither fall into the category of the capital of the bank nor 
can  be  regarded  as  liabilities  of  the  bank,  in  the  accounting  sense  of  the  term.  This  raises 
complications for the formula for capital adequacy and for other indicators and measures. How 
to  make  the  accounts  of  Islamic  banks  to  conform  to  the  banking  laws  of  Europe  without 
violating  Shari’ah  provisions  will  be  a  challenge  for  the  lawyers  of  Islamic  banks  intending  to 
provide  financial  services  in  Europe  as  well  as  a  challenge  to  the  regulators  who  will  be 
evaluating the proposals for establishing such banks in Europe. This question is already being 
examined by lawyers of Islamic banks and regulators in Europe as exemplified by the U.K. The 
outcome will benefit the rest of Europe. 
   protection of consumers of Islamic Banks; 
Transparency (including issues relating to corporate governance); and 
(c) Regulatory Challenges: 
The regulatory challenges have three main dimensions, as highlighted by the Managing Director 
of  the  Financial  Services  Authority  of  the  US  when  he  spoke  at  a  recent  conference  in  the 
Middle East: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii)  Professional  competition  (in  different  and  distinctive  aspects  of  Islamic  banking,  in 
 
Regulators will need to look at profit-sharing investment accounts from the investors’ protection 
point  of  view  and  not  merely  from  the  depositors’  protection  point  of  view,  as  in  the  case  of 
commercial banking. 
addition to competence in the conventional aspects of banking. 
The application of Islamic modes of financing require Islamic banks to assume at some stage of the 
ownership  of  the  underlying  asset,  though  in  some  cases  it  may  be  made  effective  only  for  an 
extremely  short  period  (such  as  in  the  case  of  Murabaha-based  financing).  The  ownership  of  the 
asset,  for  whatever  period  it  is  assumed,  involves  bearing  the  risks  associated  with  the  ownership. 
These risks, of course, can be insured but that will involve additional costs. (The insurance of third 
party risks could be quite expensive). Firstly, this is an issue of efficiency in providing an alternative 
product. Secondly, this is also a question of who will pay for this additional cost. If the depositors have 
to pay for it, it will have implications on the rate of return of their deposits. There will, therefore, be an 
issue of transparency about all costs and their implication on return for the depositors of the bank and 
costs to the clients seeking finances from the bank. 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  that  we  have  made  a  modest  beginning  in  several  Islamic  countries  for 
Islamic Finance to take off. The response so far has been positive and the spill-over effects are being 
felt in other parts of the world such as in Europe. This gathering is an ample testimony to the interest 
that  is  being  demonstrated  in  the  Western  world.  Nevertheless,  we  should  be  cognizant  of  the 
enormous challenges which we face. However, I am sure that the institutional framework that is being 
put  into  place  would  adequately  prepare  the  growing  Islamic  financial  services  industry  in  meeting 
these challenges in the future. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2005
