Lucas Papademos: Remarks on the ECB’s December 2005 Financial Stability 
Review 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing on the occasion of the publication of the December 2005 Financial Stability Review, Frankfurt, 
8 December 2005. 
The slides can be found on the website of the European Central Bank www.ecb.int. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Introduction  
I.  
Welcome to this press briefing on the occasion of the presentation of the December 2005 edition of 
the ECB’s Financial Stability Review, which is published semi-annually, in June and in December each 
year.  
My presentation today will have three parts (see slide 2): I will start with some introductory remarks, 
outlining the purpose, the scope, the method of analysis and the structure of the Review. Thereafter, I 
will highlight the main sources of risk and vulnerability which we have assessed as emanating from 
four areas: (i) the global macro-financial environment; (ii) financial markets; (iii) the balance sheets of 
euro area households and corporations; and (iv) financial institutions, including banks and insurance 
companies. Finally, I will provide an overall assessment of the outlook for financial stability in the euro 
area. 
By  publishing  a  Financial  Stability  Review,  the  ECB  pursues  three  objectives:  first,  promoting 
awareness  of  issues  relevant  to  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  and 
encouraging  an  informed  debate  on  these;  second,  providing  an  overview  of  sources  of  risk  and 
vulnerabilities with regard to financial stability; in this way, the review seeks to play a role in preventing 
crises; and, third, analysing ways of promoting and maintaining a stable financial system. 
The  scope  of  the  Review  is  wide,  covering  the  euro  area  financial  system,  notably  banks,  other 
financial 
financial 
infrastructure (payment and settlement systems). As such, it is the only Report of this kind for the euro 
area.  
The analysis underpinning the assessment of the financial stability outlook comprises three elements:  
• 
• 
• 
an evaluation of the robustness of the financial system; 
an identification of plausible and systemically important risks to euro area financial stability;  
an  assessment  of  the  ability  of  the  financial system to  cope with shocks  in  the  event  that 
some combination of the identified risks and vulnerabilities were to materialise. 
insurance  companies),  capital  and  money  markets  and 
institutions  (e.g. 
It  should  be  stressed  that  calling  attention  to  such  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability  does  not  mean 
seeking to identify the most probable outcome. Rather, it entails highlighting potential and plausible 
downside risks, even if these are unlikely to materialise.  
The Review has been prepared with the close involvement of the Banking Supervision Committee of 
the European System of Central Banks, which is a forum of cooperation among the national central 
banks  and  supervisory  authorities  of  the  25  European  Union  Member  States  and  the  ECB.  The 
combination of the micro perspectives of supervisors with the macro perspectives of central bankers 
contributes to making this assessment as wide-ranging as possible. The Review also serves as the 
basis  of  semi-annual  financial  stability  discussions  at  the  ECB  Governing  Council  and  therefore 
represents the common view of the Governing Council.  
The  Review  is  organised  in  four  main  chapters:  first,  an  overview,  setting  the  scene  with  a  self-
contained  analysis  and  assessment;  second,  an  analysis  of  the  macro-financial  environment  which 
assesses  the  financial  balances of  non-financial sectors of  the  economy;  third,  an  inspection  of  the 
financial system which forms the core of the Review; and, fourth, a section with six special features, 
i.e. short articles aimed at providing analytical and contextual underpinnings. The first article deals with 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
measurement challenges related to financial stability analysis. The second analyses financial market 
contagion. The third assesses the financial vulnerability of mortgage-indebted euro area households. 
The fourth study looks at determinants of euro area banks’ profitability. The fifth article looks at the 
effects of the new accounting framework on banks. The final study looks at the financial stability issues 
related to central counterparty clearing houses. In addition to the special features, the Review contains 
20 boxes as well as a statistical annex.  
Main areas of vulnerability of the euro area financial system 
II. 
Let me now turn to the substance of the Review and present the main findings of the analysis and 
assessment.  I  start  by  looking  at  the  main  developments  in  the  global  macro-financial  environment 
(see slide 4).  
Global macro finance 
II.1. 
Global imbalances continued to widen in 2005. The chart on the left of slide 4 shows that among the 
main economic areas, the United States remains the largest borrower country. However, there have 
been changes in the composition of the global creditor countries, with the shares of Japan and the 
euro  area  diminishing,  while  China  and,  in  particular,  the  oil  producing  countries,  have  grown  in 
importance in financing the US deficit in 2005.  
The chart on the right of slide 4 focuses on the evolution of the US deficit. The total net lending of the 
US economy reached new post-Bretton-Woods records of 6.5% of GDP in the first quarter of 2005, 
and narrowed slightly to 6.3% of GDP in the second quarter. For much of the time since 2000, the 
main  domestic  sources  of  the  US  current  account  deficit  have  been  growing  fiscal  imbalances  and 
heavy household sector borrowing. On the other hand, rather atypically, the corporate sector enjoyed 
a financial surplus. This may not last, however, as the corporate sector begins to leverage again. 
Overall, while the sustainability of current account positions seems rather unproblematic in the short 
term, the expansion of imbalances exposes the global financial system to the risk of sharp correction 
in the medium term, in particular if confidence were to suddenly deteriorate in financial markets.  
An additional significant risk to euro area financial stability during the current year has been the surge 
in oil prices. Slide 5 highlights some of the implications for the global financial system of the rise in oil 
prices to levels that, in real terms, have remained close to the peaks reached in the late 1970s. While 
the  impact  of  elevated  oil  prices  on  the  financial  system  has  thus  far  been  less  substantial  than 
previously feared, risk premia in some segments of the global equity markets could nevertheless have 
been  adversely  affected.  The  chart  on  the  left  plots  the  real  oil  price  against  the  US  equity  market 
earnings  yield  premium.  The  relatively  close  co-movement  between  these  two  variables  seems  to 
have carried over to the more recent episode of increasing oil prices, possibly explaining part of the 
relatively subdued developments in US equity markets in the current year.  
Regarding the corporate credit markets, in 2005 problems in the US automobile and airline sectors – 
both of which are sensitive to the level of oil prices – have created periods of short-lived turbulence in 
credit markets, including the markets for more complex structured credit instruments. Looking ahead, 
a key question in credit markets is the likely timing of the turn of the current very benign credit cycle. 
The chart on the right in slide 5 shows that the decline in global corporate default rates stabilised at a 
low  level  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2005  after  a  very  marked  decline  in  2002-2004.  Partially 
reflecting  the  effect  of  high  oil  prices,  Moody’s  rating  agency  currently  forecasts  that  global  default 
rates  will  pick  up  somewhat  in  early  2006,  heralding  less  favourable  credit  conditions  to  come.  It 
should,  however,  be  noted  that  similar  forecasts  made  at  the  beginning  of  2005  proved  to  be 
inaccurate.  
Financial markets 
II.2  
In the global fixed income markets (see slide 6), the flattening of yield curves throughout the second 
and the third quarters of 2005 has been something of a puzzle. More recently, worries about global 
inflation, mainly driven by high oil prices, seem to have reversed the decline in long-term bond yields, 
at least temporarily. The low level of US ten-year bond yields in particular remains a conundrum that is 
difficult  to  reconcile  with  underlying  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  At  the  same  time,  and  as  a 
corollary, concerns about the risk of an unexpected and abrupt upturn in these yields have remained. 
The chart on the top left of slide 6 illustrates the puzzle by plotting the evolution of the US 10-year 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
bond yield against the consensus expectations on US nominal GDP growth ten years ahead, a proxy 
for the level of bond yields consistent with expected future fundamentals. In “normal” circumstances, 
the two would be expected to remain rather close to each other. The chart shows, however, that for 
the US, since early 2002 the bond yield has been persistently lower than the expected future growth 
rate of nominal GDP. In the euro area, as shown in the chart on the bottom left on slide 6, although the 
10-year bond yield has also declined below the 10-year nominal GDP growth expectations, the margin 
is substantially narrower.  
The low levels of bond yields can be partly explained by increasing demand by institutional investors, 
such  as  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds,  for  long-term  bonds.  Ageing  populations  and 
increasing  private  provisioning  of  pensions  in  many  euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  accounting 
changes and balance sheet repair, have forced financial institutions to resort to longer-term bonds in 
order to correct maturity mismatches in their balance sheets. The chart on the right of slide 6 illustrates 
how  net  purchases  of  long-term  bonds  relative  to  quoted  shares  has  sharply  diverged  since  2002. 
Insofar as the declining bond yields reflect such structural factors, the potential for a reversal of the 
trend, should it happen, could take place more gradually than previously feared. However, it should be 
noted that other factors have also affected the patterns of global portfolio behaviour, which led to an 
unusual increase in the net demand for long-term bonds and drove down risk premia and therefore 
bond yields. 
The balance sheets of euro area corporations and households 
II.3.  
Let  me  now  briefly  discuss  developments  in  the  euro  area  economic  environment  (see  slide  7), 
focusing on developments in the corporate and household sectors that are particularly relevant from 
the point of view of the outlook for financial intermediaries’ credit portfolios.  
Starting  with  the  corporate  sector,  there  are  signs  that  earlier  weaknesses  in  demand  for  external 
funding by the non-financial corporate sector is coming to an end. This is reflected by the increase in 
lending. At the same time, reflecting the better financial condition of firms, credit standards by banks to 
firms have been relaxed somewhat, as shown in the chart on the left on slide 7 (where the vertical axis 
measures  changes).  Encouragingly,  these  developments  also  extended  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises,  which  in  many  euro  area  countries  had  faced  difficult  circumstances  over  the  past  few 
years. Overall, euro area corporate sector balance sheets show signs of improvement, after several 
years of de-leveraging and extensive cost-controlling.  
Turning  to  the  household  sector,  the  most  important  development  continued  to  be  further  rises  in 
house prices in many euro area countries and in the euro area as a whole, as shown in the chart on 
the right on slide 7. However, prices continued to fall in some countries, while in others, where house 
prices  increased  rapidly  in  the  past,  prices  have  shown  signs  of  moderation.  Given  the  relative 
robustness of household sector balance sheets in the euro area and the still, on average, conservative 
loan-to-value ratios applied to mortgage lending, more substantial credit risks to financial institutions 
would  materialize  only  in  the  currently  rather  unlikely  event  of  a  simultaneous  increase  in 
unemployment  and  a  fall  in  house  prices.  Nevertheless,  against  the  backdrop  of  signs  of  further 
relaxation of credit standards and the possibility of a substantial negative impact of a potential fall in 
house  prices  in  some  euro  area  countries  on  their  financial  systems,  the  housing  market  warrants 
further close monitoring.  
Financial institutions 
II. 4.  
Consolidated data on the euro area banking sector’s financial results are available for the full year of 
2004. The figures, further supported by non-consolidated data for the first half of 2005, paint a picture 
of strong profit growth and comfortable solvency ratios (see slide 8).  
In  2004,  the  average  return  on  equity  (ROE)  for  euro  area  domestic  banks,  the  main  indicator 
signalling  increased  profitability,  increased  by  almost  three  percentage  points  from  2003,  reaching 
10.5%. The chart on the left on slide 8 illustrates that in addition to the increase in average profitability, 
the distribution of ROE for euro area banks shifted in the direction of higher profits. The chart shows 
the proportion of euro area banks’ return on equity – weighted by each country’s total banking assets 
–  in  5%  intervals.  For  example,  banks  with  a  ROE  falling  within  the  5-10%  interval  represented 
approximately  28%  of  total  euro  area  banking  assets  in  2004.  The  shift  in  the  distribution  of  ROE 
shows that both the best and worst performing banks had become more profitable in 2004 compared 
to 2003. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 3
Against the background of a rather benign credit environment in the euro area, the aggregate flow of 
provisions as a share of total assets declined further between 2003 and 2004. The stock of provisions 
in euro terms also fell in 2004 from the previous year. Beyond the short-term horizon, the overall low 
levels of provisioning flows could be questioned as a less benign credit environment could make the 
situation more difficult for banks. Possible triggers for a deterioration include an unanticipated sharp 
rise  in  short  and  long-term  interest  rates,  or  an  unexpected  worsening  in  the  macroeconomic 
environment.  In  contrast  to  the  observed  changes  in  provisioning  flows  as  a  share  of  total  assets, 
however, the ratio of provisioning stocks to non-performing loans increased as shown by the chart on 
the right on slide 8. This mainly reflects an improvement in banks’ asset quality in the euro area as a 
whole. It should be kept in mind, however, that the quality of banks’ assets is sensitive to changes in 
the phase of the credit cycle. 
Looking ahead, the low level of provisioning flows could become a problem if the current rather benign 
credit conditions were to deteriorate and the number of non-performing loans to increase. Given that 
lending to the household sector, has, for several years, been the most rapidly growing line of business 
for  banks,  the  continuing  growth  of  exposures  to  the  household  sector  is  a  potential  source  of 
increasing credit risk. However, the quality of credit granted to households tends to be generally higher 
than that extended to the corporate sector.  
In  2004,  the  last  full  year  for  which  figures  are  available,  profitability  in  the  euro  area  insurance 
industry  improved  further,  with  the  exception  of  the  re-insurance  sector  (see  slide  9).  The 
strengthening  of  financial  positions  was  mainly  driven  by  strong  underwriting  results.  Capital  bases 
improved in both the non-life and reinsurance industries in 2004, whereas solvency ratios in the life 
insurance  industry  remained  broadly  unchanged.  The  chart  on  the  left  on  slide  9  shows  that  there 
continue to be divergent developments among the various sectors of the industry. In the life insurance 
sector, the average ROE increased between 2003 and 2004. Non-life insurers enjoyed an even more 
significant improvement in profitability. By contrast, the reinsurance industry saw a marked decline in 
profits in 2004. Profits in the non-life sector were driven by strong underwriting performances. In the 
life  insurance  sector,  lower  guaranteed  rates  of  return  and  cost-cutting  supported  the  results.  Re-
insurers suffered mainly from falling net investment income and a reduction in risk transfer from the 
non-life sector to the re-insurance sector.  
The solvency positions of insurers may be broadly measured by the ratio of surplus to net premiums 
written. As shown in the right-hand chart on slide 9, in the non-life and re-insurance industries, this 
ratio  rose  in  2004  from  the  previous  year.  Despite  rather  subdued  profits,  the  capital  base  of  the 
reinsurance  industry  grew  as  companies  limited  the  amount  of  dividends  distributed  to  their 
shareholders. In the life insurance industry, there was a slight decline in the solvency ratio in 2004.  
Regarding unregulated financial institutions, the risks associated with hedge funds have remained a 
topical issue in 2005 (see slide 10). The ECB, in collaboration with the BSC (national central banks 
and  supervisors),  carried  out  a  survey  of  EU  banks’  exposures  to  hedge  funds,  which  has  been 
published and is now available on the ECB’s website. The December 2005 Financial Stability Review 
contains a box summarising the key findings of the survey. 
The chart on the left on slide 10 shows that according to publicly available data, inflows to the hedge 
funds sector continued in the first half of 2005, albeit at a decelerating pace. The chart on the right on 
slide  10  illustrates  that  at  least  certain  hedge  fund  strategies  suffered  losses  in  March-April  2005 
owing  to  the  turbulence  in  the  corporate  credit  markets  that  was generated by  the  widely  expected 
downgrades  of  two  large  US  automakers  which  subsequently  materialised  in  May.  This  weaker 
performance in hedge fund returns may, at least in part, explain why inflows tapered off somewhat.  
Overall assessment 
III.  
Having reviewed developments in the key parts of the financial system, the overall assessment of risks 
to euro area financial stability can be formulated as follows (see slide 11).  
A number of recent positive developments support the judgement that the euro area financial markets, 
institutions and infrastructures are robust and capable of withstanding shocks: First, the pace of global 
economic  activity  has  remained  rather  strong.  Second,  balance  sheets  of  large  corporations  have 
improved  further,  with  signs  of  recovery  also  extending  to  the  small  and  medium-sized  enterprise 
sector. Third, the balance sheets of euro area banks and insurance companies have also continued to 
strengthen.  
4 
 BIS Review 86/2005
At the same time, these positive developments are clouded by the fact that risks and vulnerabilities are 
also  growing  (see  slide  12).  Global  imbalances  have  continued  to  widen.  In  addition,  it  cannot  be 
excluded that the global hunt for yield could have extended to riskier segments of financial markets, 
further accentuating the risk of disorderly market corrections as global liquidity is gradually reduced. 
High  oil  prices  and  rising  house  prices  add  to  the  sectoral  risks,  creating  vulnerabilities  to  financial 
institutions’  future  performance.  Finally,  if  the  credit  environment  turns  worse  than  currently 
anticipated, the present level of loan-loss provisioning by euro area banks may prove to be insufficient.  
Overall,  with shock-absorption  capacities  improving, but  risks  and  vulnerabilities  rising,  the  financial 
stability outlook continues to rest upon a delicate balance. While the probable outcomes could, at this 
stage,  best  be  described  as  bi-modal,  a  positive  outcome  remains  the  most  likely  prospect  in  the 
period ahead.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 5
