R Basant Roi: Overview of macroeconomic policies in Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius’  annual 
dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 2 December 2005. 
 Honourable Judges 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Evening 
I am once again pleased to welcome you all to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner.  
In my last seven end-of-the-year addresses, I persistently focused more on regulatory and supervisory 
issues  than  on  monetary  policy  issues.  The  repeated  emphasis  on  the  desirability  of  a  sound  and 
strong  banking  industry  was  motivated  by  several  critical  important  considerations.  Against  the 
backdrop of recent developments in our export markets and the evolution of our balance of payments 
position I find it quite appropriate to briefly look back in order to throw some light on future orientation 
of our macro-economic policies.  
The 1980s witnessed a rapid process of financial sector liberalization in most parts of the world. The 
long repressed financial sector in developing countries underwent a process of gradual deregulation. 
Layers upon layers of direct controls in the financial sector, fashionable in the 1950s, 1960s and in the 
early years of the 1970s, were gradually removed. Decision makers in Mauritius rightly bent with the 
then prevailing wind of change. Direct controls on interest rate determination, ceilings on bank credit 
expansion  and  exchange  control  were  done  away  with.  With  hindsight,  it  appears  that  the  wide-
ranging implications of the move from a system of direct controls to a fully liberalized financial system 
have not been fully appreciated. 
Financial  sector  liberalization  imperatively  requires  monetary  discipline,  fiscal  discipline,  financial 
market discipline, labour market discipline and very importantly a sound and solid financial industry. 
These requirements are all, in one way or the other, closely related. The lack of appreciation of the 
complexity of the relationships among them seems to trigger the on and off criticisms against the Bank 
of Mauritius regulatory and supervisory policy and other policy stance.  
The emphasis on regulatory and supervisory issues relating to the banking industry has been driven 
by four principal considerations:- 
1. 
Financial  sector  liberalization  intensifies  competition.  Obviously,  banks  operating  in  the 
country  necessarily  have  to  be  sound  and  strong,  as  otherwise  competitive  forces  would 
drive out of the market the inefficient ones. I need not overstate that it takes only one small 
bank to fail to undermine confidence in our banking system and threaten financial stability in 
a small economy like ours; 
The process of financial sector liberalization, throughout the world in the 1980s, was quite 
likely to be followed by a process of trade liberalization at the level of individual countries, 
regional level as well as the global level. Having taken the view that, at some stage, trade 
liberalization might eventually affect the balance sheets of banks thereby undermining their 
soundness,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  far-sightedly  intensified  its  regulatory  and  supervisory 
activities in a bid to stave off as far as possible its adverse impact; 
There  exists  a  solid  body  of  research  strongly  suggesting  that  improvements  in  financial 
arrangements precede and contribute to economic performance. Developing countries with 
relatively deep and efficient financial markets in the 1960s and the 1970s grew faster than 
those  with  relatively  shallow  markets.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  thus  been  committed  to 
initiate  credible  regulatory  and  supervisory  measures  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the 
banking industry; and 
The  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  implementation  in  a  liberalized  financial  system  depends 
greatly on the strength and efficiency of the players in the financial marketplace. We have a 
bank-centered financial system. In other words, banks are at the epicentre of our financial 
system. Evidently, the players in our market are banks and bankers. Banks are the medium 
through which the monetary policy impulses of the Bank of Mauritius are transmitted to the 
rest of the economy. The weaker the medium for transmission of monetary policy impulses 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
the lesser is its efficacy in achieving the desired objectives. The medium, that is banks, had 
to  be  strengthened  and  hence  the  repeated  emphasis  on  the  need  for  a  sound  and  solid 
banking industry.  
These  have  been  the  inter-related  objectives  envisioned  in  the  approach  adopted  by  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius in the last seven years with regard to the banking sector. Despite a number of hurdles and 
unforeseen happenings, the Bank of Mauritius relentlessly pursued its objectives, for it is in the best 
interests of the economy to have a banking industry sufficiently strong to meet emerging challenges. 
All  through  the  road  traveled  so  far,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  not  been  short  of  criticisms  from 
commentators. 
In January 1992, the Financial Times carried a headline “Man bites Watchdog”. The man was Robert 
Maxwell.  In  the  list  of  watchdogs,  pension  fund  trustees,  external  auditors  and  accountants, 
institutional shareholders, the Bank of England and a number of other regulators were identified as 
potential scapegoats. In private conversations and in the media everyone had his favourite scapegoat. 
Some carefully avoided including themselves in the list of potential candidates for the scapegoats, as 
is the case in Mauritius. 
The  history  of  troubled  financial  institutions  is  littered  with  eventful  episodes  of  “Men  biting 
Watchdogs”. “Watchdogs biting watchdogs” is however an uncommon happening. I guess you must 
be familiar with the story of the man who discontentedly wailed, “We were so poor in our childhood, we 
could  not  afford  a  dog;  we  ourselves  had  to  do  the  barking.”  Certain  recent  remarks  against  the 
regulator of the banking industry gave an incorrect perspective of the role of regulators. Some smart – 
pretentiously smart - but not necessarily persons of enviable integrity and probity have attempted to 
advertise  colossal  untruths.  I  refer  to  them  as  smart  persons,  for  they  are  fully  conversant  with  the 
laws that bind the Bank of Mauritius with regard to its duty of confidentiality of banking transactions. 
They  are  equally  aware  that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  certainly  no  interest  in  street  fighting  with 
“respected” delinquent borrowers however provocative the unpleasant and unfair remarks. Any form of 
public  retaliation  against  certain “law-abiding”  delinquent  borrowers  is obviously  not  the  business of 
any  regulator.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  wisely  chose  to  take  the  aspersions  leveled  against  it  cool 
headedly – with an elevated sense of respect to the laws governing the banking industry. They have 
talked the talk. We have walked the walk. 
In the last six years the Bank of Mauritius has been involved in clearing the banking system, through 
thick and thin, of outdated practices. We are today at the tail end of the clearing process. And we have 
had  a  rich  experience  in  tackling  problematic  banks  and  ‘gentlemen’  delinquents  –  I  mean  habitual 
delinquent borrowers making a good, open and public show of piety of monks in monasteries.  
It is generally wondered why the Bank of Mauritius does not aggressively resolve problems that afflict 
certain  financial  institutions,  whether  at  the  board  of  directors  level  or  the  managerial  levels.  Ailing 
financial institutions can never be brought back on rail by simply applying mechanical procedures to 
complex operational problems. It’s like a man undergoing several medical procedures simultaneously. 
One  physician  is  in  charge  of  the  head  injury,  someone  else  is  setting  the  broken  leg,  another 
physician  is  working  on  the  displaced  shoulder  and  still  another  one  is  getting  rid  of  the  gallstone. 
Each operation is perfect and is indeed a success. But to the dismay of the physicians the patient dies 
- dies of shock. It is certainly not in the interest of any regulator - nor is it in the interest of society - to 
give shocks and kill financial institutions; its primary concern is rather to rescue ailing institutions, help 
restore their financial soundness and sustain overall financial stability. Breaking problems into small 
pieces and then managing the pieces, more so if the problems stem from the highest level of decision-
making  in  a  financial  institution,  is  the  surest  way  to  a  crash.  The  regulator’s  responsibility  in  such 
cases  is  to  manage  the  dynamics,  not  the  pieces.  No  regulator  would  ever  envy  the  plight  of  an 
ambulance crew at the scene of a car crash. I regret having to use metaphors for I am bound by a duty 
of confidentiality even in respect of the ‘gentlemen’ delinquent borrowers.  
Institutional shareholders or any individual shareholder in any enterprise, be it a financial institution or 
a non-financial enterprise, are expected to be the first and foremost watchdog of its operations. The 
watchdogs are supposed to look after the best interests of the enterprise rather using their authority to 
advance  their  own  agendas.  As  is  generally  observed  the  sinews  of  good  behaviour  can  hardly  be 
reinforced by regulation. Financial regulations are not designed to catch deceit but to create markets 
and promote good corporate habits - habits that are indeed transparent to savers and investors who 
can vote with their money and why not with their feet, if the need arises.  
The dissemination of reliable information to the public at large and the ability to trust each other are 
the  pillars  of  market-based  economies.  A  former  professor  at  Harvard  rightly  observed  that  trust 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
constitutes a decisive ingredient of a society for it to be a successful capitalist society. People, who do 
not trust their neighbours, do not trust other groups, do not trust distant people, cannot trade among 
themselves. The economy is reduced to the level of a bazaar economy. The regulator needs to be 
trusted.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  none  of  us  would  ever  wish  our  economy  to  be  reduced  to  a 
bazaar economy. As I said earlier, we have reached the tail end of the clearing process. We are now 
in the process of constructing a framework for the implementation of Basel II, taking into account the 
specificities of our economy. The year 2006 will quite likely be marked by acquisitions in the banking 
industry. We have had a number of expressions of interest for take-overs from several banks of good 
reputation.  Despite  a  few  consequential  setbacks  beyond  our  control,  business  confidence  in  the 
economy is not as bad as is being painted.  
Once  an  economic  system  is  on  a  path  of  financial  sector  reform,  the  process  is  self-reinforcing;  it 
cannot  be  stopped  as  one  measure  of  reform  engenders  other  reforms.  The  Mauritius  Credit 
Information Bureau launched on Wednesday last is an innovative step that is expected to go a long 
way towards imposing discipline in the credit market. In the longer term this Bureau will definitely play 
a catalytic role in improving the quality of our financial sector. Let me clear one misconception. The 
Bureau is a repository of credit information on borrowers. When processing application for loans banks 
are required to consult the Bureau through an electronic network before deciding whether or not to 
approve the application for the loans. The decision whether or not to approve the loans however rests 
with the banks themselves, not with the Bank of Mauritius.  
Ladies and gentlemen, right at the outset I mentioned that financial sector liberalization necessarily 
requires monetary discipline, labour market discipline and fiscal discipline. Wages and salaries levels 
over and above productivity levels persistently lasting for a protracted period of time combined with 
unsustainable budget deficits are bound to influence monetary policy-making. I have to reiterate the 
point I stressed here, during previous annual dinners, and elsewhere that the Bank of Mauritius does 
not operate in isolation, irrespective of developments in the domestic economy and of developments in 
our  major  trading-partner  countries.  Its  policies  are  designed  in  the  light  of  the  dynamics  of  the 
domestic economy and developments in foreign exchange markets abroad.  
In  most  large  and  resourceful  economies,  economic  growth  is  to  quite  an  extent  driven  by 
consumption  expenditure.  Consumption  expenditure,  amongst  other  things,  is  a  propelling  force  to 
investment that, in turn, generates economic growth. In small economies like ours it is investment that 
propels economic growth that, in turn, gives rise to consumption expenditure. Ours is an investment 
driven economy and is not a consumption driven economy. The point I wish to make here is that in a 
highly  open  economy  like  ours,  overwhelmingly  dependent  on  imports,  rising  levels  of  consumption 
expenditure, not matched by production for exports, rather leads to deficits in the trade balance.  
After  four  successive  years  of  surpluses,  the  current  account  of  our  balance  of  payments  posted  a 
deficit of over Rs5 billion in fiscal year 2004-05 - close to 3 per cent of GDP. The Goods Account, 
commonly understood as the Merchandise account, posted a deficit of over Rs20 billion, roughly twice 
the deficit recorded in the preceding year. May I underline that the rupee value of petroleum products 
imported in fiscal year 2004-05 amounted to Rs11 billion, twice the value recorded only three years 
ago.  It  is  projected  to  attain  over  Rs13  billion  in  the  current  fiscal  year.  For  every  Rs100  worth  of 
imports, Rs13 account for petroleum products.  
Only in a society that embraces self-criticisms can decision-making processes produce real facts to 
cope  with  real  problems.  A  back-of-the-envelope  arithmetic  shows  that  in  certain  organizations, 
employees,  after  making  allowances  for  week-ends,  vacation  leave,  casual  leave  and  sick  leave 
entitlements, are at work for only 200 days in a year; I do not wish to say that they consume during 
400  days  in  a  year.  Household  consumption  expenditure  grew  by  8  per  cent  in  2005,  twice  the 
average growth rate of 4 per cent in the four years ended 2003.  
Fortunately,  the  incisiveness  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  led  to  an  accumulation  of  net  international 
foreign currency reserves amounting to Rs54 billion today. We cannot lean against the wind for long. 
The policy implications of these developments are fiscal rectitude and strong demand management 
policies. Why fiscal rectitude? Let me explain. Two different hypotheses exist in regard to the relation 
between trade deficits and budget deficits. One of them is the twin deficit hypothesis postulating that 
budget deficits cause trade deficits. The policy implication of this theory is that budget deficits need to 
be  reduced  to  restore  trade  balance.  The  other  hypothesis  is  what  economists  refer  to  as  the 
Ricardian  Equivalence  hypothesis:  an  increase  in  government  expenditure  is  absorbed  by  a  rise  in 
private savings and therefore no increase in consumption expenditure, which in our case, means no 
increase in imports and therefore no impact on the balance of trade. Contrarily, our consumption rate 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 3
has  gone  up  meaning  that  savings  rate  has  gone  down.  Trade  deficit  has  widened.  The  first 
hypothesis  seems  to  be  more  valid  in  the  case  of  our  economy.  Although  there  is  no  one  to  one 
relationship  between  budget  deficits  and  trade  deficits  in  our  context,  the  case  for  a  reduction  in 
budget deficit is strong. Fiscal dentistry needs to be carried out; the cavities need to be filled in. On the 
monetary policy side, stringent demand management policy is the order of the day. 
Finally, let me share with you the reflections made in the 1980s by a former Prime Minister of the U.K. 
on the state of mind of the British public, “I think we’ve have been through a period where too many 
people have been given to understand that if they have a problem, it’s the Government’s job to cope 
with it. ‘I have a problem, I’ll get a grant.’ ‘I’m homeless, the Government must house me.’ They are 
casting their problems on society. And you know there is no such thing as society. There are individual 
men and women, and there are families. And no Government can do anything except through people, 
and people must look to themselves first. It’s our duty to look after ourselves and then, also, to look 
after our neighbours. People have got their entitlements too much in mind, without obligations. There 
is no such thing as entitlements, unless someone has first met an obligation.” Aren’t these reflections 
equally valid for Mauritius? 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  way  forward  is  to  carry  out  a  really  big  and  rapid  change  rather  than 
proceeding with small gradual changes. A plunge in cold water is less painful than a slow submersion. 
We have to open up the economy, without any form of deleterious barriers. Problems do exist and will 
continue to exist. They exist to be redefined and transformed. They exist to be tackled and overcome. 
A problem shared is a problem halved.  
Let me on behalf of the Board of Directors, the staff of the Bank of Mauritius and on my own behalf 
wish you and your family a Merry Xmas and a very prosperous New Year 2006. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2005
