Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the meeting of 
the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 16 February 2006.  
The Charts in pdf-format 
 can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 1. Introduction 
On the way into this building, we pass a statue of the nineteenth century Norwegian actor Johannes 
Brun.  He  performed  at  Christiania  Theatre,  which  once  stood  in  the  square  in  front  of  the  main 
entrance.  Brun  was  an  acquaintance  of  Henrik  Ibsen,  who  also  worked  at  the  same  theatre  for  a 
period – part-time as dramatic consultant – when the theatre he had been directing closed. This was a 
difficult time for our great dramatist, both personally and financially. He was struggling to overcome 
writer’s  block  and  the  public’s  preference  for  the  mediocre  and  the  trivial.1  Nineteenth-century 
Christiania (now Oslo) was described as “O great and little city! What a cold and surly sky broods over 
you!”.2  
A  bleak  time  for  Ibsen,  perhaps.  But  the  Norwegian  economy  was  not  faring  all  that  badly.  The 
economic expansion that had begun in the 1820s gathered momentum from the middle of the century. 
The British navigation acts were repealed in 1849 and the Norwegian fleet was permitted to transport 
other  countries’  goods  to  and  from  England.  Norway  had  suddenly  become  a  major  exporter  of 
services. The tonnage of the Norwegian commercial fleet increased almost six-fold from 1850 to 1880.  
2. Changes in the international division of labour 
We are now again in a period of considerable changes in the international division of labour. Global 
trade is again growing at a markedly faster pace than production, thanks to technological advances 
and a sharp reduction in the costs associated with trade in goods, services and information.  
Trade  barriers  have  been  removed.  In  the  early  post-war  years,  tariff  barriers  between  a  few 
industrialised countries were dismantled. The later rounds in GATT, now the WTO, embraced both a 
far  broader  agenda  and  a  greater  number  of  countries.  Today,  almost  all  countries  participate  as 
members or observers and the issues are far-ranging. In addition to dismantling tariff barriers, anti-
dumping measures have been introduced, subsidies have been removed and agreements have been 
entered into for textiles and agricultural products. In the current round, issues related to health, the 
environment and development are also being discussed.  
Political changes have amplified this tendency. At the beginning of the 1990s, China changed course 
and is now a member of the WTO. Its share of total exports is growing rapidly. India is at the starting-
line.  
These countries have large labour forces that offer their services at very low wages, and these labour 
resources are available to companies that compete on world markets. The working-age population in 
rural China is nearly the same as that of the entire OECD area. Many are underemployed and are 
seeking work in urban areas.  
Low labour costs and more efficient transport and communication attract labour-intensive production. 
Production  is  being  transferred  to  China  or  other  emerging  economies.  There  are  many  examples 
showing that competition in selling highly skilled services is also intensifying. Myopia surgery is offered 
in  Turkey.  Dental  care  and  other  medical  services  are  also  offered,  at  prices  that  are  substantially 
lower than in Norway. Norsk Hydro reports that almost 300 000 hours of engineering services for the 
Ormen Lange project were supplied by Indian engineers, located in India.  
                                                      
1   Michael Meyer: Henrik Ibsen: the Making of a Dramatist 1828-1864, London 1967, p. 168 
2   Meyer, op.cit. p. 217: Excerpt from The Judge’s Daughters, by the 19th century author Camilla Collett. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 1
Trade in services flows both ways. Norwegian architects are designing landmark buildings all around 
the world. Det Norske Veritas sells its services worldwide. A company – Vik-Sandvik – that designs 
ships that are built in Europe, Asia and the US has its head office in the rural community of Fitjar. An 
ICT firm located in Ølen municipality – Omega – is developing and installing software for customers in 
Baku and Dubai.  
New markets in Asia are creating opportunities for industrialised countries. Resources are transferred 
to enterprises producing goods and services that require specialised skills. Businesses that have been 
sheltered and protected by national regulations are in a weak position when new technology or new 
agreements expose them to external competition.  
The shift in the division of labour is now influencing – and will continue to do so for a period – real 
wage growth in industrialised countries. The risk that a business will have to wind up operations or 
move  abroad  is  dampening  costs.  In  a  number  of  European  countries,  wage  growth  is  also  being 
influenced by labour inflows from the new EU member states.  
Increased  trade  has  engendered  higher  demand  for  shipping  services  and  favourable  freight  rates. 
This has in turn led to a boom in the shipbuilding industry. At the same time, high energy prices are 
boosting  investment  in  the  petroleum  and  electricity  sectors,  with  considerable  impetus  to  the 
engineering industry. Growth in Asia is having a favourable impact on aluminium prices.  
Prices for our imported goods are falling in relation to prices for goods we export. Norway’s terms of 
trade are improving. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the terms-of-
trade gains for the mainland economy have also been high.  
The situation in Norway differs from that of its Nordic neighbouring countries. Sales of Swedish and 
Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume terms, but prices are falling. Denmark has a 
diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a steady path.  
As consumers, we are benefiting from falling prices for many imported goods. Clothing prices are an 
illustration of this. Prices rose by around 3 per cent annually for a long period, but since 1995 they 
have been falling by about 6 per cent annually. This kink point coincides with the dismantling of the 
restrictions on textile trade and it coincides with a period of rationalisation in retail trade in Norway. 
China’s membership of the WTO has subsequently pushed down prices further.  
The Internet facilitates price comparison, and price margins in all sectors are under pressure.  
World  financial  markets  are  also  in  flux.  Technological  advances,  increased  trade  and  liberalisation 
have  increased  cross-border  capital  flows.  Foreign  ownership  of  businesses  has  increased 
considerably.  At  the  same  time,  savings  are  increasingly  being  invested  in  foreign  countries.  The 
home bias for investment has diminished.  
In recent years, long-term interest rates have declined. Low and stable inflation in many countries has 
made a contribution. Investors have less of a need to hedge against high inflation. There is a strong 
tendency to save among Asian and oil-exporting countries, while the willingness to invest is limited in 
many industrialised countries. This is pushing down interest rates. Low long-term rates probably also 
reflect low short-term interest rates and ample liquidity.  
Interest rate developments and buoyant growth have led to a sharp rise in equity prices in the past few 
years. At the same time, property prices are rising sharply in many countries.  
Low interest rates, sharply rising equity and property prices, high commodity prices and high energy 
prices are probably linked to cyclical developments and may therefore be transitory. Changes in the 
international division of labour, integrated financial markets and increased competition in broad goods 
and services markets are more permanent.  
Globalisation  and  cyclical developments  have  been kind  to  the Norwegian  economy.  Few countries 
are benefiting as much as Norway – and losing as little – in the current environment of freer trade in 
goods and services and cross-border labour mobility.  
3. Challenges to monetary policy 
After almost two decades of high inflation, the rise in prices stabilised in many countries in the 1990s. 
The year-on-year rise in prices in the industrial countries was about 13 per cent at the beginning of the 
1980s. In the course of the following decade, it fell to below 2 per cent. Today, most central banks 
orient monetary policy towards low and stable inflation.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2006
The practical implementation of monetary policy can vary, but the common objective is price stability. 
Low and stable inflation has contributed to solid growth in the global economy in recent years. Despite 
rising oil prices, international conflicts that have led to uncertainty, and other disturbances, the impact 
on inflation and output has been moderate.  
The perception in Norway in the 1960s and 1970s, as in other countries, was that strong growth and 
low unemployment could be achieved if we were only willing to accept somewhat higher inflation. But it 
was  gradually  recognised  that  this  was  not  the  case.  In  1980,  Odd  Aukrust,  research  director  at 
Statistics Norway said the following about economic developments in Norway: “Unfortunately, there is 
even  less  reason  for  optimism  this  time.  It  appears  that  the  competitive  position  of  Norwegian 
manufacturing  will  weaken  in  the  coming  year.  The  main  problem  is  that  no  one  controls  price 
developments. With an inflation rate of around 10 per cent a year, no one dares to make investments 
that could stop this price carousel.”3  
From the second half of the 1980s, the authorities started using monetary policy to control inflation.  
At the beginning of the 1990s, inflation had fallen, and since 1988, inflation has averaged 2½ per cent. 
Studies  of  price  developments  for  all  goods  and  services  show  that  price  formation  underwent  a 
permanent shift around 1988.4 A transition occurred from a period of high and unstable inflation to the 
current period of low and stable inflation.  
Bringing  the  rate  of  inflation  down  had  its  costs.  In  the  years  from  1988  to  1992,  the  Norwegian 
economy experienced the deepest recession of the post-war period. But growth picked up quickly, and 
the  1990s  as  a  whole  were  a  golden  decade.  It  also  appears  that  the  present  decade  will  be 
favourable. A foundation was laid when the Norwegian authorities took control of inflation.  
Developments over the past 40 years illustrate that the most important contribution monetary policy 
can make to sound economic developments in the long term is low and stable inflation. This provides 
the economy with a nominal anchor.  
Low and stable inflation makes it easier for economic agents to distinguish changes in relative prices 
from  changes  in  the  general  price  level.  Prices  become  a  more  accurate  information  vehicle.  Alan 
Greenspan has defined price stability as “a situation in which households and businesses in making 
their saving and investment decisions can safely ignore the possibility of sustained, generalized price 
increases or decreases”.5 This is the aim of monetary policy in all countries.  
When  there  is  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  monetary  policy  can  also  contribute  to  stabilising 
output and employment.  
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in 
inflation and variability in output and employment in interest-rate setting.  
Past experience indicates that expectations as to future inflation remain stable even if inflation varies 
somewhat as long as the interest rate is used actively to curb the effects. Monetary policy cannot fine-
tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from occurring when the economy 
is  exposed  to  disturbances.  In  some  situations,  it  may  be  appropriate  to  hedge  against  particularly 
unfavourable developments.  
If inflation deviates substantially from the target for a period, the interest rate will be set with a view to 
gradually returning it to the target, so that we avoid substantial variations in output and employment. 
Through  the 1990s,  inflation  remained  on  the  whole  in  the  interval  1½  –  3½ per cent.  Inflation  has 
varied  slightly  more  in  the  past  few  years.  In  a  period  of  increased  cross-border  labour  flows, 
substantial technological advances, changes in competitive conditions and new trading patterns, we 
may,  with  our  very  open  economy,  have  to  accept  a  somewhat  greater  variation  in  inflation  and 
deviations from the target, as we have witnessed over the past two to three years.  
Even though economic growth has been strong over the past 15 years, economic cycles have varied. 
A clear upturn in the years from 1993 to 1998 was followed by a period of more moderate growth and 
                                                      
3  
4   Based on an analysis conducted by Norges Bank of price indices for more than 130 different groups of goods and services 
Interview in Adresseavisen, 27 December 1980. 
for the period 1980-2005. 
5   Alan Greenspan: Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, July 13, 1988. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 3
a  mild  downturn  in  2002  and  into  2003.  Since  summer  2003,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  again 
experienced a marked upturn.  
Wage developments reflect and influence business cycles. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years is being accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn.  
The  Norwegian  economy  has  continued  to  exhibit  high  growth  this  year.  Low  interest  rates,  higher 
petroleum  investment  and  strong  global  growth  have  been  the  most  important  driving  forces.  Low 
interest  rates  contributed  at  the  beginning  of  the  upturn  to  high  growth  in  private  consumption  and 
housing investment. Last year, exports and corporate investment also showed solid growth. There is 
now a broad upswing in demand for goods and services. It has taken time for employment to pick up, 
but this is occurring now.  
Inflation  has  increased  somewhat,  but  is  still  very  low,  even  2½  years  after  the  cyclical  change. 
Inflation  is  still  being  restrained  by  the  fall  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods,  increased 
competition in a number of markets and the current period of lower nominal pay increases.  
The  trend  in  prices  for  consumer  goods  over  the  past  two  or  three  years  is  a  result  of  favourable 
developments  in  the  Norwegian  and  global  economies.  Low  inflation  is  being  accompanied  by  real 
income  growth  and  a  rise  in  production.  In  other  words,  low  inflation  is  not  the  result  of  declining 
demand, activity or employment.  
The labour supply and production equipment set a limit in the short term on the level of production in 
Norwegian enterprises. When production approaches this limit, wage and price inflation will pick up. 
For an open economy like Norway’s, this limit can vary. We buy an increasingly wide range of goods 
and  services  abroad.  The  production  of  goods  for  the  domestic  market  can  be  moved  abroad. 
Services can also be provided by producers in other countries.  
Norwegian  companies  are  no  longer  looking  to  the  domestic  labour  market  only.  Other  Nordic 
countries are an important source of labour. Last year, the number of work permits issued increased 
by 30 per cent. A large share came from the new EU member states. The waiter from Sweden, the 
Polish  carpenter,  the  cherry-picker  from  Lithuania,  the  dentist  from  Iran  and  the  physician  from  Sri 
Lanka are altering the capacity limits of the Norwegian economy.  
Nonetheless, many services are provided and must be delivered in Norway. Nor do we want to drive 
internationally exposed businesses out of the mainland economy. Language and cultural differences 
place limits on how quickly foreign labour can be absorbed, and the supply may diminish inasmuch as 
the  economies  of  Sweden  and  Poland  are  now  growing  strongly.  Norway’s  skills  requirements  and 
authorisation  procedures  are  also  curbing  competition.  Laws  and  resolutions  on  minimum  pay 
requirements may also restrict the flow of labour.  
Current  evidence  suggests  that  capacity  utilisation  is  increasing  in  some  sectors  of  the  Norwegian 
economy.  
Norwegian industrial leaders report that they are nearing capacity limits with regard to labour, plant 
and equipment. Three of four enterprises in the construction industry report that they are operating at 
capacity limits.6  
The number of advertised vacancies is rising steadily. There are reports of shortages of craftsmen, 
project managers and supervisors, engineers and skilled workers.  
Even though capacity utilisation is rising, there are no visible signs of inflation. Intensified competition 
is  exerting  downward  pressure  on  margins.  Wage  growth  is  still  at  such  a  low  level  that  it  is 
strengthening businesses and employment. However, we have experienced earlier that cost inflation 
can rapidly accelerate. The settlements in 2004 and 2005 resulted in moderate wage growth. There 
are now signs of higher local pay increases in some industries. Pay increments are probably rising in 
occupations  where  pay  is  directly  linked  to  performance.  Municipalities  and  public  entities  have 
recorded  a  sharp  increase  in  revenues,  and  this  may  easily  translate  into  higher  labour  costs. 
Nevertheless, the labour market is not so tight that there is a pronounced risk of a marked increase in 
wage growth in connection with the spring income settlement. Moreover, employee organisations have 
                                                      
6  
Information from Norges Bank’s regional network, January-February 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2006
gained acceptance for important changes in labour legislation and regulations. This probably reduces 
the near-term risk of pay increases that weaken production.  
A characteristic of the wage formation process in Norway has been that fairly long periods of moderate 
nominal pay increases and rising employment have culminated in a sharp rise in cost inflation – often 
as a result of working hour reforms – and a decline in employment. Developments in labour costs and 
the wage settlements in 1974 and 1975, 1986 and 1987 and in the period between 1998 and 2002 laid 
the  basis  for  a  subsequent  decline  in  output  and  employment.  In  our  interest-rate  setting,  we  must 
continuously  assess  how  we  should  take  account  of  the  risk  of  another  sharp  rise  in  cost  inflation 
when the labour market tightens.  
In the conduct of monetary policy, we assess the objective of stabilising inflation at close to 2½ per 
cent over time against the objective of stabilising output and employment. Given the low inflation rate, 
we have decided to keep interest rates at a low level and at times considered an even lower interest 
rate. However, against the background of solid growth in the Norwegian economy since summer 2003, 
we have instead decided to use some time to bring inflation back to target.  
Household debt has risen sharply since the mid-1990s. At the same time, house prices have shown a 
marked increase. Debt developments through the 1990s can probably be viewed to some extent as a 
delayed  adaptation  to  the  deregulation  of  the  housing  and  credit  markets  in  the  1980s,  after  many 
households  burned  their  fingers  immediately  after  the  deregulation.  At  the  same  time,  the  credit 
market has deepened. New loan products have emerged, and it is easier to raise loans. Borrowers 
can choose their repayment schedule. Credit and housing market liberalisation provides homebuyers 
with  the  opportunity  to  establish  a  high  housing standard  early  in  their  adult  lives  and  draw  on  this 
capital later in life. In recent years, household income growth has been solid, household confidence 
regarding  the  future  has  been  strong  and  households  probably  perceive  higher  income  levels  as 
permanent.  This  may  have  resulted  in  a  further  rise  in  house  prices  and  debt.  In  addition,  low  real 
interest rates are currently contributing to this.  
We have limited scope for restraining structural changes that take place when households increase 
their debt over several years in order to invest in housing and other property and assets. An interest 
rate level that effectively restrains this restructuring process would also have had adverse effects on 
economic  activity.  However,  households  are  more  vulnerable  when  debt  is  high.  Long  periods  of 
sharply  rising  asset  prices  and  debt  may  be  a  source  of  subsequent  instability  in  production  and 
employment.  
We  believe  that  expectations  regarding  interest  rate  developments  have  a  greater  impact  on 
household and business borrowing and investment behaviour than actual interest rates.  
Norges Bank communicates its analysis of the outlook for the Norwegian economy and the interest 
rate.  At  this  juncture,  the  outlook  for  output  and  inflation  suggests  that  the  interest  rate  should  be 
gradually  –  in  small,  not  too  frequent  steps  –  brought  up  to  a  more  normal  level.7  The  economic 
outlook is uncertain. We illustrate interest rate uncertainty ahead with a fan chart, which is meant to 
capture the outcome with a 70 per cent probability.  
The  consequences  of  higher  interest  rates  for  two  households  are  illustrated  in  this  chart.  Both 
households  comprise  two  adults  and  two  children.  One  household  has  a  gross  income  of  NOK 
800 000 and NOK 2 million in debt. The other has an income of NOK 600 000 and NOK 1.5 million in 
debt.  The  chart  shows  the  two  households’  income  after  basic  expenses  and  interest  and  principal 
payments have been paid. The household with an income of NOK 800 000 can cope reasonably well 
with a debt of NOK 2 million even after the interest rate has increased by 3 percentage points. The 
household with the lowest income will have a tight margin. Principal payments will have to be deferred 
and, even with a deferral of a few years, this household will have little leeway after basic expenses 
have been paid. In order to increase its financial leeway, it will either have to increase its income, or 
reduce housing consumption and dispose of its debt.  
Both households will be vulnerable should one member lose income from employment and have to 
rely on benefits. With an income loss of 10 per cent, even the household with the highest income level 
would  have  to  make  considerable  spending  adjustments.  Although  these  households  have  higher-
than-average debt, this debt level is not uncommon.  
                                                      
7   Based on the analyses in Inflation Report 3/05 and the assessments provided in the press release following Norges Bank’s 
monetary policy meeting on 25 January 2006. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 5
However,  for  most  households,  it  will  be  relatively  easy  to  cope  with  gradually  higher  interest 
expenses.  
The outlook for the Norwegian economy is favourable. Output has picked up, although so far not to 
such a degree that there are visible signs of inflation. As long as the rise in prices is slow, it will be 
appropriate to maintain a low interest rate. But when capacity utilisation increases, the interest rate will 
have to be raised gradually towards a more normal level.  
Even  though  price  inflation  has  deviated  from  the  target  for  a  period,  there  are  no  indications  that 
economic  agents  have  changed  their  view  of  future  inflation.  Expectations  are  stable.  When 
households  and  businesses  make  their  saving  and  investment  decisions  and  set  prices,  they  can 
safely ignore the possibility of sustained, marked increases or decreases in the general price level. 
The business sector can base their decisions on the assumption that wage and cost inflation will not 
revert to the level seen in the 1970s and 1980s. Employees also know that their pay increases will not 
be eroded by inflation. Low and stable inflation is a credible objective.  
4. Are we equipped for the future? 
Norwegian  enterprises  have  access  to  new  markets  and  are  encountering  increasing  competition. 
New businesses are emerging while others are scaling back and closing down.  
We have behind us 15-20 years of fairly sound macroeconomic management, which provides a good 
basis for growth in the Norwegian economy. The banking system and securities markets are highly 
developed. Generally, only unprofitable projects lack financing and capital. In a take-over, new owners 
completely  re-haul  poorly  run  operations.  In  Norway,  as  in  other  industrialised  countries,  private 
ownership is firmly protected. This is a competitive advantage and a fundamental precondition for a 
market economy to function over time.  
We  like  to  believe  that  we  have  a  highly  educated  labour  force,  and  find  some  support  for  this  in 
OECD surveys. As a result of the tax reforms of 1992 and 2006, we are able to finance the welfare 
state  fairly  effectively.  Our  infrastructure  is  being  developed.  The  security  provided  by  our  welfare 
system means that restructuring is easier than in many other countries. Like other Nordic countries, 
we apply labour market rules that for the most part do not impede restructuring.  
We  learned  a  great  deal  about  successful  –  and  less  successful  –  restructuring  in  the  1970s  and 
1980s. Two local communities that had to restructure are Kongsberg and Notodden.  
The  cornerstone  enterprises  in  these  two  communities  had  to  cut  their  workforces  substantially. 
Kongsberg  fared  well.  When  Kongsberg  Våpenfabrikk  declared  bankruptcy  in  1987,  its  defence 
business was continued while all its civilian production was split up and sold. The new companies and 
spin-off  companies  in  Horten,  Stjørdal  and  Egersund  have  posted  solid  growth  and  profitability. 
Several of the companies have become leaders in their field. An adequate supply of state-of-the-art 
technical expertise has been important for the companies’ restructuring success.  
Notodden did not fare as well. In the 1950s, Tinfoss Jernverk and Norsk Hydro employed more than 
1500  manufacturing  workers.  Towards  the  end  of  the  1960s,  they  started  shedding  labour.  The 
processing  industry  has  now  been  closed  down.  Many  workers  are  now  commuting  to  other 
municipalities,  including  Kongsberg.  The  share  of  the  population  that  is  on  disability  benefits  or 
participating  in  various  labour  market  programmes  is  above  the  national  average.  The  basis  for 
establishing new businesses has not been as favourable as in Kongsberg, but there are now at last 
signs that the situation is improving.  
Kongsberg  Våpenfabrikk  was  wholly  state-owned.  This  was  widely  perceived  as  a  guarantee  for 
continued operations. The company repeatedly required state capital injections following unfavourable 
results. When the government allowed the company to fail, this also represented an important choice 
with  regard  to  state  ownership  policy.  Profit  requirements  bolstered  discipline  in  the  fledgling 
companies.  At  the  same  time,  when  the  original  company  was  split  up,  competencies  and  values 
became visible.  
The  state  still  has  extensive  ownership  interests  in  Norwegian  business  and  industry,  but  it  has 
adopted a completely different approach to the management of its interests following the experience in 
Kongsberg, Mo i Rana, Sulitjelma and Syd-Varanger. Corporate governance is now exercised through 
resolutions in general meetings and according to recommendations from nominating committees, and 
the  board  and  management  can  run  companies  with  the  objective  of  increasing  value.  The  state-
6 
 BIS Review 10/2006
owned companies are subject to exactly the same market discipline as other operators, with a required 
return and continuous adaptation and development. This is also the only way companies can avoid 
stagnation.  
Through  the  Government  Pension  Fund,  the  state  owns  equities  worth  more  than  NOK  500  billion, 
spread across nearly 3 500 companies in over 30 countries. The holdings are minority interests. While 
long-term interests in state-owned companies require ownership discipline and distance from decision-
making,  the  challenge  to  the  Pension  Fund  is  to  assert  its  minority  interests  and  contribute  to 
transparent corporate governance. Here we can apply internationally recognised principles drawn up 
by the OECD and the UN.  
Restructuring in state-owned enterprises and the wider business sector has enhanced the efficient use 
of labour, capital and other resources.  
International comparisons indicate that production in Norway is fairly efficient – also in sectors other 
than oil and gas.8 A comparison shows that both Norway and Europe were catching up with the US for 
a while. In Norway, productivity showed a particularly strong increase at the beginning of the 1970s. 
Growth was weaker from the mid-1970s and up to the beginning of the 1990s, but has since picked up 
somewhat again.  
Productivity growth has been weaker in many European countries over the past decade. Restructuring 
in retail trade and the financial industry in particular has progressed at a slower pace in Europe than in 
the US. In this respect, developments in Norway are more similar to developments in the US. When 
productivity growth picked up in Norway, it was primarily in retail trade and the postal, telecom and 
banking industries.  
Two factors seem to be important for growth:  
First: In areas and enterprises in decline, adversity can trigger creativity when companies are split up 
and new owners make their entry. Second: In order to reap the benefits of new technology, enterprises 
must be able to make rapid changes in their workforces.9  
However, at a more fundamental level, growth and restructuring capacity is closely linked to the level 
of skills in a population. European surveys indicate that there is a high level of science and technology 
skills  among  the  adult  population.10  Surveys  among  pupils  and  students  do  not  provide  an  equally 
positive  picture.  A  report  from  the  Norwegian  Mathematics  Council  shows  that  the  level  of 
mathematical skills among new university students has declined markedly in recent years.11 Even the 
top  performing  students  score  considerably  lower  than  earlier.  This  is  illustrated  here  as  the 
percentage  of  correct  answers  in  arithmetic  and  percent  calculation,  but  we  find  similar  scores  for 
other mathematical skills. Norway is taking an economic risk in allowing the skills level to decline.  
But  –  to  take  a  brighter  view  of  this:  We  have  after  all  experienced  that  negative  trends  can  be 
reversed in very important areas of society.  
Our  most  important  resource  is  our  labour  force.  The  employment  rate  is  high  in  Norway.  This  is 
because many wish to participate in working life, and the vast majority find a job.  
However, the Norwegian labour market also has its weak points. The annual number of person-years 
worked  is  lower  in  Norway  than  in  the  US  and  the  rest  of  Europe.  Both  in  Norway  and  the  rest  of 
Europe, the fall in the number of working hours is ascribable to longer holidays and shorter working 
days. The standard working year is short in Norway, but on the other hand Norway also has a higher 
percentage of part-time employees than other countries. Access to these working hour arrangements 
has made it easier for women and young workers to enter the labour market.  
                                                      
8   See for example OECD (2006): Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth; Bart van Ark (2005): “Europe’s Productivity 
Gap:  Catching  Up  or  Getting  Stuck”;  and  Christine  Cumming:  Panel  Remarks  in  a  Symposium  on  Productivity, 
Competitiveness and Globalization, Banque de France, Paris, November 4, 2005. 
9   See for example Cumming (2005) and van Ark (2005), op.cit. 
10   European Commission (2005): Special Eurobarometer 224, Europeans, Science and Technology, June 2005. 
11   Source:  Telemark  University  College:  Norwegian  Mathematics  Council’s  autumn  2003  survey  among  new  students, 
February 2004. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 7
The income level in Norway has increased. Many may prefer to take advantage of this by increasing 
their  leisure  time  in  the  form  of  shorter  working  days  or  longer  holidays.  And  this  has  in  fact  taken 
place. Moreover, the retirement age is steadily declining. The expected retirement age is now below 
60,  when  disability  pensioners  are  taken  into  account.  At  the  same  time,  life  expectancy  has 
increased, and leisure time accounts for an increasing share of our lives.  
The large post-war cohorts will only reach ordinary retirement age after 2012, but are now nearing the 
age when they are eligible for early retirement. If they opt to retire under the scheme as it functions 
today,  the  number  of  pensioners  under  the  contractual  early  retirement  scheme  will  increase  by 
16 000 in six years. Similarly, the ageing of the population will result in an additional 41 000 disability 
pensioners.  
The  incentives  embedded  in  pension  rules,  benefits  and  taxes  encourage  early  retirement.  The 
pension rules make it costly for companies to recruit older workers. The wage trend perceived by a 
wage-earner as appropriate over a lifetime may also deviate from the trend in work capacity expected 
by the employer.  
The  basic  problem  seems  to  be  that  individuals  are  not  sufficiently  exposed  to  the  social  costs 
associated  with  leisure  and  early  retirement.  Nor  are  the  right  incentives  offered  to  individual 
businesses.  
5. Saving and returns in the Government Pension Fund 
Our  labour  force  is  clearly  our  most  important  national  resource,  but  Norway  also  has  substantial 
petroleum wealth. The state’s share consists partly of the value of oil and gas under the seabed and 
partly of the financial wealth accumulated in the Government Pension Fund – Global.  
It  is  misleading  to  look  upon  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  as  income.  The  appropriate 
economic perspective is to see the transfer of the cash flow to the Government Pension Fund as a 
way of transferring capital from one account to another – from petroleum to foreign securities.12 By 
doing so, we diversify risk.  
We are in a period marked by high oil and gas production and high prices. Substantial resources are 
therefore transferred from the one account to the other. Combined with high returns, the result is that 
the value of the Government Pension Fund is rising rapidly and may continue to do so in the years 
ahead.  
The Fund is now approaching the nominal value of one year’s GDP and may reach two in the course 
of  the  next  decade.  This  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  oil  prices  remain  high  over  the  next  few 
years  and  then  fall  to  about  USD  30  per  barrel.  Experience  has  shown  that  forecasts  for  both  oil 
production and oil prices are highly uncertain.  
The  government  bases  its  withdrawals  from  the  Fund  on  an  average  real  return  of  4  per  cent  for 
financing current expenditure. Given this spending rule, the return may come to finance more than 15 
per cent of government expenditure in 10 years. We thus reap considerable benefits from managing 
our  petroleum  wealth  well.  The  return  represents  future  income  that  we  forego  if  we  draw  on  this 
wealth  today.  But  even  with  this  source  of  income,  more  than  80  per  cent  of  expenditure  must  be 
covered by other sources. Financing the large pension payments that will have to be disbursed after 
2012 will be very demanding in any event.  
The Government Pension Fund has a prudent investment strategy, with broad risk diversification, and 
a  real  return  of  4  per  cent  is  expected  in  the  long  term.  There  are  examples  of  companies  and 
investors that achieve a considerably higher return on capital over time. However, it is important to 
remember that for each successful investor earning high returns, there are many others with the same 
ambition  and  risk  willingness,  but  with  a  record  of  poorer  performance  and  bankruptcies.  The 
Government Pension Fund cannot run the risk of ending up among the worst performers.  
The  globalisation  of  financial  markets  provides  the  Fund  with  good  opportunities  for  investing  and 
diversifying risk. However, we cannot insulate the Fund from wide annual swings in the value of the 
                                                      
12   Most of the central government’s cash flow from the sale of oil and gas is derived from the extraction of wealth under the 
seabed (economic rent), while the remainder is a normal return on invested capital. 
8 
 BIS Review 10/2006
investments.  We  invest  in  international  equity  markets  where  prices  fluctuate  widely.  These 
fluctuations are the reason why equity investments generate a higher return over time. The best year 
in the Fund’s history so far was 2003, when it posted a real return of 11 per cent. This stood in sharp 
contrast to the previous year’s result, which was -6 per cent.  
The  use  of  the  Fund’s  return  must  therefore  be  smoothed  over  time  in  order  to  prevent  events  in 
international capital markets from spreading to the Norwegian economy.  
6. Conclusion 
In  the  character  of  Peer  Gynt,  Ibsen  drew  a  rather  unflattering  portrait  of  the  Norwegian  man  who 
travelled out into the world and became rich - but who had no concern for others. At the end of the 
play, Peer is penniless.  
Ibsen himself left Norway, and although the Norwegian landscape and his Norwegian identity were at 
the core of his writing, it was his encounter with other ideas and thinking that enabled him to reshape 
his experience into world-class literature.  
In  the  asylum  in  Peer  Gynt,  where  “man  is  himself  to  the  uttermost  limit”  and  “no-one  considers 
another’s  ideas”  but  “encloses  himself  in  a  barrel  of  self”,  Peer  Gynt  is  crowned  “Emperor  of  Self”. 
When the roles are reversed and the asylum’s keepers protest at being caged instead of the inmates, 
the director of the asylum, Begriffenfeldt, answers: “When the world’s in a whirl, then we must whirl 
with it”.13  
We  do  not  share  this  attitude.  We  must  not  whirl  helplessly  along  with  the  world.  We  should  take 
advantage of the opportunities globalisation offers, but also contribute to those changes ourselves.  
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                      
13   Henrik Ibsen: Peer Gynt. Translated by Peter Watts. Penguin Books, London, 1966. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 9
