Famara L Jatta: Human resource management for economic development in 
The Gambia 
Keynote address by Mr Famara L Jatta, Governor of the Central Bank of The Gambia, at the opening 
session  of  the  Regional  Course  on  Human  Resource  Management  for  Economic  Development, 
organised by WAIFEM, Banjul, 24-28 July 2006. 
 Director General, West African Institute for Financial and Economic Management (WAIFEM), 
CBG Deputy Governors, 
Directors of the Central Bank of The Gambia, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Course Participants and Facilitators, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
1.0  
On  behalf  of  the  President,  His  Excellency,  Alhaji  (Dr.)  Col.  (Rtd.)  Yahya  A.  J.  J.  Jammeh,  the 
government and people of the Republic of The Gambia, it is my honour to welcome all of you to the 
opening  ceremony  of  the  Regional  Course  on  Human  Resource  Management  for  Economic 
Development. I would like to specially welcome Dr. Chris Itsede, Director General of the West African 
Institute  for  Financial  and  Economic  Management  (WAIFEM)  and  his  team  to  our  country.  To  our 
visiting facilitators and participants, especially those visiting for the first time, I extend a warm welcome 
to you. 
Human capital formation and economic development 
2.0 
Let me start by commending the organizers of this course, the West African Institute for Financial and 
Economic  Management  (WAIFEM)  for  the  initiative.  The  theme  of  the  course,  “Human  Resource 
Management for Economic Development” could not have been more timely and relevant, coming, 
as  it  were,  against  the  backdrop  of  growing  concern  about  Africa’s  large  army  of  the  unemployed. 
Indeed, one of the most difficult development challenges facing virtually every African country today is 
employment  creation.  Unemployment  is  indicative  of  sub-optimal  development  and  utilization  of  the 
stock  of  human  resources  in  a  country.  Yet  no  nation  develops  without  systematically  building  and 
putting  into  productive  use  its  human  capital.  Indeed,  there  is  a  consensus  that  the  degree  of 
development of a country is a reflection of the quality and quantum of its human capital. The rapid 
economic  growth  and  development  of  the  Asian  “tigers”  and  “dragons”  were  a  direct  product  of 
deliberate and sustained investment in human capital formation by the countries over a period of time. 
Using public expenditure as a proxy for investment in human capital accumulation, no Sub-Saharan 
African  country  has  met  the  UNESCO  benchmark  of  26  per  cent  of  the  government’s  budget  as 
expenditure on education. Many of the South Asian countries surpass the threshold. 
A cardinal objective of economic policy is to ensure full employment. Macroeconomic policy provides a 
good opportunity for job creation in Africa. For instance, fiscal policy has a particularly strong impact 
on the level of employment in African countries where the public sector is the biggest spender and 
employer  of  labour.  Africa’s  persistence  with  economic  reforms  over  the  years  has  started  yielding 
positive  returns.  For  the  first  time  in  almost  a  decade,  Africa  recorded  4.6  per  cent  growth  in  2004 
according to the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. Nevertheless, the growth rate fell 
short of the 7 per cent required to achieve the Millennium Development Goal to halve extreme poverty 
and hunger by 2015. 
Nature and causes of poverty in Africa 
3.0 
A basic cause of poverty is economic disempowerment which manifests itself in what Nobel Laureate, 
A. Sen, (1999), defined as income deprivation and capability deprivation. In Africa, the incidence 
of  poverty  is  compounded  by  political  and  social  strife  as  well  as  military  conflicts  which  impede 
economic  activities.  Yet,  progress  in  poverty  reduction  will  only  come  about  through  sustained 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 1
employment-creating economic growth. In spite of this obvious reality, job creation has not been put in 
the  forefront  of  Africa’s  economic  reform  agenda.  Rather,  the  pre-occupation  has  been  with 
macroeconomic stability. 
Growth without employment 
3.1  
The  demand  management  orientation  of  the  economic  reforms  invariably  occasioned  cuts  in  public 
sector employment.  As  a result,  according  to  a  joint  study  by  the  International  Labour Organisation 
and the United Nations Development Programme, new entrants into the labour market ranging from 
about 400,000 per annum in Uganda through 700,000 in Tanzania to about 6 million in Nigeria have to 
look up to the private sector for jobs. The private sector could hardly absorb up to 5 per cent of the 
new  entrants.  This  is  why  the  observed  recent  robust  growth  has  not  been  accompanied  by  a 
commensurate growth in employment and poverty reduction. One reason for this is that the growth 
has been driven mainly by the extractive sector which empirically has a low employment generating 
capacity. Perhaps more fundamentally, employment creation has not been strongly mainstreamed in 
the poverty reduction strategies and development programmes of African countries. 
Towards embedding employment in macropolicy 
4.0 
Various  strategies  have  been  advocated  for  African  countries  to  mainstream  employment  in  the 
macroeconomic policy framework. I will limit my remarks to a few of them. The logical starting point 
would be for a country to identify its entry points for employment in its macropolicy framework. This 
would involve linking employment generation to sectoral priorities. Formulation of employment-riendly 
policies with appropriative incentives is a critical element in the process of mainstreaming employment 
in  macropolicy.  The  final  stage  involves  the  mobilization  and  effective  use  of  resources  for 
employment creation; this includes domestic resources and external aid. 
Critics of globalization have blamed the process for constraining employment creation largely due to 
the  adoption  of  liberalized  investment  policies.  My  take  on  this  is  that  African  countries  should 
mainstream  their  employment  creation  policy  in  the  Bilateral  Investment  Agreements  (BIA)  they 
negotiate with foreign investors. The adoption of employment-friendly technology is also a sustainable 
way  to  tackle  the  employment  challenge.  As  much  as  is  practicable,  it  makes  sense  for  African 
countries  to  adopt  labour-intensive  techniques  of  production,  especially  in  the  construction  of  large 
public works and infrastructure. This is a tested approach which has been successfully used time and 
again to reduce employment in many countries including today’s industrialized countries. There is no 
reason to fear that it would not work in Africa. 
Role of the human resource manager 
5.0  
While  it  is  important  that  at  the  macro  level,  appropriate  policies  should  be  adopted  to  enhance 
employment creation, it is equally imperative that at the micro level, human resource managers take 
necessary measures to ensure efficient and effective utilization of their organization’s most valuable 
asset – the stock of human resource. Studies have shown a positive correlation between a well trained 
and  motivated  workforce and  productivity.  Although it  is  total  factor  productivity  that  determines  the 
level of national output in the long run, and hence the per capita income, the contribution of the human 
resource  component  to  total  factor  productivity  is  indubitable.  As  a  human  resource  manager,  you 
must  recognize  your  role  as  a  critical  link  in  this  process  and  see  yourself  as  a  change  agent  in  a 
complex web of actions and feedback. One of the strategies usually adopted by the human resource 
manager to raise and sustain productivity is to match training interventions to organization culture and 
management style. It is for you to understand the strategic objectives of your organization and adopt 
an approach to human resource management most appropriate to its goals. 
6.0  
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Looking at the caliber of facilitators and the work programme before you, I have no doubt that all the 
issues lined up for discussion will be dealt with competently. I urge you all to take full advantage of this 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2006
programme to share your practical experiences with one another even as you further sharpen your 
insights into the issues through interaction with the expert team of resource persons. 
I know you have a crowded training programme ahead of you and are anxious to set the ball rolling. 
Before I leave you to proceed with the technical aspects of the course, I would like to invite you all, 
especially  our  foreign  guests,  to  take  time  out  of  your  busy  schedule  to  visit  the  many  tourist 
attractions and to feel at home. 
It is now my honour and privilege to declare this course open. 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 3
