Sir K Dwight Venner: Finance and development in the Eastern Caribbean 
Currency Union 
Speech by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the Finance and 
Development Symposium, ECCB Headquarters, St Kitts, 27 July 2006. 
 The Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) is now at a critical stage of its development. 
The  external  and  domestic  environment  in  which  it  now  exists  and  the  events  which  lie  in  the 
immediate  future  require  the  policy  makers  in  the  ECCU  to  reflect  deeply  and  produce  strategic 
approaches to these current and impending circumstances. 
One of the strategies which has been in the forefront of the authorities’ approaches has been money 
and capital market development. 
Over the last decade the ECCB has taken measured steps to establish markets and institutions which 
could facilitate the development of its member countries. 
These steps have brought some measure of success and in light of the new circumstances we need to 
pause, reflect and chart the next steps in this process. 
The circumstances which now confront the ECCU can be identified under three headings, namely: 
• 
• 
• 
At the international level the issues with which we are confronted are many, but the following stand 
out: 
• 
International 
Regional 
Domestic 
The performance in general of the international economy, and in particular, that of the United 
States which is our main trading partner, the leading source of our tourist earnings and direct 
foreign investment, as well as the area in which the largest portion of our foreign exchange 
reserves are invested. 
The  impact  of  the  new  trading  regimes  on  our  extremely  small,  open  and  vulnerable 
economies. The WTO, EPA and FTAA can and will have a disproportionate impact on these 
entities. 
Already  the  erosion  of  trade  preferences  has  led  to  a  significant  decline  in  our  banana 
industry and the demise of the sugar industry in St Kitts and Nevis. 
The dramatic increase in the price of oil has put severe pressure on the economies of the 
ECCU  making  it  increasingly  difficult  to  carry  through  on  efforts  to  adjust  to  the  new 
international circumstances, particularly in the trading arena. 
Rising interest rates are also likely to have a negative impact on our external debt obligations 
and may affect the inward flow of capital. 
Finally,  the  increasing  number  of  regulatory  hurdles  and  standards  and  codes  will  have  a 
disproportionate effect on the smaller members of the international community. The cost of 
putting these regulatory arrangements in place will further tilt the playing field towards larger 
and better endowed participants. 
    At the regional level, the ECCU will have to contend with the advent of the CSM and the CSME. The 
question  would  be  how  can  the  ECCU  successfully  integrate  itself  into  the  wider  regional 
arrangements? These arrangements will encompass the following: 
• 
Regional  currency  arrangements  which  facilitate  cross  border  movements  of  commodities, 
services, capital and labour at lower transactions cost without unnecessary exchange rate 
risks. 
Inter bank transfers which are completed expeditiously at low transactions cost. 
 BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
   A government securities market which has a range of maturities and allows for a regional 
listing of such securities. 
A regional market for equities quoted on a single exchange. 
A  regional  legislative  framework  to  regulate  the  financial  sector  which  is  uniform  and 
supervised by a single authority or a consortium of such bodies. 
The development of a range of financial institutions whose scope is regional as opposed to 
national. 
At the national level, ECCU member countries have some very challenging issues including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Low productivity in both the public and private sectors; 
High debt levels and fiscal imbalances; 
A secular decline in growth; 
Severe diseconomies of scale and scope in public administration, production, marketing and 
distribution; 
There are also increasing social and environmental challenges in such areas as crime, social 
alienation  among  the  youth,  particularly  males,  HIV/AIDS,  coastal  erosion  and  traffic 
congestion. 
 Economic Transformation 
Growth 
Employment 
Poverty Reduction 
Human Development Indices 
The  countries  of  the  OECS,  of  which  the  ECCU  is an  integral  part,  have  signaled  their  intention  to 
establish an Economic Union in response to these various challenges. 
The Economic Union, as conceived, will create new political arrangements to support a single financial 
and economic space. 
This  new  domain,  so  to  speak,  will  have  common  socio  economic  objectives  encompassing  the 
following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It  will  also  identify  the  various  policy  instruments  which  would  be  appropriately  applied  to  the 
achievement of these objectives. 
The  areas  of  monetary  and  financial  integration,  development  and  regulation  would  be  our  primary 
concern. 
An objective assessment of the current circumstances of the ECCU would indicate that with respect to 
comparative  and  competitive  advantage,  services  are  somewhat  superior  to  the  production  of 
commodities. 
The  analysis  would  also  reveal  that  while  tourism  is  the  main  foreign  exchange  earner,  finance  is 
critical  in  two  areas.  Firstly,  in  its  normal  role  as  intermediator  between  savers  and  investors,  and 
secondly, as an earner of foreign exchange in its own right. 
It is possible to identify a number of factors which gives the financial sector in the ECCU a significant 
edge over other sectors. 
• 
The  underlying  stability  of  the  currency  and  currency  arrangements;  •  An  extremely  high 
level of monetization; 
A  track  record  of  financial  stability  and  no  major  systemic  crises  as  a  result  of  effective 
supervision of the banking system; 
A good mix of foreign and local banks; 
High levels of management and banking skills supported by good training facilities; 
BIS Review 74/2006
  2 
   High level of technology and automation; 
Access to information, domestically, regionally and internationally; 
A large pool of skilled workers to draw on through the local education system and graduates 
in the region and diaspora; 
Proximity to the north eastern United States which is in the same time zone as the Currency 
Union. 
The Eastern Caribbean Home Mortgage Bank; 
The Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange. 
Given  this  platform,  it  is  now  necessary  that  the  financial  sector  should  play  a  leading  role  in  the 
development process. 
The  strategic  approach  adopted  by  the  ECCB  has  been  to  move  towards  the  creation  of  a  single 
financial  space  through  the  removal  of  the  legal  and  administrative  barriers  dividing  the  financial 
systems in each country and creating regional markets and institutions. 
The  passage  of  uniform  legislation  has  been  the  means  by  which  barriers  have  been  removed. 
Banking,  Insurance,  Credit  Union  and  Securities  Legislation  has  been  drafted  on  this  basis,  and 
several administrative bottlenecks have been dealt with through mutual agreement. 
With respect to markets and institutions the following have been created over the last few years: 
An Inter Bank Market for liquid funds between the commercial banks in the Currency Union; 
• 
A Regional Government Securities Market for Treasury Bills and Bonds; 
• 
A Regional Market for Equities; 
• 
• 
A Secondary Market for Home Mortgages. 
With respect to institutions, there has been created: 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
Two other institutions are now on the drawing board namely – 
(cid:153) 
(cid:153) 
The  former  is  intended  to  be  a  multi  purpose  institution  providing  venture  capital  services,  debt 
instruments,  technical  assistance and export  credit  guarantees.  This  institution  will seek  to mobilize 
funding for small and medium enterprises within the Currency Union. 
The  Unit  Trust  will  seek  to  provide  saving  instruments  of  a  wider  range  to  low  and  medium  range 
income earners who have very few options outside of the banking system. 
In addition to the above, the ECCB has encouraged the formation of sector associations, for example, 
o 
o 
o 
The ECCB now finds it necessary to proceed on the basis that there is an urgency to proceed with this 
programme of money and capital market development in order to position its member countries to be 
successfully integrated into the new dispensation. 
We  will  have  to  distinguish  between  those  things  the  Bank  can  do  with  the  active  support  of  the 
member countries, and those things which must be left to the market and the private sector. 
In the latter case, creating the appropriate environment for private sector activity will be critical. The 
regulatory framework will have to embody the right balance to ensure that innovation is not stifled. The 
natural  tendency  for  monopolies  to  be  established  in  small  markets  will  also  have  to  be  taken  into 
consideration  weighing  the  advantages  of  economies  of scale  and  scope against  the  uncompetitive 
consequences of monopoly. 
The Bankers Association; 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants; 
The Eastern Caribbean Institute of Bankers. 
The Eastern Caribbean Enterprise Fund; 
The Eastern Caribbean Unit Trust. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 3
The  regionalization  of  financial  institutions  and  activities  at  all  levels  will  expand  the  scale  of 
operations, mitigate risks and improve the possibilities of competitive markets. However, this is not a 
complete solution and a wider sphere of activity will be required to improve the possibility of viability. 
The issue then becomes how competitive can the Currency Union become in selling financial services 
to the international community? There are several models of small states successfully offering these 
services -  the  Cayman  Islands,  the  BVI,  the  Bahamas,  Bermuda.  Is  there room  in  the  market  for  a 
Currency  Union  as  opposed  to  a  single  state,  and  if  there  is,  how  can  such  an  opportunity  be 
exploited? 
The preconditions of stability are very important but some crucial ingredients are missing at this stage. 
Firstly, the judicial system needs to be significantly upgraded to facilitate this new arrangement. The 
current  system  has  established  a  reputation  for  competence  but  needs  to  be  transformed  in  two 
ways – 
1. 
A complete integration of the Magistracy into the regional system so that standards will be 
raised at all levels of the judiciary; 
A division of labour of the court into Criminal, Family Law, and Commercial Divisions so that 
there can be effective specialization in these areas. 
2. 
A  positive result  of  both (1)  and (2)  above  would be  to  provide a  career path  in  the  Judicial  Public 
Service which would be attractive to talented individuals who did not want to go into private practice. 
Secondly,  there  needs  to  be  the  institutional  and  technical  capacity  to  be  on  the  cutting  edge  of 
legislation, so that the jurisdiction could maintain its competitive advantage. 
Thirdly,  that  the  firm  structure  of  service  providers  in  the  financial  sector  should  be  upgraded  from 
single  proprietorships  to  genuine  firms  or  partnerships  with  depth  and  expertise  to  service  a  highly 
sophisticated international clientele. Accounting firms, legal firms and financial advisers fall into these 
categories. 
Fourthly,  telecoms  and  computer  facilities  need  to  be  significantly  upgraded  to  provide  the 
technological facilities for international connectivity. 
Fifthly, the Real Estate Sector needs to be able to respond to the needs of such a services sector by 
providing office space and residential accommodation as an attraction in and of itself. 
Sixthly, the Leisure Industry which is a critical part of the tourism industry needs to provide first class 
facilities such as golf and yachting. 
Seventhly, travel between the member states of the Currency Union needs to be seamless, that is, 
within the ECCU, there should be no immigration or customs requirements, thus allowing the benefits 
to be more evenly spread. 
With these preconditions in place, both indigenous and foreign institutions will have the opportunity to 
provide  the  range  and  quality  of  services which  will  not only  facilitate  the  effective  mobilization  and 
allocation  of  resources,  but  also  to  do  so  at  a  level  which  would  make  these  services  exportable 
beyond the Currency Union. 
For local financial institutions this will probably suggest that in addition to the natural moves to provide 
a variety of services on a local basis, they will have to engage in mergers and acquisitions across the 
Currency Union if they are to be nationally, Currency Union wide and internationally competitive. 
The  timing  of  this  next  step  could  take  place  before  all  the  barriers  to  a  single  financial  space  are 
removed or after that event. 
If one is to use the experience of other small countries, it is possible to envisage the type of financial 
structure that could evolve in the Currency Union over the near to medium term. 
There could be one or possibly two local financial conglomerates providing universal banking services 
and such other services as insurance, investment banking brokerage/dealers, etc. 
Two major international banks, Scotia Bank and the Royal Bank of Canada. 
A hybrid institution FirstCaribbean International Bank. 
The two regional banks RBTT and Republic Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2006
A growing number of foreign institutions in specialized areas to provide services both for the Currency 
Union and the regional and international community. 
The Credit Union sector will be consolidated both within individual countries and across the Currency 
Union and will provide a broader range of services to their clients. 
The Insurance Sector will also be consolidated in both the Life and Non Life areas with local financial 
conglomerates being among the major providers across the Currency Union. 
The Eastern Caribbean Enterprise Fund would effect a major alliance with and consolidation of the 
Development Banks and development banking across the Currency Union. 
This  new  entity  will  in  addition  to  its  core  function  of  financing  development  enterprises  serve  two 
critical functions. At the external level to be on interlocutor between such external institutions as the 
IFC  and  MIGA,  European  Investment  Bank,  CDB  and  any  other  large  funding  agency  and  the 
Currency Union. At the domestic level to provide umbrella support for the micro financing agencies 
such as the SEDUs and National Development Foundations. 
This will constitute in its entirety a system of development financing throughout the Currency Union 
which is interlocking, has significant economies of scale in administration and technical capacity as 
well as having access to increased funding sources. 
In the same vein the regionalization of social security systems within the Currency Union would be a 
natural and evolutionary response to the free movement of labour and capital, particularly in light of 
the current reciprocity arrangements. 
It would also be a rational response to the current challenges of these systems so that they can bulk 
up and increase their size to achieve significant improvement in economies of scale and mitigation of 
risk. 
The underlying and obvious theme in this futuristic outlook is the need to increase the size and scale 
of  institutions  and  markets  to  the  minimum  critical  operational  levels  that  facilitates  and  stimulates 
further growth and diversification. 
As the regional and international system opens up and the Currency Union and its institutions have to 
contend with increasingly open and highly competitive systems we will have no choice but to engage 
in  lateral  arrangements  across  the  Currency  Union  to  create  institutions  of  sufficient  size,  heft  and 
influence to preserve a local presence in our own market place. 
The way forward would therefore involve deep and objective reflection on the current situation and the 
options facing us in this new and very challenging environment. 
We  need  to  identify  the  gaps  in  the  current  financial  system  which  we  need  to  fill,  as  well  as  the 
remaining impediments to the creation of a single financial space. 
We need to carefully examine the mix of public and private sector activities which are necessary to 
achieve our goals. 
We  also  need  to  identify  the  regional  and  international  institutions  in  both  the  public  and  private 
sectors which can be of critical value to us in achieving these goals. 
We need to clearly identify the legislative arrangements which are critical to go forward. 
Finally, we need to take into account the precise strategies and means by which the Currency Union 
can successfully integrate itself into the regional and international financial systems. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 5
