Paul Jenkins: Global economic trends - implications for Canada 
Remarks by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Saint John Board 
of Trade, New Brunswick, 1 February 2006. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today—I am delighted to be here. I would also like to 
thank Gilles Lepage, the Bank's director from New Brunswick, for joining me.  
Wherever one lives in Canada these days, one cannot help but be aware that the world around us has 
been  changing  rapidly.  Because  Canada  is  so  open  to  world  trade  and  finance,  we  need  to 
understand these changes so that we can manage our economy appropriately and take advantage of 
new opportunities.  
World economic growth has been remarkably strong over the past three years, averaging close to 4 
1/4 per cent, and it is expected to stay around 4 per cent this year and next.  
But despite this solid overall performance, several interconnected global trends pose major challenges 
for the Canadian and New Brunswick economies. First, we have been witnessing large and growing 
global imbalances. Most important for Canada, the United States is running a very large deficit on its 
external current account (that is, the balance of trade in goods, services, and investment income with 
the  rest  of  the  world).  The  flip  side  of  this  deficit shows  up  primarily  in  Asia, where  there are  large 
current account surpluses and a massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. Second, we are 
seeing  the  emergence  of  China  and  India  as  economic  powerhouses  and  formidable  global 
competitors. Third, there is a divergence in economic performance across world regions, with North 
America and the emerging economies of Asia outperforming Europe and Japan. 
What are the implications of these trends for Canada and for New Brunswick?  
This is what I would like to discuss today. Let me begin by reviewing these global trends in greater 
detail.  
Recent global economic trends 
The  U.S.  current  account  deficit  has  widened—by  about  US$300  billion  since  2002—to  US$785 
billion,  or  6  1/2  per  cent  of  that  country's  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).  And  the  level  of  U.S. 
indebtedness to the rest of the world has more than doubled over the past five years to more than 25 
per  cent  of  its  GDP.  Asia  has  been  the  primary  source  of  foreign  savings  flowing  into  the  United 
States. Moreover, Asian countries have accumulated over US$2 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, 
with China alone holding US$820 billion at the end of 2005. One factor contributing to this buildup of 
reserves is that some of these countries, most notably China, have been operating with fixed or tightly 
managed exchange rates (vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar) that are widely considered to be undervalued. 
These large imbalances are not sustainable over the longer run. No country, even one as big as the 
United States, can keep increasing its external indebtedness as a share of its GDP. Ultimately, these 
imbalances will have to be resolved.  
But this won't be simple. First, resolving the imbalances is not a short-term issue—it will take time. 
Second, what is needed is multi-faceted international policy action. 
Part of the solution involves an increase in U.S. national savings. But higher U.S. savings means lower 
U.S. consumption, which would likely mean lower Canadian exports to the United States. To avoid the 
dampening effect that lower U.S. spending could have on overall global demand, other industrialized 
countries need to adopt policies that promote stronger domestic demand. 
But this won't be enough. When significant global imbalances last emerged, in the mid-1980s, they 
largely  occurred  among  the  industrialized  economies.  That  is  not  the  case  today.  As  I  said  before, 
major  new  players  have  appeared  on  the  global  scene.  I'm  referring  primarily  to  the  emerging 
economies  of  Asia.  So,  the  resolution  of  today's  imbalances  requires  that  these  countries,  too, 
contribute through stronger growth in domestic demand rather than exports.  
But this shift towards greater domestic demand growth in Asia will not come about smoothly if those 
countries currently operating under fixed or tightly managed exchange rates do not begin to promote 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
greater  nominal  exchange  rate  flexibility.  If  this  does  not  happen,  there  is  a  risk  that  countries with 
floating exchange rates, like Canada, may have to bear more than their fair share of the burden of 
resolving the imbalances. There is also a risk that protectionist measures could be taken worldwide, 
hurting all trading nations, including Canada. For these reasons, the Bank of Canada has been on the 
side of the debate that advocates greater exchange rate flexibility for China and other Asian countries. 
But equally importantly, we have also argued that greater exchange rate flexibility in those countries 
will,  in  fact,  best  serve  their  own  needs,  in  terms  of  promoting  sustained  economic  growth  through 
stronger domestic demand and an efficient allocation of resources.  
Now,  what  about  the  more  general  issue  of  the  integration  of  Asia,  and  particularly  China,  into  the 
world economy? 
China's rising prominence in world trade has been partly a reflection of its increasing importance as an 
assembly platform for a broad range of exports. China's exports in the 1980s and early 1990s were 
concentrated  in  clothing,  footwear,  and  other  light  manufactured  goods.  More  recently,  its  share  of 
world  exports  has  increased  in  nearly  all  categories,  with  rapid  growth  in  areas  such  as  office 
machinery  and  telecommunications,  furniture,  textiles,  travel  goods,  and  industrial  supplies.  The 
increasing sophistication of Chinese exports means growing competition for Canadian products, both 
at home and in world markets.1  
But we should not forget that the emergence of China and India as major economic players also offers 
Canadian firms the opportunity to profit by expanding into these huge export markets and by tapping 
into cheaper sources of supplies.  
Let me now elaborate a bit on the implications of these global trends for Canada.  
Implications for Canada  
The rise of China and other newly industrialized countries to economic prominence, and the need to 
resolve the existing large global imbalances, have triggered sizable movements in key relative prices 
that are particularly relevant for Canada. I am referring specifically to the dramatic rise in the world 
prices  for  raw  materials  and  energy,  and  to  the  marked  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  since 
2002.2  
When  prices  for  energy  and  non-energy  commodities  rise  relative  to  the  prices  of  other  goods  that 
Canada  produces,  it  is  a  signal  that  economic  resources  need  to  be  shifted  into  the  production  of 
commodities.  That's  one  implication.  Another  implication,  given  Canada's  strength  in  commodity 
production, is higher real incomes for Canadians. As those incomes feed into stronger demand, the 
benefits extend to the sectors of our economy that are less exposed to global forces, such as housing 
and various services. But, of course, that's only part of the story. The other part is that large segments 
of the manufacturing sector, because of their exposure to growing competition from Asia and because 
of  the  higher  Canadian  dollar,  will  expand  less  rapidly  relative  to  other  sectors.  As  this  process 
unfolds, labour and capital are reallocated across economic sectors. 
A quick look back at the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 might help to put this current challenge in 
perspective. What we went through then is essentially the reverse of the current situation. At that time, 
world  commodity  prices  plummeted,  the  Canadian  dollar  depreciated  sharply  and,  in  response  to 
these price signals, production resources moved out of commodities into manufacturing. And so we 
saw a period of exceptionally strong growth in output, exports, and employment in the manufacturing 
sector.  
How  are  sectoral  developments  affecting  regional  economic  growth  in  the  current  environment? 
Because  of  the  differing  industrial  bases  of  Canadian  regions,  the  effects  of  the  recent  sharp 
movements in relative prices are playing out differently across the country. 
                                                      
1   B.  Desroches,  M.  Francis,  and  F.  Painchaud,  "Growth  and  Integration:  The  Emergence  of  China  and  India  and  the 
Implications for Canada." In Canada and the Global Economy. Proceedings of a conference held by the Bank of Canada 
(November 2004): 229-75. 
2   M.  Francis,  F.  Painchaud,  and  S.  Morin,  "Understanding  China's  Long-Run  Growth  Process  and  Its  Implications  for 
Canada." Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2005): 5-17. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2006
The energy-producing provinces of Western Canada are certainly benefiting from higher prices for raw 
materials and from surging oil and gas revenues. The result is increased profits and investment, strong 
growth in output and employment, and fiscal surpluses. But the sudden rapid economic expansion is 
straining the region's infrastructure. And it is creating labour shortages, not just in the energy sector 
but also in mining, manufacturing, and construction—all of which are competing for the same pool of 
labour,  especially  skilled  labour.  Certain  professions  (notably  accountants,  engineers,  and  project 
managers) are also in short supply.  
Other  parts  of  Canada  with  a  significant  resource-production  base,  including  New  Brunswick  and 
Atlantic  Canada  more  generally,  are  also  benefiting  from  high  commodity  prices.  For  example,  the 
construction this spring of a liquid natural gas (LNG) plant, right here in Saint John, has been spurred 
by  high  demand  and  prices  for  energy.  As  the  largest  producer  of  zinc  and  lead  in  Canada,  this 
province is also benefiting from surging prices for these minerals. But in Central Canada and in those 
parts  of  New  Brunswick  where  there  is  a  concentration  of  manufacturing  activity,  overall  economic 
performance has not been as strong. Since manufacturers export a good part of their production, the 
appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  and  rising  energy  costs  have  reduced  their  competitiveness. 
Reduced  profitability  and  declining  employment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  are  a  reflection  of  this. 
Several  traditional  industries,  such  as  the  fishery  and  forestry,  have  also  been  affected  because  of 
increased global competition, low selling prices, and the higher Canadian dollar. But it is important to 
note that, at the same time, there has been relatively broad-based strength across Canada in those 
sectors that are catering to robust domestic demand. 
For  many  firms  and  individuals,  adapting  to  global  change  has  been  difficult  and,  in  some  cases, 
painful.  All  of  us  understand  the  challenges  they  face.  Encouragingly,  evidence  from  the  Bank's 
quarterly surveys confirms that across Canada businesses have been responding to the new global 
economic  realities.  Some  have  chosen  to  import  more  inputs  and  finished  goods  from  lower-cost 
suppliers in Asia. Others have moved away from products and markets with low profitability towards 
those that are likely to yield higher profit margins. And firms have been investing in machinery and 
equipment to increase their productivity. Moreover, our latest Business Outlook Survey suggests that 
companies  continue  to  be  positive  about  the  economic  outlook,  and  that  investment  and  hiring 
intentions remain firm across all regions and most sectors. 
But what about macroeconomic policies—how can they contribute to the adjustment process? 
Monetary policy, which is the responsibility of the Bank of Canada, is national in nature and scope. 
This  means  that  we  need  to  look  at  what  is  happening  across  Canada,  add  it  all  up,  and  gear 
monetary policy to the needs of the entire country. In this sense, the best contribution that monetary 
policy  can  make  to  the  adjustment  is  by  aiming  to  keep  inflation  at  2  per  cent  and  the  national 
economy operating close to its production capacity over the medium term. When inflation is low and 
stable, businesses can read price signals more clearly, which helps them to make sound economic 
decisions. This is particularly important during times of rapid change, such as at present. And when 
the economy is operating at capacity, production resources can be reallocated more effectively from 
sectors where demand is weak to those where demand is relatively strong.  
Prudent  federal  and  provincial  fiscal  policies,  focused  on  keeping  government  budgets  sustainable 
and balanced over the longer run, are also important to preserve investor confidence in Canada and to 
help keep interest rates relatively low and stable. 
All in all, sound monetary and fiscal policies go hand in hand in providing a stable macroeconomic 
environment that can facilitate the required adjustments. 
Let me now summarize the Bank's latest outlook for the economy and inflation, which we discuss in 
greater detail in our January Monetary Policy Report Update that we published last week.  
Recent economic and financial developments 
In the Update, we note that the Canadian and world economies have been evolving in line with our 
expectations and that the outlook for growth and inflation in Canada is similar to that in our October 
Monetary Policy Report. We also point out that the Canadian economy continues to adjust to global 
developments and to the associated changes in relative prices.  
As I said at the beginning, world economic growth will remain robust—around 4 per cent this year and 
next. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 3
Against this backdrop, our assessment is that the Canadian economy as a whole is currently operating 
at  its  production  capacity.  And  we  expect  it  to  keep  on  growing  roughly  in  line  with  its  production 
potential through 2007. Specifically, we project annual average growth of 3.1 per cent this year and 
2.9 per cent in 2007. For New Brunswick, we are looking for a slight pickup in growth in 2006–07—to 
about 2 3/4 per cent from 2 1/2  per cent in 2005—mainly boosted by investment projects such as the 
LNG facility I mentioned earlier. 
Total  CPI  inflation  for  all  of  Canada,  which  was  at  2.3  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2005,  will 
continue to reflect changes in the prices of crude oil and natural gas. But it should return to the 2 per 
cent target by the first half of 2007. So should core inflation which, in the closing months of 2005, was 
at 1.6 per cent. 
As always, there are both upside and downside risks to our projections. For 2006, the risks relate to 
the world economic outlook and the adjustment of our economy to global developments. These risks 
appear  to  be  balanced.  But  through  2007  and  beyond,  the  risks  are  tilted  to  the  downside  as  the 
unwinding of global imbalances could involve a slowdown in world economic activity.  
With  our  economy  operating  at  capacity  and  expected  to  grow  roughly  at  potential  through  the 
projection period, on 24 January we raised the policy interest rate by another 25 basis points to 3 1/2 
per cent. And we indicated that, in line with our base-case projection and current assessment of risks, 
some modest further increase in the policy interest rate would be required to keep aggregate supply 
and demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium term.  
Concluding thoughts 
Let me conclude by summarizing my key points.  
First, because our economy is very open to world trade and finance, we need to recognize today's 
global economic realities and to have the flexibility to adjust accordingly. 
Second, sound economic policies have a critical role to play in facilitating the necessary adjustments. 
Such  policies  include,  importantly,  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable—to which the Bank of Canada is fully committed.  
Third, based on our history, there is every reason to believe that Canadian businesses and workers 
will  rise  to  the  current  challenges  and  make  the  necessary  adjustments  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities presented by an evolving and expanding global economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2006
