Stanley Fischer: The new global economic geography 
Revised version of a speech by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, presented 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Conference on The New Economic Geography, Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 25-26 August 2006. 
I am grateful to conference participants for helpful comments, and to Nir Klein and Mark Nulman for their assistance. 
 When I first saw the title of this conference – the New Economic Geography – I thought it referred to 
two branches of the economic literature that developed in the 1990s. The first, with the title of the New 
Economic Geography, pioneered by Paul Krugman, Anthony Venables, Richard Baldwin and others,1 
seeks to explain why and how economic activity tends to be geographically concentrated, and whether 
such economic equilibria are unique and stable, or may instead be driven by history. The second is 
about  the  impact  of  geography  on  development,  work  associated  primarily  with  Jeffrey  Sachs  and 
associates.2
However this conference is not mainly about economic geography in these senses. Rather it is about 
the  startlingly  rapid  changes  in  the  geographical  locus  of  global  economic  activity  and  their 
consequences:  about  the  rise  of  Asia,  about  the  BRICs3,  about  globalization,  about  economic 
convergence, about changes in the international financial system – in short about the history of the 
world and the future of the world economy.4
I shall start by briefly discussing different aspects of these changes, and then focus on the most critical 
development, the rise of Asia, especially the rise of China.  
The title of this conference, the first of the Bernanke era, also reflects what a long way this premiere 
international  economic  conference  has  come.  In  1980,  the  theme  of  the  conference  was  “Future 
Sources of Loanable Funds for Agricultural Banks”. This year it is about the economic future of the 
world. 
The changing global economic geography 
I.  
There are several ways of describing the phenomenon of the change in the locus of global economic 
activity. One is to talk about the rise of the BRICs and the near-BRICs. This would place the focus on 
Brazil,  Russia,  India,  and  China,  two  and  a  half  of  which  countries  are  in  Asia,  and  one  in  Latin 
America. But once one extends the group from India and China to include Russia and Brazil, near-
BRICs jostle for inclusion, for instance Mexico and South Korea. And it is then not clear where to stop. 
One answer is to move from the BRICs to the non-G-7 members of the G-20. This defines a group 
consisting of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia (a member of the G-
8),  Saudi  Arabia,  South  Africa,  South  Korea,  and  Turkey  –  twelve  in  all,  incidentally  raising  the 
question  of  who  will  be  the  twentieth  country  in  the  G-20.  This  group  includes  countries  from  the 
Middle  East,  Africa,  and  Latin  America,  and  is  thus  geographically  more  representative  of  global 
developments than are the BRICs or India and China. But the countries are diverse, and it is difficult 
without going into the details of each economy to talk about their future role in the global economy, 
except perhaps as the core of a new directorate for the international financial institutions. 
Alternatively we could talk about globalization, or about economic convergence, and whether and how 
it is happening. Or the rise of the South, except that in this case the South is mainly in the East. 
                                                      
1   See for example Paul Krugman, Geography and Trade, MIT Press, 1991; see also Krugman, Annual World Bank Conference on 
Development Economics, 1998. 
2   See John Luke Gallup and Jeffrey Sachs, with Andrew Mellenger, “Geography and Economic Development”, Annual World 
Bank Conference on Development Economics, 1998, 127-188. 
3   Brazil, Russia, India and China, which have been identified by Goldman Sachs as the key economies of the future. 
4   Krugman (1991). 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 1
I  shall  describe  the  phenomenon  as  the  rise  of  Asia,  primarily  the  rise  of  China  and  India.  The 
phenomenon is evident in Table 1, due to Angus Maddison. In summary, over the period 1950-2030, 
the share of global GDP (measured in purchasing power (PPP) terms) produced by the United States, 
Europe5  and  the  countries  Maddison  calls  “other  Western  offshoots”,  Canada,  Australia,  and  New 
Zealand, is expected to decline from 70 percent to 38 percent, and the share produced by Asia to rise 
from 19 to 52 percent.6
Maddison  projects  that  by  2030  Chinese  GDP  will  account  for  over  18  percent  of  global  GDP 
measured in purchasing power terms, and will have overtaken United States GDP, also measured in 
PPP terms (Figure 1). India is projected to be at about half the (PPP) GDP of China. 
Let  me  note  that  although  I  shall  use  the  PPP  numbers,  they  are  in  an  important  sense  seriously 
misleading.7 In PPP terms, World Bank data show Chinese GDP at 69 percent of US GDP in 2005. 
But at market exchange rates, Chinese GDP was only 18 percent of US GDP last year (Figure 2). It is 
the dollar values that represent the current weight of countries in the international economy, and we 
should bear in mind that using market exchange rates, Japan has the largest economy in Asia, about 
double the size of that of China. Measured at market exchange rates, Asia accounted for 25 percent of 
global GDP in 2005, well below the 40 percent that PPP data imply. 
The share of Asia in global population is projected to remain roughly constant over the period 1950-
2030, rising from 55 to 58 percent (Figure 3). By contrast, the share of the current “West” (excluding 
Japan) will decline from 30 to 16 percent of the global population. Global population is expected to 
grow by about 20 percent in the next 25 years, and much more rapidly than that in Africa. 
However measured, we are now in process in which in economic terms, the west is in relative decline, 
and Asia is rising. In a longer-term perspective, this is both the rise of Asia and also the recovery of 
Asia  –  for  according  to  Maddison8,  as  late  as  1820,  as  the  Industrial  Revolution  was  getting  under 
way, Asia accounted for over 70 percent of the world’s population and 59 percent of world GDP. 
Although I will talk mainly about China and India, it is important in considering the rise of Asia to recall 
that Japan, the second largest economy in the world, has already risen. And we should also note that 
less  than  fifteen  years  ago,  the  Asian  miracle  was  regarded  as  primarily  a  phenomenon  of  Japan, 
Korea, and the ASEAN countries. 
In focusing on the rise of Asia, I leave out areas and issues that are extremely important for the future 
of the global economy and the global polity. Among them are the economies of the Middle East, and 
other challenges of development, especially in Africa, Latin America, and parts of Asia. 
In discussing the rise of Asia, I will take up five issues in more detail: first, the rise of China; second, 
that of India; third, regional developments; fourth, implications for the world economy; and fifth, political 
implications. 
The rise of Asia: China 
II.  
How  long  will  the  rapid  growth  of  China  continue?  There  are  important  historical  precedents  in  the 
region, Japan, Korea, and the ASEAN countries.9 Their histories tell different stories: that of Japan, 
                                                      
5  
I have taken a generous view of the extent of Europe, by including Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. This means 
that Russia is not included in Asia for purposes of this paper, a view that is at best only half right. 
6   Maddison includes parts of the Middle East, including Turkey, in Asia. 
7   Why  then  use  the  PPP  data?  Mainly  because  they  do  take  into  account  differences  between  current  and  likely  future 
exchange rates, which are relevant to future comparisons among countries; in part because they are available and are 
systematic. 
8   The World Economy, A Millennial Perspective, OECD, 2001, Table 3-1c (p127) and Table 1-1 (p28). 
9   Maddison (2001), p.143, presents data on the growth performance of the countries of “Resurgent Asia”. The average annual 
growth  rate  of  per  capita  PPP  GDP  for  the  period  1950-1999  of  China,  Hong  Kong,  Malaysia,  Singapore,  South  Korea, 
Taiwan (China), and Thailand was 4.4 percent. The growth rate of Chinese per capita PPP GDP was highest among the 
periods shown by Maddison (1950-73, 1973-90, 1990-99) in the last decade of the twentieth century, at 6.4 percent. The 
most  rapid  and  sustained  growth  performance  over  the  period  was  that  of  South  Korea,  which  averaged  6  percent  (per 
capita,  PPP)  over  the  fifty  years.  Note  that  Maddison  lists  data  for  Taiwan,  China  separately  from  those  of  China;  in 
Maddison’s  data,  in  1950  Taiwanese  GDP  (PPP  terms)  was  approximately  3  percent  that  of  China,  and  by  1999  it  had 
reached 8.5 percent of that of China. 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2006
that almost full catch-up is possible – although it is hard to know whether we should start counting 
from 1868 or from 1945; that of Korea that sustained exceptionally rapid growth is possible for over 
forty years; that of ASEAN that long growth spurts are possible. 
China  has  already  been  growing  at  rates  in  excess  of  10  percent  on  average  for  over  a  quarter 
century, and its policymakers have demonstrated considerable economic management skills, not least 
in warding off foreign pressures for revaluation. The regional precedents suggest that China can keep 
growing  at  very  high  –  but  declining  –  rates  for  a  long  while  yet.  Further,  if  the  maximum  potential 
growth rate is related to the distance of the economy from the frontier – as determined by per capita 
income  levels  in  the  most  advanced  economies  –  China’s  rapid  growth  can  continue  well  beyond 
2030, for even in 2030 according to Maddison’s projections, PPP income per capita in China will be 
only one quarter that in the United States. And the fact that the bulk of China’s labor force remains 
rural,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  agricultural,  reinforces  the  view  that  China’s  Arthur  Lewis  type 
growth process could have a long way to run. 
If the Chinese economy were to continue to grow in real terms at a rate 7 percent greater than that of 
the United States economy at a constant exchange rate – as it has for over twenty years – its GDP 
would indeed overtake that of the United States in about another quarter century. Further the yuan is 
likely to appreciate over that period relative to the dollar, ceteris paribus (i.e. with unchanged domestic 
growth rates) reducing the length of the catch-up period. 
But  China  faces  considerable  challenges,  and  the  economy  is  unlikely  to  continue  growing  at  10 
percent for another quarter century. Notable among the challenges are: exchange rate management 
and  realignment;  financial  sector  reform;  state  enterprise  reform;  resource  and  environmental 
constraints;  the  ageing  population;  developing  (or  redeveloping)  a  social safety  net;  reducing  social 
gaps, especially between country and city; and political transition. 
China’s exchange rate management has until now been impressive and successful from the viewpoint 
of its goal of supporting export-led growth. It has come at the cost of a massive and likely to be costly 
buildup  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  but  so  far  with  surprisingly  low  costs  in  terms  of  inflation.  At 
some  point  –  perhaps  because  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  costs  of  the  continuing  reserve 
buildup – the process of exchange rate appreciation that other countries in the region, including Japan 
and Korea have experienced, will have to begin. And that will likely contribute to reducing the growth 
rate of the economy in real terms.10 Given China’s saving rate,11 it is likely that when the process of 
secular appreciation of the yuan gets under way, the currency will appreciate at a rate that maintains a 
sizeable continuing surplus in the current account, as has happened in the case of Japan. 
Financial sector and state enterprise reform are closely related. One way of thinking of the occasional 
recapitalizations  of  the  banks  in  China  is  as  a  fiscal  process,  in  which  the  banks  provide  loans  to 
enterprises that are in effect repaid by the state by later recapitalizations. It appears that progress is 
being made in reforming the financial system, but as of now it remains a point of vulnerability and an 
obstacle to a rapid opening of the capital account and flexibilization of the exchange rate. 
China faces the problem of a rapidly ageing population. While this will be a problem from the viewpoint 
of fiscal transfer programs (which however are on a proportionately much smaller scale than in richer 
countries), the processes of urbanization and industrialization can continue by drawing on the massive 
rural  population.  Environmental  issues  will  have  to  be  dealt  with,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  trends  in 
global commodity prices that China may well face continuing adverse terms of trade changes as well 
as rising domestic resource costs. 
Income  disparities  in  China,  between  the  coast  and  inland  provinces,  between  the  cities  and  the 
countryside, between rich and poor, have been growing rapidly, and are receiving increasing attention 
from the government. These, combined with the breakdown of the social safety net of earlier times, 
produce social and political tensions that could threaten the continuation of the growth process. And 
political pressures associated with the desire for democratization, which tends to rise as income levels 
increase, constitute another source of tension. 
                                                      
10  However, its impact on the growth rate of the dollar value of Chinese GDP would be smaller. 
11   China’s high saving rate has been attributed in part to the absence of a convincing social safety  net, and to  uncertainty 
about future economic growth. In addition, high growing economies have generally been high savers, a feature which the 
late Franco Modigliani used to assert was fully consistent with the life cycle hypothesis. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 3
The Chinese economy suffers from one disadvantage that the other Asian miracle economies did not: 
it is already very large. This raises the question of whether it can continue to rely on exports to power 
its growth – for the capacity of the rest of the world to absorb Chinese exports must be determined by 
the  global  growth  rate.12  The  answer  is  that  China  probably  cannot  continue  to  rely  on  export-led 
growth, and therefore that the switch to domestic demand led growth, which has been talked about for 
some time, is essential if growth is to continue in the 7-10 percent per annum range. 
Is China vulnerable to a 1990s style Asian financial crisis? There are some negative symptoms. The 
first is a share of investment in GDP that according to the official data exceeds 40 percent. This cannot 
be  efficient,  it  must  be  part  of  the process  of generating  bad  loans,  and  is reminiscent of pre-crisis 
investment rates in some of the Asian crisis economies. The second is a financial system that remains 
weak. But some of the vulnerabilities that led to the Asian crisis are not present: China does not have 
a current account deficit; nor are there massive short-term capital flows; and capital controls appear to 
be relatively effective, even if not fully watertight. Further, foreign exchange reserves are so large that 
it  is  hard  to  imagine  a  successful  attack  on  the  currency.  On  balance,  a  1990s  style  international 
financial crisis appears highly unlikely. 
What  about  other  types  of  crises?  The  growth  processes  in  Japan,  Korea,  and  the  other  rapidly 
growing  countries  of  East  Asia  were  punctuated  by  occasional  economic  crises.  Since  the  modern 
Chinese  economic  reform  process  began  around  the  end  of  the    1970s,  there  has  been  only  one 
major economic (and political) crisis. This is an extraordinary record, even among the extraordinary 
records of the neighborhood. Chinese economic management has benefited from very careful study of 
the history of its neighbors, and – despite the long list of potential problems just noted – there are no 
obvious sources of likely crises in the near term. 
But: trees do not grow to the sky, and trends that appear inevitable at one point of time can appear 
doomed from the perspective of only a decade or two later. In brief, to continue rolling out the clichés, 
it is difficult to forecast, especially about the future, and it would be unwise to assume that China will 
be immune to future economic crises. 
Nonetheless, even if there were to be a crisis or other interruptions to growth in the future, it is on 
balance  reasonable  to  believe  that  Chinese  growth  will  continue  at  a  rate  that  on  average  well 
exceeds  that  of  countries  at  the  current  frontier  of  economic  development  –  and  that  the  Chinese 
economy  will  be  the  largest  in  the  world,  measured  in  dollars  at  market  exchange  rates,  within  the 
lifetimes of many in this audience today. 
The rise of Asia: India 
III.  
GDP  in  China  and  India  were  roughly  similar  in  1950.13  Since  then  China  has  grown  much  more 
rapidly than India: India’s growth spurt is both more recent and more modest than that of China. At 
present Indian GDP, measured in exchange-rate mediated dollars, is approximately the same as that 
of South Korea, joint third in Asia, behind Japan and China. In these terms, Indian GDP in 2005 was 
$785 billion (World Bank data), twelfth largest in the world, in a group of five countries with very similar 
GDPs (Brazil, South Korea, India, Mexico, and Russia, in that order). 
In PPP terms, according to World Bank estimates India had the fourth largest economy in the world in 
2005, almost as big as that of Japan, a bit under half the size of PPP GDP for China. And the GDP of 
India has been growing at rates approaching 8 percent in recent years, less than that of China, but 
nonetheless  impressive.  Quite  possibly,  if  China  did not  exist,  we  would  today  be  talking  about  the 
Indian miracle. 
India’s growth prospects are enhanced by the existence of a more market-oriented financial system 
than that of China, by a more flexible and well-managed exchange rate system, by a more market-
oriented  monetary  policy,  by  the  existence  of  a  legal  framework  that  is  more  developed  and  more 
predictable than that of China, and by a stable democratic political system that enables the country to 
deal with social tensions within its political framework. Its growth prospects are set back by its so-far 
slow pace of integration into the global economy,  the slow pace of the legal process, by excessive 
                                                      
12   I am grateful to Lew Alexander of Citigroup for raising this question. 
13   Maddison  (2001),  p.214  shows  Chinese  (PPP)  GDP  at  $240  billion  (in  1990  PPP$)  and  Indian  GDP  at  $222  billion. 
According to Maddison’s estimates, per capita PPP GDP in India generally exceeded that in China until 1978. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2006
fiscal deficits, by the political inability to pursue the reform process with as much determination as has 
China, by an extensive bureaucracy, and by excessive state regulatory intervention in the economy. 
Indeed, the greatest reason to be optimistic about India’s future growth process is that considering that 
it has grown so well in the last 15 years without a sustained deep reform process, it will certainly do 
much better if and when the reform process deepens. 
While Indian growth rates have not yet reached Chinese levels, the Indian economy appears on the 
whole to be more robust. India experienced a major foreign exchange crisis in 1990, one response to 
which  was  the  start  of  the  reforms  of  the  first  half  of  the  1990s. Since  then  the  exchange rate  has 
become  more  flexible,  the  growth  rate  has  risen,  and  some  reforms  have  continued.  While  no 
economy is guaranteed against crises, the Indian economy looks less vulnerable to a major crisis than 
it was over a decade ago. But there are anti-reform strands in Indian politics that could result in policy 
changes that reduce the growth rate well below its potential. 
The rise of Asia: regional developments 
IV. 
There  are  already  important  and  rapidly  developing  economic  linkages  among  parts  of  Asia, 
particularly  in  East  Asia,  where  a  grouping  of  ASEAN  plus  Japan,  China  and  Korea  seems  to  be 
emerging. The politics of such a grouping are not simple, for the Japan-China relationship is evolving 
as the Chinese economy grows, and as it becomes clearer that China will overtake Japan at some 
point in the not too distant future. The implications of this change can be summarized by noting that 
Japan is the largest shareholder in the Asian Development Bank, and by tradition appoints its head; 
that  the  formation  of  an  Asian  Monetary  Fund  during  the  Asian  crisis  in  1998  was  not  strongly 
supported by China; and that China will no doubt want to play a greater role in any future regional 
institutions than it does in the ADB. 
Some in East Asia talk of following the example of Europe by improving trade and financial links, and 
later moving to a common market and unified financial system. It is recognized that this will take a long 
time,  but  those  involved  note  correctly  that  it  took  the  European  Union  a  long  time  to  evolve  to  its 
current condition. The European equilibrium is simplified by the fact that no single country dominates 
the union, whereas China would likely be the dominant power in an East Asian union. For many years 
Europe was driven by the Franco-German determination to build a structure that would prevent any 
future wars; possibly East Asia could eventually be driven by a similar process of Chinese-Japanese 
reconciliation,  though  recent  trends  have  not  been  in  that  direction.  One  could  imagine  Japan 
eventually playing a role similar to that of the United Kingdom in Europe, that is, as a leading member, 
but one whose views on the nature of the organization may often differ from those of other leading 
members. 
At present, there is much talk of an East Asian common currency. Whether there would be a basis for 
such a currency depends on how China’s financial and currency management systems evolve. Since 
China  would  eventually  be  dominant  in  an  East  Asian  economic  bloc,  its  preferred  currency 
arrangements will determine the eventual outcome. Very likely, the non-Chinese members would like 
to have a common currency so as to have some impact on region-wide monetary policy, but whether 
China  would  grant  that  role  would  be  up  to  China.  Here  again  one  could  see  Japan  playing  an 
independent role by retaining its currency, rather like the United Kingdom currently does in Europe. 
Further to the west, a large economic bloc could eventually develop around India, but that prospect is 
inhibited  by  the  strained  relations  between  India  and  Pakistan.  The  dynamics  of  a  South  Asian 
economic  bloc  built  around  India  would  be  different  from  those  of  East  Asia  because,  unlike  in  the 
case of China, there is no Japan – no advanced industrial economy – in the neighborhood. 
The rise of Asia: economic implications 
V.  
The rise of Asia, especially the rise of East Asia and of India, is already reshaping the world economy. 
Concerns over globalization that have become so prominent a part of the economic debate in Europe 
and also in the United States, focus on the impact on the wages of less skilled workers in the west of 
the hundreds of millions of Chinese and also Indian workers who are entering the global labor force. 
One often hears the view that “China has a comparative advantage in everything”, an argument that 
every economist can demolish, but doing so does not diminish the anxiety level. Part of the anxiety 
must derive from the discomforts of the adjustment process forced by the dynamism of Asia; and part 
must derive from the fact that the wages of unskilled workers in the west may be adversely affected by 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 5
such  competition.  Policy  can  deal  with  these  consequences,  through  adjustment  aid,  and  through 
education, but unless that is done, the negative fallout from this competition will likely continue. 
The last time I heard this degree of anxiety was in Asia during the Asian crisis, when many of China’s 
neighbors  expressed  the  same  concerns.  Then  I  used  to  ask  people  whether  they  would  prefer  to 
have a prosperous or a poor neighbor. Most opted for the prosperous neighbor, though I often had the 
sense that they might prefer that their neighbor progress at a more measured pace. 
By  now  most  of  the  developing  countries  and  most  of  China’s  neighbors  can  count  the  gains  from 
China’s  (and  India’s)  booming  growth.  China’s  voracious  appetite  for  raw  materials,  which  has 
produced a boom in commodity prices, has helped many developing countries, as well as commodity 
rich industrial countries like Australia. China’s investments in Africa – where Indian companies have 
also long been active – have lately received media attention. China and India’s energy needs have 
helped push oil and other energy prices to their highest sustained levels, and have contributed to the 
prosperity of energy producers in the Middle East, in Russia and central Asia, and also in Africa where 
there are now many oil exporters. China’s and India’s energy needs have driven their oil companies 
into the international arena, competing for sources of upscale oil. IBM laptops are becoming Chinese. 
An Indian steel company is now the world’s largest. The trends are unmistakable. 
The fact that the global economy has been growing very rapidly by historical standards in the last few 
years despite concerns over global imbalances, in particular that the years 2004-2006 will see high 
growth rates in Latin America and Africa, is as much due to the rise of Asia as to as the global engine 
of United States growth. 
Asian growth has benefited greatly from the relatively open international trading system that was built 
up after World War II. All the East Asian miracle economies pursued export led growth strategies, with 
the bulk of the exports going to industrial countries in the west. The recent failure of the Doha Round is 
deplorable,  particularly  if  it  is  final,  mainly  because  it  reduces  the  opportunities  that  some  of  the 
poorest  countries  would  have  had  to  export  agricultural  products.  But  opportunities  to  increase 
industrial exports still remain open to most developing countries. 
The basis for the current international economic system – and it is a system – was designed by the 
victors of World War II. The implications of the rise of Asia and of emerging market countries for the 
international financial system will be at the center of attention at the meetings of the IMF and World 
Bank  in  Singapore  next  month.  The  newcomers  want  to  play  a  bigger  role  in  the  international 
agencies, and they should.14 It is to be hoped that the current dominant forces in the Fund and Bank 
will make the necessary room, though historically the established powers have lagged in making room 
for others. While the newcomers want to play a bigger role in setting the rules of the game, it is not 
clear  what  rules  they  would  like  to  change,  and  whether  they  will  want  radically  to  change  the 
international system. To do that, they will need to further develop the analytic capacity to formulate 
proposals  for  change,  a  process  that  will  involve  strengthening  research  and  policy  research 
institutions, and the mechanisms through which they affect policy. 
However the impact of China and India on the international financial system does not depend mainly 
on the size of their quotas in the international financial institutions. It depends more on how important 
Shanghai  (or  Shanghai-Hong  Kong)  and  Mumbai  become  as  financial  centers.  It  is  very  difficult  to 
develop a new financial center, and some – like Paris – have declined in importance relative to where 
they stood a century ago. Others, like Tokyo and Hong Kong, have become important, but do not yet 
compete with London and New York. If China indeed becomes the largest economy in the world, if it 
develops a market-based monetary policy, if it gradually liberalizes the capital account of the balance 
of payments and allows the exchange rate to float, and if it can develop the necessary legal framework 
for the efficient operation of the financial markets, then there would be very good reason for Shanghai-
Hong  Kong  to  blossom  as  a  financial  center.  If  that  were  to  happen,  we  could  imagine  the  yuan 
becoming a major international currency, along with the dollar and the euro. But that is likely to take a 
long time. And it is an interesting question as to what language will be spoken in that market – I would 
bet on English. 
                                                      
14   Some of these issues have their counterparts on the political side, for instance the debate over the reform of the United 
Nations, especially the Security Council In this regard, it helps that China is already one of the permanent members of the 
Council. 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2006
Mumbai  has  a  language  advantage,  already  has  a  market-based  monetary  policy  and  a  flexible 
exchange rate, has a more market-based financial system, and a more developed legal system than 
has Shanghai. But the potential size of the domestic economy will probably cause Mumbai to develop 
more slowly than Shanghai as an international financial center. Nonetheless there is every reason to 
believe it will become an increasingly important player in the international financial markets. 
The rise of Asia: political implications 
VI. 
So  far  the  international  economic  system  has  dealt  reasonably  well  with  its  changing  economic 
geography. While there are major concerns about how the United States current account deficit will be 
unwound,  about  the  failure  of  the  Doha  Round,  about  protectionism  more  generally,  and  about  the 
effects  of  the  entry  of  another  billion  low-wage  workers  into  the  international  economy,  the  overall 
impact of the rise of Asia on the international system seems to have been favorable for most other 
countries.  In  addition,  the  rapid  growth  of  Asian  economies  has  contributed  to  an  extremely  rapid 
decline in global poverty in the last quarter century. 
It  is  easy  to  describe  crisis  scenarios,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  unwinding  of  the  U.S.  current 
account deficit – and many delight and profit from doing so. But overall it seems that the international 
economy and its market and governmental organizations have sufficient flexibility, and perhaps even 
the wisdom, needed to deal with the required adjustments. 
The potential political consequences of the economic rise of two more great powers, and the relative 
decline  of  others,  could  be  more  worrying.  The  economic  rise  of  both  Germany  and  Japan  in  the 
second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  into  the  twentieth  century  was  accompanied  by  their 
growing military might, increasing assertiveness, and, eventually, terrible wars. The rise of the Soviet 
Union and of international communism was also associated with major wars and political instability, in 
this case around the world. 
Are  we  more  sophisticated  now  than  the  world  was  a  hundred  years  ago?  How  long  can  the  Pax 
Americana continue to maintain stability in Asia? How wise will the sole superpower be in its future 
dealings in Asia? How in the long run will the relationship between Russia, with its underdeveloped 
and underpopulated east, and China, with its massive population directly to the south, develop? Can 
China and India take their rightful places in the world and in their regions without further major military 
confrontations? Does the fact that China and India are nuclear powers, and so is Pakistan, make the 
situation  more  stable  as  well  as  more  dangerous,  or  just  more  dangerous?  How  will  a  potentially 
nuclear  Iran  influence  the  equilibrium?  How  important  is  the  North  Korean  nuclear  threat,  and  how 
long will Japan be willing to remain non-nuclear in the face of that and other threats? 
These  questions  are  too  complicated  for  economists  to  answer.  Probably,  somewhere  in  a  parallel 
universe, political scientists are discussing them. Perhaps – but not very likely – the parallelism will 
extend  to  their  concluding  that  the  political  issues  are  likely  to  be  resolved  peacefully,  and  that  the 
economic  issues  appear  intractable.  But  whatever  they  conclude,  the  answers  to  these  political 
questions, more even than the economic issues we have been discussing, will be key to the future of 
the world. 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 7
8 
 BIS Review 77/2006
BIS Review 77/2006 
 9
10 
  BIS Review 77/2006
