Eva Srejber: Greater budgetary discipline in the EU through transparency and 
national ownership 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a breakfast seminar 
organised by Ernst & Young, Stockholm, 26 September 2006. 
 Fiscal  and  monetary  policy  are  interdependent.  A  government  needs  transparent  and  consistent 
monetary policy to know how to conduct fiscal policy. Similarly, no monetary policy will be sustainable 
if there is a rapid accumulation of debt. This is what Sweden witnessed in the 1980s and the early 
1990s. An unsustainable mix of fixed exchange rates and lax fiscal policy, which led to high inflation 
and eventually to a crisis that landed us with an even higher mountain of debt. 
When the regime collapsed, General Council decided that the Riksbank should work towards a direct 
inflation target. The Riksbank determined that the target would be two per cent. Today this policy is 
hailed as a success. However, the real breakthrough for the new regime was in the mid-1990s when a 
forceful implementation of fiscal consolidation, supported by a broad political majority in parliament, 
made  the  macroeconomic  set-up  as  a  whole  credible.  It  was  only  then  that  inflation  expectations 
among  the  public  finally  fell  to  the  target  of  2  per  cent,  and  interest  rate  spreads  against  Germany 
were reduced substantially. 
This fiscal tightening could in turn be based on the predictability of the new monetary regime with a 
clear  inflation  target.  And  the  tighter  fiscal  policy  would  eventually  allow  less  restrictive  monetary 
policy. 
Why are budgetary rules needed at EU level? 
This interaction is fairly well understood, if not always acted upon, at national level. 
But at the EU level there is an extra dimension. Many countries’ fiscal policies are now matched by a 
single monetary policy. One possible risk is that the ECB would in the end have to bail out a fiscally 
undisciplined country from an unsustainable debt. However, many EU member states’ unwillingness to 
meet the Stability and Growth Pact has shown that problems can arise before matters have gone as 
far  as  to  a  full-blown  debt  crisis.  The  problem  might  be  a  bias  towards  fiscal  laxity  that  has  to  be 
counterbalanced by tighter monetary policy - hence a bad policy mix. 
With a single monetary policy the effect of fiscal stimulus in one country will be diluted in the whole 
area  and  will  therefore  by  definition  meet  with  less  of  a  monetary  policy  response  than  it  would  if 
monetary policy had been national. 
Furthermore  the  nature  of  the  political  set-up  makes  it  more  difficult  for  the  ECB  to  comment  on 
individual  national  budgets.  This  means  that  there  will  be  a  strong  temptation  to  “free-ride”  by 
expanding  the  budget  at  the  expense  of  fellow  euro  area  nations.  But  the  dilemma  goes  further  – 
given that it is rational for others to expand their budgets it becomes rational for your own country to 
do so too – even if your instinct is not to “free-ride”. Otherwise you might rationally expect to end up 
among the small minority that does not expand and at the same time still have the tighter monetary 
policy that results from everyone else expanding. This is the classic “prisoner’s dilemma” from game 
theory. 
The conclusion is that it is necessary to have rules for fiscal policy that limit deficits and debt when 
monetary  policy  is  united  and  fiscal  policy  divided,  and  that  these  rules  need  to  be  followed  in  a 
credible fashion. 
But, in addition, the conclusion is also that the temptation to over-expand is as strong during an upturn 
as during a downturn. In fact this is what we have seen in the euro area during the heyday of the late 
1990s and the beginning of the 21st century – a much too expansionary fiscal stance in some euro 
area countries, especially in good times, which led to tighter monetary policy by the ECB and thus an 
incentive for others to further weaken fiscal discipline. 
When the downturn eventually came, the euro area entered this phase with large deficits instead of 
surpluses. What the Pact then required, a 180-degree turnaround in fiscal policy to a tighter stance, 
reinforced  the  downturn  and  was  considered  by  some  as  stupid.  In  fact  it  was  the  lack  of  savings 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 1
during the boom that was stupid. Thus, rules would be needed not only for a maximum deficit in a 
downturn, but equally some forceful rule for fiscal rectitude in good times. 
How has the Pact changed? 
The  fiscal  problems  encountered by  some  countries  during  the  downturn  triggered  a  change  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. In my view, changes were necessary and many of the amendments to the 
Pact go in the right direction. However, some of them make the framework less predictable. 
The change consists of three parts: better governance, changes in the preventive arm and changes in 
the corrective arm. 
Better governance 
Better governance includes better budgetary discipline at national level, more realistic forecasting and 
more  reliable  statistics.  National  budgets  should  be  complementary  to  the  member  states’ 
commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact. National institutions could play a more prominent 
role  in  budgetary  surveillance  through  increased  attention  to  the  development  of  public  finances  in 
public  opinion.  But  apart  from  those  general  words,  the  reformed  pact  does  not  spell  out  any 
guidelines for appropriate developments of national institutions. Within the EU we have now begun to 
analyse  various  forms  of  national  regulations.  I  hope  that  the  continued  work  will  lead  to  stronger 
anchoring of fiscal policy among the member states. I will return to this question a little later. 
More  realistic  forecasting  consists  of  having  some  common  assumptions,  mainly  on  external 
developments, in the stability and convergence programmes. The experiences from the first year of 
the reformed Pact indicate that it has led to more realistic national growth forecasts. 
More  reliable  statistics  refer  to  budget  data  problems  ranging  from  creative  accounting  via 
methodological problems to understaffed and non-independent statistical compilers. The problems are 
tackled by strengthening Eurostat and allowing it to make methodological visits in the member states, 
to  discuss  budget  issues.  A  new  high  level  group  with  a  mandate  to  advise  Eurostat  will  be 
established. As Eurostat monitors the member states’ compliance with the agreed practice, the high 
level group also, indirectly, advises the member states. 
My view is that all the reforms in this area of the Stability and Growth Pact go in the right direction 
since  they  encourage  fiscal  prudence.  However,  given  the  complicated  process  and  the  short  time 
since the Pact was changed, it is too early to determine whether the changes have been a complete 
success. 
Changes in the preventive arm 
Changes in the preventive arm have been made in the area of medium term objectives (MTO) for the 
budget balance. Member states are divided into groups depending on their debt level. Stricter MTOs 
are required for countries with higher debt. The MTOs for the euro area and the ERM2 countries range 
from a deficit of 1% of GDP to balance or surplus depending on the debt level. 
The countries that have not achieved their MTOs are supposed to follow an adjustment path to the 
objectives. The path requires more consolidation in good times. For the euro area and ERM2 states, 
the  adjustment  requirement  is  a  yearly  improvement  of  the  cyclically  adjusted  deficit  net  of  one  off 
effects by 0.5% of GDP. 
This is a strengthening compared to the earlier agreement among the euro area countries, changing 
the  requirement  from  targeting  the  cyclically  adjusted  deficit  to  targeting  an  improvement  in  the 
structural deficit. When deciding the adjustment path, public investment and structural reforms can be 
taken into account. If structural reforms are to be taken into account, they should have a large and 
proven positive effect on the economy and there should be a safety margin to the 3% deficit floor. 
My view is that there is a possibility to use the newly defined MTOs in a wise manner, more closely 
adapted to the situation of the individual country. However, the scope for interpretation is so large that 
there is a high risk of lax and uneven implementation. The experiences of the first year indicate that 
some member states have more ambitious MTOs than required by the Pact. This is often countries 
with their own national budgetary rules, such as Sweden, which comprise MTOs. At the same time, 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2006
there are other member states who need to do more to achieve their MTOs. The measures are often 
postponed too far ahead and are not sufficiently explicit and concrete. 
Changes in the corrective arm 
The  third  part  of  the  changes  refers  to  what  happens  when  a  country  has  an  excessive  deficit.  As 
before, exemptions can be granted if the country is suffering from a severe economic downturn that it 
could not foresee, so called exceptional circumstances. The definition of a severe economic downturn 
has been changed, however. According to the old agreement, a country experiencing a fall in GDP of 
0.75% could be exempted from the EDP and a fall in GDP by 2% always led to exemption. Now the 
GDP requirement is changed to negative growth or a period of very low growth relative to potential. 
Exemptions can also continue to be granted by taking into account other relevant factors, on condition 
that the deficit is temporary and close to the reference level. But the number of other relevant factors 
to  be  included  in  the  judgement  of  whether  an  EDP  should  be initiated  or  not  has  been  increased. 
Such  factors  now  include  not  only  public  investment  but  also  potential  growth,  the  Lisbon  agenda 
achievements, R & D, pension reforms, international solidarity, and European policy goals. 
In  my  opinion,  there  is  a  risk  here  that  the  Pact  could  be  interpreted  differently  and  be  applied 
differently to different countries. It will therefore be important to closely follow up how the revised Pact 
is applied in this respect. So far, however, no exemptions have been granted under the new Pact. The 
countries that have exceeded the three per cent limit have also been assessed to have an excessive 
deficit. 
If countries are found to have an excessive deficit, they now can have a longer time frame for taking 
effective action to correct the deficit and a longer timeframe to the initial deadline for correcting the 
excessive  deficit.  Normally,  the  timeframe  will  continue  to  be  2  years  after  the  excessive  deficit 
occurred. However, the revised Stability and Growth Pact now allows for the possibility to extend this 
timeframe to 3 years. In my view, this is a positive change since the earlier system in practice meant 
that  countries  only  had  a  few  months  to  correct  an  excessive  deficit,  and  this  did  not  increase  the 
respect  for  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  However,  in  addition,  a  possibility  to  revise  the  initial 
deadline has been introduced which creates a risk for an excessively prolonged EDP. 
To summarise, some of the changes in the Stability and Growth Pact thus go in the right direction and 
might  enhance  the  discipline,  while  other  changes  introduce  a  flexibility  that  could  be  abused.  As 
always, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. So far, budget plans have not moved in the stricter 
direction despite the fact that growth prospects have improved. The yearly average deficit for the euro 
area  will  stay  at  about  2.4%  of  GDP  for  the  next  couple  of  years  according  to  present  plans.  The 
structural deficit is expected to improve only marginally between 2005 and 2006 – from 2.2 to 2.1 per 
cent  –  despite  a  strong  economy.  It  is  important  to  stock  up  now  ready  for  future  times  with  lower 
growth.  The  recovery  and  consolidation  of  the  EU’s  largest  economy,  Germany,  is  of  central 
importance in this context. 
Why have we not seen the problems earlier? 
The question is why we didn’t see the problems in the Stability and Growth Pact from the beginning? 
Perhaps because we were fortunate to have something that could work as a temporary replacement 
for rules: clear objectives, strong leadership and the market as a quickly reacting judge. Most countries 
wanted to meet the convergence criteria and thereby join the euro area. Germany led the way, both in 
terms of its economic size and its example of fiscal discipline. Now the objective of joining the euro 
has  been  achieved  for  many  countries,  and,  in  addition,  Germany  has  lost  its  leading  role  and  the 
markets react less to fiscal laxity. 
Instead  of  national  leadership  towards  clear  objectives  we  have  seen  the  opposite  –  the  political 
exploitation of the gap between the national and European level. The requirements of the Pact are 
blamed on heartless “accountants in Brussels”, and when a majority within the countries puts narrow 
national  political  interests  first  the  agreed  rules  become  moot  –  “peer  pressure”  becomes  ”peer 
protection”. 
Incorrect  facts  have  been  more  or  less  deliberately  sent  to  the  Commission  ahead  of  sensitive 
elections. A study by Barclays Capital shows that during the years 2000-2003 growth projections were 
overestimated by 1.5 percentage points on average each year by the euro area countries, leading to 
fiscal balances turning out worse than expected on average by about 1% of GDP per year. In fact, a 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 3
study by the ECB shows that the closer a country comes to an excessive deficit, the more likely it is 
that the forecast the government presents officially will later turn out to be wrong. There is a strong 
bias towards unrealistic optimism once a country’s deficit approaches 3% of GDP. The same result 
was indicated in a study by Lars Jonung and Martin Larch. 
What challenges does the future hold? 
Let  me  say  something  in  this  respect  about  the  new  member  states.  It  is  all  too  apparent  that  the 
collapse  of  Germany’s  leading  role  in  fiscal  discipline  has  also  set  a  bad  example  for  some  of  the 
larger new member states. This despite the fact that Germany now appears to be in the process of 
correcting its deficit. 
Given that public finances did deteriorate so much in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic during 
the  first  years  of  this  century  it  is  fortunate  both  for  themselves  and  for  the  euro  area  that  these 
countries have postponed joining ERM II and the attempt to rapidly adopt the euro. They have made 
clear  that  their  government  finances  must  be  in  order  before  the  process  of  joining  the  euro  area 
begins. Had they tried and locked their currencies within ERM II they may well have stayed in that 
position  for  a  long  time,  becoming  in  the  meantime  targets  for  speculation  –  as  their  poor  public 
finances  would  have  lent  little  credibility  to  their  overall  economic  policy.  This  was  Sweden’s 
experience with the combination of a currency peg and deteriorating public finances in 1991-1992. 
But  now  there  is  another danger.  Given  that  the  target  of  imminent  euro  adoption  is  gone,  and  the 
large euro area nations do not provide real leadership on fiscal soundness, there is less incentive for 
some of the new member states to stick to the consolidation of their public finances. This is especially 
obvious for Hungary, where the deficit was 7.5 per cent in 2005 and is, according to present plans, 
expected to increase to around 10% this year. For Poland and the Czech Republic the deficits will stay 
at the present level of around 3% in the coming two years. 
Whether in the old or new member states, there is an additional problem, as we are entering a period 
of  intensifying  structural  changes.  Old  industrial  patterns  in  Europe  are  being  changed  when 
confronted with both the boost to productivity from IT and globalisation and enlargement, all of which 
supports  this  process.  These  trends  will  eventually  help  productivity  and  growth  in  Europe  to  start 
catching up with the US again. But in the short term the structural changes will lead to higher frictional 
unemployment  as  old  industries  are  more  rapidly  replaced  by  new  ones.  In  addition,  the  recent 
downturn never led to a dramatic increase in unemployment or a dramatic decrease in employment in 
the euro area; hence, the upturn is probably also less likely to lead to rapid job creation. 
Both of these factors create new incentives for fiscal policy to focus more on short-term job creation 
schemes and less on long-term fiscal soundness. And the new member states are not much different 
in  this  respect.  They  have  experienced  a  decade  of  incredible  structural  change,  and  yet  more  is 
ahead. Furthermore the new member states have great infrastructure needs and, coupled with high 
unemployment, there will be continued pressure for fiscal expansion, even in a cyclical upturn. So from 
this perspective, too, the hope that the recovery alone will “fix” the European deficit problem might be 
too optimistic. 
In  addition,  structural  fiscal  deficits  in  many  of  the  euro  area  member  states  might  be  larger  than 
present  calculations  show  since  there  is  a  large  risk  that  potential  growth  is  lower  than  commonly 
assumed. Estimates of potential growth for the old Europe have successively been lowered as labour 
productivity growth has fallen gradually during the last two decades from around 2% to about 1% per 
year. However, the figures for the second quarter of this year were the highest we have seen for some 
time. The IMF’s latest potential growth estimate for the euro area is about 1.8%. 
Nevertheless, inflation has been remarkably stable, just above 2% in recent years despite poor growth 
and presumed large negative output gaps. If potential growth is lower, the need for fiscal consolidation 
is even higher than present consolidation programmes show. 
Let me summarize the problem. Countries with larger fiscal deficits have had a more procyclical policy 
both in good times and in bad times. A Commission paper finds a significant impact of elections on 
procyclicality, especially procyclical tax cuts. In addition, the structural deficits are most likely higher 
than presumed. With lower potential growth, the ECB will need to push the brakes earlier and more 
forcefully  than  most  people  assume.  Hence,  the  long  awaited  help  from  growth  to  fix  the  deficit 
problems  and  the  debt-to-GDP  ratios  will  most  likely  not  materialize.  Deficits  and  debts  could 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2006
deteriorate  even  further  when  pressures  from  an  ageing  population  will  kick  in  within  the  next  five 
years. 
Is there a solution? 
Let me first note an interesting development: 1999-2004 the average yearly fiscal deficit in the euro 
area has been 1.9 per cent of GDP while the average yearly (unweighted) surplus of the three old out-
countries (the UK, Denmark and Sweden) has been 1.1 per cent of GDP. This despite the fact that the 
UK has moved from a comfortable surplus position to a deficit of 3.3% of GDP in 2004. 
Some  euro-sceptics  will  of  course  attribute  this  difference  to  monetary  union  itself  but  I  think  the 
difference is rather that all three out-countries have been forced to find new ways of building a strong 
national macroeconomic framework based on clearly stated goals and a transparent evaluation of how 
these goals are to be met, in addition to the common EU rules. The part that has been much in focus 
has been the monetary policy regime – in Sweden and the UK, inflation targeting with a specific target 
for inflation and regular and transparent inflation forecasts has worked well. But inflation targets, or for 
that  matter  Denmark’s  euro  peg,  would  never  have  been  as  successful  had  fiscal  policy  not  been 
reformed in parallel, with clear rules and budgetary ceilings in Sweden and Denmark which put the 
problems squarely in the sight of the public. 
Considering the UK fiscal deterioration the last couple of years, one might draw the conclusion that the 
so  called  golden  rule,  i.e.  only  borrowing  for  public  investment,  is  not  a  clear  enough  rule,  but  that 
expenditure  ceilings  and  targets  for  the  fiscal  balance  are  more  effective.  In  fact  those  euro  area 
countries  that  have  some  sort  of  national  transparent  targets  and  evaluation  of  fiscal  policy  have 
managed to retain some order in their public finances; Finland being a prominent example. 
The power of targets and transparency is that the public, with the help of comments from analysts in 
the media, can evaluate clearly how the government is doing in relation to a long-term norm. Is fiscal 
policy in line with the target, or is it deviating from target? The idea of being on or off target is quite 
easy  to  grasp,  and  if  the  process  is  transparent,  experts  and  the  public  alike  will  learn  to  trust  the 
figures. In this area most countries still have a lot to do. It is a pity that government accounts, which 
affect  everyone  in  a  society  in  a  compulsory  way,  are  less  transparent,  less  well  audited  and  less 
understood  than  the  accounts  of  companies  listed  on  the  stock  exchange,  which  only  affect  few 
people. 
Sweden has pre-decided ceilings on government expenditure three years ahead and a target of a 2 
per cent surplus for the public sector over the business cycle, a figure that includes pension savings 
and that, given an ageing population, is in fact akin to targeting a balanced budget over the cycle. 
This  target  is  present  in  the  debate  of  every  budget.  The  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research 
comments on the target and helps the public to understand it. This keeps the government accountable 
not  only  in  the  normal  political  sense  but  also  in  relation  to  the  targets  agreed  upon.  The  political 
debate  is  in  a  sense  being  taught  to  keep  the  long  term  in  view.  The  public  then  knows  from  the 
national debate that fiscal discipline is good for the country and, if “accountants” in Brussels or other 
nations criticise your budget policies, there is a greater chance of the criticism being interpreted as a 
help  towards  fiscal  soundness.  The  Swedish  trade  unions,  for  example,  are  among  the  most  vocal 
defenders of our budget target. 
The expenditure ceilings have been respected but to some extent with the help of creative accounting. 
In addition, the last couple of years no decisions have been taken on the ceilings for all three years, as 
was intended. Sweden would perhaps need an even more formal external fiscal evaluation. 
What are the conclusions? 
This leads to an important conclusion for the implementation of the “reformed” Stability and Growth 
Pact of the EU. Perhaps the solution to regain credibility is to build from below – to complement the 
European  level  with  national  frameworks  in  the  respective  European  nations  so  that  they  come  to 
internalise the need to balance their budget over the cycle and to ensure that the same transparency 
exists on the fiscal side as on the monetary side. While pressure from fellow finance ministers has 
apparently  not  worked  well  enough,  the  present  attempts  at  national  processes  with  transparent 
targets have a better track record. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 5
Why  not  have  all  EU  countries  commit  themselves  to  establishing  independent  bodies  with  the 
responsibility of enhancing transparency by conducting independent forecasts of the countries’ deficits 
and providing recommendations on a regular basis? They would have only an advisory role and their 
authority would stem from impartiality and expertise. The subject of their recommendations would be 
the overall fiscal stance – neither the specifics nor indeed the political orientation of fiscal policy. The 
protocol on the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) attached to the Treaty states that member states 
shall ensure that national procedures in the budgetary area enable them to meet their obligations. It 
would therefore be in the spirit of the Treaty to have EU countries commit themselves to establishing 
these kinds of bodies. 
Independent forecasts would avoid having unreliable deficit figures before elections, only to “discover” 
the real state of accounts after the vote – such as has been the case in Portugal, France, Germany, 
and Hungary and most spectacularly in Hungary and Greece. 
Happily, there have been some improvements in some member states since the Pact was reformed in 
March 2005. If they had a similar role to the Congressional Budget Office in the US, the bodies would 
ensure a reliable and unbiased “reality check” in times of fiscal profligacy. 
At  best,  the  advisory  bodies  would  create  a  continuous  national  dialogue  with  warnings  and 
recommendations  to  politicians  that  would  boost  transparency  and  put  long-term  fiscal  goals  at  the 
heart  of  the  debate  –  a  reinforced  version  of  the  process  that  has  helped  Denmark,  Finland  and 
Sweden to improve fiscal soundness. 
The experience of central banks is that transparency and goals help form expectations and behaviour, 
enlisting  the  public  in  the  struggle  for  macroeconomic  soundness.  After  a  while,  the  discipline  that 
initially seemed practically unattainable becomes almost natural. 
6 
 BIS Review 88/2006
