Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The Bank of Uganda celebrates its 40th 
anniversary 
Speaking  notes  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  Bank  of  the  Uganda,  on  the 
occasion of the official opening of the exhibition to mark the 40th anniversary of the Bank of Uganda, 
Kampala, 16 August 2006.  
 Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda 
Your Excellency the Vice President 
Yours Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda 
The Rt Honourable Speaker of Parliament 
The Honourable Vice Chairman of the National Resistance Movement 
The Rt Honourable Prime Minister 
Members of the Diplomatic Corp 
Honourable Ministers and Ministers of State 
Visiting Governors and Deputy Governors 
Governors Emeritus 
Religious Leaders 
Your Lordship the Mayor of Kampala 
Distinguished Guests 
Members of Staff of Bank of Uganda 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Your  Excellency,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  was  established  on  July  1,  1966  and  officially  became 
operational on 15th August 1966 at the same time when the national currency - the Uganda Shilling - 
was issued. 
The Bank is therefore celebrating its 40th Anniversary of dedicated service to this country this year. To 
mark the celebrations, we have planned a number of activities, including: the Charity walk, where H.E 
the  Vice  President  was  the  Chief  walker,  organized  by  the  Bank  of  Uganda  staff  to  raise  funds  to 
support Mulago hospital; Essay competition for primary schools about the features on the Ugandan 
currencies  and  their  importance  to  the  economy,  aimed  at  increasing  awareness  among  the  young 
generation about Bank of Uganda; the public exhibition to run for one week; and a symposium on the 
theme:  "Central  Banking  in  a  Globalizing  Environment:  Challenges  and  Way  Forward  for  Bank  of 
Uganda' to be addressed by eminent scholars like Professor Ali Mazrui and many others. 
Your Excellency, the public exhibition, which you have accepted to open today in particular, includes 
exhibitions  of  artifacts,  the  Bank  of  Uganda’s  official  publications,  a  film  documentary,  a  money 
Museum, launch of the book entitled “ Bank of Uganda, (1966-2006), A Historical perspective” by Prof 
Mutibwa and the launch of our 40th anniversary commemorative coin. 
As we reflect on the last 40 years existence of the Bank of Uganda, it is perhaps also fitting to take 
cognisance of numerous economic and monetary policy achievements realized over the years. It may 
also  be  fair  to  say  that  this  country  has  experienced  and  endured  a  rather  smooth  evolution  of 
economic policy reform and management from a controlled economy to a liberalized open economy 
environment. 
With  the  exception  of  the  experiences  of  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  which  were  characterized  by 
turbulence  and  economic  hardships,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  nevertheless  contributed  significantly 
towards the achievement of several national economic goals, while upholding its mission of fostering 
price stability and a sound financial system, which you will all agree with me, have been achieved. 
These achievements should give a cause to celebrate. As a “Pillar of the Economy”, it is gratifying for 
me to note that the Bank of Uganda has credibly delivered on its mandate and assisted towards the 
maintenance  of  a  sound  economy  in  Uganda.  This,  of  course,  has  not  come  about  without  its 
challenges. 
It is now my pleasure to invite the Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning & Economic Development to give 
his remarks and later invite his Excellency to officially open this Exhibition to the public, launch the 
book by Prof Mutibwa, release our commemorative coin, give awards BoU’s best staff performers and 
winners of the essay competition for primary schools. 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 1
