Ardian Fullani: The development of economic information sources in Albania 
Opening speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the seminar “Development 
and implementation of business and consumer confidence indices in Albania”, Tirana, 2 July 2006. 
 The information on the markets and the most recent economic developments may be considered as 
the key to success for businesses in the modern times of rapid information technology developments 
(it is enough taking a glance at the numerous pages of the Reuters or the space the business news 
take  to  understand  such  developments).  Although,  at  first,  it  may  not  seem  to  represent  the  most 
critical problem the Albanian businesses are currently facing, such as electricity, informality etc., not 
far from now there will be the need of recognizing and analyzing the market in real time, in order to 
cope  with  the  challenges  of  globalization.  Considered  from  a  wider  aspect,  one’s  country  economy 
may  not  attain  the  international  levels  if  the  development  policies  are  founded  on  a  weak  real 
information basis.  
The  information  on  the  most  recent  economic  developments  and  expectations  is  crucial  to  the 
monetary policy decision-making process of the Bank of Albania. For long, it has been made clear that 
the  process  of  maintaining  price  stability  –  our  main  objective  –  should  be  a  forward-looking  one. 
Considering the current situation of national statistics, which at times become available with a time-lag 
of two years, it is understandable that our duty becomes extremely difficult.  
Progress in the field of statistics and in other related fields may take a relatively long time. In the mean 
time, our decisions need to be based on sound basis. Under this information gap, one of our solutions 
was  the  conduction  of  surveys  of  various  economic  agents.  Four  years  ago,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
began the assessment of business confidence index and consumer confidence index. These surveys 
are  held  quarterly  with  the  assistance  of  INSTAT  and  involve  over  600  businesses  of  production, 
construction and services sectors and more than 1500 consumers. The collected information relates to 
the performance of prices, consumption, income, production, employment, investment and many other 
indicators, which assist significantly in the monetary policy decision-making process.  
Many  important  steps  have  been  made  in  this  context,  aiming  at  continuous  methodological 
improvements  of  indices.  To  this  purpose,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  with  the  participation  of  foreign 
experts,  has  organized  various  meetings  and  discussions  at  a  technical  level,  wherein  the  surveys 
results and analyses, as well as the related issues were presented. Moreover, the Bank has organized 
training workshops with INSTAT and their interviewers, with a view to reaching to a high confidence 
degree in such key indicators.  
Since the beginning, the Bank of Albania has been assisted in this significant process by experts of 
the IFO German Institute for Economic Research, one of the leading economic research institutes in 
the  field of  business confidence  indices.  This assistance was  provided by  the  GTZ  office  in  Tirana, 
which has mediated and supported the visit of a number of German experts at the Bank of Albania, as 
is the present occasion when we have the pleasure to have among us Mr. Gernot Nerb (IFO), one of 
the top experts of IFO institute, for the calculation of business confidence indices in Germany. He will 
be holding some presentations related to the use of indices calculated through the conducted surveys, 
which help to analyze the real economic and financial developments.  
Although so  far,  the  results  of  our surveys were presented  indirectly  in  our  periodical analyses  and 
reports, as well as in various bank studies, very soon the Bank will publish such results regularly. In 
this context, an important preliminary step would be the consolidation of applied methodology in the 
calculation  of  such  indices  through  a  professional  expertise,  as  it  is  the  case  of  IFO.  In  a  second 
phase, in close cooperation with the respective chambers of commerce and universities, we are going 
to organize several meetings with businesses and academics, wherein we could get suggestions on 
the usefulness of these surveys.  
Along the same line of enhancing the economic information sources, another initiative undertaken by 
us  relates  to  the  involvement  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  branches  in  the  collection  and  analysis  of 
economic  developments  in  various  Albanian  regions.  So  far,  there  have  been  conducted  several 
surveys which have provided very interesting results. Unlike business confidence index, these surveys 
aim at getting more complete and continuous timely quantitative information on the situation of labour 
market, prices performance, production and on the relationship between businesses and banks. Such 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
information will be used in the calculation of some important indicators, such as productivity, cost per 
work unit, etc., which are often extremely essential to the Bank of Albania work study. Currently, these 
indicators are not provided by actual formal statistics.  
I wish you a very productive day, 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
