Hamad Al-Sayari: World class banking sector 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, during 
“The Future Building" Seminar, in cooperation with Euromoney, Riyadh, 9-10 May 2006.  
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  Symposium  and  share  with  my  insights  on  “The 
Development of Banking Sector” in Saudi Arabia and have a glance over its development and role in 
supporting  the  growth  of  the  Saudi  economy  to  be  more  dynamic  and  attractive  to  domestic  and 
foreign investments.  
At first, let me briefly cover the achievements of the Saudi banking sector since the establishment of 
SAMA in 1952. According to SAMA’s Charter, two of its most important objectives are to issue and 
strengthen the Saudi currency and stabilize its internal and external value, and to regulate commercial 
banks. On the basis of a historic review, we may judge how far these objectives have been achieved. 
The  exchange  rate  has  fluctuated  in  a  very  narrow  band  over  the  past  six  decades.  This  has 
contributed  to  attaining  the  ultimate  goal  of  our  monetary  policy  of  achieving  price  stability.  The 
inflation rate has remained very low and has generally remained, on average, below 1% per annum 
over the past 20 years.  
These  stable  conditions  have  contributed  strongly  to  sustained  growth  in  the  overall  economy  with 
average real GDP growth of 3.2% per annum for the last decade. Over these decades, the economic 
environment  has  been  characterized  by  freedom  of  capital  flows,  open  investment  climate,  low 
inflation, stable financial system and availability of ample liquidity. This has encouraged the rise in both 
domestic and foreign investment in the country. Particularly in the past two decades, the growth has 
been rapid in the non-oil private sector which has almost doubled and now represents over 44% of the 
annual GDP, while the percentage contribution of the oil sector has declined to around 33%.  
As  for  SAMA’s  other  major  objective  of  supervising  and  regulating  the  financial  system,  SAMA  has 
followed prudent policies aimed at creating a sound, stable, solid and efficient financial system with a 
modern  payments  system.  SAMA’s  Charter  and  the  Banking  Control  Law  give  it  broad  regulatory 
powers to ensure that banks are adequately capitalized, having efficient managements, run by fit and 
proper Directors and Managers who meet competence and integrity requirements, and that the banks 
have fit and appropriate operation and control systems.  
Over this long period, prudent supervisory policies and timely action have ensured that banks stayed 
strong  and  solid.  This  is  a  remarkable  achievement  in  the  face  of  global  and  regional  economic 
uncertainties, political crisis, wars and volatilities of the oil market. 
Today, Saudi banks play a leading role in the financial system that also includes five large specialized 
government development financing institutions and leasing, investment and insurance companies and 
a  few  money  changers.  Saudi  banks  have  benefited  greatly  from  the  Universal  Banking  Model 
permitted by SAMA and offer a range of financial services including investment management, mutual 
funds, brokerage, and other services. During the past decade, the volume of business of Saudi banks 
has grown at a phenomenal rate. In the ten years period 1996-2005, the banks’ assets grew by 213 
per cent, deposits by 224 per cent and capital and reserves by 248 per cent. During this period the 
profits for the banking system showed strong growth and the return on equity averaged well over 20% 
and return on assets was over 2%. The strength of Saudi banks is further underlined by their average 
risk-based capital adequacy, which has been high according to Basel capital adequacy standard, and 
averaged 18% during the past decade.  
If we review our long history of foreign investment in the financial sector since early 1950, a number of 
foreign banks were granted licenses to open branches in the Kingdom. In 1976, there were 12 banks 
in the Kingdom including 10 foreign banks. To Saudize the banking system and benefit from foreign 
expertise of the banks operating in the Kingdom, the government invited foreign banks to convert their 
branches into Saudi-foreign joint stock companies with an equity share of 40% for the foreign partner. 
Technical Management Agreements were also entered into to manage the new banks by the foreign 
partners. Consequently, Saudi banking companies were established and became integrated with the 
global  banking  system,  benefiting  from  its  expertise  and  training  capabilities,  and  coped  with  its 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 1
developments.  Eventually,  the  Saudi  banks  compare  well  with  their  counterparts  in  advanced 
countries.  
During the 1990s, no new bank licenses were issued. However the year 2000 ushered in a new era of 
openness when a license was granted to the Gulf International Bank, a Bahraini bank, owned by the 
GCC  countries.  This  was  to  implement  a  decision  made  by  the  GCC  Heads  of  States  to  permit 
qualifying  GCC-owned  banks  in  their  home  markets.  This  has  been  followed  by  new  licenses  to  4 
more GCC-owned banks, (namely the Emirates Bank International, the National Bank of Kuwait, the 
National  Bank  of  Bahrain  and  the  Bank  Muscat).  Licenses  were  also  granted  to  five  other  major 
international  and  emerging  market  banks  (that  include  BNP  Paribas,  Deutsche  Bank,  JP  Morgan, 
State Bank of India and National Bank of Pakistan). Just during this past week Deutsche Bank has 
opened its branch in Riyadh and National Bank of Kuwait in Jeddah. The remaining banks are in the 
process of opening their branches in 2006. On 27/2/1427H, a Royal Decree was issued approving the 
incorporation of a joint-stock company under the name "the Development Bank", with a capital of Rls 
15.0 billion. This would enhance competition and open new horizons for diversified banking services.  
In view of the importance of payments and settlements systems for the efficiency and security of the 
banking  system,  these  have  been  developed  by  using  state-of-the-art  electronic  technologies  and 
highly  sophisticated  and  technically  advanced  information  systems  that  not  only  meet,  but  often 
exceed,  international  standards.  The  transformation  started  in  1986  when  SAMA  installed  the 
Automatic  Cheque  Clearing  System.  In  1989,  SAMA  required  all  Saudi  banks  to  join  the  Saudi 
Payments Network (SPAN) which is a national ATM system. This system was subsequently extended 
to  a  point-of-sale  that  links  customers,  merchants  and  banks.  However,  the  backbone  of  the  Saudi 
Payment and Settlement System is the Saudi Riyal Interbank Express (SARIE). This is an interbank 
system  that  operates  on  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  basis.  SARIE  provides  an  electronic  link 
between all other payments and clearing systems which had been installed earlier. A follower of the 
statistical data on the payments systems, issued by SAMA, would realize the huge growth achieved in 
the  number  of  ATMs,  POS  and  transactions  executed  through  them  in  addition  to  the  transactions 
carried out through SAREA' System.  
Of  course,  Saudi  banks  and  their  customers  have  benefited  greatly  from  these  advances  in 
technology. Banks have been able to expand their businesses by offering a range of new products, 
control their costs and to enhance profitability. Consumers have benefited from access to a broader 
range  of  services  and  from  reduction  in  costs.  Telephone  and  internet  banking  is  now  rapidly 
expanding,  and  in  2006,  the  Saudi  Payment  System  is  well  poised  for  further  enhancement  by 
SADDAD  which  provides  the  ability  to  pay  major  companies'  bills  electronically  by  debiting  the 
accounts of their customers. This will further enhance efficiency and reduce costs.  
Currently,  SAMA,  in  cooperation  with  the  banks,  is  working  to  upgrade  and  streamline  the  Saudi 
Payments Network to permit the continued expansion in the installation of ATMs and POS. so that it 
could provide more advanced banking services with high confidentiality and full security. SAMA is also 
in the process of upgrading the Cheque Clearing System to carry out transactions electronically and in 
real time. This is in to meet present and future expansion requirements of the growth of the capital 
market and to promote customer services and to provide same through electronic channels in a way 
that will cope with the large expansion in the growth of the domestic economy.  
During  the  past  decade  there  has  been  prominent  diversification  in  the  banking  business  which 
included the following:  
1.  
Banks were able to meet the increasing demand by the different categories of customers for 
various  modern  banking  services.  This  made  banking  services  provided  in  the  domestic 
market  compete  well  with  their  counterparts  in  developed  countries.  But  in  the  past  year 
there  occurred  subsequent  developments  leading  to  a  substantial  demand  for  banking 
services that included payment of salaries, payment of public utilities bills and fees through 
banks,  more  subscription  to  public  offering  of  companies'  shares,  increase  of  demand  on 
share  trading,  as well as enforcement of  some security  controls  required  as measures  for 
protecting the banking system against money laundering operations. All this occurred in a 
very short period, leading to rising complaints of inefficient services provided by some bank 
branches.  Banks  managed  and  they  are  still  working  to  overcome  such  shortcomings  by 
employing  and  training  more  staff,  opening  new  branches,  and  providing  alternative 
channels to perform banking services, with employment rising during twelve months by 20%.  
Banks  have  made  significant  strides  in  provision  of  asset  management  services  such  as 
investment  portfolio  accounts,  mutual  investment  funds  aimed  at  domestic,  regional  and 
BIS Review 59/2006
2.  
2 
 3. 
4. 
international  shares  and  bonds  markets,  money  market  instruments  and  real  estate 
investment.  Assets  under  management  increased  8  times  from  Rls  17  billion  to  Rls  132 
billion during the period 1996-2005.  
Since 1998, consumer loans have increased dramatically. This can be largely attributed to 
the SARIE system which permits loans to be secured by salary assignments. These loans 
have provided access to banking system liquidity to a large segment of customers to meet 
their consumer and investment needs, thereby, supporting the pace of economic activity.  
Another important development has been the rapid growth in the provision of Islamic Shariah 
compliant  services  to  cater  to  the  increasing  demand  by  customers  for  such  services.  All 
Saudi banks offer a range of Islamic products including Murabaha, Mudaraba, Musharaka, 
Baie Ajel, etc.  
The  significant  growth,  diversification  and  profitability  of  the  Saudi  banking  system  has  been 
underpinned by a strong and and advanced regulatory system. Over the past two decades SAMA has 
introduced many modern supervisory standards compliant with international standards including risk 
based capital adequacy, liquidity, large exposures, risk management and others. In the past two years 
alone, SAMA has developed regulations relating to market risk, loan classification and provisioning, 
controls of consumer lending and updated the requirements for appointment in senior posts of banks.  
On  the  corporate  governance  front  there  is  a  heightened  awareness  in  the  world  with  standards 
emanating  from  OECD,  Basle  Committee  and  others.  SAMA  has  been  since  the  early  1980s 
inculcating  these  concepts  in  the  Saudi  Banks.  In  1981,  it  issued  a  guidance  document  to  the 
Directors of Saudi Banks defining the general framework of their roles and responsibilities. This was 
followed by regulations on Internal Controls in 1989, Prevention of Fraud (1994), Prevention of Money 
Laundering  (1995)  and  the  Role of  the  Audit  Committee  (1996). Furthermore,  SAMA  has promoted 
proper accounting standards to be followed by the Saudi banks in order to ensure more transparency 
in  their  financial  statements.  Saudi  Arabia  was  among  the  first  countries  in  1992  to  adopt  the 
International Financial Reporting Standards by the Banking Industry.  
Another  important  subject  relevant  to  banking  supervision  is  the  Basle  II  Capital  Adequacy  Accord. 
SAMA has previously implemented the First Basle Capital Accord in 1992. Accordingly, Saudi banks 
have maintained high capital adequacy ratios of more than 18% throughout the period from 1992 to 
2005. Also it is worth noting that 90% of the capital is of the tier-1 quality. Currently, banks are working 
closely with SAMA in the implementation of the Basle II Capital Accord. We expect all banks operating 
in Saudi Arabia to implement the standardized approach for credit risk by 1 January 2008 and then 
continue to move towards more sophisticated Internal Rating Based approaches. For operational risk 
all banks are likely to move to standardized approach with one or two banks experimenting with the 
Advanced  Management  approaches.  SAMA  is  also  encouraging  banks  to  consider  a  National  Data 
Pooling initiative to help them in credit risk management. All in all Saudi banking system is well on its 
way to the implementation of Basel II and we expect that banks will remain highly capitalized under the 
new  standard.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  SAMA's  approach  in  applying  Basel  (II)  Accord  is  an 
integrated  one  aimed  at  raising  the  level  of  risk  management  in  order  to  maintain  the  continued 
strength of the banking system.  
One of the issues that has preoccupied the supervisors of the banking system and security organs is 
combating money laundering and financing of terrorism. Over the past years a number of steps have 
been taken including:  
• 
In  1990,  the  Kingdom  ratified  the  UN  Convention  against  Illicit  Traffic  in  Narcotics  and 
Psychotropic Substances.  
In 1995, SAMA issued a manual containing “Guidelines for Prevention and Control of Money 
Laundering  Activities”.  These  required  Saudi  banks  to  implement  “Know  Your  Customer” 
rules, maintain records of suspicious transactions and report any suspicious activities to law 
enforcement agencies and SAMA.  
In  2003,  SAMA  issued  revised  AML-CTF  Rules  that  updated  previous  requirements  and 
provided  a  comprehensive  framework  for  KYC  requirements,  according  to  the  40+8  FATF 
Recommendations  and  the  Basel  Recommendations.  These  Rules  provide  for  strong 
sanctions to be imposed on banks and individuals that fail to implement these requirements.  
  BIS Review 59/2006 
 3
   In August 2003, the Council of Ministers approved a Law for Combating Money Laundering. 
Subsequently, a Financial Intelligence Unit was created in the Ministry of Interior and was 
staffed with expert resources.  
Also in 2004, the Financial Action Task Force carried out a review of the implementation of 
its 40 plus its 8 special recommendations. This review indicated that Saudi Arabia was fully 
or largely compliant with almost all FATF recommendations.  
Finally, in 2005 Saudi Arabia became a member of FATF Regional Body for Middle East and 
North Africa (MENAFATF) and a Saudi official from SAMA was elected and appointed as the 
Executive Secretary of this regional body.  
Finally, another important supervisory development has been the adoption, in 2004, of a risk based 
supervisory approach by SAMA. This has significantly strengthened and made more efficient the on-
site and off-site supervision practiced by SAMA. This approach is proactive and requires enhanced 
and frequent communication with banks at all levels. It brings SAMA supervision fully in line with the 
new international standards.  
In  recent  years,  the  strength  of  the  Saudi  banking  system  and  SAMA’s  sound  banking  supervision 
practices have been recognized by a number of important international institutions. One of the findings 
of the Financial Sector Assessment Program by an IMF/WB Team in 2005 indicated that the SAMA 
Banking Supervision, fully or largely met the 25 Basle Core Principles. On the other hand, external 
rating agencies including S&P, Fitch and Capital Intelligence in 2004 and 2005 have issued favourable 
reports on the Saudi Banking system. The recent external rating upgrade by S&P to A+ reflects the 
inherent strength of the domestic banking system.  
The  developments  of  the  banking  sector  have  been  reflected  positively  on  the  performance  of  the 
Saudi economy. Over the preceding three years, GDP (at current prices) have increased by an annual 
average  growth  rate  of  18.1%,  and  private  sector  GDP  by  6.7%.  Money  supply  has  grown  by  an 
annual average rate of 12.9%, providing adequate liquidity to growth requirements of the economy.  
Looking  ahead,  the  financial  system  and  the  banking  sector  will  benefit  from  the  state’s  efforts  to 
diversify  the  economy  and  improve  the  investment  environment  through  regulatory  and  structural 
measures taken in the various sectors. A number of new laws and regulatory guidelines have been 
enacted  to  enhance  economic  growth  and  achieve  further  opening  of  domestic  markets.  The  laws 
included the Foreign Investment Law, the Capital Market and Cooperative Insurance Laws and a new 
Labour Law. Another important development is the Kingdom's accession to WTO.  
Turning to the Capital Market, its contribution to the growth of the Saudi economy has been clearly 
evident.  Over  the  preceding  few  years,  the  market  has  witnessed  remarkable  development,  and  its 
role  as  a  financial  intermediary  between  savors  and  investors  has  been  boosted.  It  would  be 
appropriate to indicate that the recent market correction witnessed by the market has had no adverse 
consequences  on  the  banks  and  banking  system.  This  is  because  SAMA,  through  its  supervisory 
functions,  has  undertaken  measures  necessary  for  safeguarding  banks  and  customers  against  any 
unfavorable developments in the market. The measures included tightening prudential limits related to 
lending for trading in the market, issuing controls for consumer loans and other measures which would 
protect customers and banks against expansion in consumer loans which may end with trading in the 
equity market. Consequently, Saudi Banks have managed to do well in the first quarter of 2006. As the 
shares market stabilizes and continued good performance by banks is maintained, it is expected that 
the financial system will greatly benefit from the efforts of the authorities to deepen and broaden the 
capital market. Now let me briefly touch upon the opportunities for the Saudi banks over the medium 
term.  
1. 
The Saudi economy is undergoing unprecedented boom era based on a well- developed and 
diversified base covering all sectors of the economy, including oil and gas, heavy, medium 
and light industries; banking, investment and insurance services; and transport and tourism, 
within  a  population  demographic  structure  which  indicates  an  expected  growth  in  the 
segment  that  would  need  banking  services.  These  entire  factors  make  the  banking  and 
financial services market poised to grow exponentially, with great opportunities for banks to 
expand in the provision of their conventional services in addition to the expansion in the area 
of  investment  banking.  Banks  will  benefit  greatly  from  their  expertise  and  experience  to 
provide advisory services in the area of underwriting and covering of new IPO’s, corporate 
finance,  financing  projects,  particularly  mega  projects  (in  the  fields  of  petroleum  and  gas, 
petrochemicals, water, electricity, housing, education and health), mergers and acquisitions, 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2006
securities  advisory  services  and  domestic  and  international  brokerage,  private  wealth 
management and asset management businesses. This may require banks restructure their 
business to cope with new regulations.  
It is expected that the financial market will both broaden and deepen, and the competitive 
edge  will  be  with  banks  that  can  innovate  and  harness  new  technologies.  The  great 
expansion in demand for investment services will tempt international institutions to compete 
domestic banks in the provision of such services to the various economic sectors.  
Shariah compliant banking services have recorded continued phenomenal growth in the area 
of retail, corporate services, and assets management. This area is demand driven and banks 
that offer new Shariah compliant solutions in response to the market need will benefit which 
will  boost  their  growth  and  competition.  There  is  also  room  to  innovate  and  develop 
adequate  products  that  would  meet  customer  various  financing  and  investment  needs. 
Domestic banks are playing a leading role in this sector and will continue to maintain their 
leadership role.  
In view of the present and expected growing demand, commercial and residential housing 
financing is poised for exponential growth. This constitutes a great opportunity for banks to 
develop products that provide a balance between risks and rewards, and meet customers' 
needs. This will be a very satisfactory development.  
Company’s issuance of bonds and SUKUKs which is a financing tool not yet implemented by 
Saudi companies. It has a potential for banks and companies that offer and issue it.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
These are the opportunities, but banks will also face many challenges. The most significant are the 
following:  
1. 
Attracting, training and maintaining skilled staff, as the present and future expansion in the 
national  economy  in  its  various  sectors,  particularly,  the  financial  sector,  will  generate  a 
strong demand for financial skills of all specializations. There will also be a sharp competition 
for  the  existing  skills,  and  staff  rotation  may  occur  at  the  financial  institutions.  Hence,  all 
banks and financial institutions should make great efforts to attract and train employees and 
should  invest  generously  in  this  area.  It  is  an  exaggeration  to  expect  that  the  number  of 
employees in the financial sector may double over the next five years.  
Saudi banks will face a more competitive environment both domestically and in the region. 
This is because with open policies in the Kingdom, the number of banks operating in Saudi 
Arabia would almost double to 20 by the end of 2006. These will include the best group of 
regional  and  international  banks,  apart  from  the  possibilities  which  modern  technology 
provides  for  offering  cross-border  services.  The  banks  will  also  compete,  in  the  area  of 
financial and advisory services, with non-banking financial institutions licensed by the Capital 
Market  Authority.  These  institutions  will  compete  in  providing  a  number  of  financial  and 
advisory services.  
In  view  of  the  expected  increase  in  demand  for  bank  financing  for  a  number  of  economic 
projects in the economic sectors, and the different financing methods, as well as the great 
development in the field of modern technology, banks will be required to develop methods 
for risk management and should be aware of the new risks included in these methods. So, 
qualifications capable of managing such risk to minimum level should be developed. It is also 
important to continue to comply with international standards in the area of supervision and 
accounting. The ability to measure and manage risks will require continued awareness of the 
dynamic nature of banking business in the context of changing markets with renewed risks 
which  require  development  of  outstanding  skills,  application  of  secure  technology  and 
following an advanced approach in risk assessment.  
It is expected that banks will face increased demand for the provision of advanced banking 
services and products to meet the requirements of the era. Therefore, work should focus on 
creativeness and innovation so that banks can cater to future needs of the different types of 
their customers. High levels of baking services should be maintained. There should also be 
expansion in the number of branches, ATMs, telephone banking and other channels.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
I wish to conclude with the observation that the Saudi economy is currently undergoing a phase of 
accelerated growth in the various sectors and activities unprecedented in the preceding decades. This 
is due to the great regulatory steps taken recently by the state which helped establish a solid base for 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 5
sustained  growth.  What  we  have  heard  recently  of  huge  initiatives  and  projects  in  the  oil,  gas, 
petrochemical,  mining,  transport,  electricity  water  sectors  and  infrastructure  projects  in  housing, 
education,  and  health,  would  indicate  the  size  and  momentum  of  the  coming  economic  expansion 
which will be accompanied by a notable rise in the per capita income. It is expected that the private 
sector  will  have  a  greater  role  in  these  projects  and  in  the  pace  of  the  overall  activity.  Thus,  the 
financial  and  banking  sector  is  entering  a  very  dynamic  and  exciting  phase  with  acceleration  in  all 
areas. There are new players, new market opportunities, a range of new products and services, and 
significant  growth  in  traditional  services.  The  financial  sector  should  be  able  to  fully  leverage  its 
tradition  of  openness  and  liberalization,  its  large  investment  in  technology  infrastructure,  internal 
control, and development of its manpower. It is entering a new era of increased consumer participation 
and  awareness,  greater  competition,  enhanced  transparency  and  strong  supervision  and  corporate 
governance. The financial sector is in a strong position to rise up to these challenges and meet the 
demands  of  a  rapidly  growing  economy  and  consumer  expectation.  I  emphasize  my  wishes  and 
expectations  that  the  Saudi  Financial  Sector  will  continue  to  be  a  leader  and  a  major  player  in  the 
domestic and regional economic activity.  
I thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 59/2006
