Zhou Xiaochuan: Remarks on China’s trade balance and exchange rate 
Summary  of  remarks  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  on  issues 
related to China’s trade balance and exchange rate, at the China Development Forum sponsored by 
the Development Research Center of the State Council, Beijing, 20 March 2006. 
 Analysis of China’s trade surplus  
1. The process of globalization, cross-border outsourcing and restructuring of supply chains has been 
accelerating  in  recent  years,  supported  by  IT  revolutionary  progress  and  the  improvement  of 
infrastructures.  It  now  becomes  possible  to  outsource  those  activities  which  would  be  difficult  to 
outsource to foreign countries in the past.  
2.  There  is  a  time  lag  in  changing  the  layout  of  competitive  advantages.  Some  labor-intensive 
production activities and services are usually outsourced to developing nations like China and India, 
while it will take a certain period of time before the developed countries (where the production cost is 
high)  could  create  new  jobs  and  develop  new  export  advantages.  Trade  imbalance  could  expand 
during such a period of time lag. 
3. FDI (particularly, of MNCs) has been playing a dominant role in cross-border outsourcing into China 
and in changing the landscape of trade balance. China has grown into a re-export processing center 
mainly by foreign-funded enterprises, with the supply chains increasingly expanded and value-added 
steadily enlarged. Exchange rate elasticity of such production and trade is fairly small. 
4.  From  1998  to  2004,  China’s  foreign  trade  was  relatively  kept  in  balance,  with  the  annual  trade 
surplus  averaged  between  US$20  billion  and  US$30  billion.  However,  trade  surplus  suddenly 
escalated to US$100 billion in 2005, which could be mainly attributed to the slower growth of import in 
contrast  to  the  steady  growth  of  export  (in  2005,  export  registered  a  growth  of  28.4  percent  while 
import increased by 17.6 percent). The slower growth of import was mainly caused by the declining 
import growth of equipments, a factor related to the structural adjustment of the Chinese economy. 
5.  FDI  (particularly,  of  the  MNCs)  has  drastically  increased  their  production  and  sales  in  China, 
substituting China’s imports. There are numerous foreign branded or foreign-designed products sold in 
the  Chinese  market,  but  a  large  part  of  these  products  have  actually  been  produced  by  the  FDI 
companies in China. 
China’s exchange rate regime reform 
6. China conducted a successful reform of the RMB exchange rate regime on July 21, 2005, which 
has won objective and positive responses from the international community. 
7. The policy analysis and forecasts conducted before the reform has produced different views about 
the reform impact, therefore, we need some time to observe and collect data to assess and confirm 
the impact of the exchange rate reform on the domestic economy and employment etc. 
8. Six months after the reform, most of the Chinese enterprises have adapted smoothly to the reform 
after  undertaking  painful  restructuring,  however  a  few  sectors  suffered  severely  from  the  exchange 
rate adjustment. On such a count, we may conclude that the market force could be allowed gradually 
to play a greater role in the floating exchange rate. 
9. Over the past eight months, great efforts have been made by China to cultivate and develop foreign 
exchange  markets.  Trading  products  were  enriched  in  the  market,  risk  hedging  instruments  like 
forward and swap were developed, market makers and OTC transactions were introduced in the inter-
bank foreign exchange market. The Chinese enterprises and financial institutions need some time to 
learn and adapt to the changes in foreign exchange market, so that they could be in a better position 
to keep in line with the flotation of exchange rate. 
10.  Over  the  past  eight  months,  China  has  decontrolled  some  unnecessary  foreign  exchange 
restrictions. Actions taken in this respect included relaxation of controls imposed on foreign exchange 
retained and use of foreign exchange under capital account by the enterprises, facilitation of foreign 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
exchange  use  by  individuals  under  current  account,  and  the  exercise  of  applying  comprehensive 
management  of  foreign  exchange  positions  held  by  the  banks.  Through  these  efforts,  the  foreign 
exchange market will more objectively reflect the relationship between supply and demand of foreign 
exchange. 
Gradualist approach or shock therapy?  
11. Due to the accelerating development of globalization, cross-border outsourcing and adjustment of 
supply  chains  as  mentioned  before,  it is  likely  that  it  will  take several  years  before  the  global  trade 
could  reach  a  new  equilibrium.  China  as  a  large  developing  economy  with  heavy  employment 
pressures  and  a  still  fragile  financial  system,  could  only  adopt  a  gradualist  approach  to  adjust  its 
economy in a controllable manner. 
12.  The  IMF  has  recently  held  a  conference  to  discuss  the  global  imbalances,  and  most  of  the 
participants  believed  that  it  was  appropriate  to  pursue  a  gradual  adjustment,  and  radical  measures 
could  result  in  unanticipated  consequences.  Besides,  some  participants  suggested  that  the  US  has 
been too slow in making an internal adjustment. 
13. Some advisors have prescribed the “shock therapy” to Russia and Eastern European countries, 
but later on this was described as “shock with no therapy”. We should be cautious to offer the same 
prescription  again,  so  as  not  to  have  credibility  jeopardized.  China  will  only  consider  to  take  the 
gradualist  reform  approach  that  wins  the  trust  of  the  masses  of  the  Chinese  people,  rather  than  a 
“shock”, not to mention that the US has not taken the lead to use “shock” to adjust its imbalances. 
Global imbalances and the role of exchange rate  
14.  The  Chinese  government  has  already  started  to  apply  a  mix  of  policy  measures,  including 
expanding  domestic  demand,  lowering  down  saving  rate,  opening  up  the  market,  floating  the 
exchange  rate  and  increasing  import,  so  as  to  improve  the  balance  of  payments.  With  the 
implementation of these policy measures, the PBC anticipates that it needs a time span of 2-3 years to 
achieve an approximate trade balance. However, what is worrisome is that, according to the analysis 
by the Chinese economists, even China basically realized a global trade balance, the United States 
might still incur large trade deficits and it would still be very difficult to achieve a bilateral trade balance 
between China and the US. So the ball would be actually not in China’s court. 
15.  The  US  and  China  should  make  joint  efforts  to  address  the  trade  imbalance  between  the  two 
countries. When the Chinese government has been making an efforts as mentioned above trying to 
relieve the problem, complaints are also heard that the US has been slow in taking concrete measures 
to reduce its twin deficits and improve saving rate. 
16.  Some  US  economists  assume  that  the  exchange  rate  is  the  key  to  fixing  the  trade  imbalance, 
while on the Chinese side there are economists from different schools and some also tend to believe 
in this assumption. However, such assumption failed in statistical test by using the trade data and real 
effective exchange rate recorded in China over the years. Besides, empirical knowledge about many 
other countries also does not support such a judgment. Therefore, we should be cautious to rely solely 
and excessively on exchange rate function to realize current account balance. 
17.  According  to  the  Articles  of  Agreement  of  the  IMF,  “member  countries  shall  have  the  right  to 
choose exchange rate regime, either free floating, managed floating or fixed exchange rate, at their 
own discretion”. In this sense, there exists no such an exchange rate regime that can be labeled as 
“manipulating exchange rate”. China’s gradual shift from a relatively fixed arrangement to an exchange 
rate regime with greater flexibility in line with the needs of economic reform and opening up has won 
extensive  support  from  the  world  community,  and  those  criticisms  wrongly  accused  this  action  as 
“manipulating exchange rate” will not be widely accepted. 
18. China’s trade balance should be assessed within a time framework of a number of years, not of a 
single year. And relevant statistics do not support the view that China gains trade advantages from the 
exchange  rate.  Japan  has  recorded  large  trade  surplus  continuously  for  many  years,  and  yet  the 
notion that Yen exchange rate has been manipulated is not accepted. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
The duality between savings gap and trade imbalances 
19.  Savings  gap  equals  to  the  difference  between  savings  and  investment,  and  trade  imbalance 
equals  to  the  difference  between  export  and  import.  Macroeconomics  describes  the  duality 
relationship between them. Excess savings will result in trade surplus, and vice versa. Therefore, it is 
important to view the problem of trade imbalance from the perspective of savings. 
20. There are many different reasons behind the high saving rate in China. Some of them are related 
to  the  economic  transition  process  while  others  are  more  associated  with  the  social,  cultural  and 
traditional characteristics. Besides, the crowding out effect of FDI on domestic investment is likely to 
further increase excess savings in China. 
21. The Chinese government now works on a broader perspective as well as more policy initiatives 
and  strategies  consistent  with  the  national  condition  to  expand  internal  demand,  particularly  the 
consumption demand. It also needs a certain period of time to realize such an adjustment. 
22. The high saving rate and large stock of foreign reserves in Asia are related to the Asian financial 
crisis.  Many  Asians  complained  some  hedge  funds  from  the  US  during  the  crisis,  and  were  also 
disappointed with the insufficient role and slow policy responses of the IMF to the crisis. These factors 
have made countries and households in Asia to rely more on their own to prevent risks. 
23. Saving rate in the US has gone to the other extreme. Both the US and China need to make efforts 
to  level  their  domestic  demand  and  saving  rate,  otherwise,  it  would  be  difficult  to  resolve  the  trade 
imbalance.  We  are  of  the  view  that  a  certain  priority  should  be  given  to  orchestrated  structural 
adjustments, and the function of exchange rate should not be too much expected. 
Foreign exchange reserves 
24. After the exchange rate regime reform on July 21, 2005, there will be a time lag before the reform 
could have an expected impact on the development of current account balance and FDI in China, and 
the speculative factors are also unlikely to leave right away. Under the managed floating exchange 
rate regime, the PBC will gradually reduce its managing role in the foreign exchange market in line 
with the situation, which will lead to a slower growth of the foreign reserves. 
25.  After  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  there  emerged  some  new  views  and  discussions  with  regard  to 
setting a higher level as the rational foreign exchange reserve holding. These developments are also 
related to the severe shocks experienced and lessons learned by the crisis hit countries. 
26. If two comparable countries have different sizes of external debts and different stocks of FDI, their 
foreign  reserves  should  not  be  held  at  the  same  level.  External  debts  need  to  be  repaid,  and  FDI 
entails dividend remittances and they may even withdraw. Besides, some speculative hot money, if 
existed, could also seize the opportunity to exit at any time. All these factors bear some influences on 
the  quantitative  level  of  foreign  reserve  holding.  If  measured  by  per  capita  level,  China’s  foreign 
reserves are not high. 
WTO rules  
27. The WTO mechanism has established game rules on a multilateral basis that enable all members 
to  win;  it  is  also  a  win-win  game  for  China  and  the  US.  Although  members  may  dispute  regarding 
some imbalances, it at least gives a room for the differences to be resolved through negotiations. If 
anybody designs a lose-lose game for US and China, it hurts both countries, and designer himself will 
be in a dilemma whether the game should go on or not. Thus we have to choose and play a win-win 
game of free trade and anti-protectionism.  
BIS Review 54/2006 
 3
