Caleb M Fundanga: Future of the Zambian economy – a balanced look  
Paper  presented  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  a  discussion 
sponsored by the LSA Group, Ndola, 30 June 2006. 
 Mr. Chairperson 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I wish to express my sincere gratitude 
to Lawrence Sikutwa Associates for inviting me to this very important discussion. Our interaction with 
the corporate world on the subject “The Future of the Zambian Economy – A Balanced Look” is 
indeed  appreciated  and  very  important.  This  subject,  as  you  rightly  pointed  out  in  your  letter  of 
invitation to us, is vital considering that Zambia, in general, and Ndola, in particular, are in dire need of 
investment.  It  is  this  investment,  Mr.  Chairman,  which  would  create  employment  and  accelerate 
economic growth, a necessary condition to combating extreme poverty among the Zambian people. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the future of the Zambian economy can only be known, if one understands 
the past and the present. Therefore, with your permission, I would like to begin by giving an account of 
the macroeconomic developments in Zambia in the recent past. I am certain that many of you have 
been following the economic trends and have seen that the economy has performed relatively well in 
recent  years.  Inflation  and  interest  rates  have  been  coming  down,  while  the  exchange  rate  has 
relatively stabilized, following a steep appreciation towards the end of 2005. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, during the period 2001-2005 growth in real Gross Domestic 
Product  (GDP)  averaged  4.7  percent  per  annum.  This  growth  has  been  broad-based  -  extending 
beyond the recovery of the mining sector. In 2005, the economy registered growth of about 5.0% in 
real terms, marking the seventh consecutive year of positive growth in real output. This growth was 
largely  due  to  the  expansion  in  construction,  driven  by  a  robust  demand  for  housing  as  well  as 
largescale  investment,  which  led  to  a  marked  pick-up  in  mineral  production,  particularly  of  copper. 
Other  sectors,  such  as,  tourism  and  transport,  storage  and  communications  also  contributed  to  the 
overall economic growth. 
Mr  Chairman,  inflation  declined  to  15.9%  at  the  end  of  December  2005  from  17.5%  at  the  end  of 
December 2004 despite several setbacks. These included the partial drought that significantly reduced 
food supply and high prices of oil and petroleum products. Attainment of single digit inflation has been 
Government’s goal for a long time. It is, therefore, encouraging to see inflation coming down in recent 
months, reaching a single digit level of 9.4% in April 2006 and dropping further to 8.6% in May and 
8.5% in June 2006. This inflation out-turn has been largely due to the conduct of appropriate monetary 
policy  aided  by  prudent  fiscal  policy  and  relative  strengthening  of  the  Kwacha.  The  bumper  maize 
harvest this season has helped to ease pressure on food prices and to keep food inflation and thus 
overall inflation low. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  respect  to  developments  in  the  money  market, 
commercial  banks  lending  interest  rates  have  also  been  coming  down,  though  not  as  fast  as  the 
decline  in  inflation  and  yield  rates  on  Treasury  bills.  Commercial  banks  nominal  weighted  average 
lending base rate declined from 29.8% in 2004 to 27.6 % in 2005. As at June 21, 2006, the weighted 
average lending base rate stood at 21.6%. Clearly, there is an urgent need for commercial banks to do 
more  to  reduce  lending  rates  in  order  to  influence  a  substantial  expansion  of  private  sector  credit. 
Lower  lending  rates  will  contribute  to  the  reduction  in  the  cost  of  doing  business  in  Zambia.  In  the 
current environment of low inflation, sustainable lowering of lending rates by commercial banks should 
be a logical course of action. 
The  next  issue  I  would  like  to  address  is  that  of  the  appreciation  of  the  Kwacha  against  major 
currencies. The appreciation has occurred mainly due to the higher supply of foreign exchange on the 
market than demand. The key factors underlying the increased foreign exchange supply include: 
1. 
Increased copper output and exports as well as record high prices of the commodity. The 
volume of copper exports has in recent years registered sustained growth, increasing from 
353,000 metric tons in 2003 to 423,000 metric tons in 2005. The price of copper rose to US 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
2. 
3. 
4. 
$4,572.0 per metric tons in December 2005 from US $3,134.79 per metric tons in December 
2004. The price of copper has since increased sharply and by May 2006 it had risen to over 
US $8,000 per metric ton;  
Increased non-traditional export earnings, from US $410 million in 2003 to US $576.7 million 
in 2005; 
Improved  economic  confidence  following  the  attainment  of  the  enhanced  Highly  Indebted 
Poor  Countries(HIPC)  Initiative  Completion  Point  in  April  2005,  which  resulted  in  reduced 
external debt service and obligations; and  
Increased foreign direct and portfolio investments, reflecting increased market confidence in 
the  economy,  occasioned  by  the  greatly  improved  prospects  for  the  copper  sector,  the 
cancellation of the bulk of Zambia’s external debt, and anticipated continued commitment to 
implementation of prudent fiscal and monetary policies. 
Mr.  Chairman,  from  this,  it  is  clear  that  the  current  strengthening  of  the  Kwacha  has  been  caused 
mostly by changes in economic fundamentals. I recognise the concerns by some of our exporters of 
non-traditional commodities that they are losing external competitiveness. I wish to point out that not 
all has been lost as a result of the appreciation of the Kwacha. Some non-traditional exporters have 
benefited  through, among  other  things,  the reduction in  the cost  of capital  goods  and  imported  raw 
materials. In addition, may I mention the fact that the exchange rate alone does not determine external 
competitiveness of exports. Exporters should look at those areas in their production processes where 
they can attain efficiency gains and improve productivity. These efforts need to be complemented by 
Government  through  directing  investment  in  infrastructure  and  structural  reforms,  including  labour 
laws, so as to reduce the cost of doing business in Zambia. On its part, the Bank of Zambia will carry 
out its function of smoothing the movements in the exchange rate in a way that would not compromise 
the low inflation objective. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, these achievements will have been impossible without the financial sector 
reforms.  In  the  early  1990s,  Zambia  embarked  on  economic  liberalisation,  of  which  reforming  the 
financial sector was a major part. Specific measures which were undertaken included, among others, 
the removal of all restrictions on interest rates and, elimination of controls on foreign exchange rates 
and  transactions.  Interest  and  exchange  rates  are  now  market  determined,  that  is  they  are  being 
driven by underlying demand and supply factors. 
To  enhance  the  role  of  the  market  in  the  determination  of  exchange  rates,  the  Interbank  Foreign 
Exchange Market (IFEM) trading system was introduced in July 2003. The entrenchment of the IFEM 
trading  system  has  been  characterised  by  increased  interbank  foreign  exchange  liquidity  flows, 
particularly from mineral exporters. 
With  the  liberalisation  of  the  financial  sector,  several  bank  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  were 
established. The financial sector has expanded remarkably over time and the services provided have 
been improved. 
• 
The number of commercial banks has more than doubled to 13 from 4 banks prior to 1990. 
Currently, the banking system is made up of the Bank of Zambia, which is the central bank, 
and  13  commercial  banks,  with  a  branch  network  of  159  as  at  end-December  2005 
compared to 123 in 1990. 
Commercial banks have improved the range of products offered to customers, in line with 
global  innovations.  These  include  Automated  Teller  Machines  (ATMs),  foreign  exchange 
accounts, Visa debit cards, mortgages, and leasing services. In 2005, 4 commercial banks 
launched  the  E-switch  facility  to  allow  their  customers  to  share  their  ATMs  and  other 
payment  delivery  channels,  like  point  of  sale  terminals.  These  services  were  unheard  of 
before the reforms and were supported by the international community. 
Commercial banks have also embarked on other initiatives including expansion programmes 
based on the community banking concept. This is consistent with the rural banking concept 
and is intended to provide financial services to those sectors of the community that are not 
currently serviced by the banking sector. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, to meet the challenges which come with an expanded banking sector and in 
our desire to continue modernising the overall financial sector, it has been imperative for the prudential 
and supervisory mandate of the Bank of Zambia to be strengthened. In this regard, the key initiatives 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
that have been effected, with an ultimate goal of promoting safe, sound and efficient operations have 
included: 
• 
The  enactment  and  amendment  of  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Acts  in  1994  and 
2000, respectively. 
The  implementation  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Application  Project,  aimed  at  supporting 
banking  supervision  and  providing  a  framework  for  supervision  with  the  view  of  having  a 
safer financial sector. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  order  to  promote  greater  access  by  the  population  to 
banking and financial services, the following have been implemented: 
• 
Establishment of an automated electronic clearing house in 1999 (to speed up processing 
cheques from 4-10 days for local and country checks to 2-5 days, respectively), enhancing 
the security of cheques and introducing machine-readable cheques. 
Establishment  of  a  direct  debt  and  credit  clearing  system  (DDACC)  and  a  realtime  gross 
settlement  system  (RTGS)  called  Zambian  Interbank  Payment  and  Settlement  System 
(ZIPSS) in October 2001 and June 2004, respectively. The DDACC system has facilitated 
the  transfer  of  money  by  electronic  means  for  payment  of  bills  and  salaries  while  RTGS 
allows a speedy, safer and large value clearing facility. Commercial banks have also set up a 
foreign currency cheque clearing system. 
The adoption of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP). This is a framework which 
aims to promote the development of a stable, sound and market-based financial system that 
would  support  efficient  resource  mobilisation  necessary  for  economic  diversification, 
sustainable growth and poverty reduction. Currently, key recommendations of the FSDP are 
under implementation. For example, the creation of a Credit Reference Bureau will improve 
the  information  available  to  credit  providers  in  order  to  enable  them  to  make  better  credit 
decisions. 
  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  at  this  juncture,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  the  macroeconomic  gains 
attained in the recent past will need consolidating in 2006 and onwards. You will agree with me that 
the  macroeconomic  gains  attained  have  set  the  stage  for  sustained  future  growth  of  our  economy, 
employment  creation  and  poverty  reduction.  In  this  regard,  allow  me  now  turn  to  the  future  growth 
focus of our economy. 
Mr. Chairman, Zambia has articulated its long-term development objectives in the National Long Term 
Vision  2030.  Part  of  this  vision  is  enshrined  in  the  Fifth  National  Development  Plan  (FNDP);  2006-
2010  whose  theme  is:  “Broad  Based  Wealth  and  Job  Creation  through  Citizenry  Participation  and 
Technological Advancement”. This calls for policies that accelerate and sustain economic growth, and 
which enable the poor to participate in, and benefit from the growth process. In this respect the broad 
macroeconomic objectives for the Plan period 2006-2010 are as follows: 
- 
- 
- 
What then do we see as the sources of economic growth and employment creation in future? Ladies 
and Gentlemen, we see the growth of the Zambia economy being driven by increased activities in 
agriculture, mining, export-led manufacturing, tourism and energy. 
To accelerate pro-poor economic growth; 
To reduce and stabilise inflation; and 
To sustain a viable balance of payments and external and domestic debt position. 
Agriculture 
Mr  Chairman,  this  sector  possesses  great  potential  to  make  higher  contributions  to  the  country’s 
growth and employment aspirations given the abundant arable land and water supply. Water supply is 
abundant, accounting for 45 percent of the total water resources of the Southern African region, thus 
providing  investment  opportunities  for  the  supply  of  water  for  irrigation,  home  and  industrial  use. 
Investment  in  agriculture  is  important  because  the  majority  of  our  people  in  rural  areas  depend  on 
agriculture for their livelihood and income. 
Thus, investment in agriculture will help reduce poverty, especially if it is directed at bringing into the 
fore small scale farmers in the production of cash crops, such as, tobacco, sugar and cotton. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 3
In addition to increased production among small scale farmers, it will be of paramount importance to 
put in place strategies that will increase productivity among small scale farmers. 
Mining 
Mr. Chairman, the ongoing activities in mining suggest that the sector is poised to be, once again, one 
of  the  major  contributors  to  the  future  growth  of  our  country.  It  is  expected  that  copper  output  in 
particular  will  soon  reach  and  probably  even  exceed  the  mid-1970s  levels.  Increased  output  is 
expected from the existing mines and those under establishment such as Lumwana in North-Western 
Province and Konkola Deep on the Copperbelt. Exploration for other mining ventures has continued 
with  high  prospects  for  nickel  mining  in  Southern  Province.  Although  in  the  early  stages  increased 
employment  will  be  created,  the  ability  to  absorb  more  labour  in  future  will  reduce  as  some  mines 
employ more efficient and less labour intensive techniques in the production processes. 
I should mention here that though copper mining has again become prominent in terms of exports and 
to  some  extent  employment,  Government  strategies  and  policies  are  focusing  on  reducing  the 
country’s dependence on copper mining through economic diversification as articulated in the FNDP 
(2006-2010). In our diversification efforts, due attention will be paid to those that have high potential 
for creating employment. This will make our economy resilient to future external shocks and ensure 
sustained development, and have a required impact on the quality of life of the Zambian people. 
Manufacturing 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Zambian  Government  has  demonstrated  its  commitment  to  the 
development of a vibrant but competitive manufacturing sector in this year’s national budget. This is in 
line with its commitment to facilitate increased value addition which is one of the key ingredients in 
achieving  sustainable  development  in  the  country.  To  this  effect,  several  measures  and  incentives 
aimed  at  enhancing  the competitiveness  of  the sector  will  be  provided  in  conformity  with  the  future 
growth objectives. One such example is the Government’s move to implement a new initiative called 
the  Multi-Facility  Economic  Zone  (MFEZ).  This  will  replace  the  Export  Processing  Zones  (EPZ),  as 
special industrial zones for both export-oriented and domestic-oriented industries. The zones will have 
all the necessary infrastructure for the easy commencement and conduct of manufacturing activities. 
In addition, several concessions will be provided for those companies that will operate in the MFEZ. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we see the growth in manufacturing emanating from increased investment in 
agro-processing whose potential has not yet been fully exploited. It is in this respect that current and 
future  initiatives  emphasise  forging  of  stronger  linkages  between  agriculture  and  manufacturing, 
particularly through upstream linkages to agro-related processing. 
The other aspect of manufacturing that we see as stimulating growth in future is increased processing 
of  minerals,  key  being  copper  (given  the  rapid  expansion  in  copper  output)  and  precious  stones. 
Distinguished  guests,  the  processing  of  copper  into  various  high  products  at  ZAMEFA  is 
commendable. However, there is still a lot of room for other investors to invest in the processing of 
copper  and  indeed  gemstones  and  precious  stones  that  are  mined  in  the  country  and  exported  as 
rough  stones.  Investing  in  downstream  processing  of  gemstones  and  other  minerals  will  not  only 
enhance our export earnings but create employment for our people. Government on its part will among 
other things facilitate improved access to capital and equipment, enhance skills, rehabilitate support 
infrastructure and facilitate linkages for marketing of processed gemstones and other minerals. 
Mr. Chairman, it is worth noting that the construction of Zambia’s third cement company by Zambezi 
Portland Cement and the planned establishment of an assembly plant by Tata Ltd of India, here in 
Ndola  are  all  welcome  developments  following  improved  confidence  in  our  economy,  which  should 
boost growth and create employment. I would like to urge the business community to invest in similar 
ventures. I am positive that with improved macroeconomic stability there will be more investment in 
such productive activities. 
Tourism 
Distinguished  guests,  tourism  is  another  of  Government’s  priority  sectors  from  which  growth  and 
employment  are  expected  to  be  generated.  One  of  the  key  aspects  of  Zambian  tourism  is  the 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2006
increasing participation of locals in the sector through among other activities establishment of lodges 
that are complimenting the traditional hotels and offering services with a Zambian touch. It is worth 
mentioning  that  tourism,  more  than  any  other sector,  is  labour  intensive  and  provides  jobs for  local 
people in both rural and urban areas. In order to stimulate the potential of this sector, there will be 
need to facilitate access to affordable and sufficient credit, entrepreneurship (private sector capacity 
building) training, improved marketing and provision of the necessary support infrastructure. Access to 
most of these tenets will enable the local small scale investors to provide competitive tourist services. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, may I also add that tourism should not be based on wild life (visiting national 
game  parks)  alone.  Here  on  the  Copperbelt,  you  have  a  unique  opportunity  to  develop  a  tourism 
industry based on copper mining - e.g. going underground. Collectively, we can also encourage and 
promote eco-tourism in much of rural Zambia. 
is  key 
tourism,  which 
Energy sector 
Mr. Chairman, a growing economy needs sufficient, stable and affordable energy supply. I have here 
in mind the electricity sector. Given abundance of water resources in the country, as earlier alluded to, 
the  potential  for  development  of  hydro-power  for  both  domestic  and  exports  is  quite  high.  Current 
estimates show that the country’s hydropower resource potential stands at 6,000 mega watts (MW) 
while the installed capacity is somewhere around 1,715.5 MW. These estimates are a testimony to the 
great potential this sector has. I am aware of several investment plans that ZESCO has put in place 
and which are aimed at exploiting this potential. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the opportunities identified above do not just happen. Zambians must make a 
conscious  effort  to  exploit  the  opportunities  identified.  We  must  not  view  Government  efforts  of 
promoting investments opportunities as meant for foreigners only. 
To  facilitate  long-term  planning  for  the  productive  sector,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  with 
measures  that  would  achieve  and  maintain  low  and  stable  inflation  and  interest  rates  as  well  as  a 
relatively stable exchange rate. This would provide a foundation for value addition in industries such 
as  agro-processing,  manufacturing,  construction,  and 
to  sustainable 
development. It is imperative that as a country, we move from being raw materials producers only to 
value addition in a stable macroeconomic environment. Apart from appropriate monetary policy and 
prudent  fiscal  policy,  the  stability  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  is  important  in  achieving  low  and 
stable  inflation.  The  objective  of  the  Bank  in  this  respect  would  be  to  achieve  a  non-volatile  but 
competitive exchange rate. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in order to achieve efficient allocation of resources and to promote savings 
and  investment,  there  is  need  to  achieve  and  sustain  low  and  stable  interest  rates.  As  earlier 
indicated,  it  is  worth  noting  that  lending  interest  rates  have  trended  downwards  in  the  recent  past 
owing  to  the  reduction  in  inflation.  Low  and  stable  interest  rates  would  create  conducive  credit 
conditions, which would improve accessibility and availability of credit to the productive sectors. This 
would  result  in  expansion  in  investment,  increased  production  as  well  as  enhanced  value  addition. 
This ultimately leads to sustainable economic growth required to accelerate poverty reduction in our 
country. 
Mr.  Chairman,  another  aspect  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  mission  is  that  of  ensuring  financial  system 
stability.  As  you  may  be  aware,  financial  system  stability  is  very  critical  to  the  maintenance  of 
macroeconomic stability. As a matter of fact, monetary policy would not be effective in pursuing the 
inflation objective if the financial system were not stable, as monetary policy actions are transmitted 
through financial institutions. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  with  its  efforts  of  ensuring  stability  in  the  financial 
sector. A stable financial system plays a catalytic role for financial institutions to provide the financial 
products that will contribute to the development of the insurance business. In this instance, the Bank 
will  continue  to  support  local  financial  institutions  in  their  efforts  to  mobilise  increased  savings 
particularly domestic, which should go towards sustained financing of the future productive activities in 
our  economy.  This  calls  for  increased  innovation  on  the  part  of  the  financial  sector  in  developing 
products to support a growing economy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  conclusion,  may  I  simply  state  that  as  we  consolidate  macro-economic 
stability, we are committed to achieving the necessary economic growth that will have a bearing on 
poverty levels in the country. In this regard, we see the future of the Zambian economy as one which 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 5
is highly diversified through resuscitating the industrial base to enable increased value addition and 
employment  creation.  We  strongly  believe  that  increased  value  addition  is  key  to  sustained 
development. I would like to urge you all and those in the private sector that are not with us to take 
advantage of the immense investment opportunities in our country. 
Let me once again thank you for inviting me to share my thoughts on this important topic. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2006
