Seong-Tae Lee: Monetary policy in an environment of low inflation 
Opening address by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Governor and Chairman of The Bank of Korea, at The Bank 
of Korea International Conference 2006, Seoul, 16 June 2006. 
 Greetings 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here to express my warm welcome to all of you attending "The Bank of Korea 
International  Conference  2006".  I  would  like  to  extend  particular  gratitude  to  our  keynote  speaker, 
Professor  Frederic  Mishkin  of  Columbia  University;  to  our  luncheon  speaker,  President  Un-Chan 
Jung  of  Seoul  National  University;  to  President  William  Poole  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St. 
Louis; and to our other chairpersons, speakers and discussants, for taking time out from their busy 
schedules to be with us today. 
This year's conference, marking the 56th anniversary of the Bank of Korea's establishment, deals with 
the theme of "Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation". Many central banks including the 
Bank  of  Korea  are  currently  facing  difficulties  conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  new  environment 
characterized by low inflation. In this regard, I believe that today's conference is very meaningful and 
most timely. 
Conducting monetary policy under low inflation 
As we are all aware, inflation throughout the world has declined since the mid-1990s. This is mainly 
attributable  to  the  emergence  on  the  global  stage  of  vast  low-wage  economies  such  as  China  and 
India;  to  productivity  gains  made  possible  by  information  technology  (IT)  development;  and  to 
intensified competition in both domestic and global markets. 
In addition to all of these factors, the increased credibility of central banks is also believed to have 
contributed to low inflation. Over the years, central banks around the world have been resolute in their 
pursuit of price stability, while working hard to enhance their capabilities in the conduct of monetary 
policy. Together with the continuing price stability, this has helped lower the inflation expectations of 
economic agents. 
The  case  is  much  the  same  in  Korea.  Both  consumer  price  and  core  inflation  rates  are  running  at 
levels  some  two  percentage  points  lower  than  those  we  saw  here  prior  to  the  currency  crisis. 
Particularly, the rate of core inflation nowadays is moving substantially below the lower bound of the 
Bank of Korea's target range. 
In the last few months, upward price movements have been observed in several countries. However, 
rising prices on a scale similar to those of the past are no longer expected to reappear for the time 
being,  as  firms  continue  their  efforts  to  improve  productivity  with  the  accelerating  integration  of  the 
world economy. Although there is concern that the run-up in oil prices may serve as a factor causing 
price  instability,  oil  has  much  less  effect  on  inflation  now  than  in  the  past.  This  is  mainly  due  to 
declining  oil-dependency  in  line  with  improved  energy  efficiency,  to  the  stabilization  of  inflation 
expectations, and so on. 
This  emergence  of  global  low  inflation  is  of  course  a  welcome  phenomenon  for  central  banks,  for 
whom price stability is the top priority. At the same time, however, it imposes upon them a new set of 
tasks. Above all, if monetary policy is conducted solely with an eye focused on price stability, factors 
representing threats to the stability of the whole economy could be overlooked. 
From early 2001, thanks to an environment of continued price stability, central banks around the world 
were  able  to  combat  economic  slowdowns  through  substantial  reductions  of  their  policy  rates.  The 
continuance  of  low  interest  rate  stances  over  a  significant  length  of  time,  however,  led  to  over-
abundant supplies of liquidity with accompanying side effects including a sharp rise in asset prices. As 
we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  Japanese  asset  bubble  in  the  late  1980s,  low  inflation  does  not  always 
guarantee financial and macroeconomic stability. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
How  best  to  deal  with  such  economic  imbalances  is  a  common  problem  that  many  central  banks 
nowadays  face.  Particularly  for  those  countries  that  have  selected  inflation  targeting  regimes,  this 
challenge is even more serious. 
In the case of Korea, during the protracted period of low interest rates, real estate prices rose sharply 
with the large increase in household sector borrowings from financial institutions. This now imposes a 
burden on the Bank of Korea in its conduct of monetary policy. 
Another challenge confronting central banks in the current era of low inflation is the possibility of their 
policy response ability becoming blunted. If nominal interest rates are low, in line with a stabilization of 
inflation  expectations,  there  is  little  room  for  central  banks  to  act  against  a  business  recession.  In 
particular, when nominal interest rates fall close to the zero bound due to deflation and other factors, 
there is likelihood of a loss of monetary policy effectiveness. 
Besides this, the response of the real economy to interest rates may change, and the sensitivity to 
inflationary pressures  may  lessen  in  an  environment  in  which  prices  have  remained  low and stable 
over an extended period of time. We need to keep a careful eye on these phenomena. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I look forward to a thorough and constructive debate on the various challenges facing central banks. I 
am  sure  that  today's  words  of  wisdom  from  many  eminent  professors  and  senior  central  bankers 
assembled here will be of great help to policy-makers at the Bank of Korea and other central banks as 
well. 
In closing, let me once again voice my deep gratitude to all of you taking part here, for sparing your 
precious time to be with us. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2006
