Shamshad Akhtar: Perspectives on Pakistan’s monetary policy developments 
Address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  as  chief  guest  at  the 
Woodrow Wilson Centre, Washington DC, 24 April 2006. 
The references for the speech can be found on the State Bank of Pakistan’s website. 
 Introduction 
I.  
In  line  with  trends  world-wide,  Pakistan  adopted  liberal  and  market-oriented  monetary  policies  and 
procedures in the 1990s. This involved a move to indirect tools of monetary policy management and a 
major departure from the age-old practice of relying on direct interventions, such as liquidity reserve 
ratios and credit ceilings and controls. Accompanying this policy change were gradual changes to the 
legal and institutional framework of monetary policy formulation, its targeting and operating procedures 
as  well  as  development  of  infrastructure  for  treasury  operation  to  allow  for  effective  open  market 
operations. 
These changes have had a subtle but profound impact on monetary management which in turn has 
impacted economic management of Pakistan. Like in several other places, there however remains a 
level of ignorance regarding the virtues and technicalities of monetary policy management and there is 
a  debate  on  some  key  issues.  Academics  often  question  the  relevance  of  policy  goals  and  tools 
because of their different ideological stances and positioning. Structuralists doubt whether monetary 
policy has any significant impact, in particular on price stability. Frustrations are also evident among 
different  economic  players  who  are  forced  to  change  their  behaviors  and  expectations  in  line  with 
tighter monetary discipline and interest rate adjustments. There is less understanding and patience for 
the  lagged  effects  of  monetary  policy  to  defuse  the  inflationary  pressures  or  to  ease  the  liquidity 
conditions. 
Recognizing the concerns and debate, Pakistan’s central bank regularly reviews the monetary policy 
in line with the evolving changes in the structure and workings of financial markets as well as in the 
broader  economic  and  political  environment.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  State  bank  has  further 
strengthened  the  market-orientation  of  policy  implementation,  cut  reserve  requirements,  developed 
open  market  operations,  increased  the  flexibility  of  liquidity  management,  sharpened  the  focus  on 
interest rates while maintaining reserve money as the operating target, improved the transparency of 
policy signals and shortened the maturity of interest rates serving as the fulcrum of policy. 
I propose to initially provide few perspectives on the evolution of monetary policy, its challenges and 
practical difficulties in its implementation and then share with you the monetary policy outlook for 2006 
and  finally  lead  into  a  discussion  of  some  of  the  complications  and  challenges  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
Policy, legal and institutional improvements in monetary management 
II.  
Monetary policy of Pakistan now for some years has been largely supportive of the dual objective of 
promoting economic growth and price stability. It achieves this goal by targeting monetary aggregates 
(broad money supply growth as an intermediate target and reserve money as an operational target) in 
accordance with real GDP growth and inflation targets set by the Government. 
Qualitatively monetary policy formulation and its implementation has improved substantially, benefiting 
from the following actions. 
• 
First,  legislative  changes  to  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  Act  has  empowered  the  SBP  and 
SBP Central Board to formulate, conduct and implement its monetary policy 
Second, a Monetary and Fiscal Board has been set up to ensure formal monetary and fiscal 
policy coordination and this Board is currently chaired by the Prime Minister in his capacity 
as Finance Minister with representation from economic ministries. 
Third, the Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act 2005 mandates a steady reduction in 
revenue deficit to zero by 30th June 2008 and maintaining it thereafter, and reducing total 
public debt to sixty percent of GDP by 2013 and below that limit thereafter. 
  BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
   These  two  principal  steps  lay  the  foundation  for  reducing  fiscal  subservience  of  monetary 
policy  that  for  years  served  to  complicate  monetary  management  and  allowed  the 
Government unlimited recourse to low and fixed interest rate financing. 
Fourth, SBP continues to refine the institutional mechanism for monetary policy formulation 
and its regular review. For instance, SBP has replaced the Open Market Policy and Review 
Committee by the Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Committee. This Committee meets 
bimonthly  to  establish  parameters  of  broad  monetary  policy  and  reviews  monetary  and 
economic  conditions  on  a  regular  basis  and  recommends  changes  in  monetary  policy 
instruments. 
Fifth,  SBP  Treasury's  capacity  has  been  strengthened  to  manage  financial  markets  and 
related  activities  more  effectively.  Proactive  conduct  of  monetary  operations  and 
management  of  market  volatility  has  helped  improve  market  flows.  The  Open  Market 
Operation (OMO) process has been institutionalized with better flexibility vis-à-vis tenors and 
frequency. From 1995 - 2005, SBP's monetary operations were focused on T-Bill Auctions 
and predetermined schedule of weekly OMOs of fixed tenors with no forecasting capability of 
market liquidity. This resulted in a high degree of volatility in Overnight (O/N) & Shortterm 
Money  Market  rates.  During  2005,  SBP  Treasury 
the  Money  Market 
Computerized  Reporting  System  (MM-CRS)  for  banks  which  helped  in  not  only  assessing 
the  market  liquidity,  but  to  improving  the  grip  on  market  gaps  and  interbank  activity,  thus 
strengthening the market management capability and SBP's forecasting capacity. 
Between Apr-Dec 2005, not only OMOs have been conducted both ways, but with a greater 
flexibility of tenors and frequency. Additionally, being active in the Swap Market has helped 
SBP  Treasury  to  mop-up/inject  USD/Rupee  liquidity  in  the  money  market,  as  and  when 
required,  thus  complementing  the  monetary  management.  This  has  resulted  in  managing 
excessive  market  volatility,  providing  effective  signals/direction  to  the  market  and  to  set 
benchmarks  for  the  rupee  inter-bank  market  in  line  with  the  monetary  policy  stance. 
Consequently, O/N Rates now move within a 100bp – 150bp range compared to previous 
trends when it fluctuated between zero to 9.0%. 
introduced 
Monetary outlook for 2006 and associated challenges. 
III.  
Current  fiscal  year  is  an  important  departure  from  the  preceding  few  years’  monetary  stance  and 
trends observed. After 3-4 years of lax monetary policy, Pakistan faced significant monetary overhang 
since the growth in broad money supply every year exceeded the growth in nominal GDP. 
Since the second quarter of 2005 monetary policy was tightened as the headline inflation, measured 
by Consumer Price Index (CPI), reached close to 11.1 in April 2005 - edging beyond the yearly target 
of 8% with Wholesale Price Index (WPI) pointing to the risk of moving to double digits. It has to be 
further recognized that given structural issues, the inflation threshold for developing countries is high - 
inflation in excess of 8- 12% is found to hurt economic growth.1
To start off, SBP raised discount rate to 9% in April 2005 which generated an uptrend in interest rates 
on T-bills auctioned and sharpened its yield curve: 3 months Tbill rate rose from 4.3 % Jan 05 to 8.1% 
by mid April 2006, 6 months 4.3% to 8.3% and one year from 5% in early 05 to 8.8%. 
Has this monetary tightening achieved the desired results i.e. of curbing inflationary pressures? Latest 
trends of CPI are comforting but reveal different levels of deceleration across CPI categories and point 
to  lingering  concerns  whether  the  deceleration  will  continue  and/or  if  the  decline  in  CPI  and  its 
components is there to stay. Some numbers are illustrative of this concern. 
• 
While CPI had dropped to 6.9% YOY by March 2006 (compared to 10.2% recorded in the 
same month last year) with food inflation falling to 5.4% (compared to 13.3% in March 2005), 
the  level  of  decline  in  nonfood  inflation  has  been  modest  at  8.0%  (compared  to  8.2%  in 
March 2005). 
                                                      
1   Khan, S. Mohsin and Abdelhak, S. Senhadji: Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between Inflation and Growth. IMF Staff 
Papers, Volume 48, Number 1, June 2001. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
  While  month  to  month  comparison  point  to  sharper  decline  in  inflation  rate,  the  period 
average  CPI  and  12  month  moving  average  CPI  are  still  at  8.2%  and  8.6%,  respectively 
which is above the target inflation rate of 8%. 
The  core 
the 
deceleration in inflationary pressure as core CPI was down to 6.7% in March 2006 relative to 
7.6%  in  March  FY05  and  the  decline  is  6.1%  (compared  to  8.0%  in  March  2005),  if  20% 
trimmed mean is calculated. 
the  non-volatile  components)  however  confirms 
inflation  (measuring 
Realities and complications facing monetary policy 
IV.  
In evaluating the effectiveness of the monetary stance on inflation there is need to recognize some 
economic  realities  and  complications  which  eventually  help  in  developing  an  appropriate  policy 
response. 
financial  development  Nexus:  MOHSIN  S.  KHAN  AND  AXEL 
Inflation,  growth  and 
SCHIMMELPFENNIG  (2005)2  conclude  an  inverse  relationship  between  inflation  and  real  per  capita 
GDP:  when  inflation  was  8  percent  on  average  during  1978-1991,  per  capita  growth  averaged  3 
percent but when inflation rose to 11% during 1992 and 1997 real per capita growth averaged only 1 
percent and it further recovered as inflation fell to 5 percent. Further this study concludes that 
“the  direct  inflation-growth  nexus  suggests  a  threshold  in  the  range  of  4  to  9  percent,  while  the 
inflation-financial development nexus suggests a lower threshold of 3– 6 percent….. Based on this, it 
is  further  recommended  that  SBP  adopts  an  inflation  target  of  5  percent.”  This  evidence  has  been 
arrived at based on empirical evidence of a number of studies: For instance: 
• 
In a panel of 140 countries, Khan and Senhadji (2001) estimate inflation threshold to be 1–3 
percent for industrial countries and 7–11 percent in developing countries. 
Focusing  on  Middle  East  and  Central  Asian  countries  including  Pakistan,  Khan  (2005) 
estimates the optimum inflation rate to be 3 percent and argues that policy-makers should 
keep inflation below 6 percent to avoid a negative impact on growth. 
Mubarik (2005) using time-series data for Pakistan from 1973 to 20003 finds that inflation in 
excess of 9 percent harms short-run growth in Pakistan. 
Hussain (2005) estimates thresholds of 4–6 percent beyond which inflation adversely affect 
growth. 
   Furthermore,  inflation  hurts  growth  by  making  financial  intermediation  costly  as  high  interest  rates 
raise costs and lower long-run real returns for the corporate sector, while introducing adverse selection 
and moral hazard problems. 
Lags in transmission mechanism. Empirical evidence indicates that there is a 6-24 months time lag 
in  developing  economies  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impact  on  aggregate  demand.  In 
Pakistan,  studies  point  that  this  lag  is  in  the  range  of  12-18  months.  It  is  because  of  this  that  the 
tolerance level of the economy for the fairly accommodative and easy monetary policy adopted over 
FY00-04  was  remarkable  as  inflation  remained  low  over  this  period  with  an  average  level  of  3.9%. 
Admittedly,  fiscal  borrowing  pressures  during  this  period  being  low  also  provided  scope  for  private 
sector credit growth. 
However,  monetary  overhang  of  few  years  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  finally  generated 
inflationary pressures which remained entrenched for some period. Consequent monetary tightening, 
now  in  place  for  over  one  year,  is  eventually  showing  signs  of  transmission  channels  working  as 
evident from CPI deceleration. 
                                                      
2   Mohsin S. Khan and Axel Schimmelpfennig: Inflation in Pakistan: Money or Wheat? Paper presented in SBP conference, 
November 2005. 
3   The authors use the Hodrick-Prescott filter to reduce volatility in the data which potentially removes relevant information. 
Furthermore, in a single country case, the threshold will be restricted to be within the range of inflation experienced by that 
country. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
An  SBP  Working  Paper  on  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy4  studies  the  relative 
importance of four channels through which monetary policy shocks are transmitted in Pakistan. While 
other transmission channels have yet to fully manifest themselves, banks have been observed to play 
a  major  role  in  the  transmission  mechanism  with  private  sector  credit  as  the  leading  indicator.  But 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  of  this  channel  is  weak  because  of  the  low  impact  of  the 
interest  rate  channel,  and  also  because  the  transmission  mechanism  cannot  be  developed  on  the 
basis of the short end of the yield curve, it needs a spectrum of rates in order to develop further, and 
the  government  has  kept  closed  the  long-term  rate  structure  by  holding  off  PIB  auctions.  Going 
forward, we need to work on strengthening the transmission mechanism by (a) further strengthening 
the banking sector, and (b) developing the market and the long-term yield curve. 
Is inflation a structural supply side or monetary phenomena? While supply side factors do play a 
role in short term, inflation is always a long-term monetary phenomenon driven by demand pressures. 
Inflation trends follow broad money growth and private sector credit growth closely with a lag of about 
12  months  and  above.  Given  these  factors,  (i)  SBP  monitors  CPI  food  and  non-food  inflation  and 
(ii) two core inflation indictors that (a) excludes all volatile components and constitutes principally of a 
non-food and non-energy index and (b) another is derived as 20% weighted trimmed mean.5 While 
(i) reflects overall price trends, the main driver for monetary policy is the core inflation. 
On the supply side, price behavior is impacted by structural impediments facing the agriculture and 
industry  sector  which  ranges  from  year  to  year  fluctuations  in  crops  and  industrial  capacity, 
distributional problems and sometimes hoarding practices. In Pakistan, supply factors influence 55% 
of CPI which accounts for three commodity groups (i.e. food and beverages, fuel and lightening and 
transport and communication) and food alone accounts for 40.3% of CPI and wheat (and wheat flour) 
has a weightage of 5.7%. 
Is inflation a fiscal phenomenon. Studies for Pakistan have confirmed that excessive government’s 
recourse to the central bank for financing fiscal deficit is inflationary in the long-run and complicates 
monetary  management  and  its  implementation.  Fiscal  deficit  has  a  direct  impact  on  inflation  as 
government expenditure constitutes a large part of aggregate expenditure that might lead to demand 
pull inflation, and an indirect impact as the fiscal deficit is financed partly through central banks. With 
the reduction in fiscal deficit in recent years, both the direct and indirect impacts of deficit have been 
low and headline inflation remained low. 
Exception  to  this  is  FY06  when  fiscal  pressures  have  been  stronger  partly  because  of  the 
unanticipated  earthquake spending  but  more significant because  of  the  inherent  weaknesses  in  the 
structure of taxes as the tax/GDP ratio has been low. 
These trends have interrupted compliance with the Fiscal Responsibility Act. The Act underscores a 
zero primary balance and a steady reduction in the overall fiscal balance with the objective of reducing 
Pakistan’s  debt/GDP  ratio  to  sustainable  levels.  Fiscal  dominance  of  monetary  policy  would  remain 
until  the  taxation  structure  is  overhauled  and  there  are  explicit  legal  provisions  which  limit 
government’s recourse to central bank financing that in turn will induce further fiscal discipline while 
encouraging mobilizing funding requirements from the market. 
Legally, SBP has recourse to section 9(A) of the SBP Act which allows the SBP to take a decision, in 
consultation with the board, on the total government borrowing as specified below: 
“the Governor may ….. determine and enforce, in addition to the overall expansion of liquidity, the limit 
of credit to be extended by the Bank to the Federal Government, Provincial Governments and other 
agencies …..”  
Aside  from  the  need  for  better  understanding  in  this  area,  issuance  of  debt  securities  has  the 
additional benefit of diversifying debt financing sources by encouraging development of the long term 
debt market in Pakistan. 
                                                      
4   Ahmed, Noor & Hastam, Shah & Agha, Asif Idrees and Mubarik, Yasir Ali (2005), “Transmission Mechanism of Monetary 
Policy in Pakistan”, SBP Working Paper Series. 
5   All CPI items are arranged according to their YOY changes in a given month, 20% items showing extreme changes are 
excluded with 10% of the items at the top of the list and 10% of the items at the bottom of the list. The weighted mean of the 
price changes of the rest of the items is core inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2006
The impact of monetary tightening on inflation would have been more visible if the government had 
kept its recourse to central bank financing at manageable levels. Over the last few months, there were 
concerns that the drift in fiscal management would persist and derail low and stable inflationary trend.6 
The stock of Marketable Treasury Bills held by SBP did rise to over Rs 540 billion but this was brought 
down to Rs 400 billion as the Government retired a part of its obligations with PTCL proceeds. 
Minimizing fiscal dominance is a key pre-condition for an efficient conduct of monetary policy and for 
enhancing central bank independence.7
Medium term outlook 
V.  
In reviewing the monetary policy stance at this juncture, SBP recognizes the potential downside risks 
to the medium term macroeconomic outlook: 
• 
First,  international  crude  prices  remain  a  potent  threat  to  overall  price  stability.  While  the 
pass-through of international crude prices has been managed well so far, further escalations 
could immediately endanger the fragile balance that currently prevails between the budget 
management, oil companies and consumers. 
Second,  portfolio  switches  and  liquidity  mismatches  that  have  emerged  have  produced 
sizeable  volatility  in  reserve  money  with  an  upward  pressure  on  money  supply,  combined 
with  a  shortening  of  maturity  of  deposits  in  the  banking  system.  Demand  deposits  have 
grown faster than time deposits and certificate of deposits have become an important source 
of funding for certain banks. These developments warrant continuous and careful monitoring 
so as to be on guard against the incipient build-up of potential demand pressures. 
Third, continued vigilance is required to examine possible strains on credit quality especially 
to  ensure  financial  stability  and  thereby  derive  synergies  with  macroeconomic  and  price 
stability. 
Fourth, the surge in imports has produced a sizeable expansion in the current account deficit 
in the first half of FY06 despite a significant of growth of exports. Higher oil prices accounted 
for 28% of the increase in oil bill and 47% of the increase in external current account deficit. 
Concurrently, there has been high demand for capital goods, raw material and intermediate 
goods  (including  fertilizer,  non-ferrous  metals  and  iron  and  steel)  and  some  of  this  is 
expected to help in enhancing industrial capacity utilization. Management of external current 
account  deficit  pressures  and  their  non-debt  financing  would  be  critical  for  the  next  few 
years. Recognizing this, the foreign exchange reserves would be kept at prudent levels to 
provide cover for six months of imports. 
Finally,  in  view  of  the  upward  pressures  on  aggregate  demand  including  pick  up  in 
investment activity, a reduction in the revenue deficit and further improvement in the fiscal 
deficit will add comfort to macroeconomic management. 
    Inflation targeting 
VI.  
Recently, there has been a proactive debate in Pakistan on alternative monetary policy frameworks - 
monetary  targeting  and  nominal  income  targeting  versus  inflation  targeting.  Former  is  questioned 
because  of  an  unpredictable  relationship  between money  and  nominal  income  and  instability  in  the 
demand for money. 
Advocates of inflation targeting have pointed out to the substantive success across industrialized and 
emerging  market  economies  of  achieving  a  high  degree  of  price  stability.  At  the  same  time  it  is 
recognized that preconditions for adopting inflation targeting are now evolving in Pakistan, for instance 
there: 
                                                      
6   Draft Paper on “Is Inflation a Fiscal Phenomenon”, Economic Policy Department, SBP. 
7   Akbari, Ather H. and Randukwa, Wimal, “Inflation Targeting in a Small Emerging Market Economy: The Case of Pakistan” 
and  Khalid,  Ahmed  M.,  “Is  Inflation  Targeting  the  Best  Policy  Choice  for  Emerging  Economies  ?  A  Survey  of  Emerging 
Market Experiences and Lessons for Pakistan.” 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 5
Exists Legal framework for central bank’s operational independence 
Exists Fiscal Responsibility Act which offers an opportunity to impose greater fiscal discipline 
Financial sector is growing and has benefited from privatization of banking system 
Pakistan is now exploiting domestic and international capital markets 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Some studies have further recommended that exchange rate would have to be factored in the inflation 
targeting framework not only to the extent that the inflation forecast is affected by the exchange rate, 
but also insofar as the SBP may need to adjust the monetary policy instruments to limit the impact of 
exchange rate changes on other objectives, say, external competitiveness.8
There are however concerns that preconditions for Pakistan switching to inflation targeting do not exist 
and  that  commodity  and  import  prices  are  a  major  determinant  of  inflation  in  Pakistan,  rather  than 
monetary policy. As has been discussed earlier, there is sufficient evidence and grounds that inflation 
is a monetary phenomenon too and this will continue to prevail more visibly as the economy further 
matures.  Given  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  associated  with  emerging  markets  which  have  good 
growth prospects but remain prone to a series of shocks (oil prices, export prices, droughts, floods, 
and  so  on)  a  move  towards  adoption  of  suitably  modified  inflation  targeting  would  be  in  order  to 
prevent the drift in headline inflation rate, as well as their potential reverberations. 
It is this consideration, which is motivating SBP to launch development of appropriate data and models 
to assess the determinants of inflation and to be able to forecast inflation. 
Conclusion 
In  the  short-term,  while  pursuing  monetary  aggregate,  SBP  will  need  to  maintain  its  monetary 
tightening  stance  and  enhance  its  communication  to  influence  inflation  expectations,  and  counter 
concerns  about  the  adverse  effects  of  higher  interest  rates  on  competitiveness  and/or  growth. 
However it is important to note that monetary policy alone will not be able to contain all the rise in 
inflationary  pressures.  In  particular,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  the  government  to  supplement  its 
administrative supply-side measures with policies to address market structure problems. Inflationary 
pressures arising from supply side factors respond more to legal and administrative measures, and 
are less sensitive to monetary tightening. 
Going forward, SBP will be launching preparatory work on inflation targeting. Among others, it will be 
important for SBP to explore what is an appropriate index to target, whether some components of the 
CPI  should  be  systematically  excluded  from  or  added  to  the  CPI  index,  what  new  statistics  and 
refinements in data (including information on stock market indicators and real estate prices) might be 
needed for developing model and analytical framework for inflation forecasting. There will be need for 
introducing  supportive  legal  and  regulatory  framework  which  allow  for  targeting  inflation  and  allow 
greater  operational  independence  to  the  central  bank,  while  ensuring  that  SBP  has  the  desired 
transparency  and  communication  strategy  critical  for  transition  to  an  eventual  adoption  of  inflation 
targeting. 
                                                      
8   As discussed in Zaidi (2005). 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2006
