Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign 
embassy representatives, Oslo, 6 April 2006. 
The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s 
monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Inflation Report 1/06 and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may 
differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First of all, I would like to thank you for taking the time to attend this event. It provides me with an 
opportunity to present Norges Bank’s view of the economic outlook for our country.  
Increased globalization 
The  last  decade  has  been  characterized  by  increasing  economic  integration  and  considerable 
changes in the international division of labour. Global trade is growing at a markedly faster pace than 
production, thanks to technological advances and a sharp reduction in the costs associated with trade 
in goods, services and information.  
World financial markets are also in flux. Increased global trade and economic integration have led to a 
strong rise in cross-border capital flows. Foreign ownership of businesses has grown considerably. At 
the  same  time,  savings  are  increasingly  being  invested  in  foreign  countries.  The  world  is  gradually 
moving closer to becoming one market.  
These  changes  have  been  made  possible  by  trade  liberalization  in  the  post-war  period.  Through 
negotiations in the WTO, earlier on the GATT, agreements have been reached on removal of trade 
barriers,  dismantling  of  tariff  barriers,  removal  of  subsidies,  introduction  of  anti-dumping  measures, 
and  agreements  have  been  entered  into  for  textiles,  agricultural  products  and  other  goods  and 
services. Today, almost all countries participate as members or observers in these negotiations and 
the issues are far-ranging.  
Political  changes  in  many  regions  have  amplified  the  tendency  of  increased  globalization.  Over  the 
past few decades, China has changed course and is now a member of the WTO. Its share of total 
exports is growing rapidly. The countries within the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) have 
increased their exports markedly since the early 1990s. India is at the starting-line.  
Many of these countries have large labour forces that offer their services at very low wages, and these 
labour  resources  are  available  to  companies  that  compete  on  world  markets.  The  working-age 
population in rural China for instance is nearly the same as that of the entire OECD area. Many are 
seeking new opportunities and work in the urban areas.  
Low labour costs and more efficient transport and communication attract labour-intensive production. 
Production of goods and services is being transferred from Norway and other high-cost countries to 
amongst others the Baltic countries, Poland, China, India or other emerging economies.  
There  are  many  examples  showing  that  competition  in  selling  highly  skilled  services  is  also 
intensifying. Norwegians are offered myopia surgery in Turkey. Dental care and other medical services 
are also offered, at prices that are substantially lower than here. The Norwegian oil and gas company 
Norsk Hydro reports that almost 300 000 hours of engineering services for the natural gas field Ormen 
Lange were supplied by Indian engineers, located in India.  
The shift in the division of labour is now influencing real wage growth in industrialised countries. The 
risk that a business will have to wind up operations or move abroad is dampening costs as bargaining 
power  is  being  transferred  from  workers  to  employers.  In  a  number  of  European  countries,  wage 
growth is also being influenced by labour inflows from the new EU member states.  
Increased trade has engendered higher demand for shipping services and favourable freight rates for 
a period. This has in turn led to a boom in the shipbuilding industry. At the same time, high energy 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 1
prices are boosting investment in the petroleum and electricity sectors, with considerable impetus to 
the engineering industry. Growth in Asia is also having a favourable impact on many metal prices.  
Norway’s terms of trade are improving. Prices for our imported goods are falling in relation to prices for 
goods we export. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the terms-of-
trade gains for the mainland economy have also been high.  
The situation in Norway differs from that of its Nordic neighbouring countries. Sales of Swedish and 
Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume terms, but prices are falling. Denmark has a 
diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a steady path.  
Strong development in the petroleum sector 
High oil prices have provided a strong impetus for the petroleum industry and have led to a strong 
increase in activity on the Norwegian continental shelf. Many projects have been launched to increase 
recovery from fields in operation, and investment in the petroleum sector has increased sharply. The 
large  development  projects  relating  to  the  natural  gas  fields  Snøhvit  outside  of  Hammerfest  and 
Ormen  Lange  at  Aukra  have  made  a  large  contribution  to  the  high  level  of  investment.  Both  these 
projects  also  involve  considerable  onshore  development,  which  may  have  generated  stronger 
impulses to the business sector locally than pure offshore projects. Investment activity associated with 
these two gas fields will probably decline in the period to completion in 2007.  
Production has reached record levels and is expected to remain high for some years, a continued high 
activity  level  is  anticipated,  and  many  new  development  projects  are  being  considered  by  the 
authorities.  
The oil age in Norway has spanned 30 years and it appears that it will continue for many years ahead. 
Our petroleum resources can be divided into three, of which approximately 1/3 has been produced by 
now, 1/3 has been found but not produced, and 1/3 remains to be found.  
The  Norwegian  authorities  have  been  successful  in  ensuring  that  the  bulk  of  the  petroleum  wealth 
benefits society as a whole. Both the state’s ownership interests through the State’s Direct Financial 
Interest  in  petroleum  activities  (SDFI)  and  the  tax  system  have  contributed.  The  companies  that 
extract  oil  earn  a  reasonable  return  on  their  investments  and  have  incentives  to  invest,  but  the 
economic rent has essentially accrued to the general public.  
The authorities have so  far also  been  successful  in  smoothing the  use  of  petroleum revenues over 
time.  This  is  important  for  several  reasons.  First,  it  is  misleading  to  look  upon  the  cash  flow  from 
petroleum activities as income. The appropriate economic perspective is to see the transfer of cash 
flow  to  investments  abroad  as  a  way  of  transferring  capital  from  one  account  to  another  –  from 
petroleum to foreign securities. By doing so, we diversify risk.  
Second, the size of the cash flow from petroleum activities varies. If petroleum revenues were to be 
used as they accrue, this would lead to wide fluctuations in demand in the Norwegian economy.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues has an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business and 
industry.  A  high  level  and  substantial  variations  in  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  would  have  a 
negative impact on internationally exposed industries.  
The  establishment  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  and  the  spending  guidelines  for  petroleum 
revenues are intended to meet these challenges.  
High oil and gas production and high prices, combined with high returns, have resulted in the value of 
the  Government  Pension  Fund  rising  rapidly  in  recent  years.  The  Fund  is  approaching  the  nominal 
value of one year’s GDP and may reach two in the course of the next decade. This is based on the 
assumption  that  oil  prices  remain  high  over  the  next  few  years  and  then  fall  to  about  USD  30  per 
barrel.  
The government bases its withdrawals from the Pension Fund on an average real return of 4 per cent 
for financing current expenditure. Given this spending rule, the return may come to finance more than 
15  per  cent  of  government  expenditure  in  10  years.  We  thus  reap  considerable  benefits  from 
managing our petroleum wealth well. The return represents future income that we forego if we draw on 
this wealth today. But even with this source of income, more than 80 per cent of expenditure must be 
covered by other sources. Financing the large pension payments that will have to be disbursed in the 
coming decades will be very demanding in any event.  
2 
 BIS Review 30/2006
The Pension Fund has a prudent investment strategy, with broad risk diversification, and a real return 
of  4  per  cent  is  expected  in  the  long  term.  There  are  examples  of  companies  and  investors  that 
achieve a considerably higher return on capital over time. However, it is important to remember that 
for each successful investor earning high returns, there are many others with the same ambition and 
risk willingness, but with a record of poorer performance and bankruptcies. The Government Pension 
Fund cannot run the risk of ending up among the worst performers.  
The  globalisation  of  financial  markets  provides  the  Fund  with  good  opportunities  for  investing  and 
diversifying risk. However, we cannot insulate the Fund from wide annual swings in the value of the 
investments.  We  invest  in  international  equity  markets  where  prices  fluctuate  widely.  These 
fluctuations are the reason why equity investments generate a higher return over time. The best year 
in the Fund’s history so far was 2003, when it posted a real return of 11 per cent. This stood in sharp 
contrast to the previous year’s result, which was -6 per cent.  
Globalization  and  cyclical developments  have  been kind  to  the Norwegian  economy.  Few countries 
are benefiting as much as Norway – and losing as little – in the current environment of freer trade in 
goods and services and cross-border labour mobility.  
Economic developments and prospects 
Let me now turn to the current economic situation and the outlook for the years ahead.  
Economic growth in Norway has generally been strong over the past 15 years, although with some 
cyclical variations. A clear upturn in the years from 1993 to 1998 was followed by a period of more 
moderate growth and a mild downturn in 2002 and into 2003.  
Wage developments reflect and influence business cycles. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years is being accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn since summer 2003.  
The expansion has gradually broadened. Low interest rates have contributed to a relatively sharp rise 
in  household  demand  throughout  the  upturn.  At  the  same  time,  solid  global  growth  has  led  to 
increased  demand  for  many  Norwegian  export  goods  and  high  prices.  Fixed  investment  in  the 
petroleum sector has increased sharply, resulting in growing demand for goods and services supplied 
by mainland enterprises. Mainland fixed investment has also picked up.  
The Norwegian economy has continued to exhibit high growth this year. So far in the economic upturn, 
the  mainland  economy  has  grown  by  an  average  of  about  3.5  per  cent  quarterly,  measured  as  an 
annualised rate.  
Thus far, a substantial share of output growth has been attributable to strong growth in person-hours 
worked. It has taken time for employment to pick up, but this is occurring now. The labour supply and 
production equipment set a limit in the short term on the level of production in Norwegian enterprises. 
When production approaches this limit, wage and price inflation will pick up.  
Our assessment of total capacity utilisation in the economy is reflected in our estimate for the output 
gap.  The  output  gap  is  defined  as  the  percentage  difference  between  actual  output  and  potential 
output.  Potential  output  indicates  the  level  of  output  that  is  consistent  with  price  and  cost  stability. 
Output has increased more rapidly than potential output for 2-3 years. Much of the available capacity 
has now been put to use. We estimate that capacity utilisation was approximately ½ per cent above 
normal at end-2005.  
Despite strong economic growth, inflation is still low. As the recovery became more broadly based, 
inflation gradually began to edge higher. In the second half of 2005, the 12-month rise in consumer 
prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) varied between 1 and 1½ 
per cent, before surprising on the downside in December and January. In February, inflation edged up 
again. Monthly variations in this measure of core inflation have been fairly pronounced recently.  
The  trend  in  prices  for  consumer  goods  over  the  past  two  or  three  years  is  a  result  of  favourable 
developments  in  the  Norwegian  and  global  economies.  Low  inflation  is  being  accompanied  by  real 
income  growth  and  a  rise  in  production.  In  other  words,  low  inflation  is  not  the  result  of  declining 
demand, activity or employment.  
Growth among our trading partners is still solid, and appears on the whole to be somewhat stronger 
than  assumed  a  few  months  ago.  High  commodity  prices  have  contributed  to  somewhat  higher 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 3
inflation, but so far underlying inflation has not been pushed up. Key rates remain low among many of 
our trading partners. Market participants expect a gradual increase in key rates in the period ahead, 
both in Sweden and the euro area. In the US, the key rate is expected to increase by a further 50 
basis points before peaking. In the UK, the key rate is expected to remain virtually unchanged in the 
period ahead.  
Interest rate developments and buoyant growth have led to a sharp rise in credit growth in the past few 
years. Property and equity prices are also rising sharply in many countries, including Norway.  
Debt developments in Norway through the 1990s can probably be viewed to some extent as a delayed 
adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many households 
burned  their  fingers  immediately  after  the  deregulation.  At  the  same  time,  the  credit  market  has 
deepened. New loan products have emerged, and it is easier to raise loans. Borrowers can choose 
their  repayment  schedule.  Credit  and  housing  market  liberalisation  provides  homebuyers  with  the 
opportunity to establish a high housing standard early in their adult lives and draw on this capital later 
in life. In recent years, household income growth has been solid, household confidence regarding the 
future has been strong and households probably perceive higher income levels as permanent. This 
may have resulted in a further rise in house prices and debt. In addition, low real interest rates are 
currently contributing to this.  
Based on the backdrop of the economic development and the outlook for continued high energy prices 
ahead,  a  mechanical  application  of  the  4  per  cent  fiscal  rule  implies  that  the  use  of  petroleum 
revenues will increase by more than NOK 31 billion from 2006 to 2009. With continued solid growth in 
the  Norwegian  economy,  it  would  be  in  line  with  the  fiscal  rule  if  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  is 
lower than the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund – Global over a few years.  
We  estimate  an  approximately  unchanged  structural  non-oil  deficit  in  2007,  and  assume  that  fiscal 
policy will provide some stimulus to aggregate demand and output in 2008 and 2009, but somewhat 
less than a mechanical application of the fiscal rule based on our oil price assumption would imply.  
The authorities conduct fiscal policy knowing how monetary policy will react. Today’s flexible inflation 
targeting regime, giving weight to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment, 
establishes  a  firm  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  provides  clear  guidelines  on  how  monetary 
policy is to respond in different situations.  
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. Flexible inflation targeting builds a bridge between the long-
term  objective  of  monetary  policy,  which  is  to  keep  inflation  on  target  and  provide  an  anchor  for 
inflation expectations, and the more short-term objective of stability in the real economy.  
This  contributes  to  predictability  for  those  who  take  decisions  about  saving  and  investment  today, 
although the result of those decisions depends on how the economy develops in the future.  
Monetary policy must strike a balance between the various objectives. Strong growth in the Norwegian 
economy, a tighter labour market, a pronounced rise in equity prices and high credit growth must be 
weighed against unexpectedly low inflation.  
Norges  Bank’s  projections  in  the  Inflation  Report  are  based  on  an  interest  rate  path  that  in  the 
Executive  Board’s  assessment  strikes  a  reasonable  balance  between  the  objectives  of  monetary 
policy. Previously, we based our analysis on various technical assumptions concerning future interest 
rates.  One  such  assumption  was  market  interest  rate  expectations.  As  from  late  last  year,  we  now 
base our projections on an interest rate path that we consider reasonable. This gives Norges Bank 
more  active  ownership  of  the  projections  that  are  presented  and  of  the  uncertainty  we  believe 
surrounds these projections.  
In the baseline scenario presented in Inflation Report 1/06, interest rates in Norway and abroad are 
assumed to rise somewhat faster in the longer term than current forward rates may imply. Exchange 
rate movements are difficult to project. The interest rate path at home and abroad may be consistent 
with an approximately unchanged krone exchange rate.  
The high growth rate in the economy implies a gradual pick-up in price and cost inflation. With interest 
rate developments as outlined above, core inflation is projected to increase from about 1¼ per cent 
today to about 2 per cent at the end of 2007. There are prospects of a further increase in inflation, with 
inflation  projected  to  be  close  to  the  target  of  2.5  per  cent  three  years  ahead.  The  output  gap  is 
expected  to  increase  over  the  next  two  years,  but  will  peak  at  a  fairly  moderate  level  as  gradual 
increases in the interest rate dampen demand growth.  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2006
On  the  basis  of  the  analysis  in  the  Inflation  Reports,  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  assesses  the 
consequences  for  future  interest  rate  development  and  adopts  a  monetary  policy  strategy  for  the 
period to the next Report.  
Interest-rate setting since last summer has been oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest 
rate  –  in  small,  not  too  frequent  steps  –  towards  a  more  normal  level.  Based  on  Norges  Bank’s 
assessment of the driving forces in the economy, this strategy appears robust. Output growth is strong 
and the labour market is becoming tighter more quickly than expected. Higher growth in the economy 
may  in  isolation  suggest  a  faster  increase  in  the  interest  rate  ahead.  This  would  reduce  the  risk  of 
bottlenecks in the economy, with rising cost inflation and continued debt build-up. On the other hand, 
the objective of bringing inflation up towards the target and anchoring inflation expectations argues for 
restraint in the upward movement of interest rates.  
Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided at its meeting on 16 March to raise the sight deposit rate by 
0.25 percentage point to 2.50 per cent. The current assessment indicates an interest rate path where 
the interest rate is raised by about 1 percentage point this year, in line with expectations in the market. 
The sight deposit rate should be in the interval 2¼ – 3¼ per cent in the period to the publication of the 
next Inflation Report on 29 June 2006, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in line 
with the projections.  
Uncertainty  surrounding  the  interest  rate  reflects  the  monetary  policy  response  to  unexpected 
disturbances  to  inflation,  output  and  the  exchange  rate.  We  have  illustrated  the  uncertainty 
surrounding forecasts for the interest rate, inflation and the output gap with fan charts. The width of the 
fan charts is based on historical disturbances. However, there is no certainty that future disturbances 
will be of the same nature and scale. The wider the fan charts are, the more uncertain the projections.  
Conclusion 
Increased globalization and the ensuing terms of trade improvements have exposed the Norwegian 
economy to a significant upward income shock. This has magnified the domestic upswing.  
So  far,  however,  strong  growth  impulses  have  not  led  to  major  imbalances  or  strong  upward  price 
pressures.  
This may be seen as an indication that the macroeconomic framework, most notably the fiscal and 
monetary policy regimes, has been quite successful so far in shielding the Norwegian economy from 
excessive  fluctuations.  More  importantly,  while  we  adhere  to  the  macroeconomic  framework  it  will 
shield the economy when oil prices fall and our terms of trade are reversed.  
Thank you for your attention!  
BIS Review 30/2006 
 5
