Usha Thorat: Treating bank customers fairly - regulatory initiatives  
Inaugural address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Financial 
Planning  Congress  2006  on 
“Establishing  consumer  Centric  Financial  Services  Delivery 
Infrastructure”, organised by the Financial Planning Standards Board India, New Delhi, 29 May 2006.  
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  Congress  organised  by  the  Financial  Planning 
Standards Board India. Today, there is much more awareness of the need to protect consumers' rights 
and  ensure  fair  practices  in  financial  services.  Countries  are  designating  specific  regulators  or  self 
regulatory  watch  dogs  for  overseeing  whether  there  is  mis-selling  and  whether  fair  and  transparent 
practices  are  being  observed  by  financial  intermediaries.  While  specific  grievances  relating  to 
deficiency in financial services can be a matter for consumer courts or the concerned ombudsman, 
from a systemic point of view, it is recognised that services have to be benchmarked against codes 
and  standards  developed  by  all  stakeholders  and  as  a  matter  of  public  policy.  In  this  context,  an 
organisation such as the FPSB India whose mission is the development and promotion of standards 
for financial planning professionals to benefit among others, the general public is indeed timely and 
relevant. The FPSB needs to be congratulated for holding this Congress, which I am sure, will throw 
up a number of issues keeping in view the central theme viz. the interests of the consumer. I am glad 
to note that the FPSB India is also focusing on financial literacy and solutions for the rural population.  
The focus on the common man is extremely important in our country as he is usually the neglected 
one. At the annual meeting of IBA last Friday, the Hon'ble Finance Minister has talked about financial 
inclusion and targeting the bottom of the pyramid. With greater penetration of formal financial services 
into  the  economy  and  society,  there  is  a  need  for  ensuring  evolution  and  adherence  to  codes  and 
standards in delivering financial services to the financially excluded.  
The banking system in India today has perhaps the largest outreach for delivery of financial services. 
Apart from the traditional financial products viz. deposits, loans and money transfer, bank branches 
are  also  serving  as  an  important  conduit  for  delivery  of  mutual  funds,  other  capital  market  and 
insurance products. The number of savings accounts with scheduled commercial banks in India stood 
at little over 300 million in March 2005. If one were to take into account cooperative banks, the number 
would  be  even  higher.  Taking  into  account  the  number  of  households  in  the  country  this  number 
certainly represents a significant coverage. 
Hence, evolving standards for bank service to depositors and the common person has to be a very 
important  part  of  financial  planning  standards.  Recognising  an  institutional  gap  in  measuring  the 
performance of the banks against codes and standards based on established best practices, Reserve 
Bank of India has taken the initiative in setting up the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India 
(BCSBI).  It  is  an  autonomous  and  independent  body,  adopting  the  stance  of  a  self-regulatory 
organisation in the larger interest of improving the quality of customer services by the Indian banking 
system.  Banks register  themselves with  the  Board  as  its  members  and provide  services  as  per  the 
agreed standards and codes. The Board in turn, monitors and assesses the compliance with codes 
and  standards  which  the  banks  have  agreed  to.  The  registration  of  banks  with  the  BCSBI,  as 
members,  enables  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  derive  greater  supervisory  comfort,  so  also  the 
customers  of  the  member  banks.  This  would  also  enable  the  BCSBI  to  accommodate  the  bank-
specific  differences  in  the  customer  service  related  benchmarks  set  by  the  banks  for  themselves.  I 
think  there  would  be  considerable  synergy  in  the  FPSB  exchanging  views  and  interacting  with  the 
BCSBI.  
The  BCSBI  represents  the  latest  in  a  series  of  initiatives  taken  by  RBI  for  addressing  the  issues 
relating  to  fair  practices  for  bank  customers  especially  the  common  person.  I  wish  to  take  this 
opportunity today to give you an outline of Reserve Bank’s efforts in this field and its vision for the 
future, in which the Financial Planning Standards Board, can play a complementary role. 
In the late seventies, RBI had advised banks to adopt the recommendations of the Talwar Working 
Group constituted by Government in 1975 to study the quality of customer service in banks. This was 
more or less the first regulatory initiative in imposing certain discipline on the banks to render quality 
service. This was followed by several and guidelines covering different areas of bank's interfaces with 
customers.  
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (CPPAPS) 
In November 2003, while presenting the mid-term review of the annual monetary and credit policy for 
the  year  2003-04,  Governor  Reddy  brought  into  sharp  focus  the  inadequacy  in  banking  services 
available  to  common  person  and  the  need  to  benchmark  the  current  level  of  service,  review  the 
progress periodically, enhance the timeliness and quality, rationalize the processes taking into account 
technological  developments,  and  suggest  appropriate  incentives  to  facilitate  change  on  an  ongoing 
basis.  Accordingly,  he  set  up  the  Standing  Committee  on  Procedures  and  Performance  Audit  on 
Public Services under the able and sagely Chairmanship of Shri S.S.Tarapore. The approach of the 
CPPAPS was unique in that it started its evaluation from the customer-end and was totally customer-
centric.  Shri  Tarapore  and  other  members  of  the  Committee  undertook  incognito  visits  to  bank 
branches including RBI’s offices for a first hand experience of difficulties faced by the public at large. 
The  Committee  was  both  clinical  and  critical  in  its  observations  and  made  a  number  of 
recommendations  covering  an  individual  customer's  dealing  with  the  bank  in  the  areas  of  foreign 
exchange, currency and government transactions including pension, besides the main relationship as 
an  account  holder.  I  am  taking  this  opportunity  for  highlighting  the  regulations  issued  to  banks  on 
aspects covering bank accounts following the Committee's recommendations. 
• 
Banks are required to inform customers upfront about the requirement of minimum balances 
and  the  charges  if  such  balances  are  not  maintained.  They  are  also  required  to  inform 
customers one month in advance any changes in such minimum balances and charges.  
Banks  are  also  required  to  provide  a  choice  of  a  ‘no  frills  account’  where  the  minimum 
balance is nil or very small but having restrictions on number of withdrawals etc. to facilitate 
common man’s access to bank accounts. 
It has been clarified to banks that NRO accounts can be held jointly with residents. 
In case of collection of cheques , banks are required to formulate and disclose their policy for 
affording  immediate  credit,  time  frame  for  collection  and  interest  payment  for  delayed 
collection, taking care to ensure that the interests of the small depositors are fully protected. 
The policy should clearly lay down the liability of the banks by way of interest payments due 
to delays for non-compliance with the standards set by the banks themselves. Compensation 
by way of interest payment, where necessary, should be made without any claim from the 
customer.  
Banks are required to provide both the drop box facility and the facility for acknowledgement 
of  the  cheques  at  the  regular  collection  counters  and  no  branch  should  refuse  to  give  an 
acknowledgement if the customer tenders the cheques at the counters.  
Depositors cannot be forced to sign a declaration that dispatch of cheques book by courier is 
at  the  depositor's  risk  as  it  constitutes  an  unfair  practice.  Banks  should  also  ensure  that 
cheque books are delivered over the counters on request to the depositors or his authorised 
representative. 
Banks have been advised to ensure that brief, intelligible particulars are invariably entered in 
passbooks  /  statements  of  account  and  they  adhere  to  the  prescribed  monthly  periodicity 
while sending statement of accounts. 
It has been clarified to banks that payment to the survivor /nominee of a deceased depositor 
where there is a valid nomination or where the account has been opened with a survivorship 
clause  is  a  valid  discharge  of  liability  provided  inter  alia  it  has  been  made  clear  to  the 
survivor(s) / nominee that he would be receiving the payment from the bank as a trustee of 
the legal heirs of the deceased depositor, i.e., such payment to him shall not affect the right 
or claim which any person may have against the survivor(s) / nominee to whom the payment 
is made. In such cases insistence on production of legal representation is unwarranted and 
would, invite serious supervisory disapproval. In such case, therefore, while making payment 
to  the  survivor(s)  /  nominee  of  the  deceased  depositor,  the  banks  have  to  desist  from 
insisting on production of succession certificate, letter of administration or probate, etc., or 
obtain  any  bond  of  indemnity  or  surety  from  the  survivor(s)/nominee,  irrespective  of  the 
amount standing to the credit of the deceased account holder. 
In  case  where  the  deceased  depositor  had  not  made  any  nomination  or  for  the  accounts 
other than those styled as "either or survivor" (such as single or jointly operated accounts), 
banks have been told to adopt a simplified procedure for repayment to legal heir(s) of the 
BIS Review 57/2006
       2 
      depositor keeping in view the imperative need to avoid inconvenience and undue hardship to 
the  common  person.  In  this  context,  banks  may,  keeping  in  view  their  risk  management 
systems,  fix  a  minimum  threshold  limit,  for  the  balance  in  the  account  of  the  deceased 
depositors, up to which claims in respect of the deceased depositors could be settled without 
insisting on production of any documentation other than a letter of indemnity. 
In  the  case  of  term  deposits,  banks  are  advised  to  incorporate  a  clause  in  the  account 
opening  form  itself  to  the  effect  that  in  the  event  of  the  death  of the  depositor,  premature 
termination  of  term  deposits  would  be  allowed.  The  conditions  subject  to  which  such 
premature withdrawal would be permitted may also be specified in the account opening form. 
Such premature withdrawal would not attract any penal charge. 
In  order  to  avoid  hardship  to  the  survivor(s)  /  nominee  of  a  deposit  account,  banks  are 
advised to obtain appropriate agreement / authorization from the survivor(s) / nominee with 
regard to the treatment of pipeline flows in the name of the deceased account holder. 
Banks  are  advised  to  settle  the  claims  in  respect  of  deceased  depositors  and  release 
payments to survivor(s) / nominee(s) within a period not exceeding 15 days from the date of 
receipt of the claim subject to the production of proof of death of the depositor and suitable 
identification of the claim(s), to the bank's satisfaction. 
Information  should  not  be  gathered  in  the  name  of  KYC  with  the  intention  of  using  it  for 
cross-selling of services. The banks should obtain the information required for opening an 
account independent of any other information that they may seek for cross-selling purposes 
with the consent of the customer. The forms containing this information must not be a part of 
the account opening form. 
The KYC procedure for opening accounts for those persons who intend to keep balances not 
exceeding rupees fifty thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) in all their accounts taken together and the 
total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed rupees one lakh (Rs. 
1,00,000/-) in a year has been simplified to enable those belonging to low income groups 
without documents of identity and proof of residence to open banks accounts. In such cases 
banks can take introduction from an account holder on whom full KYC procedure has been 
completed  and  has  had  satisfactory  transactions  with  the  bank  for  at  least  six  months. 
Photograph of the customer who proposes to open the account and his address need to be 
certified by the introducer. 
Considering the significant growth in credit cards in the recent years and the experiences of banks and 
customers with this product, the Reserve Bank issued detailed guidelines on credit card operations of 
banks  in  November  2005.  These  guidelines,  aimed  at  protecting  customer’s  interest,  include  clear 
disclosures  of  terms and conditions,  including rate of  interest  on  annualised basis,  prohibit  issue  of 
unsolicited cards, ensure customer confidentiality, and also cover matters such as ‘do not call’ registry, 
fair practices in recovery and collection.  
Revised Banking Ombudsman Scheme 2006 
Keeping  in  view  the  large  number  of  complaints  continuously  being  received  against  banks,  the 
Banking Ombudsman Scheme has been revamped this year to enlarge its extent and scope of the 
authority  and  functions  to  specifically  cover  redressal  of  grievances  against  deficiency  in  banking 
services, including a variety of banking products/services, such as, loans and advances, credit cards, 
non-payment/ inordinate delay in the payment or collection of cheques, drafts, bills, non-issue of drafts 
to  customers,  non-adherence  to  prescribed  working  hours  by  branches  etc.  Banking  Ombudsman 
(BO)  functions  as  an  arbitrator  in  respect  of  any  dispute  with  mutual  consent  of  both  the  parties 
provided that the value of the claim in such dispute does not exceed Rupees ten lakh. Under the new 
scheme,  the  complainants  will  be  able  to  file  their  complaints  in  any  form,  including  online.  The 
complainant can appeal against the awards given by the Banking Ombudsmen.  
A quick review of the complaints received at the various offices of the Ombudsman since the revised 
scheme came into force reveals that the number of complaints received by the BO’s offices has more 
than doubled to 13,483 during the quarter ended March 31, 2006. This increase could be attributed to 
the  complainants  tending  to  approach  the  Ombudsman’s  office  or  RBI  directly  instead  of  first 
approaching the concerned bank’s internal machinery for redressal. There is an urgent need for banks 
to strengthen their own internal grievance redressal machinery and set up nodal officials at various 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 3
centres. Banks should give wide publicity to the names/contact addresses etc. of such nodal officers 
so that members of public can forward their grievances to these officials. If no response is received 
within  a  month's  time  or  if  the  customer  is  dissatisfied  with  the  response  he  can  approach  the 
concerned Banking Ombudsman. Currently BO offices are functioning at 15 centres. 
Fair Practices Code of Indian Banks’ Association 
Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA)  has  also  played  a  complementary  role  in  efforts  for  improving 
customer service in banks. IBA had come out with model Fair Practices Code covering lenders liability, 
depositors’  interest  that  cover  what  a  customer  can  expect  from  his  bank.  It  also  indicates  the 
responsibilities of banks while giving different kinds of banking services. IBA has further come out with 
a  Model  Deposit  Policy.  The  Fair  Practices  Code  has  been  recently  reviewed  and  made  more 
comprehensive in consultation with the BCSBI and is expected to set higher benchmarks for customer 
services in banks. The banks will be entering into covenants with the BCSBI for adhering to the FPC.  
Ensuring reasonableness of bank charges 
As the Reserve Bank was receiving several representations from public about unreasonable service 
charges being levied by banks, it was felt that the existing institutional mechanism in this regard is not 
adequate. Accordingly, and in order to ensure fair practices in banking services, the RBI has recently 
issued instructions to banks making it obligatory for them to display and continue to keep updated, in 
their  offices/branches  as  also  in  their  website,  the  details  of  various  services  charges  in  a  format 
prescribed by it. The Reserve Bank has also decided to place details relating to service charges of 
individual banks for the most common services in its website. Furthermore, Reserve Bank has since 
constituted a working group headed by the Banking Ombudsman, Mumbai and including nominee of 
IBA  and  representatives  of  customers  to  formulate  a  scheme  for  ensuring  reasonableness  of  bank 
charges and to incorporate this in the Fair Practices Code, the compliance of which will be monitored 
by the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI).  
Customer service – institutional machinery 
In the area of customer service, the institutional machinery in banks should comprise - 
• 
At the Board level, every bank has been asked to constitute a Customer Services committee 
of  the  Board including as  invitees experts  and  representatives of customers  to  enable  the 
bank to formulate policies and assess the compliance thereof internally. 
Every  bank  has  been  asked  to  convert  the  Ad  Hoc  committee  of  executives  on  customer 
service  headed  by  the  CMD/ED  into  a  Standing  Committee  that  periodically  reviews  the 
policies  and  procedures  and  working  of  the  bank’s  own  grievance  redressal  machinery. 
These committees have been found to be very useful as the CEO of the bank and his top 
management  team  is  singularly  focused  on  matters  relating  to  customer  services  at  the 
meetings  of  these  committees  and  decisions  for  improving  services  tend  to  get  taken 
instantly, cutting across different departments. 
Each bank is expected to have a nodal department/ official for customer service in the HO 
and  each  controlling  office,  whom  customers  with  grievances  can  approach  in  the  first 
instance  and  with  whom  the  Banking  Ombudsman  and  RBI  can  liaise.  More  interaction 
between the RBI/BO and the nodal officers will enable banks to take necessary correctives 
at the local level.  
  Financial inclusion 
In the context of the focus on financial inclusion and distress amongst farmers, there is a need for the 
formal financial system to look at increasing financial literacy and financial counselling. As part of the 
Community  Reinvestment  Act  in  US,  banks  are  expected  to  contribute  towards  educating  persons 
from socially and financially disadvantaged groups on matters relating to their financial needs. Indian 
banks and financial market players should actively look at promoting such programs as part of their 
corporate social responsibility. I had recently visited a cooperative society having linkages to women 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2006
SHGs in urban slums, where the borrower was counselled in a full day program, on the implications of 
the loan, how the interest is calculated and so on, so that she is totally aware of its features. I wish the 
banks would have similar program for their clientele including farmers. There is clearly a lot to be done 
in this area.  
Advisory services 
Finally, given the vision and mission of the Financial Planning Standards Board India, I would urge the 
Board  to  develop  standards  for  financial  advisory  services  covering  marketing,  advisory  and 
counselling.  While  doing  so  the  Board  may  specifically  look  at  possible  areas  of  conflict  of  interest 
between selling and advising. In this context, I would draw reference to a recent report on 'Conflict of 
interest in financial services' of a group set up by RBI, available on our website. The FPSB India could 
evolve codes of ethics and other measures to minimize unacceptable conflicts or improper acts.  
I  thank  the  Financial  Planning  Standards  Board  India  for  this  opportunity  and  wish  it  success  in  its 
endeavour.  
BIS Review 57/2006 
 5
