Y V Reddy: Reflections on India’s economic development 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Council  on  Foreign 
Relations, New York, 12 May 2006. 
 Friends,  
I am greatly honoured by the invitation from the Council on Foreign Relations to interact with you as 
part  of  the  C.  Peter  McColough  Series  on  International  Economics.  I  intend  sharing  with  you 
reflections on India’s economic development, not in terms of advocacy or analysis but through a liberal 
recourse to anecdotes along with some illustrations. By virtue of my experience and background, the 
remarks  may  combine  a  worm’s  view  with  a  bird’s  eye-view  of  the  Indian  economy,  in  its  broader 
social context.  
In the presentation today, I will – 
a)  Provide glimpses of the process of some of the institution building in India that enabled the 
progress we have made; 
b)  Analyse  the  current  macro-economic  issues  as  identified  by  our  recent  monetary  policy 
statements; 
c)  Assess the outlook for the Indian economy by inviting attention to changing balances; 
d) 
Illustrate the importance of balance and harmony with reference to reforms in the external and 
financial sectors; and 
e)  Conclude with a discussion on some factors relevant to the prospects for India in the global 
economy.  
Institution building  
Among the institutions that constitute strong pillars of current optimism on growth prospects over the 
long term are: uniquely flexible federalism, democracy with universal adult suffrage, and coexistence 
of public and private sector. They deserve some elaboration.  
At  the  time  of  independence,  there  were  genuine  apprehensions  as  to  whether  India  would  hold 
together.  It  is  true  that  at  the  time  of  independence,  there  were  over  500  native  or  princely  states, 
which had a complex net of relationships with the colonial government in terms of paramountcy. They 
had  to  be  integrated  into  a  constitutional  framework  of  a  federation.  The  flexibility  of  the  federal 
structure  in  the  constitution  assimilated  divergent  tendencies  as  they  evolved  through  a  process  of 
political accommodation. For example, in the year 2000, three new States were carved out. We are a 
Union of States but a number of States had to be created or re-created on several occasions, while 
boundaries were also altered in some cases. India, as per the constitution, started with Hindi as the 
official language of the union along with English as an alternate, for a defined period, which again is 
being  extended.  The  constitution  lists  national  languages  which  were  14  in  1950  and  are  now 
expanded  to  22.  Every  currency  note  that  we  print  has  denomination  expressed  in  most  of  these 
national languages. In brief, India has worked hard to build itself into the viable and vibrant political 
entity that it is today in a short period while encouraging democracy to take roots. 
The constitution  of USA  or  the  developments  in  UK first  established  democracy  and  then  gradually 
conceded  to  universal  adult  suffrage  over  the  passage  of  a  couple  of  centuries.  India  started  with 
universal adult suffrage in 1950 and over the decades there has been democratic pressure for rapid 
and  full  inclusion  of  all  sections  in  the  mainstream.  Other  democracies  started  with  equality  and 
conceded  affirmative  actions  as  a  concession  to  realities.  India  asserted  the  goal  of  equality  but 
incorporated  enabling  affirmative  actions  in  the  constitution  for  a  specific  period  –  which  has  been 
extended from time to time by common consent. Thus, democracy has taken roots in India essentially 
because of, what Stephen Cohen calls, the genius of Indian people for political accommodation and 
management. 
The expansion of the public sector since independence in this milieu of socio-political transformation 
has been a major contributor to today’s strengths. Expanded educational opportunities, with nominal 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 1
fees, led to high quality in education. People could  take advantage of the educational opportunities 
since the process was accompanied by expanding job-opportunities in the public sector, based mainly 
on  performance.  In  this  background,  millions  were  convinced  that  they  needed  to  work  hard  at 
education  to  be  assured  of  vertical  economic  and  social  mobility.  The  vast  public  sector  has  also 
ensured  the  mobility  of  the  middle  class  on  a  nationwide  basis  and  has  guaranteed  a  vibrant 
middleclass.  This,  in  turn,  produced  skilled  workers  and  professionals  as  well  as  a  large  consumer 
base and a potential entrepreneurial class. The large public sector has co-existed with a private sector 
though the growth of private sector was sometime enabled and often constrained, by the public sector. 
The private sector, for its part, learnt to manage, survive and benefit from the public sector while also 
being constrained by it. In brief, it is the combination of federalism, democracy and the mixed economy 
that produced a pan-Indian vibrant middleclass of professionals and entrepreneurs. 
Thus  was  built  an  inclusive  democracy  that  virtually  celebrates  plurality  and  yet  promotes  a  self-
respecting nation proud of its unity in diversity. We believe that economic development needs to be 
viewed  in  this  broader  context.  Prime  Minister  Manmohan  Singh  summed  up  the  idea  in  this  very 
forum – Council on Foreign Relations on September 24, 2004, in the context of Russel C. Leffingwell 
Lecture : 
 
 
 
 
 
“This,  (impressive  performance)  of  course  is  the  result  of  sustained  efforts,  over  the  past  50 
years to build those institutions that provide the underpinnings of economic development over 
the  longer  term,  efforts  that  began  early  on  as  part  of  the  vision  of  India’s  first  prime-
minister,  Jawaharlal  Nehru.  It  is  also  the  result  of  economic  reforms  which  have  increased 
our competitiveness in recent years.”  
Select current issues 
Though  there  are  several  issues  relevant  to  our  economy,  in  the  monetary  policy  statements  in 
January  2006  as  well  as  April  2006,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  flagged  three  issues  as  critical  for 
maintaining the momentum of growth with stability, namely, the physical infrastructure, fiscal deficit, 
and agriculture. 
First, the poor state of the physical infrastructure, both in terms of quantity and quality, has been rightly 
agitating the business class and the policy-makers. There are some reasons to expect a satisfactory 
outcome, provided the improvement in regulatory framework is sustained. The current investments are 
demand-led  and  therefore,  are  likely  to  have  a  short-gestation  coupled  with  a  rapid  payback  on 
completion. Technological developments and rapid enhancement of domestic construction capabilities 
should aid the process of speedy and efficient implementation. Given the healthy fundamentals of the 
domestic  financial  sector  and  the  enhanced  interest  of  foreign  investors,  funding  should  not  be  a 
serious  problem.  When  I  mentioned  my  optimistic  assessment  on  these  lines  in  Basel,  one  of  the 
comments  was  “with  miserable  infrastructure,  India  is  already  competitive  in  many  areas.  I  should 
wonder what happens if the infrastructure really improves".  
Second,  fiscal  consolidation  is  taking  place  both  at  the  Centre  and  States  and  there  is  greater 
consensus  now  on  the  broad  directions.  The  recent  budget  of  the  central  government  brings  the 
consolidation  on  track,  targeting  a  fiscal  deficit  of  three per cent  by  2009  while  eliminating  revenue 
deficit.  Recommendations  of  the  Twelfth  Finance  Commission  (Chairman,  Dr.  C.  Rangarajan)  have 
reinforced the process to enable further fiscal consolidation at the State level. Our studies on State 
finances  in  Reserve  Bank  of  India  give  grounds  for  optimism  in  regard  to  their  fiscal  health.  From 
2003-04, there has been a sharp correction both in the revenue and fiscal deficits; and the process of 
correction is primarily due to buoyancy in revenue receipts, States’ own tax revenue as well as transfer 
and devolution of resources from Centre. It is noteworthy that for all the States together, the revenue 
deficit relative to the GDP is estimated to decline to 0.4 per cent in the current year from one per cent 
in the previous year and 2.7 per cent in 1990-2000. The corresponding picture for the Gross Fiscal 
Deficit relative to the GDP is 3.1 per cent compared to 3.7 per cent in the previous year and 4.7 per 
cent  in  1990-2000.  However,  the  issues  of  power  subsidies  and  ensuring  quality  in  the  delivery  of 
services, especially with regards to education and health, do need to be addressed. 
Third,  and  perhaps  the  most  difficult,  is  agriculture.  A  majority  of  the  workforce  is  dependent  on 
agriculture  while  the  GDP  growth  due  to  agriculture  is  marginally  above  the  rate  of  growth  of  the 
population,  in  contrast  to  a  strong  growth  rate  in  the  non-agriculture  sector.  This  has  generated  an 
understandably widespread feeling of absolute as well as relative deprivation among the farmers and 
the  agricultural  labour.  While  the  scope  for  better  terms  in  the  global  trading  environment  is  still 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2006
elusive, India has a large enough domestic market to facilitate a more rapid growth in agriculture. Yet, 
legislative, institutional and attitudinal changes to supplement enhanced public and private investment 
may  be  needed.  The  Reserve  Bank,  for  its  part,  is  redoubling  its  efforts  in  revitalising  the  rural 
cooperative  credit  system,  in  strengthening  Regional  Rural  Banks,  in  providing  incentives  to 
commercial banks for investments in rural economy and in ensuring an adequate and timely delivery 
of credit at an appropriate price. In fact, we are mounting a study of legislation and implementation of 
non-institutional money lending, as it is the single largest source of credit for the farmers.  
Outlook - changing balances 
Progress in India is essentially one of shifting balances. These balances shift almost continuously, and 
often  imperceptibly,  and  it  is  possible  to  hold  that  one  way  of  assessing  the  outlook  for  the  Indian 
economy would be to appreciate these changing balances. 
First, there is a changing balance in the debates on economic reforms. So far, the discussions have 
percolated from the English media to the vernacular (with the divide between the English media and 
the vernacular corresponding roughly to a socio-economic/urban-rural divide). It is interesting to note 
that while 17 leading English newspapers have a combined circulation of 6.3 million and readership of 
17.9  million,  54  leading  vernacular  newspapers  in  India  have  a  circulation  of  21.4  million  and  a 
readership of 197.2 million. Important economic issues are more and more likely to be articulated and 
shaped by the vernacular media and distilled up to the English media, since it is the vernacular that 
predominantly represents the rising 200 million middleclass. 
Second,  there  are  changes  in  the  vertical  balance  between  Central  and  provincial  or  State 
governments. The trend towards globalisation results in many of the discretionary powers of the Union 
government  in  the  economic  area  becoming aligned  with bilateral  or  multilateral requirements while 
critical  areas  for  role  of  government  in  the  economy  like  law  and  order,  education,  health,  power, 
water, etc., remain substantively in the domain of the provinces. That a few years ago, many in the 
world  would  not  have  heard  of  State  chief  ministers  while  they  do  so  now,  points  to  an  increasing 
decentralisation of economic reforms.   
Third, the horizontal inter-provincial balance is also changing. Now, States are competing for private 
investments - the drivers of growth – whether domestic or foreign. A competition among the States for 
the  Central  government  assistance  on the  basis  of  backwardness  or  need,  has  been  replaced  with 
competition for private investments facilitating growth.  
Fourth, within governments both at the union and provincial levels, regulatory agencies are expanding 
their role to reduce the discretionary or possible pro-political cycle authority of governments. 
Fifth,  the  most  dynamic  element  of  reform  is  the  mix  between  public  and  private  ownership  of 
enterprises. The rebalancing of public enterprises is not dramatic but the entry and threat of the private 
sector and a diversified ownership of public enterprises through partial disinvestment have meant a 
change in both the operating environment and internal business culture of these enterprises – which, 
until recently, had employed and retained the largest pool of the best and the brightest. It is no wonder 
that  the  equity  markets  in  India  have  given  a  big  ‘thumbs  up’  to  many  public  enterprises,  including 
banks.  
Sixth, the enormous and growing diversity in the funding and provision of essential services, such as 
health and education, is worth exploring. The enrolment in private schools or colleges, often funded 
through grants-in-aid, exceeds that in public sector in many States. On the one hand, this is positive - 
since the fees are currently affordable, but on the other, it is a cause for concern since it implies that 
the public sector is not able to deliver. In the short term, this is a waste of resources and in the long 
term  has  the  potential  for  undermining  the  greatest strength  of  India  –  a  credible  hope  for  millions, 
particularly  the  poor  and  under  privileged,  that  there  is  a  better  tomorrow  through  better  education. 
The enhancement of the quality of education – primary, secondary and collegiate – in the large public 
sector is a most difficult yet crucial challenge. Some efforts are being made in this regard by many, 
such as Azim Premji - the Chairman of one of the largest software companies in India – and the Tatas, 
one  of  the  largest  industrial  houses  in  India.  Ensuring  access  to  quality  education  for  the 
underprivileged in India is an issue that should be of greatest concern to all thoughtful and concerned 
people of the world. Similar concerns can be raised with regard to the vital area of public health. Here, 
the private sector is an alternative, though often not an affordable one for most Indians. I am happy to 
note the efforts of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation as well as the participation of McKinsey’s 
Rajat Gupta in the Public Health Foundation of India. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 3
fields  such  as  software,  pharmaceuticals,  biotech  and 
Seventh, there is a dramatic though not fully appreciated rebalancing within the private sector in terms 
of  what  may  be  called  the  “professionalisation”  of  industrial  houses.  A  new,  highly  qualified  and 
professional generation of leadership has replaced the older order in established industrial houses. At 
the same time, there has been an explosion of an entirely new set of industry leaders, particularly, in 
newer 
financial  services.  The 
professionalisation is also accompanied by the globalisation of the operations of the Indian industrial 
houses. 
Eighth,  sometimes  it  is  argued  that  large  size  is  absent  in  the  Indian  industry,  but  it  is  the  wide 
spectrum of size and diversity that imparts dynamism and generates an entrepreneurial class as well 
as employment. In the recently held Davos summit, an Indian industrialist referred to two aspects of 
our business environment. He said that Indian business is often faced with chaos and out of chaos 
comes creativity. He added that the cost per unit of output may often not be very low in India, but the 
cost per unit of innovation is!   
Ninth, the relationship between labour and management is being gradually rebalanced. It has certainly 
improved  since  the  1991  reform.  The  recent  data  on  strikes  and  number  of  working  days  lost  bear 
testimony to the maturity and wisdom of all concerned. Often, the labour market is cited as a problem 
but many globally competitive Indian businesses do not seem to perceive it as an insurmountable one. 
Further, the implementation of provisions relating to labour market under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
which is broadly in line with international standards, is becoming more pragmatic and less dogmatic in 
many progressive States. However, the need for greater labour flexibility with attendant appropriate 
legislative changes, keeping in view the socio-economic conditions, is undeniable.   
Tenth,  there  is  often  a  concern  about  jobless  growth,  but  in  reality  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish 
between lack-lustre growth in employment in the organised sector and expansion and intensification of 
employment  in  the  unorganised  sector.  By  way  of  illustration,  thirty  years  ago,  eighty  per  cent  of 
engineers or doctors moved into the organised sector, while now, sixty to seventy per cent are self-
employed. This implies a shift in the balance from what may be termed as ‘job orientation’ to ‘work 
orientation’. Despite these positive developments, the greatest challenge before the nation is to create 
productive work for the millions that are entering the market.  
Finally, during the process of reform there is an initial tendency to be pro-business to get quick results 
while  for  lasting  impact,  policy  needs  to  be  pro-market.  The  processes  of  decision-making,  often 
considered painfully slow in India, are gradually emphasising an increasingly pro-market stance.  
Reforms in external and financial sectors - balance and harmony 
What  are  the  dominant  characteristics  of  reform  in  the  external  sector?  On  the  trade  account,  the 
approach  was  to  indicate  the  direction  and  to  encourage  participants  to  equip  themselves  better, 
notwithstanding  the  risks  of  anticipatory  actions  undermining  the  policy  intent.  In  this  context,  a 
distinction  needs  to  be  made  between  promoting  growth  and  enhancing  efficiency  in  the  context  of 
economic reforms. Trade reforms in India were designed to enable domestic firms to restructure and 
spread  the  costs  of  adjustments  over  time  –  thus  enabling  enhanced  efficiency  through  a  gradual 
process.  Growth  is  promoted  on  a  longer-term  basis  in  view  of  efficiency  gains  that  were  made 
possible by the gradualist approach.  
On  the  capital  account  also,  there  has  been  a  continuous  resetting  with  a  view  to  the  accelerating 
gradual pace of liberalisation depending on the domestic and global situation but the direction has not 
been compromised. While there is full convertibility on the current account, and also for all authorised 
inflows  as  well  as  outflows  on  the  capital  account,  the  process  of  managing  the  capital  account 
consists  of  operating  two  routes,  namely  automatic  and  non-automatic.  As  far  as  foreign  direct 
investment  is  concerned,  consistent  rebalancing  in  the  desired  direction  is  done  by  expanding  the 
automatic route and by moving most of the prohibited transactions to the non-automatic but approval 
route and at a later stage, to an automatic or deregulated regime. There is full convertibility for portfolio 
flows through Foreign Institutional Investors as far as equity markets are concerned. A major area of 
managing the capital account relates to external debt and the objective in this regard is, in a way, to 
ensure that short-term debt obligations conform to what is known as Guidotti-Greenspan prescription 
for  avoiding  crisis  in  the  emerging  economies.  As  regards  residents,  a  distinction  is  made  between 
resident  individuals,  the  corporates,  and  financial  intermediaries  -  and  a  process  of  gradual 
liberalisation for each category, as appropriate, is the general approach. Currently, there is virtually full 
capital  account  convertibility  for  Indian  corporates  while  a  roadmap  for  the  future  in  regard  to  fuller 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2006
capital account convertibility is expected from a recently appointed committee on the subject, by end-
July 2006.  
The emphasis on balance and gradual rebalancing, keeping in view the desired direction and the need 
to  avoid  any  roll-back,  is  thus  evident  in  regard  to  the  external  sector  and  is  equally  significant  for 
progress in the financial sector -basically following the visionary design of Dr. C. Rangarajan, one of 
my predecessors. A few illustrations of gradualism may be in order.  
First,  the  Reserve  Bank  was,  till  recently,  de  facto  obliged  to  provide  money  to  the  government 
whenever needed, be it through overdrafts or through private placement of government debt with the 
Reserve Bank or through participation in the primary issues. These have been eliminated with effect 
from  April  of  this  year,  but  the  formal  process  was  commenced  in  1997,  with  a  memorandum  of 
understanding  with  the  Government  to  eliminate  automatic  monetisation.  More  recently,  private 
placement or participation was avoided. After being convinced that the new system works in practice, 
it  has  been  possible  to  discharge  the  relevant  mandate  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management Act with effect from April 2006.  
A  second  example  relates  to  relaxations  in  foreign  exchange  regulations.  The  Foreign  Exchange 
Regulations Act, 1973 prohibited most of the forex transactions unless exempted, and so, the initial 
process  of  liberalisation  involved  enlarging  the  list  of  exemptions.  This  culminated  in  replacing  the 
above  Act  with  the  Foreign  Exchange  Management  Act  in  June  2000,  where  all  transactions  are 
permitted unless prohibited or regulated.  
A third example relates to competition and ownership of banks. Competition has been enhanced by 
gradually removing administered interest rate structures, permitting entry of new private sector banks, 
and expanding the branch network of foreign banks. Unlike in most countries, a branch of a foreign 
bank in India can conduct any business that a bank incorporated in India may do. On ownership, while 
over 70% of the banking business was in fully public sector-owned banks ten years ago, it is now less 
than 10%, since there is a mix of public and private ownership in most of the public sector banks. In 
fact, in many large public sector banks, foreign ownership is close to domestic private ownership. The 
two largest private sector banks have foreign ownership of about 70%. The shares of most domestic 
banks  are  quoted  and  traded  in  local  stock  exchanges  and  if  stock  market  is  any  indication  of  the 
outlook, the prospects for public sector banks are bright.   
In  this  process  of  reform  in  the  banking  sector,  the  legacy  problem  of  non-performing  assets  were 
managed by the public sector banks themselves - with no banking crisis or ex post fiscal bail out. The 
government has actually benefited from the infusion of some capital in the public sector banks which 
was  done  to  comply  with  the  Reserve  Bank's  prudential  regulations.  By  all  accounts,  the  banking 
system as a whole has improved in terms of efficiency and resilience gradually, with the mix between 
public and private and domestic and foreign banks, changing incrementally to enable non-disruptive 
enhancement of competitive efficiency and stability.  
Along  with  continuous  rebalancing  within  each  sector,  harmony  in  reforms  across  sectors  is 
continuously sought. In a way, the complex tasks of timing and sequencing of reforms in India have 
been managed through continuous rebalancing within a broadly harmonised policy-framework, often 
incrementally  and  rarely  in  a  dramatic  fashion.  For  example,  the  progress  in  reforms  in  monetary 
management  and  financial  sectors  has  been  impressive,  and  in  the  external  sector,  de  facto,  very 
significant. Progress in the fiscal sector has not been as rapid, influencing the pace of reform in the 
financial and external sectors. Similarly, flexibilities in the real economy are necessary if the fruits of 
marketisation  are  to  be  obtained  without  the  attendant  risks.  Several  rigidities,  especially  in  the 
regulatory environment and the agriculture sector, are being gradually removed and reform in other 
sectors cannot be out of tune. Finally, clarity in property rights, enforcement, dispute resolution etc., on 
an  expeditious  and  reasonably  predictable  basis  is  also  being  pursued  on  several  fronts,  so  that 
further  progress  can  be  made  –  say,  in  pricing  of  risks  by  banks  as  efficiently  as  they  happen  in 
developed economies.  
Our  experience  in  regard  to  development  and  regulation  of  financial  markets  differs  from  that  of 
developed economies. The latter experienced a co-development of markets, regulations, and practices 
within the economies and at a latter stage, through a process of evolution, integrated first domestically, 
and finally, globally. In our case, non-existent or underdeveloped domestic market participants had to 
change their outlook rapidly. The regulators had to develop the requisite skills, and the self-regulatory 
organisations  needed  to  be  founded  and  strengthened.  All  these  had  to  take  place  with  narrower 
degrees  of  freedom  and  in  a  shorter  time-span,  in  view  of  global  developments  and  financial 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 5
integration with its pre-disposed as well as preferred frameworks. The constant plea for the country 
context in reforms in the financial sector may be viewed in this analytical framework.  
India and global economy 
There are several complex factors relating to domestic economy that would influence the manner in 
which India will evolve in and integrate with global economy in the long run. While it is beyond the 
scope of this address to attempt analysing them, it is proposed to discuss some of these domestic 
factors namely, trade offs between efficiency and stability; importance of political stability, process of 
empowerment of women, governance issues and demographic transition. 
The balancing of efficiency considerations with stability will be critical in India's successful integration 
into the global economy. While several observers, especially in the financial sector, hold that India is 
risk-averse, there are others who assert that a risk-sensitive approach has paid rich dividends both in 
terms of efficiency as well as stability. Two illustrations may suffice.  At a macro level, India is investing 
around 30% of GDP and recording a GDP growth rate in the range of 7% to 8% - which reflects a high 
level  of  macro-efficiency  relative  to  other  high  growth  performers  in  Asia.  Second,  at  a  micro-level, 
there  is  evidence  of  increasing  global  competitiveness  -  in  particular,  in  the  manufacturing  industry 
despite  several  handicaps  such  as  the  cost  per  unit  of  power  in  India,  which  is  two  to  three  times 
higher than that in other Asian countries. Also, savings-investment balance is - and perhaps likely to 
be  -  reasonable  at  around  2  to  3%  of  GDP  as  current  account  deficit.  Going  forward,  India's  risk-
sensitive  approach  to  management  may  ensure  that  it  contributes  to  domestic  growth  and  global 
stability.  
Issues of political stability are closely related to those of economic stability - and the stability of the 
political system in India is noteworthy. The number of coalition partners in the government, number of 
prime ministers and indeed, of a series of elections to the Parliament and State assemblies in recent 
years  may  appear  to  indicate  difficult  political  cycles.  Yet  the  overall  progress  in  economic  and, 
indeed, social fronts in the recent years, despite the apparently tortuous processes, demonstrates that 
economic  policy  cycles  do  not  necessarily  go  with  political  cycles  in  India.  There  are  grounds  for 
optimism  on  the  continued  optimal  balancing  between  socio-economic  change  and  political  system 
stability. 
No doubt, terrorism is a serious problem but it is a localised problem and the essential fairness of an 
open  multi-cultural  society  provides  hope  against  any  lasting  adverse  impact  on  stability.  It  is 
significant that there have been attacks on the iconic symbols of India - Parliament, temple, mosque 
and the Indian Institute of Science. And in all these cases, evidence is that it was driven by the non-
residents. 
It  is  useful  to  recognise  the  importance  of  empowerment  of  women.  Let  me  illustrate  with  some 
relevant facts in my home State, Andhra Pradesh. There is a reservation of one-third for women in 
medical colleges, but as of now, around half the students are women. Of the 92,000 students admitted 
in engineering colleges this year in Andhra Pradesh, over 30,000 were women. Similarly in the political 
arena,  women  are  well  represented.  In  the  local  bodies,  there  are  about  250,000  elected  officials 
ranging from a member of Gram Panchayat to Mayors of Municipal Corporation and chairpersons of 
Zilla  Parishads  and  of  these,  over  85,000  are  women;  and  the  reservation  for  women  has  been 
operative since 1987. These developments, which are shared in different ways by other States, give a 
positive twist to the outlook for empowerment of women for the future.  
The  exploration  on  the  future  of  India  will  not  be  complete  without  reference  to  a  book  by  my 
predecessor Dr. Bimal Jalan with the title 'Future of India : Politics, Economics and Governance'. In 
particular, he highlights issues relating to enhancing the quality of functioning of the parliament, the 
bureaucracy and the judiciary. These are complex issues, but the continuation of the good times in the 
economy is perhaps contingent upon the needed reforms in these areas - sooner rather than later.  
India  is  expected  to  benefit  from  the  demographic  dividend  in  a  global  context.  It  is  necessary  to 
recognise  that  the  bulge  in  the  workforce,  which  is  a  source  of  strength,  will  be  concentrated  in 
Northern  provinces  of  India.  If  education,  skills,  health  and  governance  are  improved  to  enable  a 
globally competitive labour force, there will be a demographic dividend. There is a greater advantage 
for  India,  relative  to  almost  all  other  countries,  in  that  the  demographic  transition  in  India  will  be 
stretched  over  a  longer  period  due  to  the  sheer  diversity  in  demographic  profiles  among  different 
States.  By  2016,  in  three  States  -  Tamilnadu,  Kerala  and  Andhra  Pradesh  –  the  proportion  of  the 
elderly as a percentage to the total population will be in excess of 10 per cent. On the other hand, 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2006
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, the two most populous States of India, are likely to have the lowest share at 
6.7 per cent and 7.1 per cent respectively. A preliminary observation based on the migration data as 
per  Census  2001  shows  that  Uttar  Pradesh  and  Bihar  are  the  two  States  already  experiencing  the 
highest number of people emigrating to other States in India. Employment appears to be the dominant 
factor for migration and this is a positive factor for us. In brief, the demographic profile of India may, in 
some ways, be mimicking the global profile. 
It is interesting that the extreme diversities of the world in terms of languages, religions, ideologies and 
traditions are reflected in India. There is an overwhelming preference in Indian society and polity for 
coordination, cooperation and co-option rather than confrontation. In sum, if there is one country that 
is closest to a well functioning, multi-cultural global village, it is India. 
Indo-US relations 
In conclusion, some thoughts on Indo-US relations would be in order. The single largest segment of 
the best and the brightest of India residing outside the country is in the USA, and their assimilation is 
both smooth and productive. An important source of overseas students in the USA is from India, and 
the Indian-Americans carry the goodwill for the USA wherever they happen to be. These are among 
leaders  and  opinion  makers  not  only  in  the  USA  and  in  India,  but  also  globally.  The  single  largest 
group of non-resident Indian professionals returning to India to participate in the growth story of India 
are  from  the  USA.  Finally,  as  Ambassador  Blackwell  said  in  this  very  forum,  Council  on  Foreign 
Relations on February 23, 2006, in a Journalist Roundtable 'Indians like the United States. According 
to the Pew Poll, [….] "India regards the United States more positively than any other country in the 
world, it turns out'. 
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 7
