Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan’s financial services sector – a future perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Pakistan  Society 
Dinner, London, 21 June 2006. 
 Poised  to  continue  on  its  high-growth  trajectory,  Pakistan  has  now  joined  the  league  of  emerging 
economies. The economic turnaround owes its origin to two principal factors: (i) persistent political and 
macroeconomic  stability  which  has  helped  restore  investor  confidence  and  attracted  domestic  and 
foreign capital; and (ii) the ongoing financial sector development and transformation which has helped 
meet  the  growing  financing  requirements  of  the  productive  sectors,  while  generating  consumption 
demand that turned out to be the main driver of economic growth. 
Consistent with trends observed in growing Asia, structural changes in financial markets have been 
remarkable and significant. First, a word on Pakistan’s financial sector’s scope and scale: 
- 
Financial  assets  grew  by  70%  over  the  past  five  years  and  by  end-CY05  reached  Rs  5.1 
trillion, equivalent to 80% of GDP. 
Banking sector grew at a faster pace relative to non-bank sectors and currently accounts for 
71% of the financial industry assets. 
Market capitalization of the stock exchange has grown steadily and recently peaked at 44% 
of GDP relative to 10.3 percent in June FY00. 
  Second, a word on the qualitative change and improvements in the financial sector. The liberalization 
and deregulation of the financial sector has helped transfer the banking sector’s majority ownership to 
the  private  sector.  This  has  helped  to  reorient  the  sector,  which  is  continuously  changing  and 
restructuring itself in the wake of enhanced domestic and external competition as Pakistan’s economy 
is rapidly integrating itself with global and regional markets. There has been exceptional growth in the 
profitability and efficiency of the financial services industry. This, among others, has induced a degree 
of  institutional  diversification  as  evident  from:  (i)  the  growth  of  equity  markets  that,  given  their  high 
returns, has attracted foreign portfolio flows; and (ii) proliferation of a wide array of non-bank financial 
institutions which provide a range of financial services such as leasing, investment banking and fund 
management, and offer Islamic instruments such as modarabas and musharikas. 
The  changing  characteristics  and  complexion  of  the  financial  sector,  its  dynamism  and  growing 
strength has catalyzed economic transformation. In FY05, real GDP growth rose to 8.6% supported by 
double digit growth in large-scale industry which has met domestic requirements and has generated 
an exportable surplus which facilitated almost doubling of the exports to $16.5 billion in FY06 relative 
to $7-8 billion in the preceding decade. 
Normally real sector development precedes the development of the financial sector, but strong credit 
growth in the wake of a low interest rate environment in the last few years helped Pakistan stimulate 
economic  activity.  Consistent  and  stable  economic  policies  enhanced  business  confidence.  In  the 
absence of alternative sources of funding, businesses relied heavily on banks to finance their needs. 
Growth in advances coupled with gradually rising interest rates has provided a unique opportunity for 
banks  to  generate  unprecedented  profits  and  redeployment  of  these  funds  in  the  banking  and 
economic  system  has  helped  strengthen  banks’  balance  sheets  and  continue  to  meet  the  growing 
economic requirements, respectively. 
After having achieved high economic growth, the key question posed to the Pakistani economic-policy 
makers is how sustainable is this high economic growth path? Some even contest that the economy is 
showing  signs  of  overheating.  This  debate  is  triggered  by  few  emerging  trends  which  are  typically 
observed when economies are set to achieve new heights of growth. Economic sustainability is being 
questioned on the grounds that: 
(i) 
Pakistan’s growth has been primarily driven by growth in real consumption expenditure – this 
is partly true but is also a manifestation of rising per capita income that in FY06 is around 
$850, and higher remittances inflows that have now reached close to $4.1 billion. 
After  a  consistent  reduction  in  macroeconomic  imbalances  over  FY00-04,  the  fiscal  and 
external current account deficits have been above the targeted levels for FY06 and are likely 
(ii) 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
(iii) 
(iv) 
to remain in that range in FY07. Most notable is the concern regarding trade deficit which is 
around $8.2 billion in FY06.1
 Around 45% of the increase in trade deficit for July-May FY06 
over the comparable period in the preceding year is on account of the rise in import bill for 
crude oil and petroleum products, 39% due to higher imports of machinery, 11% because of 
iron and steel and 14.3% for food and fertilizers. 
Government  is  offering  a  renewed  and  aggressive  fiscal  stimulus  in  FY07,  but  as  is  well 
known, Pakistan has no choice but to accelerate social and infrastructure development and 
offer  relief  to  certain  segments  of  population  and  businesses  to  sustain  its  economic 
achievements. Infrastructure sector programs while ambitious are absolutely needed to meet 
the growing demands in the economy as capacities are being enhanced, new industries and 
sectors are being opened up and development of industrial parks and additional EPZs are in 
the offing etc. 
After a span of price stability, Pakistan continues to face inflationary pressures that emerged 
in  late  2004  as  a  by-product  of  an  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Thus  far  effective 
monetary  management  and  administrative  measures  to  ease  product  supplies  have 
controlled inflation which is now well within single digits. With demand pressures expected to 
grow,  SBP  will  continue  to  pursue  monetary  tightening  but  there  is  need  to  strike  an 
appropriate balance between promoting economic growth and price stability. 
Over  the  medium  term,  Pakistan  is  well  positioned  to  deal  with  these  emerging  trends  effectively. 
While consumption demand would remain high, there are clear indications that investment has picked 
up – though perhaps not fully captured by national accounts statistics. Rising investment demand is 
confirmed  by:  First,  the  rise  in  gross  fixed  capital  formation  over  the  last  two  years  by  29.6%  in 
nominal terms and by about 9.8% in real terms. This has raised investment levels to Rs 1.42 trillion, 
equivalent to 20% of GDP and is likely to result in a reversal of the declining trend observed in the 
preceding  years.  Private  investment  accounts  for  two  thirds  of  the  gross  fixed  capital  formation. 
Second, the rise in imports which, excluding crude and POL products, grew by 33%. Third, the rise in 
private sector credit which, while decelerating, still grew by 23% in FY06 despite rising interest rates. 
Fourth, foreign direct investment flows, excluding privatization proceeds, also contributed to the rise in 
investments.  Finally,  high  corporate  profits  have  largely  been  reinvested  in  industry  and  there  is  a 
high degree of self financing taking place. 
Furthermore, the Government is confident that all spade work undertaken in the last few years will now 
pay  off  as  the  approved  or  lined  up  industrial  and  infrastructure  investments  take  off.  The  Medium 
Term Development (MTDF) anticipates a rise in the investment/GDP ratio of 20.7% of GDP by FY10. 
Early  indications  are  that  both  the  domestic  and  foreign  investors  are  upbeat  about  the  future 
prospects  and  there  are  some  investment  commitments  lined  up  from  the  Gulf  states.  During  its 
economic transition, Pakistan will have to develop the capacities to tolerate and finance the required 
level  of  trade  deficit  as  fresh  investments  will  bring  in  additional  import  demand.  Over  this  period, 
leveraging non-debt foreign flows will be critical to finance and sustain the external current account 
deficit. 
Sustainability of investment trends would, among others, depend on Pakistan’s success in improving 
the business climate by removing investment constraints, continuity in financial reforms coupled with 
strong vigilance of credit growth, and success in curbing inflationary pressures and tendencies within 
manageable levels. 
The latest Financial Sector Assessment for Pakistan and the Banking Sector Review,2
released by July 2006, together lend comfort that: 
(i) 
Banking sector profitability, at over $1 billion, is at an all time high and is generated by the 
enhanced business volume, the rising share of high-yield assets and widening spreads, on 
the  back  of  the  lagged  impact  of  rising  interest  rates  on  deposits.  Non-core activities  also 
made valuable contribution. Resultantly, the return on assets (after tax) increased to 1.9% 
from  1.2%  in  CY04;  easily  surpassing  the  relevant  international  benchmark.  The  rapid 
 which will be 
                                                      
1   Provisional figure, Statistics Department, State Bank of Pakistan. 
2   Annual publications of State Bank of Pakistan 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
growth  in  profits  also  resulted  in  considerably  higher  return  on  equity  (after  tax),  which 
improved to 25.8% from 20.3% in CY04. 
Falling  NPLs  to  loans  and  net  NPLs  to  net  loans  ratios  improved  to  8  percent  and  2.1 
percent respectively. 
With  strong  profits,  declining  overhang  of  NPLs  and  fresh  capital  injections,  the  solvency 
position of the banking system strengthened further. Capital adequacy ratio (CAR) increased 
to 11.3% from 10.5% in CY04. The core capital to risk weighted assets (RWAs) ratio also 
improved  to  8.3%  from  7.6%  in  CY04.  Both  these  ratios  comfortably  satisfy  the  generally 
acceptable benchmarks for wellcapitalized banks.3 
Despite losing some momentum, the overall performance of the corporate sector, which is 
the major user of banks’ funds, remained satisfactory. 
The exposure of banks to the households increased at a fast pace carrying it to more than 
12% of total outstanding private sector credit. The low default rate remained the prominent 
feature of lending to households. 
While the banking system has grown significantly in strength, rapid expansion in loans during the past 
few years in the midst of high inflation and a rising interest rate environment could pose a risk, if the 
debt burden on banks’ borrowers exceed its limits and potentially erode their repayment capacity. So 
far the exposure and default rates on advances to the consumer, SME and agriculture sector have 
been manageable but potential losses in view of high credit risk cannot be ruled out. In a stark contrast 
to past practices, the risk management systems within banks have improved significantly. The greater 
disclosure requirements, strengthened corporate governance structures and the enhanced capacity of 
SBP’s  Credit  Information  Bureau,  which  will  allow  access  to  the  credit  reports  of  all  borrowers, 
irrespective  of  the  loan  amount,  all  contribute  as  risk  mitigants.  Nevertheless,  banks’  classification 
strategies  of  their  liquid  assets  portfolio  contributed  to  increasing  the  liquidity  constraints.  Loans  to 
deposits ratio, an important liquidity indicator, also increased to 70.2% from 65.9% in CY04. Market 
risk,  dominated  mainly  by  interest  rate  risk,  also  depicted  increasing  concerns.  While  the  upward 
movement  of  interest  rates  started  to  erode  the  value  of  banks’  investment  portfolio,  especially  the 
proportion  held  in  longer-term  securities,  investments  in  capital  markets  garnered  precious  capital 
gains due to the rise in the stock market index. The absence of any fresh issue of long-term paper 
gave  rise  to  heightened  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  movement  of  interest  rates,  and  market 
displayed  greater  interest  in  short-term  paper  leading  to  a  significant  rise  in  the  banks’  holding  of 
MTBs. 
Despite these positive results, Pakistan can ill-afford to be complacent. With an average credit growth 
of 30% over the last three years, and the rapid diversification of banks’ loan portfolios, there is need 
for  vigilance  in  the  future.  Recognizing  this,  Pakistan  is  embarking  on  the  next  phase  of  financial 
sector reforms. Broadly, this would involve reforms that would focus on: 
(i) 
Further consolidation and restructuring of the banking sector; 
Strengthened risk management 
(ii) 
Developing capacities to cater to unmet requirements of special segments of the economy 
(iii) 
and catering to diverse needs; 
Diversification of the financial sector by further development of the equity and debt markets 
which,  while  fairly  vibrant,  need  to  play  a  more  significant  role  in  meeting  the  country’s 
financing requirements. 
Promoting financial product innovation 
(iv) 
(v) 
Furthering consolidation and restructuring of the banking sector 
Following  the  privatization  of  banks,  today  almost  two-thirds  of  the  banking  sector  consists  of  local 
private banks and 9 percent is owned by foreign banks; consequently the share of the public sector 
                                                      
3  For a well-capitalized bank the capital adequacy ratio should be above 10%, tier 1 to capital to RWA ratio and capital to total 
assets ratios should be above 5%. 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 3
banks has been scaled down to around 20 percent, from 50 percent in CY00. The net effect of the 
liberal licensing policy and consolidation is that today Pakistan has 39 banks (down from 46 in 1997). 
Excluding the five large banks, of which the largest bank is government owned, there are around 20 
banks  among  the  remaining  35  banks,  which  together  hold  a  mere  9  percent  share  in  the  banking 
system.  While  large  banks  are  improving  their  performance  and  converging  on  bottom-line 
performance indicators under increased competition, small banks are gradually losing ground because 
of  the  lack  of  scale  and  operational  efficiency.  Enhanced  competition  and  the  need  to  substantially 
grow the lending portfolio to remain commercially viable would eventually pose problems of existence 
for  small  banks.  Recognizing  the  system  risk,  SBP  has  stiffened  its  licensing  policy  and  regulatory 
capital requirements and has increased the paid up capital requirements for banks to $100 million.4
Positioning  themselves  accordingly,  a  few  banks  have  injected  fresh  capital  or  amalgamated  with 
other  financial  institutions  to  meet  these  requirements.  A  wave  of  mergers  and  amalgamation  has 
become a business reality in Pakistan and over the last five years, 21 financial institutions have been 
merged / acquired. This has involved a buy-in of foreign banks by the local banks, merger of smaller 
banks and DFIs, merger of investment banks with commercial banks and so on and so forth. In order 
to  eventually  have  a  stronger  banking  system,  Pakistan  is  striving  for  further  consolidation  of  the 
banking sector and it is with this in mind that the SBP has approved in principle additional five strategic 
mergers: 
1. 
Standard Chartered Bank (SCB) is acquiring Union Bank which had sometime back acquired 
Bank of America and Emirates International Bank. Following this SCB will emerge as a local 
subsidiary 
Merger of Rupali Bank Pakistan operations with and into Arif Habib Rupali Bank 
Merger  of  Atlas  Investment  Bank  with  and  into  Atlas  Bank  Limited  after  its  acquisition  of 
Dawood Bank Ltd. 
Merger of Habib Bank AG Zurich Pakistan operations with and into Metropolitan Bank 
Merger of PICIC and PICIC Commercial Bank 
4. 
5. 
Going forward, SBP’s strategy is to allow new entrants by way of strategic partnerships with licensed 
banks  and  to  encourage  additional  mergers  and  acquisitions.  This  will  help  evolve  a  stronger  and 
robust banking system to meet the challenges of the increasingly complicated financial environment. 
The  competitive  environment  might  also  force  financial  institutions  to  specialize  in  offering  certain 
types of services based on their respective expertise and market niches. 
Government shareholding is still significant in about 11 financial institutions including 4 larger banks, 
few joint ventures, and DFls. Barring joint ventures, the Government is in the process of offloading its 
shareholding  in  larger  banks  through  the  stock  market.  Aside  from  restructuring  and  selling  of  the 
Industrial  Development  Bank  (IDBP),  SBP  is  working  with  specialized  financial  institutions  and  the 
provincial government to also reduce their shareholding in provincial banks. 
2. 
3. 
Developing capacities to meet requirements of the underserved markets 
SBP  has  been  quite  proactive  in  developing  the  prudential  regulatory  framework  for  the  SME  and 
microfinance sectors. Even though access to credit has improved, there are still outstanding issues of 
inequitable distribution of credit to the sectors and segments which remain underserved. With rapid 
economic growth in the country, there are plenty of opportunities available for these sectors to grow, 
the key issue is to provide an enabling policy environment, improve delivery and outreach of banking 
services to far flung area, and resolve collateral issues. 
In order to improve the access of financial services to these sectors, the State Bank is in the process 
of setting up a Development Finance division dedicated to serve as an interface with the industry and 
improve  access  of  credit  to  various  districts  and  provinces.  SBP  has  also  been  instrumental  in  the 
amendment of the legal framework for microfinance. These amendments are quite far reaching, are in 
line with the stakeholders’ demands and hold the promise of providing the desired level of flexibility 
                                                      
4   Under the regulations, Banks were required to increase their capital base to Rs2.0 billion by end-CY05, and further to Rs6.0 
billion in a phased manner by end-CY09. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2006
both  at  the  regulatory  cum  supervisory  level,  while  easing  constraints  of  the  industry.  Microfinance 
Institutions will now be able to tailor their products to meet the needs of their customers as they move 
along  the  prosperity  continuum.  Going  forward,  development  finance  is  a  high  priority  area  for  the 
central bank. 
Strengthening risk management 
SBP  has  instituted  an  all-embracing  framework  viz.  the  Institutional  Risk  Assessment  Framework 
(IRAF) to further strengthen the existing supervisory mechanism and to mitigate the variety of risks 
banks  are  exposed  to.  The  framework  envisages  a  collaborative  and  seamless  supervisory  focus 
amongst various supervisory departments within SBP to ensure cohesive and proactive monitoring of 
risks within banks and DFIs. The framework, being highly technology driven, provides for the timely 
flow of information and enables SBP to institute more efficient and effective banking supervision and 
continuous  monitoring  both  on  the  part  of  SBP  and  the  financial  institution  themselves,  integrating 
off-site surveillance, on-site examination and current market information. 
Further,  considering  the  importance  of  a  forward  looking  approach  to  risk  management,  SBP  has 
instituted  a  framework  of  stress  testing.  The  framework  is  based  on  single  factor  sensitivity  and 
regression based analysis. Under the single factor sensitivity analysis, exposures of all banks towards 
five major risks i.e. interest rate risk, credit risk, real estate price risk, equity price risk and exchange 
rate risk is assessed after subjecting the underlying risk factors to unusual but plausible shocks. These 
exercises  have  helped  considerably  to  assess  overall  risk  exposures  as  well  as  structural 
vulnerabilities in banks that could trigger potential externalities and market failures. Besides, in order 
to  inculcate  sound  risk  management  practices  among  the  banks  and  DFIs  and  to  make  the  stress 
testing exercise more effective, consistent and focused, SBP has issued guidelines on stress testing. 
These  guidelines  contain  a  framework  for  regular  stress  testing,  the  technique  and  scope  of  stress 
testing along with methodologies and calibration of shocks. 
Encouraging greater depth and breadth in equity markets 
Pakistan’s  Stock  market  has  been  the  best  performing  market  in  the  region.  The  Karachi  Stock 
Exchange (KSE) share index – that stood at 1,507 points at the end of the year 2000 – reached record 
levels  by  17  April  2006  at  12,274  points  with  market  capitalization  being  close  to  $57  billion,  or 
equivalent  to  44%  of  GDP.  In  recent weeks,  the stock  market  has  experienced  substantial  volatility 
and has declined to under 10,000 points. In a vein similar to global and regional exchanges, there are 
different interpretations and conflicting stories regarding the current volatility in equity markets. Aside 
from rising global interest rates and uncertainties regarding US economic data, the fall in share prices 
in  the  regional  markets  is  being  attributed  by  some  to  “overdue  correction”  and  by  others  to  rising 
domestic inflationary pressures or other macroeconomic concerns. In case of Pakistan, there is no one 
explanation  for  the  oscillation  in  share  prices  which  after  a  decline  seem  to  be  re-bounding  –  with 
almost 1,174 points being added on one day in one go. Besides the standard pre-budget euphoria and 
reaction to a modest increase in the turnover tax on shares and the perceptions relating to the removal 
of  capital  gains  tax  scheduled  to  be  phased  out  by  2007,  there  is  a  view  that  this  volatility  is  a 
manifestation of structural weakness in the front line regulator i.e. the stock exchange, overleveraging 
of the market, and margin calls which triggered heavy selling, uneasiness with delays in the settlement 
of the continuous funding system (CFS) which is expected to be modified and eventually be replaced 
by  margin  financing  to  do  away  fully  with  badla  –  a  form  of  short  selling  –  tightening  of  some 
regulations, introduction of universal identification number for brokers etc. SECP has launched a probe 
of short and blank selling and has proposed measures to boost investor confidence by tightening the 
risk  management  practices  at  the  stock  exchanges,  addressing  issues  of  netting  of  open  market 
positions across three markets, mark to market profit/loss, etc. 
Barring  these  aberrations,  the  stock  market  has  been  exceptionally  buoyant  benefiting  from  the  (i) 
increased  investor  confidence  in  economic  policies  and  high  corporate  profitability,  (ii)  increased 
supply of scrips augmented by privatization of large government owned companies such as the recent 
additions  to  the  market  of  issues  of  the  Pakistan  Telecommunication  Corporation  (PTC),  Muslim 
Commercial Bank (MCB), and the large issue of a power project, namely the Hub Power Company 
(HUBCO), which has been actively traded (iii) renewed interest of a large number of buyers of shares, 
(iv)  bright  prospect  of  reaping  dividends  and  capital  gains,  (v)  foreign  portfolio  investments  and  (vi) 
continuous efforts to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework of the ,securities markets. 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 5
The events in equity markets not only provide an opportunity for self correction of overvaluation but 
also will help strengthen the governance of the exchanges. The stock market is expected to further 
receive a boost from the continued implementation of the privatization program, issuance of GDRs by 
OGDC – a large utility company – and as the banking sector offloads more of their shareholding to 
markets, and companies initiate IPOs to meet their financing requirements. 
To  restore  investor  confidence,  the  regulator  is  encouraging systematically  the  strengthening  of  the 
governance of exchanges by restructuring of Boards and appointment of independent management, 
encouraging  the  demutualization  of  exchanges,  while  strengthening  risk  management  systems  that 
have involved the introduction of T+3 settlement and circuit breaker limits, proper capital adequacy for 
brokers etc. Investor confidence will be further enhanced as the Code of Corporate Governance has 
been incorporated into the listing regulations of stock exchanges, there is enhanced vigilance to check 
undisclosed  trading  and  front  running,  and  effective  enforcement  mechanisms  are  implemented. 
Efforts  are  underway  to  achieve  market  development  through  the  introduction  of  stock  futures, 
over-the-counter  market  and  online  access  for  Internet  trading  and  over  the  period  phasing  out  of 
badla with CFS and eventually margin financing to provide funding to leveraged investors. Pakistan 
has set up its first fully automated National Commodity Exchange which plans to introduce trading in 
derivatives, mainly futures contracts in commodities starting with gold contracts and later to expand to 
agro-commodity contracts such as cotton, rice, and wheat. Riding on the strength of the stock market 
boom and  in  response  to  the  rising  demand  for  investment avenues among retail  investors,  mutual 
funds in Pakistan have more than tripled in the last few years. The industry’s combined net asset value 
stands at Rs125 billion as of end-June FY05. 
In parallel, there is need to launch pension and insurance reforms which would eventually help impart 
long term liquidity to equity markets. As a beginning, the Government is encouraging the Voluntary 
Pension  Schemes  and  allowing  Asset  Management  Companies  and  Life  Insurance  Companies, 
meeting the fit and proper criteria, to be licensed to act as Pension Fund Managers. Life insurance 
companies would be authorized to offer Annuity Plans at the retirement age of the participants. For 
insurance  businesses,  stringent  solvency  standards  have  been  introduced  and  minimum  capital 
requirements  have  been  enhanced.  Insurance  companies  have  also  been  directed  to  obtain 
reinsurance  treaties  from  the  international  “A”  class  re-insurers.  Takaful  rules  have  been  issued  to 
allow for Islamic insurance products. 
Promoting product innovation 
In  Pakistan,  though  derivatives  have  been  a  relatively  new  concept  until  recently,  the  derivative 
volume has increased manifold amidst the changing market and regulatory environment. In response 
to  the  evolving  market  dynamics  and  in  order  to  develop  an  Over  the  Counter  (OTC)  financial 
derivatives  market  in  the  country,  SBP  issued  Financial  Derivatives  Business  Regulations  in 
November 2004. Prior to this, banks were allowed to undertake the business of financial derivatives 
after getting specific approvals from SBP. However, with the issuance of these guidelines, the banks/ 
DFIs,  besides  meeting  the  eligibility  criteria  specified  therein,  also  obtain  Authorized  Derivatives 
Dealer (ADD) or Non Market Maker Institution (NMI) status from SBP; have been allowed to undertake 
derivatives business. The grant of such status is based on the capacity of the applicant to undertake 
derivatives transactions based on both onsite and offsite analysis. At present, three banks have been 
granted the status of Authorized Derivatives Dealer. The regulations allow three types of transactions 
viz. Interest Rate Swaps (IRS), Forward Rate Agreements (FRAs) and FX options. 
During the last one year, derivative transactions have grown substantially owing to the growing interest 
of  the  market  players.  Resultantly,  the  derivatives  players  in  OTC  derivatives  market  reported 
outstanding  derivatives  contracts  with  a  notional  value  of  Rs  115.5  billion  as  of  March  FY06,  a 
measure that has grown manifold compared to Rs14.5 billion in March FY05. Most of these derivative 
transactions were under the IRS category. So far, foreign banks have been quite active in carrying out 
derivative transactions as the major chunk of these transactions lies with such banks. As for the FX 
options, around Rs 18 billion have been booked with major currency being the Euro against the US 
Dollar.  Most  of  the  IRS  have  been  undertaken  by  the  foreign  banks  with  both  their  corporate  and 
financial sector clients. Since FRAs are essentially short term in nature, outstanding FRAs stand as nil. 
Whilst the banks can undertake derivative transactions both for hedging and market making, most of 
such  transactions  were  assumed  for  hedging  purposes  up  till  now.  However,  with  greater 
sophistication of the market, the transactions for the latter are also expected to grow in future. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2006
