Joseph Yam: Financial integration and regulation 
Remarks by Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the conference: 
The Euro: Lessons for European and Asian Financial Markets, Hong Kong, 24 February 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. It is a great pleasure for me to open the proceedings of this conference on “The Euro: Lessons for 
European and Asian Financial Markets”. It is also an honour for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority to 
be co-sponsoring this event with the European Commission. The programme is a very rich one and it 
will be impossible for me, in these opening remarks, to cover all the topics to be discussed later this 
morning and in the afternoon. I do notice, however, that the words “financial integration and regulation” 
appear in several of the session titles. These are topics close to my heart, because I have come to 
believe  that  they  can  influence  profoundly  how  Asian  economies  develop  in  the  years  ahead.  Well 
managed  financial  integration,  combined  with  sound  regulatory  practices,  can  help  the  region 
maximise its economic growth potential while maintaining financial stability. I have chosen therefore to 
focus on these topics. 
2. I will try and lay out a case for closer financial integration in Asia, both as a means of achieving 
more efficient allocation of resources in the region, thereby contributing to continued economic growth, 
and as a means of supporting financial stability. I will also discuss what concrete steps can be taken, 
and  are  being  taken,  to  further  financial  integration  in  the  region.  Expanded  intra-regional  flows  of 
funds  do  potentially  expose  financial  institutions  to  new  types  of  risks.  Hence  I  will  argue  that 
regulators need to be vigilant as the integration process proceeds. Here in Hong Kong, we are actively 
working to implement the latest supervisory standards. This should ensure that our banking system 
will be ready to take on the new challenges associated with greater financial linkages in the region. 
3. But let me start at the beginning, namely, the definition of financial integration and what benefits it is 
likely to bring. 
4. The fundamental characteristic of financial integration is that net savers in an economy can have 
access  to  any  investment  vehicle  regardless  of  the  geographical  location  of  either  the  saver  or  the 
issuer of the investment product. Similarly, entrepreneurs seeking funds to finance capital expenditure 
plans can, in a financially integrated area, have access to sources of credit irrespective of geographic 
location. 
5. Put differently, financial integration permits the efficient transfer of funds between economic units 
that save in excess of their investment plans to economic units for which the opposite is true. As a 
result, net savers will receive the highest return on their funds, and the investors will obtain credit on 
the lowest available terms. In addition, financial integration enhances competition in each locality since 
savers and investors are not constrained to deal only with local suppliers of financial services, but can 
search for the most efficient supplier in the entire integrated area. 
6. It is uncontroversial to suggest that financial integration within a given jurisdiction will be beneficial 
for the economy as a whole. Few would question that financial integration within the United States, for 
example,  has  made  a  positive  contribution  to  that  country’s  economy.  And,  I  am  sure  that  the 
increasingly comprehensive  financial  linkages  across  provinces  in  Mainland China,  would  make  the 
mobilisation of the high savings and the allocation of capital there more efficient, leading to sustained 
economic  dynamism.  But  the  benefits  of  financial  integration  need  not  occur  only  within  a  single 
jurisdiction. Observing from afar the process of economic integration in Europe, it is clear to me that 
financial integration across national borders will make a positive contribution to the region’s economic 
development. But I shall leave it to other speakers in our conference, particularly those with first-hand 
experience in Europe, to elaborate on that point. 
7. Here in Asia, financial integration across economies has not proceeded as far as within either North 
America  or  Europe,  even  though  the  degree  of  economic,  in  particular  trade,  integration  within  the 
region  has  been  rising  sharply.  As  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  in  the  financial  sphere  Asian 
economies are less integrated with each other than with economies in the rest of the world. I believe 
that economic integration, brought about by market forces, having regard to comparative advantages 
in production, can best be served by financial integration of a similar degree. 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 1
8. I should emphasize, however, that this is as yet merely a belief on my part. I have so far found it 
difficult  to  provide  empirical  evidence  to  support  my  hypothesis  that  the  optimal  degree  of  financial 
integration is the same as, or close to, the degree of economic integration within a region. To start 
with,  there  are  theoretical  difficulties  in  identifying  measures  of  optimality.  In  addition,  there  is  no 
established  measure  of  the  actual  degree  of  financial  integration,  let  alone  the  actual  degree  of 
economic integration. 
9. Lack of empirical evidence notwithstanding, one intuitively thinks that the synergy driving economic 
integration can best be harnessed financially by the stakeholders themselves, who know better what 
they are doing and take a longer term view, rather than by those, motivated largely by relatively short-
term  financial  rates  of  return,  and  acting  in  accordance  with  credit  assessments,  conducted  many 
miles away from where the action is. 
10.  Regrettably,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  financial  integration  in  Asia  lags  considerably  behind 
economic  integration.  Currently,  a  sizable  portion  of  gross  savings  in  Asia  finds  its  way  into  debt 
instruments  of  governmental  and  quasi-governmental  issuers  in  industrialized  economies,  while 
investment in Asia is financed, to a significant degree, by capital from those same countries. This state 
of affairs seems incongruous and is a reflection of the relative lack of integration between the financial 
markets among Asian economies. It seems to me quite likely, that the cost of capital for enterprises in 
Asia would be lower, if there was a deep and well-functioning corporate bond market in the region to 
tap the considerable pool of savings, much of which now flows instead to industrial countries. 
11. In the other direction, the dependence of regional investment on funds from external sources is not 
only incongruous; it also exposes the region to the ‘sudden stop’ phenomenon, whereby the flows of 
capital dry up abruptly, wreaking havoc with real economic activity. This well-documented feature of 
international capital flows, especially costly to emerging market economies, has unfortunately lead to 
greater  policy  conservatism  towards  financial  openness,  at  least  in  this  region,  thus  limiting  and 
slowing down the pace of financial integration. But, in my opinion, it is for precisely this reason that 
financial integration in Asia should be pursued more vigorously. 
12.  One  effective  defence  against  volatile  global  financial  flows  is  a  large  and  financially  integrated 
regional  market.  Speaking  from  experience,  there  is,  I  think,  other  things  being  equal,  a  non-linear 
relationship  between  vulnerability  to  financial  instability  and  the  size  of  financial  markets.  The  very 
small financial markets are not attractive to international capital because of the lack of liquidity and so 
there is little volatility generated by the inflow and outflow of international capital. At the other extreme, 
where financial markets are very large relative to international capital, sudden movements of the latter 
will only lead to ripples, which are not big enough to cause any financial-stability concerns. The most 
vulnerable  financial  markets,  other  things  being  equal,  are  the  medium-sized  ones,  which  have 
adequate liquidity to attract international capital but which are, unfortunately, small enough for short-
term trends to be dictated by large operators looking for short-term gains. There is also the temptation, 
for  some,  to  engage  in  manipulative  behaviour,  amplifying  volatility  and  vulnerability  to  financial 
instability. 
13. I do not want to give the impression that the size of a financial market can substitute for sound 
macroeconomic policies as a guard against volatile capital flows. Indeed, I take it for granted that the 
authorities in the region are committed to prudent monetary, exchange-rate, and fiscal policies. But I 
am convinced that expanding the effective size of Asian financial markets through greater integration 
across jurisdictions, can increase the ability of our economies to absorb the volatility of international 
capital,  as  effectively  as  the  US  and  European  markets.  It  is  therefore  heartening  to  observe  that 
several official initiatives towards greater financial linkages in the region are bearing fruit, notably the 
Chiang Mai and the Asian Bond Fund initiatives. I note that my colleague Julia Leung will describe the 
latter in some detail in the afternoon session. 
14.  Having  made  the  economic  case  for  increased  financial  integration  allow  me  to  spend  a  few 
moments  outlining  some  practical  steps  that  may  be  taken  to  achieve  it.  First,  it  is  necessary  to 
establish  linkages  between  jurisdictions  across  the  whole  spectrum  of  financial  infrastructure  –  the 
trading, payment, clearing, settlement and custodian systems for money and for financial instruments. 
This  would  facilitate  the  movement  of  savings  between  jurisdictions  and  make  cross-border 
transactions more efficient. In this age these linkages are neither difficult nor costly to establish as the 
technology, in the form of electronic messaging platforms of acceptable security, is already available 
and in international use. 
15.  The  second  element  concerns  the  relaxation  of  non-supervisory  restrictions,  where  they  exist, 
against  access  by  foreign  financial  intermediaries  to  the  domestic  financial  markets.  The  size  of 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2006
financial intermediaries, measured for example in terms of capital, is often a barrier to market access; 
but,  as  we  know,  size  is  not  necessarily  a  good  indicator  of  quality.  Capital  adequacy,  assessed 
objectively by reference to risk, provides a better safeguard. Greater competition, wherever it comes 
from,  also  enhances  efficiency,  although  allowances  should  be  made  for  the  weaker  domestic 
institutions  to  enable  them  to  cope  and  find  viable  long-term  solutions,  in  the  interest  of  financial 
stability. 
16. The third element concerns the harmonisation of standards in the financial system. A degree of 
harmonisation,  at  least  the  adoption of  minimum  acceptable  international standards,  is  essential  for 
improving  investor  confidence  and  enriching  the  flow  of  capital  within  the  region.  It  would  also  be 
conducive  to  the  stability  and  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  I  would  emphasise  the  word 
“international”  as  there  is  no  reason  to  develop  regional  standards  different  from  those  that  have 
already  been  developed  by  international  financial  institutions  and  professional  bodies,  together  with 
supervisory agencies. 
17.  The  fourth  element  concerns  the  strengthening  of  co-operative  efforts  in  financial  system 
development. As I have already noted, in Asia we have been making good progress in our efforts to 
develop  the  domestic  and  regional  debt  markets  through  various  regional  forums  and  involving  the 
international financial institutions. In the context of developing Asian Bond Fund 2, for example, we 
have achieved a few firsts, including the introduction of the first exchange-traded bond index fund in 
Asia, arranging for two Asian markets to allow exchange-traded funds for the first time, and opening 
up the renminbi inter-bank bond market for the first time to foreign investors. 
18. The final, and probably most difficult, step towards creating an integrated Asian financial market 
involves the relaxation of statutory restrictions on cross-border capital flows. It is likely to be the most 
difficult, in part because it depends on the ability of the financial system in individual jurisdictions to 
cope with the ensuing risks. 
19. This last point brings me to the next issue I wish to touch upon in my remarks, namely, the need 
for  a  strong  and  efficient  regulatory  framework  that  is  adapted  to  the  integration  of  the  domestic 
financial system with that of other jurisdictions. 
20.  Greater  financial  integration  across  jurisdictions  brings  about  at  least  two  new  sources  of  risk 
facing domestic financial institutions. The first and most obvious is the risk of currency mismatches 
when cross-border transactions involve the use of different currencies, as they are likely to do in Asia 
for  the  foreseeable  future.  Although  monetary  integration  is  a  topic  that  is  often  mentioned  in  the 
region, its realisation, if indeed it occurs, is almost certainly going to take considerably more time than 
it will take for financial markets to become more closely linked. In the meantime, financial systems will 
have to be robust with respect to fluctuations in exchange rates that may impact assets and liabilities 
of financial institutions differentially. Of course, the financial turbulence in 1997 and 1998 has already 
alerted  both  regulators  and  the  private  sector  to  these  risks,  but  if  financial  integration  leads  to 
increased cross-border financial commitments for domestic financial institutions, the size of the risks 
may become larger. 
21. If integration has the desired effect of increasing cross-jurisdiction intermediation between savers 
and investors, or if it leads to cross-jurisdiction establishment of subsidiaries and branches, the nature 
of credit risks facing financial institutions may also change. Exposures to different business cycles will 
increase  as  will  exposures  to  different  sources  of  idiosyncratic  risk.  Supervisory  agencies  need  to 
make sure that appropriate risk control measures are implemented in individual institutions, and that 
their capital adequately reflects the market, credit and operational risks they are exposed to as they 
enter foreign markets. 
22. Here in Hong Kong we are well on our way to implementing the latest international standards in 
this respect, i.e. the Basel II standards. As the bank supervisor, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority 
has  been  working  with  banks  and  legislators  to  ensure  that  we  are  able  to  implement  the  new 
standards by 1 January, 2007. We have also been working with other regulators in the region through 
the EMEAP Working Group on Banking Supervision to share our experiences on the implementation 
process. 
23. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have given you a brief personal perspective on financial integration and 
regulation in our region. I do not know whether I have convinced you of the importance of these topics 
for our continued economic prosperity and financial stability. But I certainly hope to have persuaded 
you that they are topics that deserve our attention whether we are policy makers, regulators of the 
financial system, or members of the private-sector financial community. I am sure that more will be 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 3
said about these topics throughout the conference, and I look forward to hearing from our European 
colleagues about the experience in Europe concerning financial integration and regulation in the Euro 
area. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2006
