Ben S Bernanke: Reflections on the yield curve and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before the Economic Club of New York, New York, 20 March 2006. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  this  evening.  I 
intend  to  take  the  opportunity  afforded  by  an  audience  of  experts  on  global  financial  markets  to 
address  an  intriguing  financial  phenomenon:  the  fact  that,  over  the  past  seven  quarters  or  so, 
tightening monetary policy has been accompanied by long-term yields that have moved only a little on 
net.  Why  have  long-term  interest  rates  not  risen  more,  as  they  have  done  over  previous  policy 
tightening  cycles?  And  what  implications  does  this  pattern  of  long-term  interest  rates  have  for 
monetary policy and the economic outlook? As you will see, in my remarks I will do a better job of 
raising  questions  than  of  answering  them.  In  particular,  I  will  conclude  that  the  implications  for 
monetary policy of the recent behavior of long-term yields are not at all clear-cut. I hope you will agree 
that  these  questions  are  nevertheless  worthwhile  posing,  as  they  are  intertwined  with  a  number  of 
important economic and financial issues. I should say at the outset that the views I will express are my 
own  and  are  not  necessarily  shared  by  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC). 
The Federal Reserve's tightening cycle 
The tightening cycle that began at the end of June 2004 is notable in at least four respects. First, its 
onset  was  delayed  for  longer  than  many  observers  expected.  The  FOMC  kept  policy  unusually 
accommodative for an extended, or should I say for a considerable, period. The goal, as you know, 
was  to  help  ensure  that  the  economic  expansion  would  be  self-sustaining  and  to  protect  against  a 
remote  risk  that  the  fall  in  inflation  observed  during  2003  might  culminate  in  outright  deflation--an 
outcome that could have had potentially serious consequences for the economy and for the efficacy of 
monetary policy. Indeed, with those concerns in mind, in 2003 the Federal Reserve made explicit for 
the first time that price stability is a symmetric objective: It is important to avoid inflation that is too low 
as well as inflation that is too high. 
A  second way  in  which  the  most  recent  experience has  been unusual  is  the extent  to  which policy 
actions have been signaled in advance. Both in the months leading up to the initiation of the tightening 
cycle  and  during  the  cycle  itself,  the  statements  issued  after  each  meeting  of  the  FOMC  provided 
qualitative  guidance  about  the  likely  future  path  of  policy  and  its  dependence  on  economic  events. 
Providing information about the expected path of policy helped to ensure that long-term interest rates 
and  other asset  prices did  not  build  in  a  projected pace  of  tightening  that  was  more rapid  than  the 
Committee  itself  anticipated,  and  the  statement's  focus  on  the  conditionality  of  future  policy  actions 
emphasized the ongoing need for both policymakers and financial market participants to respond to 
economic news. In retrospect, the clear communication of policy provided notable benefits, in my view, 
by increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy while minimizing unnecessary volatility in financial 
markets. 
Third,  policy  moved  gradually,  tightening  in  one-quarter  point  increments  over  fourteen  successive 
meetings.  Together  with  expanded  communication,  this  gradual  approach  served  to  stabilize  policy 
expectations and damp market volatility. In addition, the measured pace of rate increases gave the 
Committee time to observe the progress of the economy and to adjust its plans and communications 
strategy  accordingly.1  To  be  sure,  gradualism  was  possible  only  because  inflation  expectations 
remained  contained--testimony  to  the  importance  of  a  central  bank's  retaining  credibility  in  financial 
markets and among businesses and households. 
A fourth interesting aspect of the latest tightening cycle, which is my principal focus this evening, is the 
behavior of long-term interest rates. Since June 30, 2004, the overnight interest rate has moved up 3-
1/2 percentage points, but the ten-year nominal Treasury yield has only edged higher. At less than 4-
                                                      
1  
I  spoke  about  this  in  more  detail  in  "Gradualism,"  a  speech  delivered  at  an  economics  luncheon  co-sponsored  by  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the University of Washington, Seattle, May 20, 2004. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 1
3/4 percent, that yield is not much above the target federal funds rate of 4-1/2 percent and, indeed, is 
about  even  with  yields  for  maturities  of  one  to  three  years.  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  I  will 
speculate  on  the  reasons  for  and  consequences  of  this  historically  unusual  behavior  of  long-term 
rates. 
The recent behavior of longer-term yields 
Some  discussion  of  the  arithmetic  of  longer-term  yields  provides  a  useful  perspective  on  recent 
developments  in  bond  markets.  The  ten-year  Treasury  yield,  for  example,  can  be  viewed  as  a 
weighted  average  of  the  current  one-year  rate  and  nine  one-year  forward  rates,  with  the  weights 
depending on the coupon yield of the security. As I will discuss, each of these forward rates can be 
split further into (1) a portion equal to the one-year spot rate that market participants currently expect 
to  prevail  at  the  corresponding  date  in  the  future,  and  (2)  a  portion  that  reflects  additional 
compensation to the bondholder for the risk of holding longer-dated instruments.  
Current  and  near-term  forward  rates  are  particularly  sensitive  to  monetary  policy  actions,  which 
directly affect spot short-term interest rates and strongly influence market expectations of where spot 
rates are likely to stand in the next year or two. Indeed, as we would expect, the recent tightening of 
policy  has  been  accompanied  by  increases  in  both  the  current  one-year  rate  and  next  few  years' 
forward rates. For example, since June 2004, the one-year forward rate for the period two to three 
years in the future has risen almost 1-1/2 percentage points. As the ten-year yield is about unchanged 
even as its near-term components have risen appreciably, it follows as a matter of arithmetic that its 
components representing returns that are more distant in time must have fallen. In fact, the one-year 
forward  rate  nine  years  ahead  has  declined  1-1/2  percentage  points  over  this  tightening  cycle. 
Incidentally, by comparing forward rates implied by yields on nominal Treasuries with those implied by 
Treasury  securities  that  are  indexed  for  inflation,  we  can  infer  that  about  two-thirds  of  the  overall 
decline in far-distant nominal forward rates over this tightening cycle has been associated with a drop 
in real yields, with the remainder reflecting a drop in inflation compensation.  
It is important to note that the marked decline in far-forward interest rates has not been confined to 
U.S. Treasury securities. The spread in yields between Treasuries and longer-term private securities 
such as corporate bonds is little changed or is down on net since June 2004, implying that essentially 
all of the fall in forward rates seen in the Treasury market has occurred in private yields as well. These 
patterns  have  also  appeared  in  securities  not  denominated  in  dollars.  For  example,  over  the  same 
period,  longer-term  government  and  swap  yields  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  euro  area  have 
moved appreciably lower. Indeed, long-term nominal yields have dropped in a number of countries, 
often  by  more  than  in  the  United  States,  and  the  yield  curves  in  many  of  these  countries  are  also 
rather flat or even slightly inverted. 
Some reasons for the decline in far-forward rates  
Why have the far-forward rates implied by the term structure of interest rates declined in recent years? 
Observers have offered two broad (and not mutually exclusive) classes of explanations. One set of 
explanations holds that bond yields are reacting to current or prospective macroeconomic conditions. 
Another  set  focuses  on  special  factors  that  may  have  influenced  market  demands  for  long-term 
securities  per  se,  independent  of  the  economic  outlook.  I  will  first  consider  explanations  that 
emphasize  possible  changes  in  the  net  demand  for  long-term  securities  and  later  return  to 
explanations that focus on the link between bond yields and the economic outlook. 
As  I  have  noted,  each  of  the  forward  interest  rates  implicit  in  the  term  structure  can  be  usefully 
decomposed  into  two  parts:  (1)  the  spot  interest  rate  that  market  participants  currently  expect  to 
prevail  at  the  corresponding  date  in  the  future  and  (2)  the  additional  compensation  that  investors 
require for the risk of holding longer-term instruments, known as the term premium. With the economic 
outlook held constant, changes in the net demand for long-term securities have their largest effect on 
the  term  premium.  In  particular,  if  the  demand  for  long-dated securities  rises relative  to  the  supply, 
then  investors  will  generally  accept  less  compensation  to  hold  longer-term  instruments--that  is,  the 
term premium will decline.  
To quantify the importance of the shift in the balance of demand and supply and of the consequent 
change in the term premium, we can appeal to the research literature on the term structure of interest 
rates. In modern models of the term structure, yields at each horizon are explained by a small number 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2006
of factors. In some models, these factors can be explicitly tied to observable economic variables, such 
as  inflation;  in  other  models,  the  factors  represent  statistical  summaries  of  the  data  and  have  no 
explicit  economic  interpretations.  These  factors,  in  turn,  can  be  used  to  estimate  term  premiums  at 
each  point  in  time,  although  one  should  clearly  acknowledge  that  the  results  can  be  sensitive  to 
various statistical and modeling assumptions. 
According to several of the most popular models, a substantial portion of the decline in distant-horizon 
forward rates over recent quarters can be attributed to a drop in term premiums.2 Using some of these 
models, we can further divide the term premium into two parts--a premium for bearing real interest rate 
risk and a premium for bearing inflation risk. Both of these components have trended lower over time 
as  well,  according  to  the  standard  models,  but  the  decline  in  the  premium  since  last  June  2004 
appears to have been associated mainly with a drop in the compensation for bearing real interest rate 
risk.  
At least four possible explanations have been put forth for why the net demand for long-term issues 
may  have  increased,  lowering  the  term  premium.  First,  longer-maturity  obligations  may  be  more 
attractive because of more stable inflation, better-anchored inflation expectations, and a reduction in 
economic volatility more generally. With the benefit of hindsight, we now recognize that an important 
change  occurred  in  the  U.S.  economy  (and,  indeed,  in  other  major  industrial  economies  as  well) 
sometime in the mid-1980s. Since that time, the volatilities of both real GDP growth and inflation have 
declined  significantly,  a  phenomenon  that  economists  have  dubbed  the  "Great  Moderation."  I  have 
argued  elsewhere  that  improved  monetary  policies,  which  stabilized  inflation  and  better  anchored 
inflation  expectations,  are  an  important  reason  for  this  positive  development;  no  doubt,  structural 
changes in the economy such as deregulation, improved inventory control methods, and better risk-
sharing  in  financial  markets  also  contributed.3  Whatever  the  reason  for  the  fall  in  macroeconomic 
volatility, if investors have come to expect this past performance to continue, they might believe that 
less compensation for risk--and thus a lower term premium--is required to justify holding longer-term 
bonds.  In  that  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  long-term  forward  rates  were  also  low  in  the 
1950s and 1960s. With long-term inflation expectations apparently anchored at low levels and with the 
prospect of continued economic stability, market participants may believe that it is appropriate to price 
bonds for an environment like that which prevailed four or five decades ago. 
A second possible explanation of the evident decline in the term premium is linked to the increased 
intervention in currency markets by a number of governments, particularly in Asia. According to this 
explanation, foreign official institutions, primarily central banks, have invested the bulk of their greatly 
expanded dollar holdings in U.S. Treasuries and closely substitutable securities, and these demands 
by  the  official  sector  have  put  downward  pressure  on  yields.  This  interpretation  has  some  support, 
including  research  that  I  did  with  two  coauthors  that  found  that  longer-term  yields  came  under 
significant  downward  pressure  during  episodes  of  heavy  official  purchases  of  dollars  in  2004.4  And 
financial-market  participants  appear  to  be  especially  sensitive  to  any  suggestion  that  foreign  official 
entities may alter their portfolio preferences. 
However, these observations speak more to the existence of a short-term impact of large purchases 
and  sales--the  result  of  limits  to  liquidity  in  the  very  short  run--than  to  the  perhaps  more  important 
question  of  whether  those  transactions  have  a  lasting  effect  on  yields.  On  this  latter  issue,  clear 
evidence is harder to come by. Several pieces of indirect evidence suggest that the long-term effect of 
foreign  purchases  on  yields  may  be  moderate.  Notably,  the  global  market  for  dollar-denominated 
bonds  is  enormous--perhaps  around  $25  trillion,  including  dollar-denominated  debt  issued  by  other 
countries  as  well  as  debt  issued  abroad  by  U.S.  residents.  In  the  long  run,  therefore,  the  market 
should  be  able  to  absorb  purchases  and  sales  of  large  absolute  magnitude  with  relatively  modest 
changes  in  yields.  Indeed,  long-term  yields  continued  to  fall  over  recent  quarters  even  as  foreign 
official holdings of Treasury securities increased at a slower pace than previously.  
                                                      
2   Don  H.  Kim  and  Jonathan  H.  Wright  (2005),  "An  Arbitrage-Free  Three-Factor  Term  Structure  Model  and  the  Recent 
Behavior  of  Long-Term  Yields  and  Distant-Horizon  Forward  Rates,"  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2005-33 
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). 
3   Ben S. Bernanke (2004), "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, 
Washington, D.C., February 20. 
4   Ben  S.  Bernanke,  Brian  P.  Sack,  and  Vincent  R.  Reinhart  (2004),  "Monetary  Policy  Alternatives  at  the  Zero  Bound:  An 
Empirical Assessment," Brookings Papers on Economic Analysis (2), pp. 1-100. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 3
The performance of Treasuries relative to that of other fixed-income instruments also argues against a 
dominant influence of foreign official portfolio decisions on long-term rates. If foreign official holdings of 
Treasuries were the source of the decline in their yields, then we would expect to observe increased 
spreads between yields on Treasury securities and the returns to other types of debt less favored by 
foreign official holders. But we have not seen a significant widening of private yield spreads relative to 
Treasuries--quite the contrary--and, as I noted earlier, yields in other industrial economies have fallen 
as well, in many cases by more than U.S. yields. A reasonable conclusion is that the accumulation of 
dollar reserves abroad has influenced U.S. yields, but reserve accumulation abroad is not the only, or 
even the dominant, explanation for their recent behavior. 
Changes  in  the  management  of  and  accounting  for  pension  funds  are  a  third  possible  source  of  a 
declining term premium. Reforms proposed in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are widely 
expected to encourage pension funds to be more fully funded and to take steps to better match the 
duration of their assets and liabilities. Together with the increased need of aging populations in the 
industrial  countries  to  prepare  for  retirement,  these  changes  may  have  increased  the  demand  for 
longer-maturity securities. We have seen little direct evidence to date of sizable pension-fund portfolio 
shifts toward long-duration bonds, at least in the United States. But judging from anecdotal reports, 
bond  investors  might  be  attaching  significant  odds  to  scenarios  in  which  pension  funds  tilt  the 
composition of their portfolios toward such assets substantially over time. 
Fourth  and  finally,  as  investors'  demands  for  long-duration  securities  may  have  increased  over  the 
past few years, the supply of such securities seems not to have kept pace. The average maturity of 
outstanding Treasury debt, for example, has dropped by 1-1/2 years since its peak in 2001, a trend 
just  now  beginning  to  turn  with  the  Treasury's  reissuance  of  the  thirty-year  bond.  Corporations  and 
households, however, have taken advantage of low long-term rates to lengthen the duration of their 
debt  in  recent  years,  which  has  compensated  to  some  extent  for  the  reduced  duration  of  available 
Treasury debt. 
Long-term yields and monetary policy 
What  does  the  historically  unusual  behavior  of  long-term  yields  imply  for  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy? The answer, it turns out, depends critically on the source of that behavior. To the extent that 
the decline in forward rates can be traced to a decline in the term premium, perhaps for one or more of 
the reasons I have just suggested, the effect is financially stimulative and argues for greater monetary 
policy  restraint,  all  else  being  equal.  Specifically,  if  spending  depends  on  long-term  interest  rates, 
special factors that lower the spread between short-term and long-term rates will stimulate aggregate 
demand.  Thus,  when  the  term  premium  declines,  a  higher  short-term  rate  is  required  to  obtain  the 
long-term  rate  and  the  overall  mix  of  financial  conditions  consistent  with  maximum  sustainable 
employment and stable prices. 
However, if the behavior of long-term yields reflects current or prospective economic conditions, the 
implications for policy may be quite different--indeed, quite the opposite. The simplest case in point is 
when  low  or  falling  long-term  yields  reflect  investor  expectations  of  future  economic  weakness. 
Suppose, for example, that investors expect economic activity to slow at some point in the future. If 
investors expect that weakness to require policy easing in the medium term, they will mark down their 
projected path of future spot interest rates, lowering far-forward rates and causing the yield curve to 
flatten  or  even  to  invert.  Indeed,  historically,  the  slope  of  the  yield  curve  has  tended  to  decline 
significantly in advance of recessions. 
What is the relevance of this scenario for today? Although macroeconomic forecasting is fraught with 
hazards, I would not interpret the currently very flat yield curve as indicating a significant economic 
slowdown to come, for several reasons. First, in previous episodes when an inverted yield curve was 
followed by recession, the level of interest rates was quite high, consistent with considerable financial 
restraint. This time, both short- and long-term interest rates--in nominal and real terms--are relatively 
low by historical standards.5 Second, as I have already discussed, to the extent that the flattening or 
inversion  of  the  yield  curve  is  the  result  of  a  smaller  term  premium,  the  implications  for  future 
                                                      
5   This is consistent  with empirical  work in Ben S.  Bernanke and Alan S. Blinder  1992), "The Federal Funds Rate and the 
Channels of Monetary Transmission," American Economic Review, vol. 82 (September), pp. 901-21. In that paper, we found 
that the level of the federal funds rate was extremely informative about future movements of real macroeconomic variables. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2006
economic activity are positive rather than negative.6 Finally, the yield curve is only one of the financial 
indicators  that  researchers  have  found  useful  in  predicting  swings  in  economic  activity.  Other 
indicators that have had empirical success in the past, including corporate risk spreads, would seem to 
be consistent with continuing solid economic growth. In that regard, the fact that actual and implied 
volatilities  of  most  financial  prices  remain  subdued  suggests  that  market  participants  do  not  harbor 
significant reservations about the economic outlook.  
An  alternative  perspective  holds  that  the  recent  behavior  of  interest  rates  does  not  presage  an 
economic  slowdown  but  suggests  instead  that  the  level  of  real  interest  rates  consistent  with  full 
employment  in  the  long  run--the  natural  interest  rate,  if  you  will--has  declined.  For  example,  some 
observers  have  pointed  to  factors  that  may  create  a  longer-term  drag  on  the  growth  in  household 
spending, including high energy costs, the likelihood of slower growth in house prices, and a possible 
reversal of recent declines in saving rates. If these drags on the growth of spending do materialize, 
then a lower real interest rate will be needed to sustain aggregate demand and keep the economy 
near  full  employment.  To  be  consistent  with  a  lower  long-term  real  rate,  the  short-term  policy  rate 
might have to be lower than it would otherwise be as well.  
Given  the  global  nature  of  the  decline  in  yields,  an  explanation  less  centered  on  the  United  States 
might  be  required.  About  a  year  ago,  I  offered  the  thesis  that  a  "global  saving  glut"--an  excess,  at 
historically  normal  real  interest  rates,  of  desired  global  saving  over  desired  global  investment--was 
contributing to the decline in interest rates.7 In brief, I argued that this shift reflects the confluence of 
several  forces.  On  the  saving  side,  the  factors  include rapid growth  in  high-saving  countries on  the 
Pacific Rim, export-focused economic development strategies that directly or indirectly hold back the 
growth of domestic demand, and the surge in revenues enjoyed by oil producers. On the investment 
side, notable factors restraining the global demand for capital include the legacy of the Asian financial 
crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  which  led  to  continuing  sluggishness  in  investment  in  some  of  those 
economies,  and  the  slower  growth  of  the  workforce  in  many  industrial  countries.  So  long  as  these 
factors  persist,  global  equilibrium  interest  rates  (and,  consequently,  the  neutral  policy  rate)  will  be 
lower than they otherwise would be. 
Conclusion 
What  conclusion  should  we  draw?  Clearly,  bond  prices,  like  other  asset  prices,  incorporate  a  great 
deal of information that is potentially very relevant to policymakers. However, the information is not 
always easy to extract and--as in the current situation--the bottom line for policy appears ambiguous. 
In  particular,  to  the  extent  that  the  recent  behavior  of  long-term  rates  reflects  a  declining  term 
premium, the policy rate associated with a given degree of financial stimulus will be higher than usual. 
But to the extent that long-term rates have been influenced by macroeconomic conditions, including 
such factors as trends in global saving and investment, the required policy rate will be lower. Given 
this reality, policymakers are well advised to follow two principles familiar to navigators throughout the 
ages:  First,  determine  your  position  frequently.  Second,  use  as  many  guides  or  landmarks  as  are 
available.  
In  the  context  of  monetary  policy,  these  principles  suggest  that  policymakers  should  monitor  bond 
yields carefully in judging the current state of the economy--but only in tandem with the signals from 
other important financial variables; direct readings on spending, production, and prices; and a goodly 
helping of qualitative information. Ultimately, a robust approach to policymaking requires the use of 
multiple  sources  of  information  and  multiple  methods  of  analysis,  combined  with  frequent  reality 
checks.  By  not  tying  policy  to  a  small  set  of  forecast  indicators,  we  may  sacrifice  some  degree  of 
simplicity, but we are less likely to be misled when a favored variable behaves in an unusual manner. 
                                                      
6   See the discussion in Jonathan H. Wright (2006), "The Yield Curve and Predicting Recessions," Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series 2006-7 (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March). 
7   Ben S. Bernanke, "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," Homer Jones Lecture, April 14, 2005. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 5
