Tigran Sargsyan: The Basle recommendations - approaches and realization; 
banking supervision - generator or hindrance in development of the banking 
system 
Speech  by  Mr  Tigran  Sargsyan,  Chairman  of  Central  Bank  of  Armenia,  at  the  15th  International 
Banking Congress, Saint Petersburg, 7-10 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Let me express my thanks to the organizers of the Congress for this opportunity to take the floor and 
share  my  thoughts on some  issues which  the  banking communities  of  our countries are concerned 
about. 
Today I will speak about the role of banking supervision in the development of the banking system.  
Methodological notes 
1.  
The  key  word  for  determining  the  topic  is  ‘Development’  and  therefore  we  need  to  look  into  this 
conception. 
Just  a  little  methodological  digression  from  the  theme!  Recently  Messrs.  Alexei  Ulukaev,  Aftandil 
Babaev and myself were discussing in relation to Caucasus. From the review I presented it turned out 
that Armenia had been the most successful in development. This aroused some discontent with the 
interlocutors. But my response was that no one disturbed them to make their own review. 
What does it mean – from the methodological point of view? In order to understand whether or not 
there is development, we have to identify who’s the subject, what goals it pursues, and who evaluates 
the results of the action.  
Development is the change of an object’s qualitative characteristics being the result of one or several 
accomplished projects with definitely set goals realized by the subject/subjects of the development.  
Project is a technological process of a purposeful change of qualitative parameters of the object. 
Development often, without going into the matter of qualitative characteristics of the object, is being 
replaced  by  the  growth.  Since  when  the  discussion  is  development  of  the  banking  system,  the 
indicators such as growth of assets, share of assets in GDP, level of capitalization, etc. are the ones 
that are most referred to. In our opinion, never attempting to underestimate the importance of these 
indicators, there should however be some other approaches to evaluating the development. Namely, 
to watch the obtained results in correlation with the set goal. 
That is, where we see the reformer and the goals set by that reformer, it will be no difficult to evaluate 
the obtained results in terms of the change of qualitative characteristics. Here, the question is: who 
may  give  the  evaluation?  Answer  –  firstly,  the  subject  that  fulfils  the  project,  and,  secondly,  an 
independent subject that is familiar with the project.  
Actually, the mess really comes about because there is great deal of evaluators of development of the 
banking system, and each of them, with their own perception of the development, issues inadequate 
evaluations. The conclusion is if you fail to know the reformer’s goals it’ll be impossible to evaluate 
whether or not the banking supervision is generator or hindrance to the development of the banking 
system. 
Three phases of development of the banking system  
2.  
We might distinguish three phases of development of the banking systems of our countries: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Phase of depuration 
Phase of regulation (establishment) 
Phase of development 
BIS Review 77/2006 
 1
The basic  characteristics of  the  first  phase  include  chaotic  emergence  of banks,  a  great number of 
bankruptcies,  frequent  change  in  ownership,  formation  of  legislation,  establishment  of  banking 
supervision. At this stage, the goal of development of the banking system has been apparent – that’s 
depuration  of  the  system.  Also  apparent  was  the  subject  of  the  development  (banking  supervision) 
and the projects accomplished pursuant to the goals set. In Armenia, we have implemented a project 
of  improvement  of  the  bankruptcy  legislation  whereby  the  banking  supervision  was  empowered 
adequately in order to exercise bankruptcy with as minimum social consequences as possible. The 
legislation clearly stipulated quite tough criteria pertaining to insolvency, including the Central Bank’s 
subjective  judgment  of  the  activities  of  the  bank.  The  fulfillment  of  this  project  helped  us  liquidate 
around  30  percent  of  the  banks  and,  over  a  year,  quantitative  indicators  of  the  banking  system 
recovered. Russia accomplished a project on the introduction of all-known individual deposit insurance 
scheme.  
The  second  phase  has  peculiarities  as  follows:  enlargement  (consolidation)  of  banking  institutions, 
identification of a level playing field, formation of core elements of an institutional environment of the 
banking sector, adherence by the banking supervision and regulation to international standards and 
practices,  and  practices  of  corporate  governance.  What  comes  forward  also  at  the  stage  of 
establishment  is  the  goal  of  development  of  the  banking  system  –  that’s  stabilization,  and  banking 
supervision  appears  to  be  the  main  subject  of  the  development.  International  rules  of  banking 
supervision and banking regulation clearly set a vector around which banking supervision authorities 
of  practically  all  CIS  countries  take  their  measures.  Generally,  these  are  Recommendations  of  the 
Basle Committee and other regulatory papers for the banking business. Without introducing these, the 
international banking activities are not possible. How successful has the banking supervision been in 
realizing projects at the second phase is generally the business of international organizations which 
launch various investigations to evaluate compliance to international practices. And, as we read and 
learn these documents, we could see whether the banking supervision is generator or hindrance to the 
development. So, the problem of evaluators at the first and second phases does not emerge as the 
goals are visible.  
Quite  a  few  banking  systems  of  the  CIS  countries  entered  the  phase  of  development.  The 
fundamentals  of  this  phase  are  building  of  a  single  model  of  financial  market,  and  creating  of  an 
institutional environment, pursuant to an alternative goal of development. 
Goals of development at the current phase (alternatives) 
3.  
What goal could be set for the banking system of our countries at the third phase?  
Let  us  review  three  basic  alternatives.  Naturally,  these  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  however  the 
priorities should be set out primordially.  
Alternative  1  suggests  a  supportive  ground  for  stability  of  the  banking  system.  The  key  function  of 
banks in the context of this model lies in performing the role of intermediation in the payments and 
settlements  area.  The  accumulation  of  resources  and  lending  to  economy  is  the  key  source  for 
creation of value, and the funding of the real sector comes from non-bank sources.  
Alternative 2 characterizes building by the banking system of the function of intermediation, connected 
with the accumulation of resources and lending to economy. In this model, the function of investment 
is not intrinsic to banks, as non-bank institutions are there for this function.  
Alternative 3 points out the banking system as performer of a role of locomotive for the development of 
the economy on the whole. In this model, an investment component of the bank comes forward, and 
banks mostly position themselves as management institutions, bringing considerable influence upon 
the decisions taken in other sectors of economy. 
So,  in  the  third  phase  the  goal  is  not  apparent.  In  order  to  understand  whether  or  not  supervision 
authorities are generator or hindrance to the development, we first need to look into the projects of 
development and, therefore, goals and then to evaluate how far a banking system today is from the 
one we would like to set up.  
This means that all participants of the market – banks, consumers, regulators – should hold a single 
vision of the future of the banking system.  
A relevant question here is – who shapes that vision and stands as the subject of development on a 
phase when goals are not that visible.  
2 
 BIS Review 77/2006
The answer is simple – the one who will take a responsibility and fulfill the project of development of 
the banking system. That could be the government on behalf of the ministry of finance, or that could 
be the central bank, and a group of banks (in a form of association of banks). 
There could be no development unless purposeful activities, open declaration, transparent measures 
are in place. The subject that implements a project activity shall have adequate capacities, resources 
and methods. 
It is obvious that all the participants of the market should discuss the project in question, and once it is 
adopted, the parties of the discussion will automatically become participants of the project. Within its 
framework it’ll be quite easy to judge whether the banking supervision is a generator or a hindrance.  
Some of you in the lecture-room may have a new question, like ‘How you accomplish the approaches 
in your country, which you are proposing?’ To us, the answer is already evident – we are for the third 
alternative providing that banks come out as driver of the development of economy. At present, much 
effort is being spent on re-writing the legislation and other regulatory papers which would give banks 
an access onto the investment market. Banks in Armenia – that’s a vital sector that accumulates the 
experience  of  management,  including  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  and  financial  flows 
management. In reality, banks are the very entities which could push ahead corporate governance to 
the enterprises of the real sector. This would both downsize the underground economy, and increase 
the number of solvent, transparent enterprises. After all, indeed, the principal problem on the way of 
economic development today is corruption and ‘shadow’ economy. While we had success in resolving 
the issue in our banking system, there comes then a necessity to use the potential of the banks as 
subjects interested in resolution of such problems in other sectors of the economy as well. 
We need to realize this project in close cooperation with the banking community.  
Significance of Basle II for the development of banking system 
4.  
The topic of the Congress reads “The Basle Recommendations: Approaches and Realization”. 
We would rightfully ask a question to ourselves: Could Basle II become a development project for the 
banking system? 
Our answer is: No, it could not. Inasmuch as we fail to set up clear goals of development, we will not 
be able to answer questions like these: “How to introduce the Basle II?”, “What would be the phases 
for its introduction?”, “What realities of the current situation do we need to consider, what to ignore?”, 
and the introduction of new standards would always meet with resistance.  
To us, Basle II is a new instrument for both banks and banking supervision, and a competent usage of 
that instrument within the framework of the set goals might enable accomplishment of the project.  
Main conclusions 
5.  
To sum up, I would like to formulate the basic theses of my address. 
First – a development may only be if it is designed; 
Second – there should emerge a subject which would take a responsibility for the accomplishment of 
the development project; 
Third – evaluating the activity of a regulator is not possible without a design position. 
At the phase of depuration and establishment, the banking supervision will act as a generator for the 
development of the banking system, since both goals and reformers are visible. At the new phase of 
development,  the  banking  supervision  may  be  a  hindrance,  as  goals  are  not  obvious,  vision  of  the 
future of the banking system varies, and there is at least three alternatives to choice. 
For today, the main challenge we face is clear delineation of the desired goal of development.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 77/2006 
 3
