Hermann Remsperger: Global imbalances and policy implications 
Speech by Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the  Wilton  Park  Conference  "How  best  to  promote  growth,  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
European Union?", Eltville, 9 May 2006. 
 I must say that I find the traditional Wilton Park motto “Bridging divides” truly fascinating. And the more 
I think about it, the clearer it becomes that this motto could also describe the work of central bankers. 
Just consider, for example, the dividing line between the media and market players on the one side 
and central bankers on the other. Bridging divides is a core function of communication in monetary 
policy.  
The  question  often  arises:  Why  is  this  communication  so  difficult?  Many  people  think  that  the 
asymmetric  distribution  of  information  is  to  blame.  I  do  not  share  this  opinion.  In  my  view  that 
information is distributed quite symmetrically between markets and central banks.  
I see a kind of time inconsistency as being the deeper-rooted reason for major challenges in monetary 
policy  communication.  The  forward-looking  approach  of  market  players  and  the  media  is  inevitably 
focused on meetings, the precise outcome of which is usually not yet known even by the monetary 
policy decision-makers themselves. In my opinion, it would certainly help to bridge the divide between 
the media, market players and central bankers if everyone bore this simple fact in mind.  
Nevertheless,  communication  would,  even  then,  still  involve  some  stress.  As  Laurence  Meyer,  the 
former Fed Governor, put it: “Preparing a speech is a joy. 
Giving  a  speech  is  fun.  Dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  the  speech  is  the  only  thing  where  there  is 
stress.”  
I have to admit, however, that preparing and giving a speech is not always joy or fun. Let me be very 
frank: I feel stressed right now. As my participation at the Wilton Park Conference was only decided a 
few days ago, I simply did not have the time to prepare a talk on the original topic. And that is why I 
would ask you to forgive the fact that I will not be speaking on the subject that had been planned for 
my colleague Professor Stark.  
Instead I would like to make some remarks on global imbalances. However, as you will see in a few 
minutes,  the  policy  conclusions  that  we  have  to  draw  for  Europe  in  general  and  the  euro  area  in 
particular  with  a  view  on  reducing  global  imbalances  are  very  much  in  line  with  the  agenda  of  this 
conference.  
Growing current account imbalances have been shaping developments in the world economy for some 
years now. In 1999, the US current account deficit exceeded 3% of GDP – a ratio which, for a long 
time, had been regarded as critical for the long-term sustainability of a negative net savings position.  
Since then, the growing asymmetries in the global current account structure have often been portrayed 
as a risk to the world economy. Above all, warnings are made about the potential consequences that a 
sharp correction of current account balances might have for the world economy. There is a worry that 
tensions in the financial and foreign exchange markets, accompanied by frictions in the real economy, 
may occur.  
Now, there happen to be a number of approaches in the literature which seek to explain why the risks 
of the global imbalances have not manifested themselves so far or why they are not such a problem 
as is often assumed. I will address these in a minute. To make the outcome clear from the start: even 
after analysing these approaches, which can be labelled for short as “global savings flows”, “Bretton 
Woods II” and “dark matter”, I see no reason to neglect the global imbalances in the economic policy 
debate. But the prospects of a more equal distribution of global economic growth do give hope that the 
necessary adjustments will gradually come under way.  
 Trends in globalisation  
I 
So  that  my  comments  on  global  imbalances  may  be  better  understood,  I  would  like  to  begin  with 
emphasizing three trends in globalisation. First, for some decades now, world trade has been growing 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 1
faster than global economic output. On an average of the past 30 years, world trade has increased 
one and a half times more than global GDP. In the 1990s, world trade grew more than twice as much 
as global output. Accordingly, the openness of many economies – in other words, the ratio of exports 
plus imports to GDP – showed a substantial increase. In Germany, the ratio last year reached more 
than 75%. That is very high for a major industrial country. The comparable figure for the United States 
and Japan is just over 26%. 
The second trend I would like to mention is the internationalisation of production. This is reflected, for 
example,  in  the  rise  in  cross-border  direct  investment.  For  many  companies,  it  has  become  more 
important and, at the same time, easier to take a global perspective. Accordingly, national borders are 
becoming less important in production and sales decisions.  
Initial estimates by UNCTAD show that cross-border flows of direct investment in 2005 totalled almost 
US$900  billion.  This was around  30%  more  than  in  2004.  There  are  now  about  70,000 enterprises 
worldwide  that  are  organised  transnationally.  They  have  about  690,000  foreign  subsidiaries.  These 
global players account for around two-thirds of world trade, half of which is in the form of intra-group 
trade.  
German enterprises, too, have increased their international activities. German firms account for 8½% 
of the global stock of foreign direct investment (FDI). For 2004, the Bundesbank’s FDI statistics show 
around 22,700 affiliates abroad with 4½ million employees.  
By the same token, foreign firms are, of course, investing in Germany. I do not want to go into this 
subject in detail at this point, but I would like to take the opportunity to counter an impression which 
recently gained a lot of attention. It was reported that the levels of FDI stocks in France are twice as 
high as in Germany. Evidently, however, market values were being compared with book values. Using 
book values for both countries shows higher FDI in Germany than in France. 
Besides the growing links in production and international trade, the increasing global integration of the 
financial markets is, as I see it, the third major trend in globalisation. More and more countries have 
access  to  the  international  capital  market.  There  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  the  volume  of 
cross-border  securities  transactions.  In  the  case  of  Germany,  for  example,  turnover  in  cross-border 
securities transactions amounted to almost 600% of GDP in 2005 – which is 80 times more than 25 
years ago.  
The  sharp  increase  in  global  foreign  exchange  market  transactions  is  a  further  major  indicator  of 
globalisation  in  the  financial  sector.  According  to  figures  provided  by  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, for example, daily foreign exchange market transactions in 2004 amounted to US$1,880 
billion. This is more than a threefold increase on the late 1980s, and corresponds to 42 times the value 
of world trade.  
This  astonishing  increase  in  foreign  exchange  market  trading  which  is  not  directly  linked  to 
transactions in the real economy has a number of different reasons. Explaining factors are likely to be 
increasing investor orientation towards cross-border investments as well as a more active investment 
management and the growing importance of hedge funds.1
Overall, countries’ financial openness has increased significanty. This openness can be expressed as 
the  ratio  of  the sum of  external assets  and  liabilities  to GDP.  For  Germany, the  degree  of  financial 
openness in 2004 amounted to around 300% – three times higher than in 1990.  
For  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  this  indicator  roughly  doubled  in  the  same  period. 
Owing  to  the  particular  role  of  London  as  an  important  international  financial  centre,  the  United 
Kingdom showed a degree of financial openness of more than 700% in 2004.  
Globally integrated financial markets are expanding the investment spectrum, reducing capital costs 
and  contributing  to  greater  market  liquidity,  price  efficiency  and  risk  distribution.  Along  with  the 
advancing  integration  of  the  financial  markets,  investors’  “home  bias”  will  probably  continue  to 
diminish,  too.  This,  in  turn,  will  reinforce  the  convergence  process  and  facilitate  the  cross-border 
allocation of savings.  
                                                      
1   See BIS (2005), Triennial Central Bank Survey, Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2006
 Global savings flows  
II 
Right here there should be a moment’s pause for thought as we have come to a crucial point. We 
have to look at global imbalances from two angles – first, from the perspective of the current account 
balance and, second, in terms of the balance between saving and investment. Ultimately, these are 
two sides of the same coin: Countries with a current account deficit absorb savings from abroad and 
countries with a savings surplus transfer resources abroad.  
The scale we are dealing with here is revealed by looking at the global current account structure. The 
US current account deficit last year of US$805 billion – 6.4% of GDP – stood in contrast to current 
account surpluses of US$164 billion in Japan, US$159 billion in China and a further US$86 billion in 
some Asian emerging economies, and US$259 billion in the OPEC countries. 
The euro area was running a current account deficit equivalent to US$28 billion.  
However, looking briefly only at the German current account, it is plain to see that Germany, too, with 
a  surplus  of  US$115  billion  (€92  billion,  4.1%  in  relation  to  GDP),  provides  net  savings  to  other 
countries on a large scale.  
In macroeconomic terms, this reveals that – unlike in the 1990s – domestic saving in Germany has no 
longer been fully absorbed by domestic aggregate fixed capital formation. At 2¾% to 3% of disposable 
income in the period from 2002 to 2005, the overall net investment ratio was very low compared to the 
first half of the 1990s, when it was between 9% and 12 %. And in the second half of the 1990s it was 
at roughly 8%.  
In other countries, too – above all, in parts of Asia – the rather subdued investment, along with a high 
level of savings, has led to the creation of a saving surplus that was available for investment in the 
international capital markets. Over the past few years, rising net savings of the oil-producing countries 
have  been  an  additional  factor,  which  means  that  the  global  transfer  of  financial  resources  is  also 
being shaped by high oil prices.  
In short, capital has been flowing from emerging economies to industrial countries, particularly to the 
United States. As mentioned, the US national saving gap was more than 6% of GDP in 2005. Along 
with  a  negative  private  financing  balance,  the  government  budget  deficit  has  also  been  a  major 
contributor (in 2005, the budget deficit was around 4% of GDP). 
The large US current account deficit, which contrasts with positive net savings in other parts of the 
world, has been taken up as part of the “global savings glut”2 theory. One of its key propositions is that 
the US current account deficit has not only been financed but also shaped by the net savings in many 
other countries.  
From  this  perspective,  the  US  deficit  is  essentially  the  product  of  economic  developments  in  other 
countries  and,  therefore,  endogenised:  The  increased  supply  of  net  savings  in  various  parts  of  the 
world during the past decade is said to have made the United States a net importer of capital and, at 
the same time, ensured relatively low real interest rates.  
It  is  claimed  that  several  factors  have  determined  the  increase  in  net  savings  outside  the  USA.  In 
industrial countries with an ageing population, so the argument goes, there is a major incentive and 
need to save more.  
In many emerging and developing countries, experience of the financial crises, in particular, has led to 
a  build-up  of  currency  reserves  for  precautionary  reasons  which  has  made  them  suppliers  –  rather 
than demanders – of capital.  
At this point – if not earlier – one has to wonder, however, whether saving and investment behaviour 
outside the United States, which has allowed the US current account deficit to be financed relatively 
easily so far, is “immutable”. I doubt it, not least because some of the saving surplus is due to special 
factors outside the United States that can hardly last for ever.3  
                                                      
2   Bernanke, B.S. (2005), The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit, Speech at the Homer Jones Lecture, 
St. Louis, Missouri. 
3   See IMF (2005), World Economic Outlook, Building Institutions, Washington DC. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 3
Ben Bernanke, too, has said in commenting on the “global savings glut” that the “current pattern of 
international  capital  flows  –  should  it  persist  –  could  prove  counterproductive”  in  the  longer  term.4 
Above all, it is difficult to predict whether and at what price markets are prepared to contribute more or 
less indefinitely to the transfer of resources between the various regions of the world.  
As I have just indicated, however, this is not just a matter of how private economic agents behave. 
Central banks are also players in this game. That is revealed by looking at the global stock of currency 
reserves, which roughly doubled between late 2001 and late 2005, although a certain deceleration in 
the build-up of foreign exchange reserves was apparent last year.  
What determined the sharp increase in currency reserves, especially between 2002 and 2004, was the 
exchange rate policy of some Asian countries seeking to support their currencies’ peg to the US dollar. 
This meant that, for a number of countries, the central banks’ currency purchases were, at times, the 
main vehicle for investment abroad.5
Of the ten largest holders of currency reserves, eight are countries in Asia. China and Japan alone 
account for a total of roughly 40% of the global stock of those reserves.  
Bretton Woods II  
III  
Against the backdrop of these developments, it is only a small step to the idea of a revived Bretton 
Woods.  The  short  way  of  putting  this  –  “Bretton  Woods  II”  –  is  intended  to  express  the  idea  that 
exchange rates are shaped by a voluntary, semi-institutional exchange rate system.6  
The growing US net saving gap, it is claimed, is being financed without major difficulty because some 
Asian central banks are prepared to accumulate large stocks of dollar reserves. As these countries 
have an interest in supporting their national economic policies by fixing the exchange rate, US current 
account deficits can be financed by the accumulation of currency reserves elsewhere and therefore 
persist.  
Essentially, the proposition of Bretton Woods II does highlight one major aspect of global imbalances. 
The comparison between a voluntary, unilateral peg of the exchange rate of various Asian currencies 
to the dollar and multilateral agreements such as the 1944 Bretton Woods agreement, however, is not 
quite accurate. Furthermore, the main point is that market interventions also involve costs for these 
countries. 
For central banks, growing dollar reserves also mean a growing risk of losses should the US dollar 
depreciate.7  Their  incentive  to  give  more  consideration  to  other  currencies  in  the  portfolio  might 
become stronger. However, it also seems doubtful whether the avoidance of foreign exchange losses 
motivates central banks’ actions.  
Another aspect of “Bretton Woods II” is the growing importance of dollar reserves in the intervening 
central  banks’  balance sheets  for  their  countries’  monetary policy.  Many  of  the  Asian  central  banks 
have sterilised the bulk of their reserve purchases.8 Besides costs resulting from possible changes in 
the exchange rate, these sterilisation costs also have to be borne in mind.  
In actual fact, in the past few years there has been a certain easing of the alignment of some Asian 
currencies’  exchange  rates  with  the  dollar.  In  March  2004,  Japan  discontinued  its  currency  market 
interventions. Since then, the Japanese foreign exchange reserves have been nearly unchanged. The 
authorities in Korea, Taiwan and Singapore also were already allowing fairly large fluctuations of their 
currencies in the course of 2004.  
                                                      
4   Bernanke, B S (2005), loc cit. 
5   See Higgins, M/Klitgaard, T (2004), Reserve Accumulation: Implications for Global Capital Flows and Finanicial Marktes, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues, Vol 10, No 10, September /October 2004. 
6   See Dooley, M P/Folkerts-Landau, D/Garber, P (2003), An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System, NBER Working 
Paper 9971. 
7   See Roubini, N/Setser, B (2004), The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the US External Imbalances, Stern School 
of Business, NYU und University College, Oxford. 
8   See Higgins, M/Klitgaard, T (2004), loc cit. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2006
The build-up of currency reserves in those countries has now lost momentum. Last year in July, the 
transition  to  a  new  exchange  rate  regime  was  initiated  in  China.  Overall,  this  means  that  some 
modification of the exchange rate arrangements has now been put in place. 
This transformation is also reflected in the US financial account. In 2005, unlike earlier years, currency 
purchases  by  public  investors  no  longer  made  the  largest  contribution  to  financing.  The  idea  of  a 
“Bretton Woods II” system has therefore already become somewhat less relevant – especially as the 
oil-exporting countries have become more important for financing the US current account deficit.9  
 Dark matter  
IV 
While the idea of Bretton Woods II has been attracting less public attention of late, there is now a more 
lively debate on a line of reasoning that the US negative net foreign asset position is mitigated by the 
fact that net cross-border investment income is still positive. In 2004, for example, the United States 
had a negative international investment position of US$2.5 trillion. In the same year, however, US$36 
billion flowed into the USA as investment income.  
Now,  in  order  to  explain  this  apparently  contradictory  situation,  Ricardo  Hausmann  and  Federico 
Sturzenegger have recently referred to “dark matter”, arguing that the US negative net foreign assets 
are due to statistical shortcomings. They say that an analysis of the investment income clearly shows 
that the US assets abroad – measured by their earning capacity value - exceed the liabilities to non-
residents.  The  USA,  they  argue,  is  generating  income  from  unseen  assets,  which  they  call  “dark 
matter”.10
“Dark matter” is a term from the astronomy describing the discrepancy between real matter – which 
can be deduced from the gravitational force operating in the galaxies – and visible matter.  
The  phenomenon  of  positive  net  investment  income  alongside  negative  US  net  foreign  assets  had 
already been discussed earlier in the literature.11  
As  I  see  it,  dark  matter  does  not  necessarily  have  to  be  used  as  an  argument  in  order  to  explain 
positive investment income alongside negative net assets. For example, the IMF had already pointed 
out earlier that US investments abroad generate a higher average return than foreign investment in 
the United States.12  
This  advantage  is  due,  in  roughly  equal  parts,  to  the  composition  of  the  assets  and  the  differing 
profitability of comparable items. A prominent role is played by the high profitability of US FDI.  
With regard to the sustainability of the US foreign trade position, however, that is precisely what raises 
doubts about the stability and reliability of the flow of income stemming from the yield advantage. 
Last year, net investment income amounted to no more than US$7.4 billion, for example. There are 
many arguments to suggest that, in the United States, high positive net investment income is by no 
means guaranteed.  
First, it has to be borne in mind that market position gains can soon be lost if the economic setting 
changes. The age structure or yield maturity of US and non-US FDI, which at present probably still 
differ in favour of the United States, may also converge in the medium term.  
Second, the positive sign of the investment income balance conceals the fact that it has been falling 
steadily in relation to gross flows since the early 1980s. In 1980, it accounted for more than 40% of 
total US income from investment abroad, while, in 2005, it was less than 2%. This means that, today, 
                                                      
9   See ECB (2006), The Accumulation of Foreign Reserves, Occasional Paper Series No 43, February 2006. 
10   See Hausmann, R/Sturzenegger, F (2006), Global Imbalances or Bad Accounting? The Missing Dark Matter in the Wealth 
of Nations, Harvard University, CID Working Paper No 124, Cambridge MA. 
11   See Cline, W (2005), The United States as a Debtor Nation, Washington DC, sowie Gourinchas, P O/Rey, H (2005), From 
World  Banker  to  World  Venture  Capitalist:  US  External  Adjustment  and  the  Exorbitant  Privilege,  presented  at  the  NBER 
Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. 
12   See IMF (2005), loc cit. 
BIS Review 41/2006 
 5
comparatively small changes on the income or expenditure side can have far-reaching effects on the 
net income statement.13
Third,  even  with  US  investors  enjoying  constant  yield  advantages,  an  increase  in  borrowing  costs 
could push US net interest income into deficit. Given the credit liabilities14 of around US$3.6 trillion net 
shown at the end of 2004, a 1 percentage point increase in the global interest rate level over the entire 
maturity range would lead to an additional net interest burden of US$36 billion.15
That would be the case at least in the long run if the higher interest rate level affects all assets and 
liabilities. It would eat up the 2005 interest income balance, which was no more than US$7.4 billion.  
In the final analysis, the “dark matter” theory does not provide a compelling reason why the USA and, 
with it, the world economy should be immune to risks of persistently large current account deficits.  
 Implications  
V 
Coming to the policy implications, let me first note that globalisation by no means automatically gives 
rise to imbalances. In the past few years, what we have been dealing with is the advancing process of 
globalisation coinciding with a particular set of factors that have contributed to the emergence of global 
imbalances.  
In  this  context,  the  close  integration  and  increasing  breadth  and  depth  of  the  international  financial 
markets have undoubtedly facilitated the financing of current account deficits.  
Second, I would indeed like to acknowledge that the concepts behind the labels “global savings flows”, 
“Bretton Woods II” and “dark matter” contain a number of components that can help us explain why 
the current account imbalances have not caused larger problems up to now. 
Nevertheless,  my  comments  are  intended  primarily  to  show  that  such  explanations  for  what  has 
happened in the past are not proof of the sustainability of current account imbalances in the future. But 
the prospects of a more equal distribution of global economic growth in my view do give hope that the 
necessary adjustments will gradually come under way.  
Third, what is now crucial is that the process of adjustment is supported by an economic policy which 
ensures that a gradual and balanced reduction in the major imbalances really does occur. Simulations 
by  international  organisations  all  point  in  the  same  direction:  Owing  to  the  sheer  size  of  the 
imbalances, it will be crucial for the adjustment to occur through several channels at once.16 This is the 
best way to avoid extreme changes in individual variables and to ensure that any adjustment process 
is as orderly as possible.  
The  steps  required  include  additional  efforts  to  increase  savings  in  the  US,  greater  exchange  rate 
flexibility in some Asian countries and reforms to strengthen the conditions for growth in Japan and, in 
particular, Europe.  
With regard to the implications of the global imbalances for the euro area let me first emphasize that 
the external position of the currency union as a whole is more or less balanced. In 2005, the current 
account deficit amounted to US$ 28 billion (EUR 23 billion) or 0.3 % of GDP. Consequently, the role 
the euro area can play in facilitating the adjustment process is certainly rather limited. Nevertheless, 
enhancing  long-term  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  essential  for  internal  reasons  and 
simultaneously will contribute to reducing global imbalances.  
Turning now to the policy conclusions that can be drawn for Germany, it is widely accepted that this 
necessitates  structural  reforms  that  are  designed  to  restore  consumer  confidence  and  to  increase 
incentives  to  invest.  In  my  opinion,  there  are  currently  three  policy  areas  at  the  top  of  the  reform 
agenda: the labour market, health care and corporate taxation.  
                                                      
13   See Cline, loc cit. 
14   Excluding US reserve assets on the assets side and cash on the liabilities side. 
15   See Cline, loc cit. 
16   See OECD (2004), The Challenges of Narrowing the US Current Account, Economic Outlook 75, pp 151-168; IMF (2004), 
The Global Implications of the U.S. Fiscal Deficit and of China’s Growth, World Economic Outlook, April 2004, pp 63-102; 
IMF (2005), loc cit. 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2006
With regard to the labour market, initial steps to create greater flexibility have already been taken. The 
reform of unemployment benefits and the extension of the qualifying period are a move in the right 
direction. Further efforts are needed, however, to increase individual firms’ room for manoeuvre within 
the framework set by negotiated wages, and to lower the costs of additional employment by reducing 
non-wage labour costs.  
Health care and corporate tax reform also have to be addressed in the near future. As I see it, the 
coalition  government  of  Christian  Democrats  and  Social  Democrats  should  find  adequate  solutions 
which pave the way for more growth and employment.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  putting  these  specific  suggestions  for  Germany  into  the 
broader  context  of  how  to  reduce  global  imbalances,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  topic  of  this 
conference,  on  the  other.  These  two  days  we  have  heard  valuable  contributions  on  “How  best  to 
promote growth, employment and competitiveness in the European Union?”, and we will hear more 
about this tomorrow. At the same time, your agenda shows exactly the way, how Europe could and 
should contribute to the reduction of global imbalances.  
BIS Review 41/2006 
 7
