Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic integration in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 15th European 
Regional Conference of the Board of Governors, Tel Aviv University, Paris, 31 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear Friends, 
Thank you for inviting me here today, it’s a great pleasure to be once again with the friends of the Tel 
Aviv University and among such a distinguished audience.  
1.  Introduction.  As  you  know,  the  euro  represents  a  unique  endeavour  in  economic  history: 
voluntarily creating an economic area with a single market and sharing a single currency among 12 
national economies. Under the influence of the euro, many important developments are now taking 
place. I would like to share with you some thoughts on these developments and their implications.  
My  reflections  are  organised  along  four  main  lines.  First,  I  argue  that  the  euro  pushes  integration 
forwards.  Second,  I  highlight  some  of  the  main  benefits  and  costs  of  European  economic  and 
monetary  integration.  Third,  I  provide  some  snapshots  of  the  diversity  of  euro  area  national 
economies, a natural phenomenon in a wide currency area. Fourth, I discuss the issue of the optimal 
economic management of the euro area.  
2.  First,  the  economic  and  financial  environment  of  the  euro  area  has  changed  and  is  still 
changing. The economies of euro area countries are becoming more interdependent as the euro acts 
as a catalyst, both directly and indirectly.  
We have clear evidence of a significant increase in both intra- and extra-euro area trade in goods 
since the launch of the euro. Exports and imports of goods within the euro area increased from 
about 26.5% of GDP in 1998 to around 31% in 2005. This may be partly related to the introduction of 
the single currency and the increased price and cost transparency, which have promoted cross-border 
trade.  Over  the  same  period,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  with  trading  partners  outside  the 
euro area rose from about 24% of GDP to almost 30%. This is mainly due to more sustained growth in 
world GDP, an increase in global trade integration, and a very sizeable increase in trade with the ten 
new members of the European Union. All in all, these developments are noteworthy, given the already 
high  degree  of  openness  of  the  euro  area  countries,  suggesting  that  we  are  not  witnessing  the 
creation of a “fortress Europe”.  
A  less-known  feature  is  that trade in services with  partners  inside  and  outside  the  euro area  also 
increased  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  in  recent  years.  Intra-euro  exports  and  imports  of  services 
increased from about 5% of GDP in 1998 to around 6.5% in 2005. Proportionately, this represents a 
higher increase than extra-euro exports and imports of services, which increased from about 7.5% of 
GDP in 1998 to around 9% in 2005. Trade in services can rise much further when the single market for 
services is completed, particularly in the financial area.  
Intra-euro  area  Foreign  Direct  Investments  (FDIs)  have  grown  considerably  as  well.  They  are  now 
catching  up  with  extra-euro  area  FDIs.  Between  1994  and  2004,  intra-euro  area  FDI  stocks  grew 
robustly from almost 14% of euro area GDP to around 24%. Extra-euro area outward FDI stocks have 
instead grown somewhat less rapidly since the introduction of the euro: i.e., from 22% to 30% of euro 
area GDP. Such FDIs – that also include Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) activity – accumulate over 
time and contribute to the reshaping of Europe. If you allow me, this represents an investment of the 
euro area in itself!  
The  faster  movement  towards  a  single  market  in  financial  services  is  another  example  of  the  euro 
acting as a catalyst. I will give just a few examples. Last year, for the first time, the ECB published a 
set  of  indicators  on  the  state  of  integration  of  euro  area  financial  and  banking  markets.  These 
indicators clearly show that the euro has been a catalyst, particularly in those market segments that 
are closer to the single monetary policy. For example the cross-sectional standard deviation of EONIA, 
EURIBOR  and  EUREPO  lending  rates  across  euro  area  countries  plummeted  to  close  to  zero 
following the introduction of the euro and remained stable thereafter at around 1-2 basis points. 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 1
The euro corporate bond market has grown very significantly since 1999, and has the potential to grow 
even further, closing the gap with the US market. The outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-
financial corporations of around €2.5 trillion in the United States is still three times larger than in the 
euro area. A gradual integration is also taking place in euro area equity markets. Stock prices across 
the euro area increasingly react to euro area-wide factors and news. Furthermore, the elimination of 
intra-euro  area  currency  risk  has  reduced  the  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of  institutional 
investors, but the country effect is still quite important. Here there is potential for greater integration.  
Cross-border  interbank  loans  and  holdings  of  securities  are  another  area  in  which  we  have  seen 
significant  progress.  At  the  end  of  1997,  securities  issued  by  non-monetary  financial  institutions  of 
another  euro  area  country  accounted  for  only  16%  of  the  securities  held  by  euro  area  monetary 
financial institutions (MFIs). This share has now reached almost 40%.  
But  integration  in  retail  banking  has  been  slow  so  far.  Concentration  in  the  banking  sector  has 
increased mostly due to domestic mergers. Cross-border banking mergers have only recently started 
to  happen.  In  this  respect,  while  a  number  of  euro  area  banks  have  considerably  expanded  their 
interests  outside  the  euro  area  in  recent  years,  cross-border  activity  within  the  euro  area,  has 
remained limited. Only in recent quarters however, have we seen an increase. The continuation of this 
trend  will  result  in  an  increase  in  the  level  of  competition  and  efficiency  in  the  euro  area  financial 
system. 
Let  me  briefly  mention  that  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  are  actively  involved  in  several  joint 
initiatives. The launch of TARGET2 – the new payment platform for the financial system – is planned 
for  the  end  of  2007.  We  are  participating  in  the  Short-Term  European  Paper  (STEP)  initiative  to 
promote the convergence of standards and practices prevailing in the European short-term securities 
markets. We are also working with the European Commission on the Green Paper on Mortgage Credit 
in the EU. This segment of the banking and retail markets has an outstanding volume of more than €4 
trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU, corresponding to around 40% of EU GDP. Euro area 
mortgage markets are not yet fully integrated, and I see here great potential for further integration.  
I  would  also  like  to  see  further  progress  in  creating  more  flexible  labour  and  product  markets. 
Movements in this area have been slower than we expected. I will come back to this issue later on.  
All  in  all,  the  economic  and  financial  environment  is  steadily  changing:  euro  area  countries  are 
becoming even more interdependent than they were at the start of EMU. We all have a bigger stake in 
each other and are increasingly inter-reliant.  
The ECB and the Eurosystem pay close attention to these effects of the euro. Last June we held a 
workshop to explore developments in all areas. I can only repeat here what I said at the end of that 
workshop, namely: “All my experience tells me that in such a rapidly changing world, where the 
progress  of  sciences  and  technology,  the  globalisation  process  and  the  very  profound 
structural  changes  in  Europe  are  simultaneous,  we  have  to  be  humble  in  front  of  facts  and 
figures and be ready to take [them] on board.” 
3.  My  second  observation  is  that  the  single  currency  has  fostered  changes  in  the  economic 
and financial environment that are beneficial. The single currency has created lower transaction 
costs  and  increased  price  and  cost  transparency  on  top  of  the  Single  Market  Programme,  thus 
fostering competition in the area of tradable goods and services, and promoting trade. Indeed, there 
are  benefits  from  deeper  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Increasing  intra-euro  FDIs  and  M&As  allow 
companies based in Europe to obtain higher returns.  
The  Eurosystem  –  with  the  ECB  at  its  centre  –  has  built  a  successful  monetary  framework.  This 
includes  a  clear  monetary  policy  strategy  to  deliver  our  primary  objective  –  price  stability  –  and  an 
efficient payment system. As a result, expected inflation levels are low, in line with our definition of 
price stability. This has allowed for nominal and real interest rates standing at historically low levels, 
thus creating favourable conditions for sustained economic growth and job creation.  
Currently, nominal and real interest rates are at historically low levels. In most euro area countries, 
lower  real  interest  rates  existed  only  back  in  the  1970s,  when  financial  captivity  preceded  financial 
liberalisation. But these rates were "too low" to maintain price stability in these countries. The main 
achievement which we see at present is low nominal and real rates consistent with stable inflation, due 
to the credibility of the ECB in solidly anchoring long-term inflation expectations. 
The  euro  area  has  become  more  resilient.  As  a  whole,  we  find  less  volatility  because  the  cyclical 
component  of  output  growth  is  more  synchronised  and  some  previously  idiosyncratic  national 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2006
economic policies have disappeared. A relevant factor for some euro area member countries is that 
the risk of possible speculative attacks on national currencies has been removed.  
Clearly, there are also general economic benefits arising from more financial integration in the euro 
area. I will mention a few. Financial integration fosters financial development and the modernisation of 
the financial system and, ultimately, economic growth. Some of our studies and some analyses by the 
EU  Commission  claim  that  the  potential  gains  from  the  financial  integration  of  European  bond  and 
equity markets in terms of additional GDP growth amount to around 1% over a ten-year period.  
Thanks to greater financial integration, economic agents can invest more easily in any part of the euro 
area and thereby spread the risk of potential local shocks impacting on income and consumption. The 
potential benefits of this are enormous. To the extent that euro area investors are assigning a higher 
weight to portfolio investment in euro area countries – and banking integration increases as well – risk-
sharing in the euro area increases: a very important shock absorber.  
I will give you a comparison. A few years ago Sorensen and Yosha showed in a research paper that 
the US capital markets smoothes 39% of the shocks to gross state product, credit markets 23% and 
the federal government 13%. 25% of the shock is not smoothed. Hence, in the United States, financial 
markets and financial institutions contribute by 62%, to the absorption of state idiosyncratic shocks. 
The  effect  is  about  five  times  more  important  than  the  federal  budget.  While  in  Europe  the 
supranational  budget  plays  a  different  role,  we  expect  European  financial  markets  to  move  in  this 
direction. 
Furthermore, by making markets deeper and more liquid, financial integration creates economies of 
scale and increases the supply of funds for investment opportunities. The integration process fosters 
competition,  the  expansion  of  markets  and  intermediation,  thereby  complementing  and  leading  to 
further financial development. Financial development, in turn, leads to lower intermediation costs and 
a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital.  Allocating  resources  to  the  most  productive  investment 
opportunities  ultimately  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more  sustainable  non-inflationary 
economic growth. 
All in all, there is no doubt that sharing the euro has been beneficial for all euro area countries. The 
313  million  people  in  the  euro  area  and,  more  generally,  the  460  million  European  Union  citizens 
expect such economic benefits. 
4. My third observation concerns the level of diversity among the euro area national economies. I 
will  present  some  snapshots  of  diversity  from  several  angles.  First,  I  will  analyse  the  evolution  and 
dispersion  of  inflation,  as  well  as  indicators  of  growth  differentials,  competitiveness  and  unit  labour 
costs.  I  will  compare  and  contrast  the  euro  area  with  the  other  major  industrialised  continental 
economy, the United States.  
4.a Inflation dispersion in the euro area has considerably declined, and it is on par with the level found 
in the United States. Inflation dispersion among euro area countries declined in the 1980s and 1990s 
and has broadly stabilised since the inception of the euro. The progress made was very impressive. 
The unweighted standard deviation of annual HICP inflation rates was still around 6 percentage points 
in  late  1990.  It  has  declined  to  1  percentage  point  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  a  level  at  which  it 
broadly stabilised. This dispersion level is similar to that of the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas 
(MSAs), but somewhat higher than for the four US census regions. Although such comparisons are 
subject to some well-known caveats, it can be argued that inflation dispersion in the euro area has not 
been high by international standards.  
One significant feature of euro area inflation differentials is their persistence. Inflation in most member 
countries displays significant inertia. Many countries below, or above, the euro area average inflation 
rates  in  recent  years  have  remained  in  this  position  on  average  for  at  least  a  decade.  Such 
widespread persistence of inflation differentials over long periods does not occur in the United States. 
We  now  see  signs  of  limited  reversals:  some  euro area countries  with  relatively  high  inflation  rates 
have moved down to, or even below, the euro area average. Overall, these corrections are welcome, 
but the point is that they have been quite slow. While some wage or inflation differentials are justified – 
and  prove  that  monetary  union  promotes  adjustments  –  there  is  a  need  to  better  understand  the 
reasons for this apparent sluggish adjustment process.  
If I look at the cost side, in most countries, domestic factors dominate external factors in generating 
inflation differentials. In particular, we have witnessed a sustained divergence of wage developments 
across the euro area, and narrower differences in labour productivity growth. As a result, differentials 
in  the  growth  of  unit  labour  costs  have  been  persistent.  This  suggests  a  link  with  differing  wage 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 3
rigidities  across  the  euro  area.  However,  changes  in  profit  margins  also  contributed  to  inflation 
differentials.  Imperfect  competition  and  associated  price  rigidities  across  countries  may  also  have 
been a factor in explaining inflation differentials.  
If I look at product groups, there has been a relatively higher price dispersion in the area of services. 
This is probably associated with the dispersion in services wage developments. By contrast, inflation 
dispersion  was  relatively  low  for  tradeable  goods.  Then,  of  course,  products  with  relatively  volatile 
price developments (energy, unprocessed food and processed food) also showed a high dispersion of 
price changes across countries. 
Hence, there is a certain degree of structural diversity in inflation and cost developments among euro 
area national economies. A portion of this diversity is undesirable and, if uncorrected, may engender 
negative effects and externalities for the euro area as a whole. We can conclude that, while differing 
wage  and  price  rigidities  play  an  important  role,  increased  competition,  particularly  in  the  services 
sector, is very welcome to the extent that it has a dampening effect on inflation differentials.  
4.b The second snapshot of diversity in the euro area concerns growth dispersion. Growth dispersion 
in the euro area has been broadly stable since the early 1970s. Between 1999 and 2005 no signs of 
increased divergence emerged. The average dispersion of annual real GDP growth (measured as the 
unweighted  standard  deviation)  was  around  2  percentage  points.  This  is  very  close  to  the  average 
dispersion of real growth rates since the 1980s. By comparison, the dispersion of real growth across 
the 50 US states fluctuated around an average of 2½ percentage points over the last 15 years, while 
the average dispersion of the real growth rates was around 1½ percentage points across the eight US 
statistical regions. 
There is also a relatively high degree of persistence of output growth differentials within the euro area. 
A certain degree of persistence of growth differentials is also found in the United States. However, to 
take the United States as a benchmark is useful only up to a certain point. On the one hand, the US 
economy  is  known  to  be  more  flexible  than  the  euro  area  (and  thus  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks 
should be absorbed more easily and faster). On the other hand, the United States exhibits stronger 
regional  specialisation  than  the  euro  area,  making  its  regions  more  subject  to  specific  asymmetric 
shocks.  
It  is  useful  to  distinguish  between  the  developments  of  dispersion  and  the  issue  of  business  cycle 
synchronisation. Dispersion in real GDP growth rates across the euro area countries reflects two main 
factors:  dispersion  of  cycles  and  dispersion  of  trends.  Using  the  production  function  approach,  the 
dispersion of cycles, that are often addressed as output gaps, has steadily declined since the early 
1990s from about 2 percentage points to 1 percentage point. Instead, since the beginning of the 1990s 
we  witness  more  lasting  differences  in  trend  growth  that  rose  from  about  1.2  percentage  points  to 
about 1.7 percentage points in the late 1990s and then started declining. Some euro area countries 
persistently exhibit trend output growth either above or below the euro area average.  
Related to this, the degree of synchronisation of business cycles across euro area countries seems 
to  have  increased  since  the  early  1990s.  This  finding  holds  true  for  various  measures  of 
synchronisation applied to overall activity and to the cyclical component, for annual and quarterly data 
as well as for various country groupings. In particular, the degree of correlation appears currently to be 
at a historical high.  
These  two  features  are  unique  to  the  euro  area.  No  increase  in  the  contribution  from  trend  growth 
differences and no increase in synchronisation have been detected for a subset of 12 non-euro area 
OECD countries. This may indicate that EU integration and more recently EMU – as opposed to global 
forces  –  have  led  to  smaller  differences  in  output  gaps  and  an  increase  in  the  synchronisation  of 
business cycles across the euro area countries.  
Differences in trend growth among euro area countries, can be explained by various structural factors, 
including to some extent demographic trends and catching up with others in terms of the standard of 
living. Differences in the timing and extent of past structural reforms in euro area countries are likely to 
have  played  a  significant  role.  For  example,  the  Netherlands  and  Spain  have  undertaken  labour 
market  reforms  earlier  than  the  largest  euro  area  country.  As  a  result,  diverse  long-term  trends  in 
labour  productivity  and  employment  growth  have  been  observed.  More  in  general,  the  degree  of 
economic flexibility could be a factor explaining trend growth differences. In some countries, short-term 
shocks  may  have  had  more  persistent  effects  on  growth  differentials,  due  to  slow  adjustment 
processes in the presence of structural rigidities. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2006
The increasing weight of differences in trend growth, and the lower weight of dispersion in business 
cycles  has  important  implications.  Macroeconomic  policies  can  only  partly  address  this  dispersion 
while structural reforms can more fully address them.  
4.c My third snapshot of diversity concerns the rapidity with which relative changes in cost and price 
competitiveness  are  occurring.  These  movements  mainly  reflect  changes  in  unit  labour  costs  and 
inflation  differentials.  They  demonstrate  that  there  is  much  leeway  for  loosing,  or  gaining, 
competitiveness even in the absence of exchange rate adjustment: more leeway than was foreseen 
prior to the launch of the euro. Let me give you an order of magnitude. Between 1999 and 2005 the 
difference  in  the  cumulated  growth  of  unit  labour  costs  for  the  total  economy  between  the  “highest 
inflation” and the “lowest inflation” countries was about 20–25%.  
This  is  an  important  phenomenon  that  calls  for  a  deep  understanding  of  the  factors  driving  it.  I  will 
touch upon a few developments: 
Unit labour costs are increasing at a relatively fast pace in those euro area economies which started at 
a significantly lower price and cost level. In most cases this phenomenon is driven by the Balassa-
Samuelson  effect,  which  occurs  when  there  is  a  catching-up  to  higher  living  standards,  and  is 
generally acceptable, as it reflects the movement to a new equilibrium;  
Germany has seen very moderate growth in unit labour cost over an extended period, leading to a 
correction of the losses in competitiveness as a result of German reunification. This correction and the 
related sustained period of relatively low inflation is, of course, fully justified and perfectly welcome. It 
also  shows  that  adjustment  mechanisms  in  EMU  do  work.  A  high  degree  of  wage  flexibility  would 
contribute to speeding-up such welcome adjustment processes;  
Some  other  sources  of  diversity  are  not  economically  justified.  They  might  be  partly  attributable  to 
insufficient flexibility; in such economies corrections must be made. For example in some economies 
wage  increases  have  exceeded  the  weak  labour  productivity  growth  rates  for  a  sustained  period, 
leading  to  a  progressive  deterioration  of  their  competitiveness.  Furthermore,  in  several  euro  area 
countries there exists a phenomenon of hysteresis in wage formation (for example due to indexation 
mechanisms) and in price formation in general, limiting the responsiveness to shocks.  
5. My fourth observation concerns the optimal economic management of the euro area. I will 
now stress the importance of three “guiding principles” that must guide the economic management of 
the  euro  area:  strict  adherence  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  close  monitoring  of  the 
implementation of the structural reforms called for by the Lisbon agenda, and close attention to the 
indicators  of  relative  competitiveness  inside  the  euro  area.  Such  economic  management  aims  to 
exploit  all  the  benefits deriving  from  a  single currency,  given  the  fact  that countries no  longer  have 
national monetary policy tools to resort to.  
5.a A rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact.  There are several  reasons  for 
clear  fiscal  rules  in  a  monetary  union  such  as  those  embodied  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, 
including: correcting the “deficit bias” of fiscal policy, and preventing spillovers from fiscal policies to 
monetary policy. I have made these reasons clear on numerous occasions. Euro area countries need 
to maintain budgetary positions that are close to balance or in surplus over the medium term and to 
reduce public debt to a low and sustainable level.  
But the subject of my speech today is the economic integration of the euro area, so I would like to 
mention three other reasons for supporting sound fiscal policies: first, the need to reduce the risk of 
fiscal policy externalities; second, the need to gain flexibility and adaptability; and third, the importance 
of ensuring proper incentives. Sound fiscal policies allow flexibility, which cushions the effects of the 
economic cycle through the working of automatic stabilisers. Additionally, sound fiscal policies create 
room  for  domestic  economic  management  going  beyond  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact and, say, pursue the desired tax and spending policies. Furthermore, the tax and benefit system 
should avoid major distortions to incentives to work, save, invest and innovate. This creates conditions 
which are conducive to stability and sustainable growth. Ireland is one of the very clear examples of 
such a virtuous process inside the euro area.  
The  public  sector  also  has  a  “role  model”  function,  for  example  concerning  public  wages  and/or 
administrative prices. Its behaviour can make the social partners more aware of the trade-off between 
higher salaries and job creation.  
BIS Review 27/2006 
 5
While a sound fiscal policy is in a country’s own interest, it is very much in the interest of the euro area 
as well. An inappropriate fiscal policy in one country directly affects the other countries as the impact 
on interest rates is no longer confined to one country but spreads across the euro area.  
5.b The close monitoring of the implementation of structural reforms. Earlier, I referred to some 
common denominators behind inflation and growth differentials: the detrimental role of pervasive price 
and  wage  rigidities,  excessive  labour  market  regulations,  and  of  imperfect  competition  in  several 
important sectors of the euro area economies. We have known this for quite a long time. A lot is at 
stake here, and there is an urgent need for action.  
Why?  All  euro  area  countries  need  structural  reforms,  although  to  different  degrees.  Reforms  are 
essential to raise factor productivity and potential output, to create new jobs and achieve lower prices 
and  higher  real  incomes.  The  need  for  reforms  is  signalled  very  clearly  by  the  fact  that  euro  area 
potential output growth seems to have moved to the lower bound of its previously estimated range of 
2–2.5% and that, in addition, euro area real GDP per capita is still about 70% of that in the United 
States.  Furthermore,  reforms  are  also  needed  to  increase  the  resilience  and  the  flexibility  of  the 
economy.  
The Lisbon agenda of 2000 was, and is, a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw Europe’s 
attention  to  the  urgency  of  structural  reforms.  It  identified  everything  that  needs  to  be  changed. 
However, the modest and uneven implementation so far has clearly shown how difficult reforms are. 
More  recently,  the  Lisbon  agenda  has  been  refocused  towards  growth  and  employment.  Diverse 
feasible  goals  were  set  in  order  to  enhance,  among  other  things,  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of 
labour markets, to raise competition in the markets for goods and services, to increase employment, 
promote innovation and strengthen growth and employment in each participating country. The need 
for  structural  reforms  and  liberalisation  applies  also  to  financial  markets.  In  fact,  further  financial 
integration has the potential to greatly foster economic growth.  
Governments  are  paying  greater  attention  to  the  implementation  of  reforms.  We  appreciate  this 
renewed impetus, which has now resulted in the more focused Partnership for Growth and Jobs and in 
the structural reform commitments of the National Reform Programmes. We also need to reinforce the 
benchmarking of good performance to better identify where the reform challenges are most urgent. As 
I  have  explained  above,  a  successful  reform  programme  is  of  particular  importance  for  euro  area 
countries. 
5.c  It  is  necessary  to  monitor  unit  labour  costs  and  national  competitiveness  indicators  to 
prevent  or  correct,  if  necessary,  abnormal  deviations.  We  would  expect  some  dispersion  and 
differentials  among  euro  area  countries:  in  the  long  and  very  long  term,  several  parameters 
characterising  their  economies  are  bound  to  fluctuate  around  some  average  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. Put more clearly, there will always be some diversity as in other monetary unions, including the 
US. In particular, this should be the case for countries catching-up in terms of GDP per capita and 
price  levels  and  would  thus  show  faster  output  growth  and  inflation.  For  some  economies,  the 
observed  diversity  may  go  beyond  the  completion  of  the  “catching-up”  process.  This  should  be  the 
case for corrections of past excesses in terms of overall cost and price competitiveness, particularly in 
the  tradable  goods  and  services  markets,  triggered  by  the  proper  functioning  of  the  market 
mechanism. 
*** 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  dear  friends,  to  conclude,  several  developments  are  already  evident,  while 
some  others  are  still  latent.  Please  remember  that  the  euro  was  introduced  as  a  single  scriptural 
currency only in 1999, and as a physical currency three years later: hence, things are still unfolding 
and it will take time for the full effects of the euro to become apparent. The economic and financial 
environment is changing and the euro is operating as a catalyst – both directly and indirectly – in many 
areas. Euro area countries are becoming more interdependent. All in all, I see mainly beneficial effects 
resulting  from  the  launch  of  the  euro.  However,  some  more  hard  work  is  needed  to  improve  the 
flexibility and adaptability of the euro area economies. The implementation of the structural reforms is 
essential in order to enhance growth potential for the euro area as a whole, and to facilitate and speed 
up  the  endogenous  corrections  of  deviations  of  economic  parameters,  including  competitiveness 
indicators.  
Against  this  favourable  background,  we  need  to  monitor  and  understand  the  factors  behind  the 
diversities among euro area countries: if they were to persist unchecked they could accumulate over 
time.  These  developments,  and  the  underlying  factors,  need  to  be  discussed  by  euro  area  policy-
6 
 BIS Review 27/2006
makers and appropriate corrective measures have to be taken to ensure a smooth functioning of the 
euro area in the coming years.  
Given the global and open environment in which we live, this hard work would have been needed in 
any  case.  The  euro  has  brought  low  inflation,  low  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates,  and  much 
stability to the euro area as a whole: three achievements that lend support to these urgently needed 
reforms.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 7
