Jean-Claude Trichet: Celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Paris Club 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the celebration of the 
50th anniversary of the Paris Club, Paris, 14 June 2006. 
 levels, 
introduced 
the  Paris  Club 
It is a great pleasure to be here in Paris on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the Paris Club. This 
is not only because the Paris Club is an important forum that has made a major contribution in the 
area of orderly debt restructuring, but also because I have of course a lot of personal memories of the 
long time – from 1982 until 1993 – that I spent actively participating in its activities, together with a lot 
of close friends from all over the world. 
The Paris Club, which is responsible for the rescheduling of official bilateral credits to developing and 
emerging  market  economies,  has  played  a  remarkable  role  as  a  forum  for  crisis  management  and 
resolution.  Embedded  in  the  international  financial  system,  the  Paris  Club  has  responded  to  the 
changing international financial landscape and the various financial crises over the last few decades 
by systematically adapting its modus operandi to the varying needs of the different groups of indebted 
countries. In particular, once it was recognised that traditional mechanisms were not sufficient to attain 
sustainable  external  debt 
increasingly  concessional  debt 
restructuring terms and, as of the late 1980s, debt reduction mechanisms as well to address the rising 
debt burdens of certain countries. During that time, the Paris Club reached its peak level of activity. 
More  recently,  the  number  of  countries  rescheduling  with  Paris  Club  creditors  has  been  declining, 
reflecting enhanced access by middle-income countries to market financing and more comprehensive 
debt stock treatment of low income countries. Since its first debt rescheduling meeting in 1956, the 
Paris Club has been highly effective and has reached some 400 agreements with 81 debtor countries, 
covering a total of USD 523 billion in nominal value. The success of the Paris Club is understandable 
and, considering that these accomplishments were attained by what we could term a “non-institution” 
(there was no international treaty or written charter to set up the Paris Club), may therefore appear to 
be a paradox at first sight.  
The operations of the Paris Club over the last five decades reflect both the way in which developing 
and  emerging  market  economies  have  benefited  from  economic  and  financial  globalisation  and  the 
challenges  that  they  have  been  faced  with  during  this  process.  Let  me  be  more  specific  on  the 
substantial  benefits  of  economic  and  financial  globalisation  and  the  inevitable  challenges  that  this 
poses to policy-makers and market participants. 
Among the benefits of globalisation, I would mention one which appears particularly relevant for the 
activities of the Paris Club. Emerging countries are becoming more and more integrated into the world 
economy. They are increasingly involved in the exchange of goods and capital, and can benefit from 
the  transfer  of  know-how  and  technologies.  The  scrutiny  by  international  investors  enhances  the 
quality of their economic policy, thus contributing to better fundamentals. In most recent years, several 
emerging countries have been providing the rest of the world with net resources in the form of current 
account surpluses – a trend that would have been unthinkable just a few years ago in the midst of the 
Asian  crisis.  Given  these  developments,  an  increasing  number  of  emerging  countries  have 
significantly decreased their external debt or have even turned into net creditors vis-à-vis the rest of 
the world. 
That  said,  economic  success  does  not  come  without  risks.  Globalisation  and  capital  mobility  have 
made the international system more vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment. We all remember the 
severe financial crises that have occurred over the last 25 years, including the debt crises during the 
1980s, starting with Poland and Mexico and spreading to Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and 
the Soviet Union; the Mexican crisis in 1994; the Asian crisis starting in 1997; the Russian crisis in 
1998; and the Argentinian crisis in 2001-02. All these events, irrespective of their origin or magnitude, 
posed  major  threats  to  the  international  financial  system.  While  the  international  community  has 
always  managed  to  resolve  such  crises,  they  highlighted  the  potential  vulnerabilities  of  the  global 
economy,  the  resilience  of  which  cannot  be  taken  for  granted.  This  is  true  even  in  a  period 
characterised by high growth, low inflation and stability of financial markets such as the one we have 
been experiencing since 2003. Past financial crises or, in a more benign way, recent increases in risk 
awareness as reflected in higher asset price volatility, remind us of the relentless need to improve the 
functioning of mechanisms that deal with the prevention and resolution of such events.  
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
I  will  focus  on  two  issues  today.  First,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  review  the  important 
contribution of the Paris Club to orderly sovereign debt restructuring over the last 50 years. Second, I 
will  make  some  observations  on  recent  international  developments  related  to  crisis  prevention  and 
resolution.  
History and achievements of the Paris Club 
The fact that the Paris Club has enjoyed the trust of the international financial community for half a 
century  now  is  due  to  its  efficient  way  of  dealing  with  sovereign  debt  restructuring  by  combining 
pragmatism with a strict set of principles to be implemented when working out agreements on debt 
restructuring. 
First, making decisions on a case-by-case basis allows Paris Club creditors to tailor their actions to the 
individual situation in each debtor country. Such an approach reflects a spirit of permanent adaptation 
to  new  financial  problems  and  difficulties  faced  by  rescheduling  countries.  Second,  Paris  Club 
treatments  are  agreed  by  consensus  by  all  participating  creditor  countries.  Third,  creditor  countries 
apply the principle of conditionality, whereby debt treatments are granted to countries only if they need 
debt relief and implement appropriate reforms to resolve their payment difficulties in the context of an 
IMF programme. Fourth, the principle of solidarity commits every Paris Club creditor, in its conclusion 
of individual bilateral agreements, to respect the terms agreed upon in the joint negotiation. Last but 
not least, the Paris Club attaches great value to comparability of treatment of all creditors. By insisting 
that a debtor country should not accept less favourable terms from another creditor than those agreed 
by  consensus  within  the Paris Club,  it  is  ensured  that  its  taxpayers’ claims are not  subordinated  to 
those  of  other  creditors  and  that  their  financial  interests  are  preserved.  Moreover,  applying  such  a 
clause provides a guarantee that the agreed debt treatment reaches its intended goal of putting debtor 
countries’ debt burdens on a sustainable footing.  
Keeping these principles in mind, what have been the main concrete achievements of the Paris Club? 
The first Paris Club restructuring took place, as mentioned, in 1956, when Argentina and its official 
creditors agreed to reschedule payments due on officially supported credits. At that time, the Club had 
no  formal  rules  or  procedures  and  was  only  intended  to  provide  pragmatic  responses  to  specific 
problems. Until 1980, Paris Club creditors on average signed no more than four agreements per year, 
applying  the  standard  “classic  terms”,  whereby  credits  were  rescheduled  at  the  appropriate  market 
rate. During these early years of the Paris Club, negotiations and agreements were more and more 
standardised, preparing this forum for the busy times that were to come.  
I remember well those years of intense negotiations and the overall activities of the Club. I remember 
well the members of the Club at the time and I see some of them here in this room. To you I would like 
to express all my friendship and gratitude. We had intense discussions but it was always possible to 
find  solutions  because  the  members  of  the  Club  had  an extraordinary  level of  both  professionalism 
and mutual confidence.  
I  remember  well  the  officials  and  members  of  governments  of  the  debtor  countries,  officials  from 
Mexico,  Brazil,  Argentina,  Poland,  Egypt,  Nigeria,  Morocco,  the  Soviet  Union  and  Russia,  and  so 
many more. Among all those officials let me mention Angel Gurría, the present Secretary General of 
the  OECD,  who  was  the  first  negotiator  I  encountered,  defending  the  interests  of  Mexico  with 
remarkable professionalism and lucidity. 
I remember well the major partners of the Club in the period from 1982-1993 in both the public and 
private sectors. I would like to mention the names of Jacques de Larosière and Michel Camdessus in 
the IMF, Paul Volcker, Alan Greenspan and Bill McDonnough from the Federal Reserve, Bill Rhodes 
as regards the private sector rescheduling. Without all those remarkable people, without their lucidity 
and tireless activity the world would not have been able to surmount difficulties of an enormous global 
magnitude. 
The Paris Club felt the fall-out from this crisis as its workload increased exponentially: the number of 
agreements concluded rose to well above ten per annum and reached an all-time high of 24 in 1989. 
Many countries negotiated multiple debt agreements with the Paris Club. They were coming from all 
over  the  globe,  the  bulk  from  sub-Saharan  Africa  and  Latin  America,  but  also  from  Asia  (the 
Philippines), the Middle East (Egypt and Jordan) and central and eastern Europe (Poland, Yugoslavia 
and Bulgaria).  
2 
 BIS Review 57/2006
While the Paris Club confined its mandate solely to debt rescheduling up to 1988, it changed radically 
its modus operandi in the late 1980s, given the severe impact of debt crises on the poorest and most 
highly indebted countries. The Paris Club adopted a completely new approach to the treatment of debt 
of those countries whose debt burdens remained unsustainable. It agreed to reduce the net present 
value of eligible debt, thus moving to increasingly concessional rescheduling terms, which have in fact 
included a reduction of up to a third since 1988 under the Toronto terms, a half since 1991 under the 
London terms, and two-thirds since 1995 under the Naples terms. On the latter occasion, the Paris 
Club agreed for the first time to also consider implementing stock treatment – and not only flow relief, 
as had been done until that time – to facilitate an exit from repeated reschedulings. Finally, middle-
income countries benefited from the introduction of the more favourable Houston terms in 1990.  
When it became clear that even the more concessional debt rescheduling and reduction mechanisms 
were  still  not  sufficient  to attain  sustainable  external  debt  levels, particularly  in  a  number  of  African 
low-income  countries, another key policy  initiative was  launched  in 1996  by  the  IMF  and  the World 
Bank:  the  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Countries  Initiative  (HIPC).  Under  this  initiative,  the  entire 
international community, including some multilateral institutions, decided to take coordinated action to 
reduce the debt burdens of eligible countries to sustainable levels. In this context, Paris Club creditors 
agreed to increase the reduction in the net present value of eligible debt up to 80% under the Lyon 
terms and, in 2000, up to 90% or even more under the Cologne terms. The financial implications of 
these decisions were substantial: around 36% of the initiative’s total cost, amounting to USD 38 billion 
thus far, has been borne by Paris Club creditors. Finally, the HIPC initiative has been supplemented in 
2005  by  the  Multilateral  Debt  Relief  Initiative,  which  allows  for  100%  debt  relief  by  multilateral 
institutions for countries completing the HIPC process. This marked a major break with the principle of 
preferred creditor status of international financial institutions. 
Looking  at  the  most  recent  past  of  the  Paris  Club,  another  development  worth  noting  is  that  the 
number of countries rescheduling with Paris Club creditors has been declining significantly. Besides 
the more general macroeconomic developments I recalled at the beginning of this talk, this desirable 
trend  is  also  due  to  two  more  specific  developments:  first,  the  more  comprehensive  debt  stock 
treatment of low income countries; and second, a graduation from rescheduling of most middle-income 
countries as a result of the implementation of economic reforms that have increased their access to 
market  financing  and  thus  private  creditors.  Indeed,  while  official  flows  to  emerging  markets  were 
dominant  in  the  1980s,  reaching  on  average  over  60%  of  total  flows,  the  1990s  saw  a  dramatic 
increase in private flows, which on average accounted for around 85% in the period from 1990 until 
2003.  Accordingly,  the  Paris  Club  has  been  paying  increasing  attention  to  coordination  with  private 
sector  creditors.  In  particular,  early  discussions  can  be  scheduled  when  the  proportion  of  private 
external debt is deemed significant and when comparability of treatment is an issue. Also, interaction 
between  Paris  Club  creditors  and  private  sector  representatives  can  be  initiated  if  private  creditors 
indicate their willingness to help restore debt sustainability in good faith and if a comprehensive debt 
treatment is envisaged. 
As a result of the enhanced access by middle-income countries to market financing, the Paris Club 
has already concluded an increasing number of prepayment agreements with debtor countries. Recent 
such agreements include Poland, the Russian Federation, Peru and Brazil. In passing, let me mention 
that the IMF is making a similar experience as it has been facing a considerable decline in demand for 
its resources during recent years.  
Let  me  conclude  this  part  of  my  talk  by  responding  to  those  who  claim  that  the  Paris  Club  lacks 
transparency and predictability. I would argue that, quite to the contrary, the rules applied by the Paris 
Club are clear, transparent and well-tailored to address different country groupings. In particular, while 
the Club’s classic terms are standard treatment, the Houston terms, the Naples terms and the Cologne 
terms are applied respectively to highly-indebted lower-middle-income countries, highly-indebted poor 
countries, and countries eligible for the HIPC initiative. Moreover, being embedded in the international 
financial system, the Paris Club works closely not only with creditor and debtor countries, but also with 
the IMF and market participants. 
Crisis prevention and resolution 
In  my  reflections,  I  have  presented  the  Paris  Club  as  an  important  forum  for  negotiations,  both 
between the creditor countries and individual debtor countries and among the creditors themselves. I 
now wish to take a wider perspective and share with you some thoughts on where the international 
community stands in the area of crisis prevention and resolution. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 3
Starting with crisis prevention, I would like to underline the growing number of initiatives undertaken by 
policy-makers  and  market  participants to  improve  transparency  and  promote best practices.  One  of 
the  weaknesses  identified  during  the  financial  crises  of  the  1990s  was  that  there  had  been 
considerable  information  asymmetries  between  local  authorities,  market  participants,  and  the 
international  financial  institutions.  Transparency  is  a  key  precondition  for  well-functioning  markets 
since it facilitates better risk management and leads to strengthened market discipline. It is therefore 
welcome that significant changes have been introduced in a number of fields. For example, the IMF 
started  to  disclose  information  on  its  policies  and  to  encourage  increased  transparency  by  its 
membership. A large number of international standards and codes of good practice have been agreed 
upon, covering such different fields as transparency in fiscal policy or monetary and financial policies, 
banking supervision, corporate governance, accounting and auditing. The Paris Club has in turn also 
taken steps to increase the transparency of its procedures, for instance by convening meetings with 
private sector representatives and by providing comprehensive information on its website.  
Turning to crisis management and resolution, I would argue that important lessons have been learnt 
from  past  experiences.  Discussions  have  continued  on  the  appropriate  involvement  of  the  private 
sector  in  solving  debt  crises.  This  is  not  only  important  because  the  availability  of  official  funds  is 
limited, but also because there are moral hazard concerns associated with large financial assistance 
provided  by  the  official  sector.  Since  every  single  crisis  is  different,  the  challenge  arises  again  and 
again  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the  debtor  country’s  domestic  adjustment,  private  sector 
involvement  and  official  support.  As  regards  the  role  of  the  official  sector  in  the  area  of  crisis 
management, work continues at the IMF on a number of issues in the context of the strategic review of 
its  activities.  First,  an  open  issue  is  the  lack  of  clear  guidelines  for  involvement  of  the  IMF  in  the 
process of sovereign debt restructuring in the event a country faces an unsustainable debt situation. 
The  case  of  Argentina  is  an  example  of  a  very  difficult  debt  restructuring  process.  It  is  crucial  that 
authorities cooperate closely with their creditors, while the IMF remains closely involved in the process 
and takes an active role in providing information. In that context, further discussions will be needed on 
how the Fund should financially support a country that is in the process of renegotiating its debt with 
private creditors, i.e. the lending-into-arrears policy. Second, discussions continue on the framework 
for  large  financial  assistance  programmes  –  the  so-called  exceptional  access  policy  –  that  sets 
guidelines in order to make Fund lending more predictable. Finally, proposals are being examined for 
a possible new instrument to provide high access contingent financing. All in all, what is important in 
these different discussions in my view is to increase predictability and clarity on the part of the official 
sector so as to set the right incentives for all the actors involved. 
While  there  are  several  issues  that  still  need  to  be  addressed  in  the  context  of  crisis  resolution, 
substantial progress has been achieved on two fronts, both aimed to improve debtor-creditor relations 
and  define  ex  ante  the  best  conditions  to  address  possible  financial  crises  leading  to  debt 
restructuring.  By  doing  so,  these  two  initiatives  are  eventually  also  beneficial  in  terms  of  crisis 
prevention. 
First, following the pioneering issuance by Mexico of bonds with collective action clauses (CACs) in 
February  2003,  the  adoption  of  CACs  in  international  sovereign  bonds  has  become  much  more 
widespread. Practically all international sovereign bonds issued since mid-2005 contain CACs, which, 
while  not  yet  being  tested,  have  by  now  become  the  market  standard.  As  is  confirmed  by  market 
participants, the inclusion of CACs has not affected the pricing of international sovereign bonds, as 
was initially feared. The share of outstanding bonds including CACs increased, as a result, to 60% at 
the end of February 2006. This means that we are gradually moving towards a time when the entire 
stock of outstanding debt will include CACs. I deem this development remarkable, in particular in view 
of the rather sceptical attitude that many countries and private sector representatives had taken in the 
past vis-à-vis the recommendations of the Rey report published after the 1994 Mexican crisis. 
Second, I am pleased to note that the Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring 
in Emerging Markets, which were endorsed by the G20 in November 2004, are gaining more and more 
international support. The aim of these market-based and voluntary Principles is to provide guidelines 
for  the  behaviour  of  sovereign  issuers  and  their  private  creditors  regarding  information  sharing, 
dialogue, and close cooperation in times of financial distress. From the outset, I have been personally 
involved  in  the  launch  of  the  Principles  since  I  promoted  the  idea  that  such  guidelines  carry  the 
potential  to  help  prevent  liquidity  problems  from  turning  into  a  deep  financial  crisis  with  serious 
repercussions for all parties involved. The Principles are also likely to improve the handling of possible 
future private sector debt restructurings.  
4 
 BIS Review 57/2006
Conclusion 
In my view, seen over a long-term horizon, the concept of the Paris Club seems to have been in many 
respects a precursor signalling some of the main features that later proved appropriate to handle the 
very stimulating but complex globalised economy and finance of the world today. 
First the Paris club was global from the start. It is remarkable that as early as 1956 in the case of 
Argentina it appeared necessary to embark on a single concept for public credits restructuring and not 
on a series of bilateral agreements. In the same way, as soon as some creditors from the emerging 
world expressed the desire to participate in the activities of the group of creditors they were accepted. 
Brazil was a creditor of Poland, for example.  
Second, the Paris Club was and is open and transparent. It was a bold initiative at the end of the 70s 
and the beginning of the 80s to invite all international institutions, in particular the IMF, the World Bank 
and  the  Regional  Development  Banks,  together  with  the  United  Nations  UNDP  and  the  OECD  to 
participate  in  the  discussions  and/or  observe  the  rescheduling  negotiations.  This  unseen  level  of 
transparency would compare with the very discrete bilateral negotiations that were the norm before the 
setting-up of the Club. 
Third, the Paris Club was and is based on a set of principles that are applied by all parties concerned 
in a purely voluntary fashion. There was no setting-up of a new institution, no new official piece of 
legislation  or  regulation.  Globalisation  and  global  ownership, 
transaparency  and  voluntary 
implementation of principles are, in my view, three of the major avenues that have proved not only 
necessary  but  also  very  successful  in  the  world  today.  I  would  particularly  stress  the  systemic 
importance of the codes of good conduct and good practices, reflected now in the “Principles”, that are 
agreed  upon  by  a  very  large  degree  of  global  consensus,  are  voluntary  and  incorporate  enhanced 
transparency. This is a key to better understanding today's global trends in international economics 
and finance. I feel proud, along with all those in this room I am sure, that the Paris Club may be among 
the first to invent and try out what was and is so promising. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 5
