Su Ning: Press ahead with reform and opening-up and promote the rapid and 
healthy development of the financial sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Financial  Summit, 
Beijing, 23 May 2006. 
 Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good  morning.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  attend  the  Financial  Summit.  This  year  is  the  concluding  year  of 
China’s WTO accession transitional period. Soon, China’s opening-up will reach a new stage. Over 
the five years of transitional period, the Chinese Government has unswervingly pressed ahead with 
opening-up, actively implemented the promises of financial sector opening, and promoted the reform, 
innovation and development of financial sector. Let me take this opportunity to review the opening-up 
of financial sector in the past five years and its impact on the reform and innovation of the banking 
sector.  
Honoring WTO commitments and actively opening up financial sector  
1. 
With China’s accession to the WTO on 11 December 2001, the policy of financial sector opening-up 
has become more transparent, and the pace of opening more steady and orderly. At present, not only 
the  geographical  restriction  and  business  limit  on  foreign  financial  institutions  have  been  lifted 
according  to  our  WTO  commitment,  but  also  the  range  of  financial  sector  opening-up  has  been 
widened.  
In the banking sector, the commitment of lifting geographical and business limit on RMB business of 
foreign  banks  was  honored.  Foreign  banks  are  allowed  to  provide  RMB  services  to  Chinese 
companies  in  25  cities.  The  geographical  and  client  restrictions  on  foreign  exchange  business  of 
foreign banks were removed. Under the precondition of ensuring the state’s controlling stake and the 
country’s  financial  safety,  foreign  capital  were  allowed  to  take  part  in  the  reform  of  state-owned 
commercial banks.  
In the securities sector, commitments of opening-up were honored; in addition, explorations have been 
made  to  further  open  the  securities  market.  Foreign  investors  are  allowed  access  to  the  B  share 
market;  Sino-foreign  joint  ventures  are  allowed  to  raise  fund  in  the  A  share  market;  QFIIs  are 
introduced  to  the  A  share  market;  securities  service  sector  are  partially  opened  by  allowing  Sino-
foreign  joint  venture  or  cooperative  companies  access  to  underwrite  securities  issuing  and  wealth 
management in the domestic market.  
In  the  insurance  sector,  almost  all  geographical  and  business  limits  have  been  lifted.  Foreign 
insurance companies can operate without any geographical limit and in almost all businesses except 
compulsory insurance.  
International financial institutions are given further access to the financial market. In October 2005, the 
PBC  approved  the  IFC  and  ADB  to  issue  at  the  inter-bank  bond  market  RMB  denominated  bonds 
worth of 1.13 billion and 1 billion yuan respectively. This is an important step forward in the inter-bank 
bond market. The Pan Asia Fund and the Asian Bond Fund were introduced to the inter-bank bond 
market  as  the  first  foreign  institutional  investor.  In  addition,  the  auto  finance  market  was  further 
opened. Five foreign auto finance companies have started their business in China since 2004.  
Further opening up of the financial sector, as a part of China’s WTO accession commitment, is also a 
necessary  ingredient  in  developing  a  socialist  market  economy  in  China.  Opening-up  has  not  only 
brought challenges and pressures, but also fresh opportunities and more competitiveness. 
Financial reform was boosted by opening up 
2.  
Opening up has helped deepen the reform of state owned financial institutions. Since State Council’s 
decision in 2003 on joint stock reform of commercial banks, piloting banks have moved very fast in 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
their  reform  by  improving  corporate  governance  structure  on  the  basis  of  international  standard  on 
public  banks  and  in  accordance  with  the  regulatory  requirements,  drawing  upon  the  advanced 
management  expertise  and  technology  from  foreign  banks,  and  conducting  cooperation  in  risk 
management, internal control, financial management, human resources. Financial indicators of these 
piloting banks have approached or reached the international standards. These banks have basically 
become  modern  joint  stock  commercial  banks  with  adequate  capital  and  strict  internal  control 
mechanism. The Bank of Communications and China Construction Bank have already been listed on 
the Hong Kong stock market. 
The  opening-up  of  the  Chinese  economy  has  promoted  the  management  mechanism  reform  in  the 
financial sector. One good example is the foreign exchange management system. In recent years, in 
line  with  the gradual  opening-up  of  the  financial sector,  we  have  speeded  up  the  foreign  exchange 
management  mechanism  and  improved  management  over  the  current  account.  Compulsory  foreign 
exchange surrender under the current account has been replaced with quota surrender. The coverage 
of exporting enterprises’ automatic verification has been widened; limit on foreign exchange payment 
by  enterprises  under  the  current  account  has  been  eased;  balance  ceiling  of  enterprises’  foreign 
exchange account has been raised and regional ceiling abolished. The foreign exchange management 
over individuals has been relaxed to allow individuals to pay and receive foreign exchange under the 
trade account. The convertibility of RMB under capital account has been promoted. Management over 
external  debt  of  Chinese  and  foreign  banks  and  the  foreign  exchange  lending  in  their  domestic 
operation has been strengthened and extended aggregate volume control over the external borrowing 
of domestic and foreign banks. Implementation of the going abroad strategy is supported by easing 
the  restriction  of  domestic  fund  transfer  and  overseas  investment.  Foreign  financial  institutions  are 
granted  further  market  access  through  the  introduction  of  QFII  and  the  RMB  denominated  bond 
issuance by international development agencies. On July 21, 2005, we reformed the RMB exchange 
rate regime in a self-initiated, controllable and gradual manner.  
The  opening up  has  also promoted  financial  legislation  and  the  optimization  of  the  financial  market 
and caused the market-based interest rate reform to move faster. The cross-sector operation piloting 
and the reform of intermediary institutions received a boost. It is fair to say that opening-up has greatly 
promoted financial reform in China. 
Faster opening-up supported financial innovation in China 
3.  
Since China’s WTO accession, opening up of the financial sector has brought into China advanced 
financial technology, service and product design philosophy and boosted innovation in the sector.  
First  of  all,  opening-up  has  benefited  the  innovation  of  financial  organization  system.  The  Chinese 
financial sector has innovated in and improved financial organization by learning from the advanced 
international experience and based on the scientific development approach. The ICBC, CCB, Bank of 
Communications  and  other  commercial  banks  were  allowed  to  experiment  in  establishing  fund 
management  companies.  Cross-sector  operation  has  also  made  steady  progress.  Experiment  was 
also made in setting up a micro loan agency to improve the rural financial service system. Efforts has 
been made to set up a risk compensation system in line with the need of a socialist market economy, 
establish a securities market investor protection fund, a deposit insurance agency and an insurance 
protection fund.  
Secondly,  innovation  in  financial  products  has  offered  more  choices  for  investors.  Drawing  on  the 
international experience, commercial banks in China issued subordinated bonds and financial bonds. 
Channels of direct financing have thus been expanded, helping commercial banks to raise their CARs. 
Experiments on MBS and ABS have been conducted, with the China Development Bank and China 
Construction Bank successfully issuing MBS and ABS respectively.  
Third, financial transaction instruments and modes have been innovated to deepen the functions of 
financial  market.  Transaction  instruments  for  risk  management  have  been  developed.  On  June  15, 
2005,  the  first  derivative  financial  instrument,  bond  forward  transactions,  was  launched.  In  order 
further promote the corporate bond market, inter-bank bond market access has been granted to many 
corporate  bonds.  The  bond  transaction  system  and  book-keeping  system  were  linked  to  achieve 
straight-through  processing.  Research  and  design  on  when-issued  trading  will  be  expedited,  and 
guidance  provided  to  intermediary  agencies  on  technological  upgrading  of  relevant  systems  so 
deepen the inter-bank bond market. New instruments of interest rate swap will be explored and certain 
institutions will be allowed to experiment in interest rate swap.  
2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Fourthly,  there  has  been  more  innovation  in  the  product  and  transaction  at  the  foreign  exchange 
market  Banks  have  been  allowed  to  conduct  foreign  exchange  swap  with  their  clients;  OTC  and 
market makes have been introduced to the market. On May 18, 2005, a market maker driven system 
of  foreign  currency  to  foreign  currency  spot  transaction  was  launched,  offering  the  market  more 
products. More participants and a larger coverage were introduced in the piloting operation of forward 
foreign exchange surrender and purchase. We have moved faster to integrate with the international 
foreign exchange market. In March 2006, the China Foreign Exchange Trade System and the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange reached an agreement for Chinese financial institutions and investors to trade 
the exchange rate and interest rate products of the latter through the former.  
Fifth,  innovation  in  financial  service  philosophy  and  mode  has  been  promoted.  Opening-up  has 
introduced advanced expertise, new philosophy, new technology, and new philosophy from developed 
financial  market.  The  domestic  financial  institutions  have  parted  ways  with  their  old  operational 
method, adopted the philosophy of putting the customers first, innovated in service system and set up 
a  service  mechanism  in  line  with  the  international  practice  in  terms  of  financial  product,  business 
arrangement, procedure and management. Quality of their service, operation and management has 
been  elevated.  Domestic  enterprises  and  households  now  enjoy  financial  services  in  investment, 
wealth  management,  payment  and  settlement,  financial  consulting,  etc,  and  the  convenience  of 
payment through bank cards, and online payment.  
Thanks to opening-up, the Chinese financial sector has become stronger and the domestic financial 
market has progressed by leaps and bounds. The financial system has functioned better in resource 
allocation, promoting the rapid growth of financial sector and national economy. 
4.  
Further promote the opening-up and enhance the competitiveness of the financial 
sector 
China’s economic performance has caught global attention because its impact on the global economy 
has been on the increase. In the years to come, along with the progress of globalization and economic 
growth in China, we will definitely integrate more deeply in the world economy, and influence the world 
economy more significantly. It is a challenge for the financial industry to  
capital  account;  the  domestic  financial  market  will  be  further  opened;  financial  legislation  will  be 
strengthened  to  build  a  market  environment  for  fair  competition;  a  financial  macro  management 
system and a regulatory system will be improved in line with the degree of financial opening-up, to 
safeguard  financial  security,  and  improve  the  overall  quality  as  well  as  the  competitiveness  of  the 
financial sector.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
With the end of WTO transitional period, opening-up of the financial sector will reach a new stage. The 
Chinese economy will continue to realize its huge potential. We will move on with the reform, opening-
up  and  development  of  the  financial  sector,  and  create  a  favourable  environment  for  domestic  and 
foreign  financial  institutions,  so  that  the  financial  sector  can  make  even  greater  contribution  to  the 
development of a socialist market economy in China.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
