Andres Sutt: Are ROEs peaking? 
Luncheon  speech  by  Mr  Andres  Sutt,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia,  at  the  9th  Annual 
Nordic Financial Services Conference, Stockholm, 31 August 2006. 
Background slides (PPT) for the speech can be found on the Bank of Estonia’s website.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honor to address you at this conference. You represent financial institutions that control the 
flow of money, the lifeblood of the economy. I as a central banker can contribute the experience of 
someone who stands in the middle. Central banks, as you know, have a double task: to safeguard the 
price stability on the one hand and the wellbeing of the financial system on the other. It is with this 
balance in mind that I would like to address three topics today.  
• 
Firstly,  what  are  the  characteristics  of  a  Nordic-Baltic  region  as  a  closely  integrated 
economic and financial market;  
Secondly, the challenges posed by recent economic and credit growth; 
Thirdly,  some  financial  sector  policy  and  supervisory  challenges  in  this  highly  integrated 
regional market.  
 Not surprisingly, the focus of my examples will mostly be on Estonia. 
Some special characteristics of the Nordic-Baltic region 
The economic situation in the Nordic-Baltic region is outstanding, especially in comparison with other 
regions of the EU. Output growth in the Nordic countries is up to two and in the Baltic countries even 4 
to 5 times higher than the EU average. The employment level and wage growth are generally good; 
economic expectations are high.  
A notable feature of the Nordic-Baltic markets is their high level of integration. Let's take the example 
of Estonia. Last year, Finland and Sweden accounted for about 40 percent of Estonian exports and 30 
percent of imports. In the stock of FDI, the share of Sweden and Finland is about 75 percent.  
Cross-border  financial  integration  is  all  but  complete,  with  the  market  share  of  Nordic  financial 
institutions  accounting  for  99  percent  of  bank  loans  and  leasing.  A  long  list  of  Nordic  companies 
regards  Estonia  and  the  other  Baltic  countries  as  their  home  market.  Therefore,  many  important 
business functions, for example liquidity and risk management, are increasingly run on a group-wide 
basis. Viewing the Baltic countries as a part of the home market, Nordic companies take a long-term 
business view. This lowers the risk of sudden slowdown or reversal of capital flows, often named as 
the main risk in the Baltic environment of strong credit growth and high current account deficits. 
A bit of history: entry of Nordic banks 
Of course this high degree of integration has been achieved over time. In the Baltic countries, today's 
level of economic and financial development was a distant dream as recently as 10 years ago. The fall 
in GDP bottomed out in mid-1990s. The following years have brought rapid output growth. In Estonia, 
for example, the level of real GDP has more than doubled. (A side remark: output growth in the Nordic 
countries has also been robust in the past 10 to 15 years. Swedish GDP, for example, has doubled. 
Such pace of development is likely to have contributed to the growth in the Baltic countries.) 
Coming back to the Baltics, 1997 and 1998 were the years of the Asian and Russian crises. In the 
Baltic states, these crises led to the collapse of the stock markets, bankruptcies of many companies, 
including banks, and a surge in interest rates and unemployment. Thus it was a good time to make 
cheap  acquisitions  in  many  industries,  including  Baltic  banks.  That  said,  strategic  entry  of  Nordic 
banks  was  at  the  time  of  critical  importance  to  restore  market  confidence.  SEB  and  Swedbank 
acquired minority shares in two largest Estonian banks, and started to increase their control. In the 
year 2000, Sampo Bank followed.  
BIS Review 81/2006 
 1
Indeed,  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  in  emerging  markets  has  generally  been  found  to  increase 
stability, efficiency, and governance. Combined with  improved regulation, strong Nordic banks have 
brought  a  qualitative  change  in  the  Baltic  financial  sector.  As  a  result,  we  can  proudly  say  that  the 
Estonian  financial  system  stands  out  in  the  EU  for  integration,  e-banking,  and  credit  conditions,  to 
name a few.  
Nordic  investment  in  Estonian  banking  sector  has  proven  profitable:  ROE  has  been  around  20 
percent.  Furthermore,  local  know-how  helped  the  Nordic  parent  banks  to  enter  the  Latvian  and 
Lithuanian as well as the Russian markets.  
Effects of EU accession 
The EU accession has led to even better market access for local producers and has given Estonia as 
well as the other new Member States a kind of "seal of quality" as an investment destination. Already 
the prospect of the EU accession enhanced these countries' credibility in the eyes of investors. But 
since the accession, the inflow of funds has been especially strong, as economic situation in the euro 
area was combined with higher global liquidity.  
Furthermore,  the  geography  of  investors  has  broadened.  The  prospect  of  adopting  the  euro  in  a 
relatively  near  future  has  lowered  interest  margins  in  several  of  the  new  Member  States  including 
Estonia and has given an additional boost to investments. The above factors, including convergence, 
as  a  background,  one  may  speculate  about  the  length  of  the  current  economic  cycle,  and  where 
exactly we stand in that cycle at the moment. In short, there are some suggestions that we might have 
entered unusually long economic cycle and may be coming closer to the peak of the cycle. 
However, many of the current vulnerabilities of the Baltic economies are also tied in with these effects 
of the EU accession and rapid convergence. Understanding these risks requires careful analysis.  
Let me now turn to my second topic - challenges the strong economic and credit growth are offering. 
Perceived risks to financial stability: credit growth and real estate markets 
The  acceleration  of  credit  growth  is  a  prominent  but  natural  part  of  the  picture  of  robust  economic 
growth and general optimism in the region. Improved access to credit in the Baltic countries has led to 
higher  investments  (much  needed  in  rapidly  developing  economies)  and  helped  to  smooth 
consumption  over  time.  For  example,  in  Estonia  the  overall  increase  in  bank  credit  and  leasing 
accelerated to around 60 percent in mid-2006. This has by far exceeded the growth rates seen in the 
Nordic  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  the  accompanying  rise  in  indebtedness  and  current  account 
deficits has given cause for concern to both domestic and international evaluators.  
It is always worthwhile to put things in perspective. During the past five years, the growth in household 
indebtedness in terms of GDP has been fast in several "old" EU Member States, including Denmark - 
in fact, even faster than that in the Baltic countries.  
At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  forgotten  that  the  level  of  household  savings  (especially  long-term 
savings)  in  Estonia  and  other  Baltic  countries  is  still  low  when  compared  to  that  in  the  Nordic 
countries. Therefore, households face a non-negligible risk to their balance sheets, as their financial 
assets are still rather low in international comparison. It is the lenders - banks and leasing companies - 
that need to take these risks into account.  
Of all the factors of credit growth I would point out two. Firstly, there are longer maturities of real estate 
loans.  Longer  maturities  have  smoothed  the  growth  of  borrowers'  debt  burden  in  terms  of  monthly 
payments of a mortgage. Of course, looking at total loan servicing costs, the overall debt burden has 
increased.  
When  we  compare  Estonia  and  other  Baltic  countries  with  more  developed  economies,  there  is 
obviously room for further credit growth: total bank credit as a percentage of GDP in 2004 was over 
100  percent  in  the  euro  area,  around  60  percent  in  Estonia,  and  only  20  percent  in  Lithuania.  And 
although  it  is  rapidly  increasing,  the  debt  burden of  Estonian  households,  at  32  percent  of GDP  by 
end-2005, was still about two times lower than in the Nordic countries.  
Secondly, the increase in incomes enables people to upgrade their living conditions. For example, the 
number of square meters per capita in Estonia (at around 30) is relatively small compared to Sweden 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2006
(45) or Denmark (50). Moreover, older housing stock needs quality improvements. Both these factors 
may indicate that real estate markets may continue to perform reasonably well over the medium term, 
even  if  some  slowdown  might  be  ahead.  Indeed,  the  relative  contribution  of  Estonia's  construction 
sector to GDP is hardly exceptional if compared to many other EU countries. 
Are risk premia sufficient? 
However,  this  rapid  growth  poses  important  questions  of  sustainability  and  stability,  especially  in 
countries with shorter borrowing experience.  
While housing loans have historically been relatively "safe" in view of loan quality, real estate loans 
have come to dominate households' loan stock in Estonia and the other Baltic countries. And not all of 
the housing credit goes into investments.  
The Bank of Estonia estimates that up to 10 percent of the growth of real estate loans in Estonia may 
have  "leaked"  into  consumption  in  2006  -  a  significant  rise  from  past  years.  These  developments 
suggest a need for vigilance from the lenders' side. In a highly competitive and profitable market, one 
may not appreciate how little borrowing experience households in these countries have.  
At the same time, the interest margin over Euribor for housing loans is about 80 to 90 basis points in 
Estonia and Lithuania, but 50 basis points in Finland. Does this kind of fairly marginal difference in risk 
premia (30 to 40 basis points) adequately reflect respective country risk differences?  
Can we say that the level of risk is indeed so similar? The differences in sovereign ratings show that 
risks are still higher in the Baltic countries than in the Nordic market. It seems that fierce competition 
for market shares in new markets may have led to excessive compression of risk premium in certain 
asset classes and suboptimal price discrimination between the borrowers based on their individual risk 
profile. These concerns keep the central banks and financial supervisors in the region alert.  
In general, one may say that the level of risk depends on three factors: speed and sustainability of 
GDP growth, sectoral concentration of exposure (real estate), and currency mismatch in borrowers' 
assets and liabilities. 
Faster  GDP  growth  allows  one  to  expect  faster  accumulation  of  assets  and,  therefore,  faster 
improvement in the ability to service loans. However, estimating potential output growth is tricky. Such 
estimations are roughly based on the average of the past few years' performance. Today we think that 
potential output growth may be around 7 percent in Estonia. Let me remind you that a few years ago 
we thought it was 4 to 5 percent. Upward revisions are not the problem, of course, but there are also 
several  examples  of  downward  revisions:  Portugal,  Greece...  even  Poland.  While  credit  growth  has 
given  a  significant  contribution  to  output  growth,  it  is  hardly  sufficient  in  the  long  run.  Too  high 
indebtedness will limit output growth potential, as loan-servicing costs will eventually curb consumption 
and investment.  
The  effects  of  economic  slowdown  or  recession  on  loan  quality  may  be  quite  different  over  the 
business  cycles,  however.  All  things  considered,  Estonian  borrowers  weathered  the  effects  of  the 
Russian  crisis  of  1998  relatively  easily.  However,  one  has  to  keep  in  mind  two  things.  Firstly,  the 
household credit to GDP ratio was at around 10 percent. Now it is around 30 percent. Secondly, the 
households'  loan  servicing  ability  did  not  deteriorate  dangerously,  as  low-income  households  who 
suffered the most in that recession had not had access to credit. In the current cycle there are more 
households with an access to credit, also from the lower income deciles, indicating the spread of the 
effects of the potential slowdown to a wider part of the economy.  
The second risk factor I would like to point out is the price level of real estate. Real estate prices have 
recently  surged  globally,  and  also  in  the  Baltic  countries.  The  possible  factors  behind  this  increase 
include  rapid  and  relatively  widespread  income  growth,  favorable  borrowing  conditions,  and 
international demand. However, despite these surges, absolute levels of real estate prices remain still 
about two times lower in Tallinn than in Helsinki, in line with the difference of overall price levels. There 
are  signs  that  prices  are  now  stabilized  in  nominal  terms  and  may  have  slightly  decreased  in  real 
terms. 
Nevertheless, relative prices of real estate have increased dramatically. Whereas the ratio of price of a 
square meter to monthly wages is about one in Helsinki, it exceeds two in Tallinn. The expectations of 
real estate price convergence fuel credit demand in Baltic countries but imply ever-increasing risks to 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 3
both borrowers and lenders. (It is fair to say, though, that the majority of real estate loans are used for 
buying homes, not for speculation.) 
The  third  factor  I  wanted  to  mention  -  currency  mismatch  -  has  caught  some  attention  from 
international observers. The issue is more nuanced than the classical approach. It is absolutely true 
that risks inherent in currency mismatch require vigilance from banks as well as from supervisors. But 
it  becomes  alarming  when  currency  mismatch  comes  from  skewed  incentive  structure  as  we  have 
seen, for example, also in some EU member states where loans have been taken in foreign currencies 
because  of  lower  nominal  interest  rates  of  foreign  currency  loans  (e.g.  Swiss  francs).  At  the  same 
time, most of the borrowing in the Baltic States is denominated in the anchor currency, the euro. It is 
quite natural in the context of the EU integration that new long-term contracts take into account the 
forthcoming euro adoption. Therefore, the issue at hand is not to "fight the liability dollarization". Such 
a  fight  would  not  only  be  a  waste  of  scarce  resources,  but  also  completely  futile  in  small  open  EU 
countries.  
Implications for risk management and supervision 
That  brings  me  to  the  third  topic  I  wanted  to  touch  upon  today,  of  risk  management  and  financial 
supervision.  I  believe  that  the  concerns  I  just  mentioned  should  neither  be  overstated  nor  played 
down. These risks are a natural part of the immensely positive impact that financial integration has had 
on the development of the Baltic economies. In a rapid catch-up process, it is difficult to assess the 
level of optimal credit growth. Instead, it is important to analyze the loan growth in broader economic 
policy context where due consideration should be paid to the credibility of macroeconomic policies and 
the impact other policies may have on the incentive structure in the financial markets.  
As I stated earlier, the presence of Nordic banks in the Baltic market is, of course, a hugely important 
positive  factor.  Parent  banks  are  sometimes  considered  to  have  an  implicit  responsibility  for  the 
stability of the banking systems in the Baltic countries. It is said that the Baltic banks are too small to 
fail.  
International experience lends support to this view, although the evidence is not always in one way. 
Hence,  there  are  also  potential  risks.  If  parent  banks  are  active  in  many  countries  of  the  region,  a 
shock affecting exposure in one country may lead to a reduction in their exposure across the region. 
Build-up of exposures to common risk factors in a region may also increase the potential for contagion 
- a reduction in lending to countries not affected by a crisis. The potential for contagion is naturally 
higher in highly integrated economies.  
Another  potential  risk  factor  is  the  smallness  of  the  banks  in  the  Baltics  combined  with  their  high 
profitability.  While  the  Nordic  banks  have  high  profitability  in  all  of  their  markets,  profitability  in  the 
Baltic  market  is  especially  high.  As  a  result,  the  share  of  banking  groups'  assets  in  the  Baltics  is 
significantly lower than the share of profits banks make in this region. This divergence may tempt the 
Nordic owners to be more aggressive in the high-growth market.  
It is therefore and with these risks in mind - though with a very low probability at the time - that Bank of 
Estonia as a regulator has set higher capital charges for banks operating in Estonia.  
From the point of view of a central bank or a financial regulator it is positive that Nordic banks seem to 
treat  the  Baltic  market  as  a  part  of  their  home  market.  Parent  banks  extend  their  advanced  risk 
evaluation  models  to  their  Baltic  subsidiaries  and  branches.  However,  risk  measurement  and 
management systems used in the Nordic countries need to be appropriately calibrated when applied in 
the Baltic countries. The principles of risk evaluation that work well at the level of the whole group may 
not be optimal in countries where borrowers have a limited credit history, in most cases less than one 
full  cycle.  For  example,  there  is  no  experience  of  loan  servicing  in  the  environment  of  increasing 
interest rates.  
The integration and the presence of foreign banks have brought new challenges for surveillance and 
policy,  especially  regarding  appropriate  risk  assessment.  The  host  country's  options  for  mitigating 
macroeconomic  instability  are  often  limited.  Therefore,  cooperation  between  supervisors  and 
exchange of information is becoming increasingly important and a part of a business as usual practice. 
Bilateral cooperation can ensure the effectiveness of regulation, but it has its limits. Thus, it is vital to 
keep  the  EU  legislation  up  with  market  developments.  The  forthcoming  implementation  of  Basel  II 
framework also underlines the need to address practical policy issues of supervisory cooperation.  
4 
 BIS Review 81/2006
Are ROEs peaking? 
Finally, I would like to make my personal bet to the question of the day, "Are ROEs peaking?" I cannot 
quote  the  classics  as  a saying  that  "sky  is  the  limit"  proved  wrong  some  15  years  ago  just  here  in 
Sweden. At the same time, when one wants to believe the story of an unusually long economic cycle 
in the region I would say that the return-on-equity has not peaked but stabilised. But of course, as we 
all know, there is always a factor of uncertainty in every forecast - beauty as a prudence is in the eyes 
of a beholder. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 5
