Zhou Xiaochuan: Capital return of state-owned enterprises 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 2005 Annual Meeting 
of  China  Enterprises’  Leaders  &  the  20th  Anniversary  of  <China  Entrepreneurs>,  Beijing,  11 
December 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, fellow participants, 
Good afternoon. 
It is my great honor to discuss issues of common interest with many entrepreneurs in this gathering. In 
the same gathering two year ago, I expressed my hope to have more dialogues with entrepreneurs. I 
regret  that  I  couldn’t  attend  yesterday  and  this  morning’s  discussions  and  listen  to  your  marvelous 
speeches, since I just came back from a business trip. Today, I would like to take this opportunity to 
share with you my opinions on capital returns of enterprises. 
Nowadays,  it  is  already  natural  for  private  enterprises  to  distribute  dividends.  But  are  state-owned 
enterprises  willing  to  pay  dividends?  Should  the  state  accept  dividends?  Those  questions  draw 
attentions from many and are worthy of discussion. Here, I also wish to exchange my personal views 
with you. 
1. Background of the issue 
Economic development has produced different backgrounds for the issue. 
Background one: Many state-owned enterprises including state-holding companies have more profits 
than  before.  Some  enterprises  have  even  higher  profits  due  to  high  energy  prices,  particularly  oil 
prices. 
Background  two:  To  promote  reform  process,  government  needs  huge  amount  of  funds  to  dissolve 
historical  burdens.  In  the  aftermath  of  Asian  financial  crisis,  sources  of  fund  were  needed  to  help 
enterprises in distress, establish a safety net and to relieve enterprises off social functions.  
Background  three  has  a  lot  to  do  with  public  companies.  Many  people  criticized  listed  companies 
because they seldom paid dividends. As listed companies, I think they should reward their investors 
after raising funds in the capital market. 
Background four: reform of state-owned commercial banks. Currently, China Construction Bank, Bank 
of China and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China have undergone financial restructuring and 
recapitalization. Furthermore, China Construction Bank has become a listed company. As their holding 
company, the Central Safe Investment Co. Ltd. has made it clear that it expects dividends. However, 
since 1994, state-owned enterprises have never paid dividends to their investors. People will ask why 
there are such differences.  
2. Dividend distribution or not: my personal view 
I think owners have the right to receive dividends. First, in terms of corporate governance, this will set 
a  clear  operational  target  for  management  of  the  company  and  protect  shareholders’  interests. 
Management  should  earn  profits  for  shareholders,  and  accordingly  shareholders  ought  to  require 
dividends. 
Second, the property rights structure must be clear. A rewardless investment is the result of unclear 
property rights structure and could give rise to insider controls and other problems. 
Third, we should consider the efficiency of resource allocation. Are resources efficiently allocated?  If 
even the investors don’t consider dividends, how could we measure the return on investment? 
Some people may argue that, in principle a company should pay dividends to its shareholders, but it 
needs to take good care of itself in order to have self-development capacity before paying dividends to 
its shareholders. I think this argument only touches the surface. 
In a book I wrote in 1992, I mentioned that the many distortions in our system restrained enterprises’ 
real  costs  and  distorted  the  relation  between  cost  and  profit.  Also,  enterprises  took  over 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 1
responsibilities that should not have been theirs. As a result, enterprises had exaggerated profits or 
had difficulties in paying dividends or submitting profits.  
If we all agree that state-owned enterprises and state-holding companies should pay dividends to the 
state, great efforts should be made to correct those distortions. Otherwise, reform will be damaged by 
those distortions. 
Enterprise reform has always been a crucial part in our institutional reform. In the 1980s and 1990s, 
enterprise reform was taken as both the starting point and the basis of the whole reform program. But 
recently,  I  feel  the  voice  for  enterprise  reform  has  been  a  bit  muffled.  I  wonder  if  this  is  because 
enterprise reform has achieved a lot. But in my view, many tasks are yet to be accomplished, many 
questions are to be answered and many reform measures need to be taken. Only by doing so, can we 
strengthen our micro-economy and enhance competitiveness. 
In order to promote enterprise and relevant supporting reforms, establish a clear operational target, 
clarify ownership structures and improve capital resource efficiency, I think we should put forward such 
a proposition, i.e. state-owned enterprises and state-holding companies should pay dividends to their 
owners. Accordingly, owners should have the rights to decide whether to distribute dividends and by 
how much.     
3. Some supporting reforms are crucial.  
It  will  not  be  easy  to  resolve  the  above  mentioned  proposition  without  implementing  a  series  of 
supporting reforms. Therefore, we should not neglect their importance in this process. 
First, distortions in the relation between cost and profit in enterprises’ financial statement need to be 
tackled. A lot of works are still waiting ahead, though after many years’ efforts great progress has been 
achieved  in  raising  accounting  standards  and  amending  accounting  rules  since  the  Asian  financial 
turmoil. 
In the end of 1980’s and early 1990’s, serious distortions in enterprises’ costs and profits propelled the 
launching  of  financial  accounting  reform  in  1993  and  adoption  of  new  accounting  standards  and 
general  financial  rules.  Comparing  the  profit  margin  of  Chinese  enterprises  with  their  international 
counterparts,  we  would  notice  that,  profit  margin  of  Chinese  enterprises  was  much  higher  than  the 
average 5 percent of the top 500 enterprises in the world. You can check the detailed data of Chinese 
enterprises  at  that  time  for  yourself.  Such  comparison  doesn’t  mean  higher  profitability  of  Chinese 
enterprises, as a large amount of costs was not reflected in cost, but in profit. For instance, bonus, 
employees’ pensions, health, R&D and advertisement expenditures should have been cost items, but 
they were covered by profits. If such artificially high profits of enterprises were paid out as dividends, 
enterprises could not survive and develop. 
Therefore,  resolving  distortions  in  cost  and  profit  should  be  the  first  task  in  a  series  of  supporting 
reforms. This involves upgrading accounting standards. In recent years, continued progress has been 
made in this regard, for instance, adoption of many practices. Further international comparison may 
help us detect the remaining problems.  
Financial treatments of complicated operations are also involved in the fundamental issue of cost and 
profit  classification,  such  as  risk  provisioning,  loss  write-off  and  accounting  rules  on  derivatives. 
Without  a  clear  classification,  there  will  be  serious  disputes  and  complaints  from  enterprises  when 
distorted  profits  are  used  as  a  basis  to  pay  dividends.  Some  entrepreneurs  think  it  is  a  difficult 
problem. We can look at it from the perspective of distorted relationship between profit and cost. 
Second,  there  are  deficiencies  in  the  tax  system.  Our  tax  system  should  be  rational  and  with  few 
distortions.  Yet,  this  is  not  easily  achievable  for  countries  in  transition  and  emerging  markets  and 
usually takes a long time. The first is tax category. Improper tax categories affect the amount of profits 
before anything else, thus causing problems.  
The second is tax base. Right now, reform of tax base is underway in China. The value-added tax 
(VAT) will be shifted from production-based to consumption-based. One of the issues involved is how 
to  apportion  equipment  investment  and  whether  such  input  should  be  taken  as  costs.  Some  large 
state-owned enterprises also face problems in taxable salary, depreciation of fixed assets and others 
that I just mentioned, such as R&D expenditure, advertisement expenditure, risk provisioning and loss 
write-off  etc.  If  those  items  could  be  reflected  accurately  in  the  tax  base,  the  profits  will  also  be 
accurate too.  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2006
Third, there is the problem of enterprises’ undertaking social functions. We have a very clear direction 
of relieving enterprises of their social functions. But things are not that simple. In fact, enterprises are 
still responsible, to varying degrees, for some social functions and working to preserve stability. It is 
feasible  to  transfer  the  function  of  providing  employment,  pensioning,  and  health  cares  from 
enterprises  if  we  could  have  clearly  defined  responsibilities.  Otherwise,  “responsibility  vacuum”  is 
really  troublesome  if  no  social  entities  take  over  those  social  functions.  This  is  potentially  possible 
since reform of social institutions needs much time to complete. 
Fourth,  it  is  related  to  many  public companies.  Their  legacy companies coexist  with  them  and  their 
relations need to be tackled. Some enterprises underwent cosmetic restructuring to get listed in the 
stock market simply to raise funds, thus it is unnecessary to keep the legacy company. In most cases, 
there are differences within an enterprise group. Some are growing while others are on the decline; 
some  are  well  managed  and  work  really  hard  while  others  owe  it  to  themselves  for  the  bad 
performance. At the time of going to the capital market and structural design, consideration should be 
given to an effective incentive mechanism, moral hazards and striking a balance between the rich and 
poor. To solve these problems, enterprises have a part to play; at the same time, it has something to 
do with the state’s obligations and historical reasons.  
My  personal  preference  is  quite  clear.  I  don’t  think  we  should  underestimate  those  supporting 
measures. Only with concerted efforts to promote enterprise reform and take supporting measures can 
we smoothly solve the problem of returns on state investment. 
4. Who should be paid dividends? 
There  is  no  doubt  to  whom  the  state-owned  enterprises  and  state  holding  companies  should  pay 
dividends.  Clear  definition  of  property  rights  can  be  found  in  the  Company  Law,  differing  from  the 
traditional definition of absolute and relative ownership in the contract-based responsibility system.  
Compared with some advanced countries and emerging market economies, where the share of state-
owned enterprises in the GDP is 2 percent or 5 percent only, ours is much larger. Accordingly, it is 
necessary  to  have  multi-leveled  operational  management.  Should  each  level have  capital operation 
rights? We can find a clear answer in corporate governance structure and the Company Law. 
Centralized management will not be suitable in China, since we have a sizable presence of three-level 
state ownership. Great Britain once ruled over India, Australia and some other places. A story was told 
that, the British government delivered heating radiators to schools in colonial India where electronic 
fans were actually needed, for officials in London thought India might be as cold a place. For China 
with  a  complex  and  large  capital  system,  we  could  not  imagine  that  a  highly  centralized  approach 
could work without a layered management mechanism featuring clear responsibilities and adequate 
capital operational capacities. 
Under  such  circumstances,  owner-agent  relationship  of  state-owned  capitals  thus  became  crucial. 
Since  Chinese  people  are  the  real  owners  in  essence,  how  could  we  realize  such  ownership?  To 
whom  to  consign  responsibilities?    Through  what  kind  of  organizational  structures,  corporate 
governance  structure,  checks  and  balances,  including  competitive  and  incentive  mechanism? 
Establishing holding company looks like a good solution. Different holding companies may compare 
their performances, thus resulting in different incentives. Holding companies could have diverse capital 
structures and go public to improve efficiencies through public monitor. From this point of view, the 
establishment of holding companies is an inevitable choice. 
As an integral part of SOE reforms, the reform of state-owned commercial banks adopted the holding 
company model after studying international and Chinese enterprises’ reform experiences. Of course, it 
has to be tested in practice.   
Finally,  how  to  pay  dividends  should  be  decided  by  the  board  of  directors  and  the  shareholders’ 
meeting. The board of directors decides whether and how much to pay, and all shareholders rather 
part of shareholders should be paid. In summary, who should be paid dividends depends on a clear 
property right structure. There is no need to complicate this matter.  
5. Conclusions 
In  my  personal  view,  to  clarify  property  right  and  improve  corporate  governance,  we  should  make 
efforts to reach consensus through discussion of dividends distribution by state-owned enterprises and 
investment returns of state owned shares in enterprises with mixed ownerships. In line with such a 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 3
spirit,  we  have  carefully  studied  and  discussed  property  right  reform  for  Bank  of  China,  China 
Construction Bank and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, hoping to avoid the co-existence 
of both listed companies and the legacy companies like before. All three conducted complete financial 
restructuring. Among them, China Construction Bank has less than 10 percent of capital invested by 
the China Jianyin Investment Co. Ltd. which is responsible for providing trust loans on behalf of fiscal 
authority. And the China Jianyin Investment Co. Ltd. is not a legacy company. The China Construction 
Bank reform is still complete restructuring. To sum up, property right has become clearer as a result of 
this approach.  
In  fact,  many  of  the  problems  we  had  to  cope  with  in  the  process  of  reform  are  from  supporting 
measures. That is to say, the problem with return on capital is related to a series of issues, including 
the systematic reform of enterprises and others that are yet to be properly resolved. As a result, I think 
we  should  stress  the  importance  of  enterprises’  reform  under  current  conditions,  and  not  neglect  it 
since it has been   ongoing for many years. 
Owners  of  a  company  have  the  right  to  enjoy  its  profits  through  decisions  made  by  the  board  of 
directors and shareholders’ meeting in line with corporate governance. In a high-growth environment, 
many enterprises will find themselves lacking of capital .If a company distributes all its profits, how can 
it continue development when it lack of capitals? In fact, these are two different matters. On one hand, 
investment should have returns. On the other hand, a company should have other financing channel 
to supplement capitals in addition to profits. Without financing channel, companies may worry about 
dividends distribution since they cannot obtain additional funds for future growth. As a result, capital 
market should be further developed by resolving the non-tradable shares problem. I believe, with our 
efforts, we will make more progress in the reforms. 
I  hope  my  speech  will  contribute  to  the  discussion.  Your  comments  and  criticisms  are  warmly 
welcome.  
 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 4/2006
