Adriano Maleiane: Financial services efficiency in Mozambique 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Adriano  Maleiane,  Governor  of 
(Banco de Moçambique), at the SWIFT African Regional Meeting, Maputo, 22 May 2006. 
the  Bank  of  Mozambique 
 Dear Mr. Arthur Cousins, SWIFT Board member, 
Dear Mr. David Pryce, Regional Director for Africa 
Dear guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  accepted  with  satisfaction  the  invitation  to  chair  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  SWIFT  African 
Regional  Conference  to  be  held  under  the  slogan  “Transforming  the  future:  optimizing  the 
local, regional and global markets”. 
I  would  like  to  welcome  all  delegates  present  in  this  conference  room,  especially  the  African 
countries’ representatives. As hosts of the SWIFT African Regional Conference, we are greatly 
honoured to welcome you in Maputo and wish you a pleasant stay. 
The  great  interest  and  participation  in  this  Conference  proves  the  commitment  of  our 
governments and financial institutions to information technology current matters that we currently 
use  in  order  to  better  prepare  our  countries  to  face  up  the  challenges  of  the  globalization  and 
regional and continental integration. 
Nowadays, information technologies are a paramount platform for the activity of various economy 
sectors, including the financial sector as well as the payment systems. The SWIFT is an integral 
part of the technological infrastructure that our institutions use for settlement and clearing of bills, 
in the perspective of better serving the clients, prevent risks associated with our activity and, in 
general,  to  contribute  for  business  environment  improvement,  an  important  factor  to  attract 
investments that we need to accomplish our economic and social development plans. 
In the globalized world we live, the information technology platforms are ever more harmonised, 
the reason why it is urgent to improve them in order to reduce the transaction costs and allow an 
adequate  risk  management,  both  in  the  domestic  plan,  as  well  as  within  the  regional  and 
international scope. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Our  economies  continue  to  be  too  small  in  the  context  of  production  and  world  trade.  Our 
countries are, in general, very sensible to exogenous shocks, either those resulting from adverse 
natural  factors  as  well  as  those  induced  by  situational  changes  and  yet  those  resulting  from 
changes in the international trade rules. 
Our  positioning  in  the  world  economy  continues  to  be,  in  overall  terms,  that  of  commodity 
producers,  whose  access  to  international  markets  still  faces  various  barriers  and  unequal 
treatment. 
This characteristic makes our countries highly dependent on the international community financial 
support, mainly in the form of grants. 
Mozambique  started  with  deep  reforms  in  1987,  whose  results  within  the  financial  sector  are 
already  visible,  as  can  be  evaluated  through  the  number  of  operators  as  well  as  the  financial 
products  available  in  the  market.  In  effect,  owing  to  substantial  changes  that  we  have  been 
undertaking, today we have a number of diversified credit institutions and financial corporations 
which offer competitive products and services within the domestic and international markets. 
In  the  domain  of  the  information  technology,  we  have  evolved  to  a  financial  system  in  which 
greater part of the transactions that take place are made in real time, whereas by the beginning of 
90’s,  such  transactions  were  made  resorting  to  a  telex  and  other  primitive  data  transmission 
mechanisms.  The  nostro  accounts  management  improved  after  our  adherence  to  SWIFT  by 
1995. 
At that time,  only 3 (three) banks were operating within the SWIFT system, but about 10 (ten) 
years later, we can gladly confirm that all Credit Institutions operating in the country perform their 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
foreign exchange transactions through that system, resulting in an improved management of the 
country’s foreign exchange operations. 
The entry of new operators in our banking system, with strong establishments abroad, brought an 
added value to the national financial system, to the extent that Maputo and other capital province 
trading markets have thereafter been connected to the main international financial markets. 
The  financial  system  evolvement  put  forward  to  the  Banco  de  Moçambique,  as  Central  Bank 
entity, the challenge to introduce foreign exchange and monetary policy management instruments 
more adequate to the dynamics and transformations of the markets. We continue to modernize 
our payment systems, especially on clearing and settlement of bills, besides having strengthened 
the banking supervision to comply with the dimension of our financial market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  improvement  of  financial  services’  efficiency  is  an  important  encouraging  factor  for  the 
attraction of more foreign investments and other financial inflows to our countries. Today, a strong 
and  sound  infrastructure  is  an  important  factor  in  the  creation  of  new  opportunities  for  our 
countries to find alternative sources of financing. 
In this context, the SWIFT system is considered to be an important element of such infrastructure, 
which  should  therefore  be  prepared  to  participate  in  the  definition  of  markets  development 
strategies that are being undertaken in many countries and within several African sub-regions. 
Other challenges that today are put forward  to SWIFT system and other banking management 
computer solutions, is the assurance of adequate integration among front, middle and back office 
operation systems to allow an efficient management as well as access of information on nostro 
accounts, in real time. 
Within  the  SADC  (Southern  African  Development  Community)  region,  some  countries  have 
already implemented or are set in an advanced stage of implementation of the RTGS (Real Time 
Gross Settlement) payment systems. SWIFT should be assumed as an important partner for the 
improvement of the payments’ systems efficiency and mainly for risk mitigation. 
Recognising  the  importance  of  having  good  infrastructures  in  Africa,  it  is  our  responsibility,  as 
Africans, to develop common and/or harmonised projects in this field. 
Within 
harmonisation process of some financial infrastructures have already been created. 
In  effect,  various  projects  on  procedures  harmonization  with  the  Central  Banks  are  at  the 
implementation  stage,  of  which  it  is  worth  referring  to  the  payment,  settlement  and  clearing 
systems, communication and information technologies and banking supervision projects. 
Let me finish by expressing my conviction that this conference will produce the expected results 
and  the  strengthening  of  cooperation  among  our  institutions  in  the  domain  of  interbanking 
telecommunications,  in  order  to  develop  a  modern and  liable  financial  platform  and compatible 
with those used in the main international markets. 
The matters to be addressed and the expertise of the lecturers ensure that the discussions will be 
frank and everyone will come out of the meeting with enriched knowledge. Once again, I wish you 
good stay in Maputo and in this way, I officially declare the SWIFT African Regional Conference 
open. 
Thank you very much. 
the  Southern  African  Development  Community 
region,  pre-conditions 
the 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
