John Hurley: Prospects for productivity and growth in Ireland and the euro 
area  
Opening statement of Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Conference “Prospects for 
Productivity and Growth in Ireland and the euro area”, Dublin, 15 September 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you to this one-day conference on the Prospects for Productivity and Growth 
in Ireland and the euro area. I extend  a special welcome to those who have come from abroad, in 
many cases travelling long distances. 
Today's event brings together a wide range of participants to discuss these important topics, not just 
academics  and  policy-makers  but  also  representatives  of  commercial  banks, 
international 
organisations, the public sector, industry groupings and economic commentators.  
The day will be divided into two sessions, the first dealing with the Irish economy and the second with 
the euro-area economy. These sessions will begin with a number of presentations by invited speakers, 
including some of the Bank's economists, and will be based largely on the speaker's own research. 
After contributions from discussants, there will be an opportunity for a more general discussion of the 
issues. Of course, we do not expect that the conference will end with a consensus on all the issues. 
The conference topics are ones on which there can be quite a range of views and each of today's 
participants will naturally present their own particular analysis. However, I hope that, by the end of the 
day, most of you will feel this event has been useful and that it will stimulate further debate on matters 
that are of critical importance to Ireland and the wider euro area.  
I would like to stress that this conference is about growth prospects over a number of years or even 
decades. It is not about what will happen in the next quarter, the interpretation of the latest data or any 
aspect of the conjunctural situation. It focuses instead on the medium to longer-term growth potential 
of the economies in question and the factors that will determine this potential over time. At the most 
basic level, these factors are the supply of labour and capital and the increasing efficiency with which 
these are used over time, that is, total factor productivity growth.  
The evolution of each of these three individual components - labour, capital and productivity - is a very 
complex  story  in  itself.  For  example,  the  supply  of  labour  reflects  developments  in  a  range  of 
underlying  variables,  not  just  demographic  developments  such  as  ageing  and  migration;  it  also 
includes behavioural aspects, such as the decision whether to participate in the labour force or not. 
The  availability  of  a  plentiful  supply  of  labour,  even  a  well-qualified  labour  force,  does  not  in  itself 
guarantee a favourable growth performance. It may be a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for 
growth, as the Irish experience of the 1980s shows.  
The supply of capital is another key element in an economy's growth potential, whether that reflects 
domestic  capital  accumulation  or,  as  in  Ireland's  case,  significant  foreign  direct  investment  inflows. 
Again, the story here is quite complex. It may be clear that rates of capital accumulation and, in some 
cases, the nature and composition of investment, is weak or unfavourable, particularly when compared 
with other economies. Often, however, the reasons for this are difficult to discern. Why, for example, 
does  the  application  of  information  and  communications  technology  in  certain  sectors  of  the  US 
economy, such as retail distribution, seem to be noticeably greater than in Europe? The answers are 
not immediately clear. 
Even more intractable, perhaps, is the question of the determinants of total factor productivity growth. 
Certainly,  it  is  likely  that  rising  skill  levels  and  the  accumulating  knowledge  of  how  to  apply  new 
technologies more efficiently may account for much of this productivity growth. There are also other 
important factors involved, however, such as institutional factors that enhance the efficiency with which 
both  capital  and  labour  are  deployed  in  an  economy  in  response  to  all  sorts  of  developments, 
including  technological  progress.  In  other  words,  the  flexibility  of  an  economy,  and  the  institutional 
features that give rise to this flexibility are an important part of the picture. This is the type of analysis 
that underlies the Lisbon Strategy and the structural reform process in Europe generally. 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 1
The  importance  of  research  in  this  area  is  clear.  Productivity  growth  is  the  key  driver  of  living 
standards in the long run. Over time, an economy's productivity growth performance will be a major 
determinant of both the absolute level of living standards in an economy and its relative ranking vis-à-
vis other economies. The rationale behind this is fairly clear; in the long run, there has to be a fairly 
strong  relationship  between  increases  in  output  per  head,  the  corresponding  rise  in  incomes  this 
generates and increases in the level of consumption.  
How do the concepts of productivity and competitiveness relate to each other? These terms are often 
used interchangeably in public discussion. In a narrow sense, competitiveness is often about short-
term  developments,  as  measured  by  a  range  of  various  indicators,  including,  in  particular,  relative 
labour and other input costs. It is very important to pay attention to these variables. For instance, it is 
likely  that  sharp  losses  in  competitiveness,  stemming  from  exchange  rate  changes  or  excessive 
earnings growth domestically, could adversely impact on the traded goods sectors and cause damage 
that could take a long time to undo, through losses in market shares and the closure of firms. One has 
to distinguish this concern, however, from a concern about longer term developments.  
Over a longer perspective, it is productivity growth that matters. By moving from the production of low-
valued-added and low-productivity activities to higher value-added higher-productivity ones, facilitated 
by  flexible  markets  and  appropriate  policies,  an  economy  can  increase  its  export  earnings  and  its 
command  over  internationally  traded  goods  and  services.  It  can  also  benefit  from  the  increased 
efficiency of production of non-traded goods and services. The alternative is simply to stick with low-
valued  activities  and,  typically  in  today's  world,  be  faced  with  limited  prospects,  due  to  competition 
from  lower  cost  production  locations.  One  might  be  able  to  technically  maintain  competitiveness  in 
such circumstances, but only by paring back labour earnings and domestic incomes. Clearly, this is 
not a very desirable long-term strategy.  
It is evident, therefore, that a certain amount of structural change is a desirable feature in an economy. 
Ireland  has  undergone  very  high  levels  of  structural  change  and  the  results  have  generally  been 
beneficial.  If  we  had  simply  tried  to  maintain  the  production  structure  of  the  past,  with  its  greater 
concentration on lower-value added traditional activities, it is implausible to suggest that the economy 
could have performed in the manner that it has. In fact, Ireland tried to pursue this approach up until 
the late 1950s with unsatisfactory results. Further structural change will clearly continue to be required 
if we are to maintain and improve our relative position. The policies to be pursued, therefore, are ones 
that permit, or even encourage, structural change to occur on an ongoing basis and in as smooth a 
manner as possible. 
Determining what is important in terms of promoting productivity growth constitutes a key challenge for 
economic research. The importance of this topic has led the Bank to prioritise it as an area of research 
alongside  the  ongoing  commitments  of  its  research  function  to  ECB  activities.  The  Bank  also  sees 
itself as having a role to support the adoption of policies domestically that boost long-term sustainable 
growth, as well as contributing to research within the Eurosystem on this important topic. 
The first session today will deal with the domestic economy. It will commence with an overview paper 
followed by others relating to two specific topics that have been, and remain, key factors in this regard. 
These are foreign direct investment and the role of education in improving the quality of the labour 
force. Given the rather striking growth performance of the Irish economy in recent years, I hope that 
the  discussion  of  the  domestic  economy  will  be  of  interest  to  all  of  you,  including  those  who  have 
travelled from abroad.  
This  is  a  particularly  appropriate  time  to  consider  the  prospects  for  overall  growth  and  productivity 
performance  for  Ireland.  The  much-discussed  era  of  exceptionally  strong  growth  -  representing  a 
delayed catch-up process, if you like - is clearly behind us now. Growth still remains relatively robust 
by comparison with most other mature economies but it is running below the average rates of growth 
of  the  late  1990s.  There  are  also  a  number  of  specific  concerns,  albeit  some  of  a  more  short-term 
nature.  In  particular,  growth  has  become  somewhat  unbalanced  in  recent  years,  with  an  unusually 
high reliance on the construction sector, combined with some deterioration in the economy's export 
performance. The productivity performance of the economy has also weakened, partly in response to 
this shift in the pattern of activity.  
The  second  session  of  today's  conference  will  focus  on  the  wider  euro-area  economy  and  on  its 
potential for growth. Unfortunately, developments in recent years point to a rather poor performance 
on a relative basis, in particular, in comparison with the US economy. Europe had been catching up on 
the US productivity performance over much of the latter part of the last century but, since about the 
mid-1990s, this process of convergence towards US living standards essentially stalled and, indeed, 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2006
has even reversed itself somewhat. This reflected a pick up in US productivity growth that was not 
emulated in Europe.  
Measurement issues may play some role in explaining these differing trends. Measures of output in 
the US take greater account of quality changes, so that for any given value increase in investment or 
the output of the high-technology sectors, greater volume growth may tend to be recorded in the US. 
These measurement issues are not central to the argument, however. It is clear that, abstracting from 
them, the underlying story, though slightly less dramatic, is essentially unchanged.  
An unusual feature of US developments has been the fact that productivity growth remained strong 
even during the downturn at the beginning of this decade. Typically, productivity performance is often 
poor in a downturn as output growth falls back but employment does not respond immediately. This 
performance was also recorded despite a peaking in information technology investment, but perhaps 
the impact of previous investment was only evident with a lag. In contrast, in Europe, the downturn 
saw  further  declines  in  productivity  growth,  although  there  has  been  some  improvement  recently. 
Possible explanations for these trends and the implications of their continuation will be central to the 
afternoon  session.  Clearly,  the  prospects  for  European  productivity  growth  are  very  important,  not 
least,  because  in  the  future  population  ageing  will  mean  that  each  worker  will  be  supporting  more 
dependents.  
Before concluding, I would like to say something about the links between the conference topics and 
central banking. There are a number of important ways in which monetary policy and potential output 
growth interact. For example, it is important for monetary policymakers to have a reasonably accurate 
estimate of the sustainable rate of growth of the economy, so that the stance of policy can be adjusted 
in a timely fashion to avoid inflationary pressures emerging in an economy. Equally, monetary policy 
can itself contribute to maximising potential output growth by maintaining price stability. Relative price 
movements and the required re-allocation of resources that they may indicate are important signals 
and they can be distorted against the background of unstable prices.  
It  is  also  important  to  recognise  what  monetary  policy  cannot  achieve.  Monetary  policy  cannot 
permanently  raise  output  levels  through  adopting  a  stance  that  is  too  accommodating.  This  might 
increase  demand  in  the  short-term  but  it  will  ultimately  hamper,  rather  than  boost,  the  economy's 
growth potential and is likely to end in a damaging inflationary episode. 
In a specifically domestic setting, the Bank sees itself as having role in contributing to policy formation, 
specifically, by encouraging the adoption of policies that support long-term sustainable development. It 
can do so by sharing the results of its economic research and facilitating the discussion of important 
policy  issues.  Today's  conference  contributes  to  the  Bank's  overall  efforts  to  meet  its  goals  in  this 
regard. 
In  conclusion,  I  am  looking  forward  to  an  interesting  and  stimulating  discussion  and  exchange  of 
views. I will now pass you over to the Bank's Assistant Director General, Tom O'Connell, who will act 
as chairman for today's sessions. 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 3
