Donald L Kohn: Regulatory relief  
Testimony  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  United  States  Senate, 
Washington DC, 1 March 2006. 
 Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to 
discuss the Federal Reserve's views on regulatory relief. The Board commends the Committee for its 
continued focus and work on this important issue. In particular, I'd like to recognize and thank Senator 
Crapo  and  his  staff  for  their  ongoing  efforts  to  coordinate  the  many  regulatory  relief  proposals  that 
have been advanced to date by the federal banking agencies, financial trade associations, and others. 
The  regulatory  requirements  imposed  on  our  nation's  banking  organizations  have  grown  over  time. 
Often  the  impact  of  these  requirements  falls  hardest  on  our  nation's  community  banks,  which  have 
fewer  resources  than  larger  organizations  to  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  new  or  additional 
regulations.  Although  the  individual  requirements  and  restrictions  imposed  by  federal  law  may  well 
have been justified at the time of adoption, changes in the marketplace, technology and, indeed, in the 
federal banking laws themselves may well have altered the balance of the cost-benefit analysis that 
should underlie each requirement and restriction. Unnecessary regulatory burdens hinder the ability of 
large  and  small  banking  organizations  to  meet  the  needs  of  their  customers,  operate  profitably, 
innovate,  and  compete  with  other  financial  services  providers.  That  is  why  the  Board  periodically 
reviews its own regulations and why it is so important for Congress to periodically review the federal 
banking  laws  to  determine  whether  there  are  any  provisions  that  may  be  streamlined  or  eliminated 
without compromising the safety and soundness of banking organizations, consumer protections, or 
other important objectives that Congress has established for the financial system.  
The Board, working with the other banking agencies, has been, and will continue to be, a strong and 
active supporter of Congress' regulatory relief efforts. In 2003, the Board provided this Committee with 
a  number  of  legislative  proposals  for  inclusion  in  a  regulatory  relief  bill.  Since  then,  in  response  to 
requests  from  Senator  Crapo,  the  Board  has  reviewed  numerous  other  regulatory  relief  proposals 
included in the Matrix of Financial Services Regulatory Relief Proposals (Matrix) compiled by Senator 
Crapo's staff that may affect the Federal Reserve or the organizations we supervise. As a result of that 
process, I am pleased to report that the Board now supports more than 35 legislative proposals. These 
proposals  would  meaningfully  reduce  regulatory  burden,  improve  the  supervision  of  banking 
organizations, or otherwise enhance the federal banking laws without compromising the fundamental 
goals of bank regulation and supervision. A complete listing and summary of the proposals supported 
by  the  Board  is  included  in  the  appendix  to  my  testimony.  We  believe  these  proposals  provide  an 
excellent  starting  point  for  any  regulatory  relief  legislation,  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  the 
Committee as you develop and perfect such legislation.  
In my remarks, I will highlight the three items that are the Board's highest regulatory relief priorities. 
These  proposals  would  allow  the  Federal  Reserve  to  pay  interest  on  balances  held  by  depository 
institutions at Reserve Banks, provide the Board greater flexibility in setting reserve requirements, and 
permit depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits. These proposals may well sound 
familiar to you and they should. The Board has supported these amendments for many years because 
we believe each of them would improve the operation of our financial system. I should note that these 
three amendments form the core of S. 1586, the Interest on Business Checking Act of 2005, which 
was introduced last year by Senators Hagel, Reed and Snowe. The Board strongly supports passage 
of S. 1586, either independently or as part of a broader regulatory relief bill.  
In addition to these priority items, I will highlight a few other legislative proposals that we believe would 
provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations as well as some steps that the Board has 
taken on its own to reduce regulatory burden. Finally, I will discuss several matters related to industrial 
loan  companies  (ILCs).  This  topic  has  been  raised  by  some  regulatory  relief  proposals,  but  it  has 
much broader policy implications for the structure and supervision of the banking industry.  
BIS Review 14/2006 
 1
Interest on reserves and reserve requirement flexibility (Matrix Nos. 1 and 2) 
The  first  two  of  the  Board's  priority  items  relate  to  reserve  requirements,  which  exist  to  assist  the 
Federal Reserve conduct monetary policy. Federal law currently obliges the Board to establish reserve 
requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions and mandates that the Board set the 
ratio  of  required  reserves  on  transaction  deposits  above  a  certain  threshold  at  between  8  and  14 
percent. Because the Federal Reserve does not pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks 
to  meet  reserve  requirements,  depositories  have  an  incentive  to  reduce  their  required  reserve 
balances to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of reserve avoidance activities, including 
sweep  arrangements  that  move  funds  from  deposits  that  are  subject  to  reserve  requirements  to 
deposits  and  money  market  investments  that  are  not.  These  sweep  programs  and  similar  activities 
absorb real resources and therefore diminish the efficiency of our banking system.  
Besides  required  reserve  balances,  depository  institutions  also  voluntarily  hold  two  other  types  of 
balances in their Reserve Bank accounts--contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances. 
A depository institution holds contractual clearing balances when it needs a higher level of balances 
than its required reserve balances in order to pay checks or make wire transfers out of its account at 
the Federal Reserve without incurring overnight overdrafts. Currently, such clearing balances do not 
earn explicit interest, but they do earn implicit interest in the form of credits that may be used to pay for 
Federal  Reserve  services,  such  as  check  clearing.  Excess  reserve  balances  are  funds  held  by 
depository  institutions  in  their  accounts  at  Reserve  Banks  in  excess  of  their  required  reserve  and 
contractual  clearing  balances.  Excess  reserve  balances  currently  do  not  earn  explicit  or  implicit 
interest.  
The Board has long supported legislation that would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay depository 
institutions  interest  on  the  balances  they  hold  at  Reserve  Banks.  As  we  previously  have  testified, 
paying interest on required reserve balances would remove a substantial portion of the incentive for 
depositories to engage in reserve avoidance measures, and the resulting improvements in efficiency 
should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. Having the authority also to 
pay interest on contractual clearing and excess reserve balances as well as required reserves would 
enhance  the  Federal  Reserve's  ability  to  efficiently  conduct  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  it  would 
complement  another  of  the  Board's  proposed  amendments,  which  would  give  the  Board  greater 
flexibility in setting reserve requirements for depository institutions.  
In order for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to conduct monetary policy effectively, it is 
important that a sufficient and predictable demand for balances at the Reserve Banks exist so that the 
Federal Reserve knows the volume of reserves to supply (or remove) through open market operations 
to  achieve  the  FOMC's  target  federal  funds  rate.  Authorizing  the  Federal  Reserve  to  pay  explicit 
interest  on  contractual  clearing  balances  could  potentially  provide  a  demand  for  voluntary  balances 
that  would  be  stable  enough  for  monetary  policy  to  be  implemented  effectively  through  existing 
procedures  without  the  need  for  required  reserve  balances.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Board,  if 
authorized,  could  consider  reducing--or  even  eliminating--reserve  requirements,  thereby  reducing  a 
regulatory  burden  for  all  depository  institutions,  without  adversely  affecting  the  Federal  Reserve's 
ability to conduct monetary policy.  
Having the authority to pay interest on excess reserves also could help mitigate potential volatility in 
overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve was authorized to pay interest on excess reserves, and 
did so, the rate paid would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks generally 
would not lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at a 
Reserve Bank. Although the Board sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, 
the ability to do so would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary policy toolkit of the Federal 
Reserve.  
Interest on demand deposits (Matrix No. 3) 
Another  priority  item  for  the  Board  would  repeal  the  statutory  restrictions  that  currently  prohibit 
depository  institutions  from  paying  interest  on  demand  deposits.  Repealing  these  restrictions  would 
improve  the  overall  efficiency  of  our  financial  sector,  assist  small  banks  in  attracting  and  retaining 
business  deposits,  and  allow  small  businesses  to  earn  direct  interest  on  their  checking  account 
balances. As a practical matter, these restrictions currently do not impede the payment of interest on 
consumer deposits because depository institutions generally are permitted to offer individuals interest-
2 
 BIS Review 14/2006
bearing  negotiable  order  of  withdrawal  (NOW)  accounts,  which  are  checkable  transaction  accounts 
similar to demand deposits.  
To  compete  for  the  liquid  assets  of  businesses,  however,  banks  have  been  compelled  to  set  up 
complicated  procedures  to  pay  implicit  interest  on  compensating  balance  accounts  and  they  spend 
resources--and  charge  fees--for  sweeping  the  excess  demand  deposits  of  businesses  into  money 
market investments on a nightly basis. Small banks often do not have the resources to develop the 
sweep  or  other  programs  that  are  needed  to  compete  for  the  deposits  of  business  customers. 
Moreover, from the standpoint of the overall economy, the expenses incurred by institutions of all sizes 
to implement these programs are a waste of resources and would be unnecessary if institutions were 
permitted to pay interest on demand deposits directly. The costs incurred by banks in operating these 
programs are passed on to their large and small business customers and many small businesses do 
not benefit from these programs.  
For these reasons, the Board's proposed amendment would allow all depository institutions that have 
the legal authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. The amendment would 
eliminate the need for banks to operate, and business customers to pay for, sweep and compensating 
balance  arrangements  to  pay  or  earn  interest  on  demand  deposits.  As  I  will  explain  a  little  later, 
however, the Board opposes amendments that would separately authorize ILCs that operate outside 
the supervisory and regulatory framework established for other insured banks to offer, for the first time, 
transaction accounts to business customers.  
The Board believes that, once enacted, the authorization for depository institutions to pay interest on 
demand deposits should become effective promptly. S. 1586 would achieve this goal by requiring that 
the  authority  to  pay  interest  on  demand  deposits  become  effective  no  later  than  90  days  after 
enactment. The Board, however, does not advocate the provisions of S. 1586 or other bills that would 
allow  banks  to  offer  a  reservable  money  market  deposit  account  (MMDA)  from  which  twenty-four 
transfers a month could be made to other accounts of the same depositor. These provisions would 
permit banks to sweep balances from demand deposits into MMDAs each night, pay interest on them, 
and  then  sweep  them  back  into  demand  deposits  the  next  day.  This  type  of  twenty-four-transfer 
MMDA  likely would  be useful  only  during  the  transition  period  before  direct  interest  payments  were 
allowed.  Moreover,  as  the  Board  has  explained  in  previous  testimonies,  this  type  of  account  would 
represent an inefficient, more costly and less readily available alternative to interest-bearing demand 
deposits.  
De novo interstate branching 
The  Board  also  strongly  supports  an  amendment  that  would  remove  outdated  barriers  to  de  novo 
interstate branching by banks. Since enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching 
Efficiency  Act  of  1994  (Riegle-Neal  Act),  all  fifty  states  have  permitted  banks  to  expand  on  an 
interstate basis through the acquisition of an existing bank in their state. Interstate banking is good for 
consumers  and  the  economy  as  well  as  banks.  The  creation  of  new  branches  helps  maintain  the 
competitiveness  and  dynamism  of  the  American  banking  industry  and  improve  access  to  banking 
services in otherwise under-served markets. It results in better banking services for households and 
small  businesses,  lower  interest  rates  on  loans,  and  higher  interest  rates  on  deposits.  Interstate 
branching also increases convenience for customers who live, work, and operate across state borders.  
However,  the  Riegle-Neal  Act  permitted  banks  to  open  a  branch  in  a  new  state  without  acquiring 
another  bank  only  if  the  host  state  enacted  legislation  that  expressly  permits  entry  by  de  novo 
branching  (an  opt-in  requirement).  To  date,  twenty-two  states  and  the  District  of  Columbia  have 
enacted some form of opt-in legislation, while twenty-eight states continue to require interstate entry 
through the acquisition of an existing bank.  
This limitation on de novo branching is an obstacle to interstate entry for all banks and also creates 
special problems for small banks seeking to operate across state lines. Moreover, it creates an unlevel 
playing  field  between  banks  and  federal  savings  associations,  which  have  long  been  allowed  to 
establish de novo branches on an interstate basis.  
The  Board's  proposed  amendment  would  remove  this  last  obstacle  to  full  interstate  branching  for 
banks and level the playing field between banks and thrifts by allowing banks to establish interstate 
branches on a de novo basis. The amendment also would remove the parallel provision that allows 
states  to  impose  a  minimum  requirement  on  the  age  of  banks  that  are  acquired  by  an  out-of-state 
banking organization. While the Board supports expanding the de novo branching authority of banks, 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 3
the Board continues to believe that Congress should not grant this new branching authority to ILCs 
unless  the  corporate  owners  of  these  institutions  are  subject  to  the  same  type  of  consolidated 
supervision and activities restrictions as the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks.  
Small bank examination flexibility (Matrix No. 68) 
The Board also supports expanding the number of small institutions that may qualify for an extended 
examination cycle. Federal law currently requires that the appropriate federal banking agency conduct 
an on-site examination of each insured depository institution at least once every twelve months. The 
statute, however, permits institutions that have less than $250 million in assets and that meet certain 
capital,  managerial,  and  other  criteria  to  be  examined  on  an  eighteen-month  cycle.  As  the  primary 
federal supervisors for state-chartered banks, the Board and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC)  may  alternate  responsibility  for  conducting  these  examinations  with  the  appropriate  state 
supervisory  authority  if  the  Board  or  FDIC  determines  that  the  state  examination  carries  out  the 
purposes of the statute.  
The  $250  million  asset  cutoff  for  an  eighteen-month  examination  cycle  has  not  been  raised  since 
1994. The Board's proposed amendment would raise this asset cap from $250 million to $500 million. 
Importantly, this change would not exempt any insured depository institution from routine safety and 
soundness examinations, and would not lengthen the examination cycle for institutions experiencing 
financial  or  managerial  difficulties.  This  change  is  unanimously  supported  by  the  federal  banking 
agencies and potentially would allow approximately an additional 1,200 insured depository institutions 
to  qualify  for  an  eighteen-month  examination  cycle.  The  Board  believes  this  change  would  provide 
meaningful relief to small, financially strong institutions without compromising safety and soundness.  
The Board's supervisory experience, however, indicates that institutions with assets approaching $1 
billion  tend  to  have  more  complex  risk  profiles  and  are  more  likely  to  operate  business  lines  on  a 
regional or national basis than institutions with assets of less than $500 million. For these reasons, the 
Board is not comfortable raising the asset threshold for an eighteen-month examination cycle to $1 
billion,  as  items  No.  112  and  No.  169  in  the  Matrix  would  do.  The  Board  also  does  not  support 
proposals, such as item No. 42 in the Matrix, that would allow a federal banking agency to extend the 
examination  cycle  for  a  potentially  indefinite  period  of  time  for  institutions  of  any  size.  Despite 
advances in off-site monitoring, the Board continues to believe that regular on-site examinations play a 
critical role in helping bank supervisors detect and correct asset, risk-management, or internal control 
problems at an institution before these problems result in claims on the deposit insurance funds. If an 
agency  is  experiencing  shortages  in  its  examination  resources,  we  believe  it  would  be  better  to 
address  these  constraints  through  the  supplementation  of  the  agency's  resources,  rather  than  by 
extending the mandated frequency of safety and soundness examinations.  
Other Board legislative proposals and actions to reduce regulatory burden 
In  addition  to  these  proposals,  the  Board  supports  a  variety  of  other  regulatory  relief  amendments 
included  in  the  Matrix.  These  amendments,  which  are  discussed  more  fully  in  the  Appendix,  would 
among other things:  
•  Restore  the  Board's  ability  to  determine  that  nonbanking  activities  are  "closely  related  to 
banking"  for  purposes  of  section  4(c)(8)  of  the  Bank  Holding  Company  Act  (BHC  Act)  and, 
thus,  permissible  for  all  bank  holding  companies  to  conduct  directly  or  through  a  nonbank 
subsidiary (Matrix No. 137(a));  
•  Streamline the process for insured banks to acquire savings associations and trust companies 
in interstate merger transactions (Matrix No. 138);  
•  Modify  the  cross-marketing  restrictions  that  apply  to  the  merchant  banking  and  insurance 
company investments of financial holding companies (Matrix No. 139);  
•  Eliminate  certain  reporting  requirements  imposed  on  banks  and their  executive  officers  and 
principal shareholders that do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending or 
the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions (Matrix No. 4);  
•  Streamline the inter-agency consultation process for transactions under the Bank Merger Act 
(Matrix No. 5);  
4 
 BIS Review 14/2006
•  Shorten  the  post-approval  waiting  period  for  bank  acquisitions  and  mergers  where  the 
Attorney General and the relevant federal banking agency agree the transaction will not have 
a significant adverse effect on competition (Matrix No. 6);  
•  Simplify the restrictions governing dividend payments by national and state member banks in 
a way that would not adversely affect the safety and soundness of member banks (Matrix No. 
31); and  
•  Facilitate the flow of information during the supervisory process by clarifying that depository 
institutions and others do not waive any privilege they may have with respect to information 
when they provide the information to a federal, state or foreign banking authority as part of the 
supervisory process (Matrix No. 100).  
In our discussions with banking organizations about regulatory relief, one topic that frequently comes 
up is the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). We recognize that provisions of the BSA require considerable effort 
by the banking industry to obtain, document and provide information to law enforcement. To further 
promote the uniform application of BSA and anti-money laundering (AML) requirements, the federal 
banking  agencies,  working  with  the  Financial  Crimes  Enforcement  Network  of  the  Treasury 
Department,  recently  issued  a  joint  BSA/AML  Examination  Manual  that  is  designed  to  promote  the 
effective and consistent examination of BSA/AML compliance. The Board will continue to work with 
our fellow banking agencies and FinCEN to address key issues related to BSA/anti-money laundering 
compliance.  With  respect  to  currency  transaction  reports  (CTRs),  we  support  the  efforts  of  the 
Treasury  Department  and  others  to  develop  ways  of  reducing  the  burdens  imposed  on  banks  in  a 
manner  that  would  not  adversely  affect  the  ability  of  banks  to  manage  their  risk  or  unintentionally 
impede the investigative tools available to law enforcement.  
Before moving on, I'd like to mention some recent changes that the Board itself has made to its Small 
Bank Holding Company Policy Statement ("Policy Statement") and capital guidelines that we believe 
should  provide  significant  relief  to  community  banking  organizations.  The  Board  adopted  the  Policy 
Statement  in  1980  to  help  facilitate  the  transfer  of  ownership  of  small,  community-based  banks. 
Currently, the Policy Statement applies to bank holding companies that have consolidated assets of 
less than $150 million and that meet certain qualitative criteria. These qualitative criteria are designed 
to ensure that a small bank holding company does not qualify for the Policy Statement if it engages in 
significant  activities  outside  its  supervised  bank  subsidiaries.  Small  bank  holding  companies  that 
qualify for, and operate under, the Policy Statement also are subject to several additional restrictions 
and conditions that are designed to ensure that they do not present an undue risk to the safety and 
soundness of their subsidiary banks.  
Last week, the Board approved an amendment that increases to $500 million the asset size threshold 
for determining whether a bank holding company may qualify for the Policy Statement and the related 
exemption  from  the  Board's  capital  guidelines  for  bank  holding  companies.  The  Board  also  has 
proposed  to  make  conforming  revisions  to  its  regulatory  reporting  framework,  which  should  further 
lower  reporting  and  compliance  costs  for  small bank  holding  companies.  The  Board  believes  these 
actions properly balance the goals of facilitating the transfer of ownership of small banks, on the one 
hand, and ensuring capital adequacy and access to necessary supervisory information on the other 
hand.  The  Board,  however,  does  not  support  amendments,  like  item  No.  116  in  the  Matrix,  that 
potentially  would  require  the  Board  to  raise  the  asset  size  threshold  in  the  Policy  Statement  to  $1 
billion.  
Industrial loan companies 
As I noted earlier, the Board strongly supports amendments that would allow depository institutions to 
pay interest on demand deposits and allow banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. 
The  Board,  however,  believes  that,  because  the  corporate  owners  of  ILCs  operate  outside  the 
prudential  and  legislative  framework  applicable  to  the  corporate  owners  of  other  types  of  insured 
banks, ILCs should not be authorized to offer transaction accounts to business customers or branch 
de novo across state lines. Our position on these matters is long-standing and based on the broad 
policy issues presented by the special exemption in current law for ILCs chartered in certain states.  
ILCs are banks; specifically, they are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks. However, due to a special 
exemption in the federal BHC Act, any type of company, including a commercial or retail firm, may 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 5
acquire an ILC in a handful of states--principally Utah, California, and Nevada--and avoid the activity 
restrictions and consolidated supervisory requirements that apply to bank holding companies.  
ILCs were  first  established  early  in  the  twentieth  century  to  make  small  loans  to  industrial  workers. 
When the special exemption for ILCs initially was granted in 1987, ILCs were still mostly small, local 
institutions that had only limited deposit-taking and lending powers. For example, in 1987, most ILCs 
had less than $50 million in assets and the largest ILC had assets of less than $400 million. Moreover, 
in  1987,  the  relevant  states  were  not  actively  chartering  new  ILCs.  Utah,  for  example,  had  a 
moratorium on the chartering of new ILCs at the time the exemption was enacted.  
However,  as  the  Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO)  recently  documented,  the  ILC  exemption 
has been actively exploited in recent years, resulting in a significant change in the character, powers 
and ownership of ILCs. For example, one ILC operating under the exception now has more than $60 
billion in assets and more than $52 billion in deposits, and an additional nine exempt ILCs each have 
more than $1 billion in deposits. The aggregate amount of estimated insured deposits held by all ILCs 
has grown by more than 500 percent since 1999, and the total assets of all ILCs has grown from $3.8 
billion in 1987 to $140 billion in 2004. Several large, internationally active commercial companies now 
own  ILCs  under  this  exception  and  use  these  banks  to  support  various  aspects  of  their  global 
commercial operations.  
While only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there is no limit on the number 
of exempt ILCs these grandfathered states may charter in the future. In addition, due to the limited 
restrictions that apply under federal law to the ILCs operating under this exemption, an exempt ILC 
legally  may  engage  in  the  full  range  of  commercial,  mortgage,  credit  card  and  consumer  lending 
activities;  offer  payment-related  services,  including  Fedwire,  automated  clearing  house  (ACH)  and 
check clearing services, to affiliated and unaffiliated persons; and accept time and savings deposits, 
including certificates of deposit (CDs), from any type of customer.  
Why  does  this  growth  and  potential  further  expansion  of  ILCs  matter?  Simply  stated,  it  has  the 
potential  to  undermine  several  important  policies  that  Congress  has  established  for  the  banking 
system. Let me explain.  
Congress has established a prudential framework for banking organizations in the United States that is 
based both on the supervision of insured banks and the supervision of their corporate owners on a 
group-wide or consolidated basis. Consolidated supervision refers to the legal framework that provides 
a supervisor the tools it needs--such as reporting, examination, capital and enforcement authority--to 
understand,  monitor  and,  when  appropriate,  restrain  the  risks  associated  with  an  organization's 
consolidated or group-wide activities. Consolidated supervision of the organizations that control banks 
not only helps prevent bank failures, it also provides important tools for managing and resolving bank 
failures  if  and  when  they do  occur.  In fact,  following  the collapse  of  Bank of  Commerce and Credit 
International  (BCCI),  which  lacked  a  single  supervisor  capable  of  monitoring  its  diverse  and  global 
activities, Congress amended the BHC Act in 1991 to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they 
are  subject  to  comprehensive  supervision  on  a  consolidated  basis  prior  to  acquiring  a  bank  in  the 
United States.  
For a variety of reasons, Congress also has long sought to maintain the general separation of banking 
and  commerce  in  the  United  States.  This  position  was  reaffirmed  by  Congress  in  the  Competitive 
Equality  Banking  Act  of  1987  and  again  in  the  GLB  Act  of  1999.  In  fact,  in  each  of  these  acts  the 
Congress took affirmative action to close the main loophole then being used by commercial firms to 
acquire FDIC-insured depository institutions--the so-called "nonbank bank" loophole in 1987 and the 
unitary thrift loophole in 1999.  
ILCs  have  developed  and  expanded  in  recent  years  outside  this  framework  that  governs  banking 
organizations generally. Because of their special exemption in federal law, any type of company may 
acquire an FDIC-insured ILC that is chartered in certain states without regard to the activity restrictions 
that  Congress  has  established  to  maintain  the  general  separation  of  banking  and  commerce.  The 
exemption  also  allows  a  company  to  acquire  an  FDIC-insured  bank  and  avoid  the  consolidated 
supervisory  framework--including  consolidated  capital,  examination  and  reporting  requirements--that 
applies to the corporate owners of other full-service insured banks under the BHC Act. In addition, the 
exemption allows a foreign bank to acquire a U.S. bank engaged in retail banking activities without 
meeting  the  requirement  under  the  BHC  Act  that  the  foreign  bank  be  subject  to  comprehensive 
supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country.  
6 
 BIS Review 14/2006
As insured banks, each ILC is supervised by the FDIC as well as by its chartering state. The Board 
has never questioned either the need for, or the adequacy of, this supervision of an ILC. However, 
experience  has  led  Congress  to  determine  that  supervision  of  a  full-service  insured  bank  is  not 
sufficient, by itself, to protect the taxpayer and the financial system when the bank operates as part of 
a  larger  corporate  organization.  The  FDIC  does  not  have  the  authority  to  supervise  the  corporate 
owners of ILCs and their affiliates in the same manner that bank holding companies and their nonbank 
affiliates  are  supervised  under  the  BHC  Act.  The  GAO  recently  concluded  that,  due  to  these 
differences in authority, exempt ILCs may pose more risk to the deposit insurance funds than banks 
operating in a bank holding company structure.  
The exemption for ILCs in the BHC Act also permits a diversified securities, insurance or financial firm 
to  acquire  an  FDIC-insured  bank  without  complying  with  the  enhanced  capital,  managerial  and 
Community  Reinvestment  Act  (CRA)  requirements  established  by  Congress  in  the  GLB  Act  for 
financial  holding  companies.  In  addition,  although  the  USA  PATRIOT  Act  requires  the  Board  to 
consider the effectiveness of a company's policies in combatting money laundering prior to approving 
the company's application to acquire a bank, this requirement does not apply to companies that seek 
to acquire an exempt ILC.  
Affirmatively granting ILCs the ability to offer transaction accounts to business customers or open de 
novo  branches  nationwide  would  significantly  expand  the  powers  of  exempt  ILCs,  increase  the 
attractiveness of the current loophole, and eliminate any vestige of a distinction between ILCs and full-
service insured banks. This result would be inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and 
the terms of their special exemption in current law. These proposals individually and collectively also 
would  exacerbate  the  competitive  advantage  that  the  corporate  owners  of  ILCs  have  over  other 
banking organizations that operate within the supervisory framework established by Congress.  
The  Board  believes  that  the  important  principles  governing  the  structure  of  the  nation's  banking 
system--such  as  the  separation  of  banking  and  commerce,  consolidated  supervision,  and  the 
supervisory criteria applicable to companies that seek to own or control a bank--should be decided by 
Congress and, once established, should apply to all organizations that own a bank in a competitively 
equitable  manner.  We  are  concerned  that  the  expansion  and  exploitation  of  the  ILC  exemption  is 
undermining  the  prudential  framework  that  Congress  has  carefully  crafted  and  developed  for  the 
corporate  owners  of  insured  banks.  Importantly,  these  changes  also  threaten  to  remove  from 
Congress' hands the ability to determine the direction of our nation's financial system with regard to 
the mixing of banking and commerce.  
Congress should not permit the nation's policy on these important issues to be decided for it on a de 
facto  basis  through  the  expansion  of  a  loophole  that  is  available  to  only  one  type  of  institution 
chartered in a handful of states. Rather than expanding the powers of ILCs that operate under this 
special  exemption  in  a  regulatory  relief  bill,  we  believe  it  is  important  for  Congress  separately  to 
conduct a thorough review of the special exemption for ILCs and its potential to change the landscape 
of our financial system and create an unlevel competitive playing field.  
Conclusion 
I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  Board's  legislative  suggestions  and  priorities  concerning 
regulatory relief. The Board looks forward to working with the Committee and your staffs in developing 
and advancing meaningful regulatory relief legislation that is consistent with the nation's public policy 
objectives.  
Appendix 
Regulatory relief proposals supported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System 
The  Board  believes  the  first  20  items  listed  below  would  provide  meaningful  regulatory  relief  to 
banking  organizations within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  remaining  16  items  would 
improve the supervision of banking organizations, facilitate the resolution of failed banks, streamline 
procedural or other requirements under the federal banking laws, or eliminate outdated provisions of 
law. 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 7
1.  Authorize  the  Federal  Reserve  to  pay  interest  on  balances  held  at  Reserve  Banks 
(Matrix No. 1)  
Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by 
depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks. 
2.  Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements (Matrix No. 2)  
Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves 
that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current 
ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. 
3.  Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits (Matrix No. 3)  
Amendment  repeals  the  provisions  in  current  law  that  prohibit  depository  institutions  from 
paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository 
institutions  that  have  the  authority  to  offer  demand  deposits  to  pay  interest  on  those 
deposits. 
4.  Ease  restrictions  on  interstate  branching  and  mergers  in  a  competitively  equitable 
manner (Amendment provided to Committee in July 2003)  
Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on 
an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if 
the  state  has  affirmatively  authorized  de  novo  branching.  This  existing  limitation  places 
banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to 
branch  de  novo  on  an  interstate  basis.  The  amendment  also  would  remove  a  parallel 
provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that may 
be acquired by an out-of-state banking organization.  
The  amendment  would  not  allow  industrial  loan  companies  (ILCs)  that  operate  under  a 
special  exemption  in  federal  law  to  open  de  novo  branches  on  a  nationwide  basis.  The 
corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and 
activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by 
the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC).  Granting  exempt  ILCs  nationwide 
branching  rights  also  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  terms  of  their  special  exemption  in 
federal law.  
5.  Small bank examination flexibility (Matrix No. 68) 
Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-
month (rather than a twelve-month) safety and soundness examination cycle. Under current 
law,  an  insured  depository  institution  may  qualify  for  an  extended  eighteen-month 
examination  cycle  only  if  the  institution  has  less  than  $250  million  in  total  assets.  See  12 
U.S.C.  §  1820(d).  The  amendment  would  raise  this  asset  cap  to  $500  million,  thereby 
potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,200 institutions to qualify for an extended 
examination cycle.  
6.  Modification  of  the  cross-marketing  restrictions  applicable  to  merchant  banking  and 
insurance company investments (Matrix Nos. 139, 171 and 187)  
Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to 
engage  in  cross-marketing  activities  with  portfolio  companies  that  are  held  under  the 
merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as 
such  activities  are  currently  permissible  for  portfolio  companies  held  under  the  GLB  Act's 
insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository 
institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities 
with  a  portfolio  company  held  under  either  the  merchant  banking  or  insurance  company 
investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company. 
7.  Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a 
trust  for  the  benefit  of  a  bank  holding  company  or  its  shareholders  or  employees 
(Matrix  No. 140)  
The  amendment  would  allow  the  Board,  in  appropriate  circumstances,  to  waive  the 
attribution  rule  in  section  2(g)(2)  of  the  Bank  Holding  Company  Act  (BHC  Act).  This 
attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in 
BIS Review 14/2006
       8 
      all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee 
benefit  plan)  for  the  benefit  of  the  company  or  its  shareholders  or  employees.  The 
amendment  would  allow  the  Board  to  waive  the  rule  when,  for  example,  the  shares  in 
question  are  held  by  a  401(k)  plan  that  is  widely  held  by  the  bank  holding  company's 
employees and the facts indicate that the bank holding company does not have the ability to 
control the shares held by the plan. 
8.  Allow  insured  banks  to  engage  in  interstate  merger  transactions  with  savings 
associations and trust companies (Matrix No. 138)  
The  amendment  would  allow  an  insured  bank  to  directly  acquire,  by  merger,  an  insured 
savings  association  or  uninsured  trust  company  in  a  different  home  state  without  first 
converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under 
current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger. 
9.  a.  Restore  Board's  authority  to  determine  that  new  activities  are  "closely  related  to 
banking" and permissible for all bank holding companies (Matrix No. 137a)  
Amendment  would  restore  the  Board's  ability  to  determine  that  nonbanking  activities  are 
"closely related to banking" under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for 
all  bank  holding  companies,  including  those  that  have  not  elected  to  become  financial 
holding  companies.  Bank holding  companies  would still  be  required  to  become  a  financial 
holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act--
including  full-scope  securities  underwriting,  insurance  underwriting,  and  merchant  banking 
activities--as  well  as  any  new  activities  that  the  Board  determines  under  the  GLB  Act  are 
"financial  in  nature,"  "incidental  to  a  financial  activity"  or  "complementary  to  a  financial 
activity." 
b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative 
to Item 9.a.) (Matrix No. 137b)  
Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have 
not elected to become financial holding companies, to act as agent in the sale of insurance. 
Currently,  bank  holding  companies  that  do  not  become  a  financial  holding  company  may 
engage  only  in  very  limited  insurance  sales  activities  (primarily  involving  credit-related 
insurance). However, most banks are permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly 
or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank 
holding  companies  to  act  as  agent  in  the  sale  of  insurance.  Insurance  agency  activities 
involve  less  risk  than  insurance  underwriting  and  other  principal  activities.  Bank  holding 
companies  would  continue  to  be  required  to  become  a  financial  holding  company  to 
underwrite insurance (other than credit-related insurance). 
10. Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the 
relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have 
adverse competitive effects (Matrix No. 6)  
Amendment  allows  the  responsible  federal  banking  agency,  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
Attorney  General,  to  reduce  the  post-approval waiting  periods  under  the  Bank  Merger  Act 
and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment would not alter the 
time  period  that  a  private  party  has  to  challenge  a  banking  agency's  approval  of  a 
transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act. 
11. Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository 
institutions (Matrix No. 4)  
Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a 
bank to file a report with the bank's board of directors concerning the officer's indebtedness 
to  other  banks;  (ii)  a  member  bank  to  file  a  separate  report  each  quarter  concerning  any 
loans  made  to  its  executive  officers  during  the  quarter;  and  (iii)  executive  officers  and 
principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank's board of directors any loans received 
from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not 
contribute  significantly  to  the  monitoring  of  insider  lending.  These  amendments  would  not 
alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by banks to their insiders. 
12. Provide  an  adjustment  for  the  small  depository  institutions  exception  under  the 
Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA) (Matrix No. 49)  
BIS Review 14/2006 
 9
      Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one depository institution 
from  serving  as  a  management  official  of  any  other  non-affiliated  depository  institution  or 
depository  institution  holding  company  if  the  institutions  or  an  affiliate  of  such  institutions 
have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides 
an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but 
this  dollar  figure  has  not  been  updated  since  1978.  The  amendment  would  increase  this 
amount to $100 million. 
13. Simplifying dividend calculations for national and state member banks (Matrix No. 31)  
Amendment  would  simplify  the  process  for  national  and  state  member  banks  to  pay 
dividends by eliminating the restrictions that currently allow a national bank or state member 
bank to pay dividends only if the bank's surplus is equal to or greater than its capital account 
or the bank has transferred at least 10 percent of its recent net income to its surplus fund. 
The amendment would not alter the other restrictions in current law that ensure that national 
and state member banks do not pay excessive dividends. For example, national and state 
member  banks  would  continue  to  be  prohibited  from  paying  any  dividend  if  such  action 
would cause the bank to become undercapitalized. 
14. Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts (Matrix No. 141)  
Amendment  permits  banks  that  are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  to  count  as 
reserves  their  deposits  in  other  banks  that  are  "passed  through"  by  those  banks  to  the 
Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use 
such pass-through reserve accounts. 
15. Protection of information provided to banking agencies (Matrix No. 100)  
Amendment  allows  a  depository  institution  to  share  information  with  a  federal,  state  or 
foreign bank supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory process without waiving any 
privilege  the  institution  may  have  with  respect  to  the  information.  The  Board  strongly 
supports  broadening  the  amendment  to  ensure  that  other  persons,  including bank  holding 
companies,  foreign  banks  and  Edge  or  agreement  corporations,  also  may  provide 
information to a federal, state or foreign supervisor as part of the supervisory or regulatory 
process without waiving any privilege they may have with respect to the information. 
16. Repeal of CRA Sunshine requirements (Matrix No. 7)  
The  amendment  would  repeal  the  so-called  "CRA  Sunshine"  requirements  that  were 
adopted as part of the GLB Act in 1999. These provisions require nongovernmental entities 
or  persons  and  banking  organizations  that  enter  into  certain  agreements  that  are  in 
fulfillment of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to (1) make the agreements available 
to  the  public  and  the  appropriate  banking  agency,  and  (2)  file  an  annual  report  with  the 
appropriate  banking  agency  concerning  any  payments  made  or  received  pursuant  to  the 
agreement.  
17. Flood insurance amendments (Matrix No. 65)  
These amendments would: 
(a)  Allow  lenders  to  rely  on  information  from  licensed  surveyors  to  determine  whether  a 
property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old;  
(b) Increase the "small loan" exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to 
$20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index;  
(c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender 
can "force place" flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period 
during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better 
enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and 
(d)  Give  the  federal  banking  agencies  discretion  to  impose  civil  money  penalties  on 
institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance 
requirements.  
18. Permit credit card banks to make a limited amount of community development loans for 
CRA purposes (Matrix No. 179) (Support with Minor Modifications) 
10 
 BIS Review 14/2006
       The amendment would allow a limited-purpose credit card bank--without losing its exemption 
under the BHC Act--to make and purchase loans that help meet the credit needs of low- and 
moderate-income  persons  and  neighborhoods  or  promote  economic  development  by 
financing small businesses or farms. The aggregate amount of these non-credit card loans 
could not exceed 5 percent of the bank's capital and surplus.  
The  Board  supports  this  amendment  subject  to  a  slight  modification.  The  modification  is 
designed  to  ensure  that  any  non-credit  card  loans  made  by  a  credit  card  bank  under  the 
amendment  are  made  for  eligible  community  development  purposes.  Because  credit  card 
banks are evaluated for CRA purposes under a special community development test, there 
is no need to allow them to make non-credit card loans for CRA purposes unless those loans 
would qualify as community development loans under the CRA.  
19. Periodic interagency review of call reports (Matrix No. 109) 
Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms 
at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports 
may  be  eliminated.  The  federal  banking  agencies  would  retain  their  current  authority  to 
determine  what  information  must  be  included  in  the  Call  Reports  filed  by  the  institutions 
under their primary supervision. 
20. Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFT Act) notifications (Matrix No. 115, first bullet) 
Amendment  would  increase,  from  21  days  to  30  days,  the  amount  of  advance  notice  an 
institution  must  give  to  a  consumer  under  the  EFT  Act  before  the  effective  date  of  any 
changes in the terms of the consumer's account. The amendment would conform the timing 
provisions of the EFT Act regarding notices of a change in account terms with the similar 
provisions in the Truth in Savings Act. 
21. Technical and conforming amendments related to D.C.-chartered banks (Matrix No. 164) 
The amendment would make technical and conforming amendments to the federal banking 
laws to ensure that banks chartered by the District of Columbia are treated as "state" banks 
consistent with the purposes of the 2004 District of Columbia Omnibus Authorization Act. 
22. Electronic records (Matrix No. 161) 
This amendment would allow each federal banking agency to preserve the agency's records 
in  electronic  or  photographic  form  and  determine  when  such  electronic  or  photographic 
records  may  be  destroyed.  In  addition,  the  amendment  would  provide  that  any  record 
maintained electronically or photographically by a federal banking agency in accordance with 
the  agency's  regulations  shall  be  considered  an  original  record  for  all  purposes,  including 
submission into evidence in a judicial or administrative proceeding. 
23. Ensure  protection  of  confidential  information  received  from  foreign  supervisory 
authorities (Matrix No. 46)  
Amendment  ensures  that  a  federal  banking  agency  may  keep  confidential  information 
received  from  a  foreign  regulatory  or  supervisory  authority  if  public  disclosure  of  the 
information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained 
the  information  in  connection  with  the  administration  and  enforcement  of  federal  banking 
laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The 
amendment  would  not  authorize  an  agency  to  withhold  information  from  Congress  or  in 
response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency. 
24. Eliminate  requirement that the  reviewing  agency  request  a  competitive  factors report 
from the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions (Matrix Nos. 5 and 69) 
Amendment  would  eliminate  the  requirement  that  the  reviewing  agency  request  a 
competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. 
The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive 
analysis  of  the  proposed  merger,  and  (ii)  request  a  competitive  factors  report  from  the 
Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the 
reviewing agency). 
25. Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities 
that are already under common control (Matrix No. 61) 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 11
      The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving 
affiliated  entities  to  request  a  report  on  the  competitive  factors  associated  with  the 
transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also 
would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving 
affiliated  entities.  The  merger  of  depository  institutions  that  already  are  under  common 
control typically does not have any impact on competition. 
26. Repeal  requirement that  the Board approve  removal  actions  brought by  the  Office  of 
the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) (Matrix No. 32) 
Amendment repeals the requirement that the Board approve removal actions brought by the 
OCC against institution-affiliated parties of a national bank. 
27. Clarify and confirm the ability of the banking agencies to enforce conditions imposed in 
Change in Bank Control ("CIBC") Act Notices (Matrix No. 147) 
Amendment confirms the existing authority of a federal banking agency to enforce a written 
condition  imposed  on  a  depository  institution  or  an  institution-affiliated  party  in  connection 
with a notice filed under the CIBC Act. 
28. Expand factors that the banking agencies may consider in evaluating CIBC Act notices 
(Matrix No. 40 and No. 146) 
Amendment expands the factors the federal banking agencies may consider in determining 
whether  to  disapprove  a  notice  under  the  CIBC  Act  to  include  the  financial  condition  and 
future  prospects  of  the  depository  institution  involved  in  the  transaction.  The  amendment 
also would allow the agencies to extend the time period for processing CIBC Act notice (up 
to an additional 90 days) if the agency determined that additional time is needed to analyze 
any  plans  the  notificant  may  have  to  make  major  changes  in  the  business,  corporate 
structure, or management of the institution.  
29. Enforcing conditions imposed by another banking agency (Matrix No. 148)  
Amendment would allow the appropriate federal banking agency for a depository institution, 
bank holding company or savings and loan holding company to enforce a written condition 
imposed on the institution or company by another federal banking agency. This would allow, 
for example, the Board (as the appropriate agency for a state member bank) to enforce a 
condition  imposed  on  a  state  member  bank  by  the  FDIC  in  connection  with  the  bank's 
application for deposit insurance.  
The  Board  supports  the  amendment  subject  to  a  minor  modification.  The  modification  is 
designed  to  clarify  that,  regardless  of  what  agency  imposes  a  condition  on  a  depository 
institution  or  holding  company,  only  the  appropriate  federal  banking  agency  for  the 
depository institution or holding company has the authority to enforce the condition against 
the depository institution or holding company. (As under current law, the FDIC would retain 
its "back-up" authority under section 8(t) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act) to 
take action against an insured depository institution if certain conditions are met.)  
30. Eliminate the special treatment of holding companies that control only ILCs and credit 
card  banks  under  the  cross-guarantee  and  "golden  parachute"  provisions  of  the  FDI 
Act (Matrix Nos. 151 and 152)  
Amendment  would  modify  the  cross-guarantee  provisions  of  the  FDI  Act  (12  U.S.C.  § 
1815(e)) to cover insured depository institutions whenever they are controlled by the same 
company and even if the parent company is not a bank holding company or a savings and 
loan  holding  company.  In  addition,  the  amendment  would  modify  the  "golden  parachute" 
provisions of the FDI Act (12 U.S.C. § 1828(k)) to cover a company that owns an insured 
depository institution, but that is not a bank holding company or savings and loan holding 
company. Currently, these provisions do not apply to a company that owns one or more ILCs 
or credit card banks, but that is not otherwise a bank holding company or savings and loan 
holding company.  
While the Board supports these limited changes, the Board notes that these amendments 
would not alter the much more significant exemption for ILCs from the definition of "bank" in 
the BHC Act. The exemption for certain ILCs in the BHC Act permits a company to own an 
12 
 BIS Review 14/2006
FDIC-insured 
requirements that generally apply to the corporate owners of other insured banks.  
the  activity  restrictions  and  consolidated  supervisory 
ILC  and  avoid 
31. Contractual arrangements with a failed bank (Matrix No. 155) 
Amendment  would  prohibit  a  party,  for  90  days  after  the  FDIC  is  appointed  receiver  or 
conservator  for  an  insured  depository  institution,  from  exercising  any  contractual  right  the 
party may have to terminate, accelerate or declare a default under a contract with the failed 
institution, or obtain possession of collateral pledged under such a contract, unless the FDIC 
consented to the action. 
32. Barring  convicted  felons  from  participating  in  the  affairs  of  an  uninsured  depository 
institution (Matrix No. 38) 
Amendment extends to uninsured national banks, state member banks and U.S. branches of 
a foreign bank the provisions of section 19 of the FDI Act, which automatically prohibits a 
person that has been convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, a breach of trust 
or money laundering from participating in the affairs of an insured depository institutions. The 
amendment also would allow the OCC or Board, as appropriate, to waive this prohibition as 
it  applies  to  an  uninsured  bank  or  branch,  just  as  the  FDIC  currently  has  the  authority  to 
waive this prohibition as it applies to insured banks.  
33. Restricting  the  ability  of  convicted  individuals  to  participate  in  the  affairs  of  a  bank 
holding company or Edge Act or agreement corporation (Matrix No. 142)  
Amendment  would  prohibit  a  person  convicted  of  a  criminal  offense  involving  dishonesty, 
breach  of  trust,  or  money  laundering  from  participating  in  the  affairs  of  a  bank  holding 
company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the 
consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion 
to  prevent  individuals  convicted  of  crimes  involving  dishonesty  or  a  breach  of  trust  from 
participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. 
34. Enhancing the ability of the banking agencies to suspend or remove bad actors (Matrix 
No. 43 and No. 150) 
Amendment  revises  section  8(g)  of  the  FDI  Act,  which  currently  allows  the  appropriate 
Federal banking agency to suspend a person from participating in the affairs of a depository 
institution,  bank  holding  company  or  savings  and  loan  holding  company  if  the  person  has 
been charged with the commission of certain crimes involving dishonesty, a breach of trust 
or  money  laundering.  The  amendment  would  prohibit  a  person  who  has  been  suspended 
from service at one depository institution, bank holding company or savings and loan holding 
company  from  becoming  employed  by  another  depository  institution  or  holding  company 
during the length of the suspension order. In addition, the amendment would clarify that a 
person  may  be  suspended  under  section  8(g)  even  if  the  person  was  charged  with  the 
relevant crime before becoming affiliated with the depository institution or holding company 
in question. 
35. Clarify application of section 8(i) of the FDI Act (Matrix No. 144)  
Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a 
person  for  conduct  that  occurred  during  his  or  her  affiliation  with  a  banking  organization 
regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order. 
36. Elimination of outdated provisions of the BHC Act (Matrix No. 143) 
Amendment eliminates certain outdated provisions of the BHC Act that no longer have any 
effect. 
        BIS Review 14/2006 
 13
