Y V Reddy: Asian perspective on growth – outlook for India 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the G30's International Banking 
Seminar, hosted by the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 18 September 2006.  
 Distinguished friends, 
I am delighted to be here at the G30's International Banking Seminar hosted by the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore. Indeed, it is an honour and privilege to be amidst the global Gurus of financial world. I 
divide  my  humble  presentation  into  five  parts:  namely  the  contours  of  Indian  economy;  the  major 
challenges  facing  the  Indian  economy;  the  impact  of  global  imbalances  on  India;  some  not  easily 
quantifiable strengths of India and; India's growing economic relations with Asia. 
Contours of Indian economy 
• 
         The Indian economy has been growing at an average annual growth rate of nearly 6 per cent 
since the 1980s, and at over 8 per cent during the last three years. A Draft Approach Paper 
to the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12) suggests that the economy can grow 
between 8 and 9 per cent per year. 
India has also shown considerable resilience during the recent years and avoided adverse 
contagion impact of several shocks. 
The inflation rate has been low and stable since the mid-1990s moderating to around 5 per 
cent per annum. The common intention of the Government and the Reserve Bank of India is 
to maintain annual inflation below 5 per cent in the medium term. 
We see a consistent increase in gross domestic investment rate from 23.0 per cent of GDP 
in 2001-02 to 30.1 per cent in 2004-05. The gross domestic saving rate has also improved 
from 23.6 per cent to 29.1 per cent over the same period, contributed by a significant turn 
around in public sector saving.   
The productivity of capital use, as measured by the Incremental Capital Output Ratio (ICOR), 
has been high by Asian standards and is showing downward trend reflecting improvement in 
productivity growth as well as more intensive use of existing capacity. This point to prospects 
for sustained high growth in future, given the existing level of investment in the economy, 
coupled with upward trend in domestic savings. 
A  noteworthy  development  during  the  recent  years  has  been  the  continued  recovery  in 
manufacturing  sector.  This  has  been  supported  by  domestic  as  well  export  demand, 
increased  capacity  utilization,  augmentation  of  capacities  and  improvements  in  private 
business and consumer confidence.  
The services sector accounts for 60 per cent of GDP and has been growing at 9 per cent per 
annum  since  the  mid-1990s,  with  potential  for  creating  jobs  and  generating  additional 
income.  
There has been a significant decline in the poverty ratio during the 1990s as reflected in the 
latest  survey  of  2004-05  by  the  National  Sample  Survey  Organisation.  The  growth 
performance  and  potential  augurs  well  for  addressing  concerns  relating  to  disguised 
unemployment, seasonal unemployment and underemployment in the years ahead. 
The fiscal position of the Government, both central and States, is undergoing consolidation 
in terms of targeted reduction in fiscal deficit indicators.  
The  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  to  GDP  ratio  has  been  moderate  in  India.  The  current 
account remained in surplus during 2001-02 to 2003-04, before turning into a modest deficit 
since then. It is expected to continue to be in the range of 2 to 3 per cent under the projected 
outlook  of  8  to  9  per  cent  growth  rate  during  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan.  India's  foreign 
exchange  reserves  now  stand  roughly  at  US  $  165  billion  and  are  well  in  excess  of  total 
external debt of the country. 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 1
   The financial markets, especially the money, government securities and forex markets have 
been nurtured and developed in view of their critical role in the transmission mechanism of 
monetary policy.  
The financial sector has acquired greater strength, efficiency and stability by the combined 
effect  of  competition,  regulatory  measures,  policy  environment  and  motivation  among  the 
market players including banks. 
The  workers  enjoy  considerable  freedom  of  movement,  expression  and  rights,  especially 
through  unionisation  which,  while  making  some  changes  difficult,  ensures  a  vibrancy  and 
timely improvisation to deal with competition. 
Major challenges for sustenance of Indian growth process 
• 
First, the poor state of the physical infrastructure, both in terms of quantity and quality. The 
most  important  issue  here  is  regulatory  framework  which  is  being  addressed  by  the 
Government. Technological developments and rapid enhancement of domestic construction 
capabilities should aid the process of speedy and efficient implementation. Given the healthy 
fundamentals of the domestic financial sector and the enhanced interest of foreign investors, 
funding  should  not  pose  any  serious  problem.  One  other  concern  has  been  the  cost 
recovery,  which  is  expected  to  improve  with  more  public-private  partnership.  There  are 
grounds for optimism for a medium term resolution of these issues. 
Second,  fiscal  consolidation.  The  recent  budget  of  the  central  government  brings  the 
consolidation on track, targeting a gross fiscal deficit of three per cent of GDP by 2009 while 
eliminating revenue (current) deficit. Our studies on State finances in Reserve Bank of India 
give grounds for optimism in regard to their fiscal health. We recognize two important areas 
which  will  result  in  fiscal  empowerment.  One  is  elimination  of  subsidies  which  are  not 
appropriate, and elimination of tax exemptions, which are distortionary. While in any polity 
fiscal  consolidation  is  hard,  it  is  particularly  so  in  our  setting,  but  there  are  grounds  for 
optimism. 
Third, and perhaps the most challenging issue relates to development of agriculture. While 
over 60 per cent of the workforce is dependent on agriculture, the GDP growth generated 
from agriculture is only marginally above the rate of growth of the population, which is not 
adequate to ensure rapid poverty reduction. To facilitate a more rapid growth in agriculture, 
legislative, institutional and attitudinal changes to supplement enhanced public and private 
investment  are  needed.  There  is  an  increasing  recognition  of  this  issue  among  policy 
makers. 
Fourth, there is a need to shift the emphasis to attracting foreign direct investment, which is 
less volatile. This requires a more favourable investment climate in general both for domestic 
and foreign capital. 
Fifth, delivery of essential public services such as education and health to large parts of our 
population is a major institutional challenge. It is strongly felt that education will empower the 
poor to participate in the growth process and the large gaps in availability of health in terms 
of minimum access to the poor needs to be filled. 
With  rapid  growth  in  manufacturing  and  services,  a  sudden  and  intense  pressure  has 
developed in regard to availability and quality of urban infrastructure and urban services. A 
notable  beginning  has  been  made  in  this  direction  with  the  launching  of  "National  Urban 
Renewal Mission". 
     Implications of global imbalances for India 
• 
India  has  not  contributed  either  positively  or  negatively  in  terms  of  large  current  account 
surplus  or  large  current  account  deficit;  saving-investments  have  been  by  and  large 
balanced;  the  economy  is  domestic  demand  driven  and  generally  our  policies,  including 
exchange rate are market oriented. Thus, India has been following policies which not only 
served it well but also contributed to global stability.  
2 
 BIS Review 86/2006
     Any  large  and  rapid  adjustments  in  major  currencies  and  related  interest  rates  or  current 
accounts of trading partners would impact the Indian economy though the impact on India 
may be less than many other emerging market economies.  
India does not depend on the international capital market for financing the fiscal deficit and 
consequently to some extent adverse consequences of the global developments would be 
muted.  However,  there  could  be  a  spill-over  effect  of  global  developments  on  domestic 
interest rates and thus on fisc also.  
Any  abrupt  adjustment  in  global  imbalances  may  have  some  impact  on  the  corporates, 
banks and households in India though their exposures, in aggregate, to external sector are 
not huge. With respect to the impact on corporates, if there is widening of spreads due to a 
shift  in  investor  confidence  in  the  international  markets,  those  corporates  which  have 
borrowed at variable rates may possibly suffer more than those, which have taken loans on a 
fixed rate basis.  
Though, banks' exposure to the risky assets has been severely restricted by Reserve Bank’s 
regulatory  actions,  should  there  be  a  reversal  of  capital  flows,  asset  prices  may  decline. 
Further, banks in India have invested significantly in government debt and other fixed income 
securities. If a rise in international rates gets reflected in domestic interest rates, banks will 
have to mark down the value of their investment portfolio. However, the banking sector has 
acquired some added strength to absorb such probable shocks, largely aided by regulatory 
actions. 
As  regards  impact  on  the  households,  there  is  a  risk  that  rise  in  interest  rates  in  general 
could impact the housing market and expose the balance sheet of the households to interest 
rate risk, increasing the risk of loan losses for banks. The overall banking sector’s exposure 
to housing loans being relatively small, adverse developments may not have any systemic 
implications on the banking sector. 
Not easily quantifiable strengths 
• 
First, a vast pool of science and technology graduates and the millions who are familiar with 
English language are sources of strength for the emerging India so far. The familiarity with 
multiple languages in India prepares the people to adapt better to multi-cultural situations, 
making  it  easier  for  them  to  fit  into  international  systems  very  smoothly.  There  is  also 
recognition of the need to maintain and enhance quality of research and skills. 
Second,  impressive  are  the  initiatives  of  many  States  for  empowerment  of  women  which 
defend their rights and help to gain greater self-esteem and control over their own personal 
lives and social relationships.  
Third, the existence of a free press provides some insurance against excesses and makes 
Governments at all levels more accountable than otherwise. The recently enacted Right to 
Information Act has contributed to credibility of transparency in public policies. Thus, Indian 
democracy and media are active and vital to our nation. 
Fourth,  the  political  climate  is  characterised  by  what  may  be  termed  as  political  system 
stability, despite the coalition cabinets and periodic elections both at the Centre and several 
States.  As  Michael  Mandelbaum,  a  democracy  expert  at  Johns  Hopkins  University  in 
Washington said:  
"There’s a lot of turmoil on the surface of Indian democracy, but there’s a lot of 
consensus deep down in the political system."  
Fifth, India will remain one of the youngest countries in the world in the next few decades. 
This "demographic dividend" is seen as an inevitable advantage provided prerequisites such 
as skill-upgradation and sound governance to realize it are put in place. More important, the 
demographic transition is likely to be stretched over a longer period since States in India are 
at different stages of such transition from Kerala to Uttar Pradesh.  
Sixth  advantage  is  India’s  business  culture.  In  terms  of  business  environment,  the 
impressive growth coupled with market orientation of the economy has been a bottoms-up 
exercise,  with  a  very  broad-based  growing  entrepreneurial  class.  These  tendencies  are 
     BIS Review 86/2006 
 3
 perhaps reflective of a penchant for innovation among growing entrepreneurial class in India, 
imbued with professionalism and seeking to be globally competitive. 
Seventh,  there  is  increasing  enthusiasm  amongst  the  provincial  governments  to  attract 
foreign  investment  and  hence  we  can  hope  that  they  will  be  keen  to  ensure  physical 
infrastructure and good governance. 
Let me conclude with what Mr. Edward Luce who was with the Financial Times in India has to say 
about India in his latest book "Inspite of the Gods: The Rise of Modern India" 
"India is not on autopilot to greatness. But it would take an incompetent pilot to 
crash the plane" 
Economic relations with Asia 
• 
China and India are not only helping the global economy in producing low-cost goods and 
services  but  are  also  rapidly  growing  markets  in  their  own  right,  with  a  huge  demand  for 
consumer  and  capital  goods  produced  all  over  the  world.  In  the  context  of  on-going 
buoyancy in the Asian region and the increasing trade between developing countries, India's 
trade relation has undergone a significant structural change, with developing economies in 
general and Asia in particular, accounting for a major share of India's merchandise trade. In 
terms of non-oil imports, China has become the largest trading partner for us. 
Asia accounts for nearly half of India's foreign trade, excluding oil imports and is growing. 
Exports to Asia accounted for 46 per cent of India's total exports, while non-oil imports from 
Asia  accounted  for  45  per  cent  of  India's  total  non-oil  imports  during  2005-06.  China  has 
emerged  as  the  third  major  export  destination  after  US  and  UAE.  India's  total  trade 
(merchandise exports and non-oil imports) with Asia has increased from US $ 29 billion in 
2000-01 to US $ 91.5 billion in 2005-06, comprising exports at US $ 47.2 billion and non-oil 
import at US $ 44.3 billion. 
Total trade with the ASEAN (exports plus non-oil imports) has increased manifold from US $ 
6.7 billion in 2000-01 to US $ 21.1 billion in 2005-06. India's exports to the ASEAN region 
stood at US $ 10.5 billion and imports at US $ 10.6 billion during 2005-06.  
India  has  become  a  formal  dialogue  partner  of  ASEAN,  and  is  keen  to  expand  its 
participation  in  Southeast  Asian  and  Asia-wide  institutions.  Similarly,  India's  trade  with 
SAARC  countries  which  presently  stands  at  about  at  US  $  6.7  billion  has  vast  scope  to 
expand further. 
In  order  to  boost  regional  trade  and  investment,  India  has  entered  into  comprehensive 
economic cooperation agreements/trade agreements with several countries including China, 
Japan,  Korea,  Singapore,  Thailand,  Maldives,  Bhutan,  Bangladesh,  Nepal,  Sri  Lanka  and 
regional blocks such as ASEAN. 
Mr. Raymond Lim, Singapore's Minister of Transport and Second Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
in his article "Creating Globally Connected Asian Community" which appeared in the June 
2006 issue of Finance and Development of the IMF notes:  
"The rise of China and India  will redefine regional divisions of labour and trade 
and  help  the  Southeast  Asian  economies  take  off  on  a  new  and  higher  growth 
trajectory. China and India will bring Asia into the center of the global economy. 
….. The rise of China and India is helping Asia to not only grow but to become 
more integrated." 
BIS Review 86/2006
     4 
 