Glenn Stevens: Some observations on recent economic and financial trends 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants in Australia, Financial Services Seminar, Melbourne, 22 February 2006. 
 Accounting  
Today's  program  shows  that  you  are  looking  intently  at  some  of  the  big  forces  shaping  the 
environment  for  the  financial  services  industry.  There  are  a  number  of  forces  at  work,  including 
changes to regulation, accounting, technology and attitudes in the community.  
In  the  accounting  field,  Australian  entities  are,  of  course,  working  to  implement  the  change  to 
International Financial Reporting Standards. There is a host of issues associated with all of this, some 
of  which  have  been  quite  contentious,  particularly  for  some  parts  of  the  banking  and  finance 
industries.  
So  I  am  relieved  to  say  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  no  role  in  developing  or  enforcing  accounting 
standards,  though  we  do  of  course  have  to  produce  our  own  accounts  consistent  with  the  relevant 
standards.  It  may  interest  you  to  know  in  this  context  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  itself  made  the 
change to IFRS, and will present its 2005/06 accounts on this basis in the  Annual Report later this 
year,  just  like  any  listed  company.  To  our  knowledge,  we  are  the  only  major  central  bank  to  adopt 
IFRS  in  full,  as  yet.  This  continues  the  RBA's  practice  for  many  years  of  adopting  commercial 
standards of financial disclosure.  
For the most part, the effects of IFRS on our accounts are fairly small. The main one of substance is 
the recognition of the surplus in the staff superannuation fund on the balance sheet. This potentially 
adds some volatility to annual results as measured by the accounting standard, as the position of the 
fund  alters  with  market  prices.  But  sensibly  applied,  and  combined  with  the  wise  provisions  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  Act  1959,  which  govern  the  way  in  which  the  Bank's  earnings  are  distributed  to  the 
Commonwealth, there should not be too much additional variability in the dividend.1
There is an important general point there. Differing accounting treatments have the potential to affect 
the  behaviour  of  decision-makers  in  different  ways,  the  more  so  when  combined  with  regulatory 
requirements.  
A  number  of  commentators  have  suggested,  for  example,  that  one  factor  behind  the  extraordinary 
demand  for  long-dated  government  securities  we  currently  observe  in  several  European  countries 
reflects,  at  least  in  part,  the  attempt  by  trustees  and  managers  of  defined-benefit  pension  plans  to 
restructure  their  portfolios  in  response  to  changes  in  accounting  conventions  and  regulatory 
requirements.  In  the  UK,  perhaps  the  most  striking  case,  index-linked  government  securities  have 
recently traded at real yields of less than half of 1 per cent for a 50-year security. Pension fund buying 
is prominent among the explanations on offer for this phenomenon. 
                                                      
1  
In many countries, central bank accounting is regarded as unique and is often subject to particular legislative provisions or 
tailor-made approaches. In Australia's case, the Reserve Bank Act 1959 is not prescriptive about accounting, but is quite 
particular about how the earnings of the Bank are to be distributed to its owner – the Commonwealth. Valuation gains on 
assets –  which  can  on  occasion  be  substantial –  contribute  to  profits,  but  are  only  available  to  the  Commonwealth  as  a 
dividend when realised. Unrealised gains are retained in reserves against the possibility of future valuation losses. This is a 
very sensible arrangement because it prevents a situation where the central bank might come under pressure to distribute 
unrealised gains, eroding its capacity to cope with inevitable subsequent unrealised losses (and, potentially, requiring re-
capitalisation at government expense). It has been a problem for some central banks, but never in Australia. 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 1
           Graph 1 
     
 
The accounting difference between the discounted value of a fund's future obligations and the value of 
its  assets  is  these  days  (quite  properly)  recorded  on  the  sponsoring  company's  balance  sheet.  A 
market  bond  rate  is  used  to  discount  liabilities,  as  opposed  to  the  older  convention  of  using  an 
assumed fund earning rate. Unless the fund's assets are also placed in bonds, movements in bond 
rates will affect the solvency position from year to year, which in turn will affect corporate results. At 
the  same  time,  stricter  pension  rules  now  require  any  measured  funding  gap  between  assets  and 
liabilities to be made good more quickly than used to be the case. Perhaps it is not surprising that UK 
pension trustees have changed asset allocations in the direction of holding more indexed bonds. This 
lessens the likelihood of nasty solvency surprises in any one year, though the associated downward 
pressure on bond yields has itself weakened the average solvency position, as measured.  
One can, of course, see why accounting rules stipulate that valuations of assets and liabilities should, 
for  most  purposes,  use  market  prices  and  interest  rates.  Equally,  pension  rules  requiring  plan 
providers  to  fund  adequately  their  obligations  protect  the  plan  beneficiaries  against  the  risk  of  the 
company failing and leaving insufficient funds.  
But if the behavioural response to all this is a rush into assets yielding a real return of half of 1 per cent 
per year for 50 years, there will be a very large increase in the long-run cost of providing the pensions 
which  are  the  whole  object  of  the  exercise.  That  increase  in  costs  will,  in  turn,  eventually  place  a 
question  mark  over  the  viability  of  the  schemes.  Hence,  the  question  in  the  UK  is  whether  the 
combination of regulatory and accounting reforms is ultimately going to strengthen the private pension 
system or hasten its demise.  
The  point  I  am  making  from  this  foreign  example  is  that  accounting  matters,  and  not  only  to 
accountants. It doesn't just inform us of the state of an enterprise, it affects behaviour - hopefully for 
the  better,  but  either  way  can  often  have  unforeseen  interactions  with  regulatory  signals.  Stated 
accounts  are  also  viewed  through  the  lens  of  market  or  media  perceptions,  which  all  too  often  are 
focused on the very short run. These sorts of considerations are, in practice, quite important.  
Let  me  turn  now  to  some  remarks  about  general  economic  trends,  beginning  with  the  external 
environment.  
The Global Environment  
We  have  been  living  through  some  remarkable  developments  in  the  world  economy  over  the  past 
decade.  Growth  performance  has  improved,  with  global  GDP  growth  averaging  3.8  per  cent  since 
1996,  compared  with  3.4  per  cent  for  the  preceding  two  decades.  That  doesn't  sound  like  a  big 
difference but it is: almost half a percentage point extra growth on average, every year, is definitely 
worth having. What's more, the variability of growth has declined, with the standard deviation of annual 
growth falling from about 1.1 per cent to 0.9 per cent. The mean growth rate has risen substantially, 
while variability has declined: any portfolio manager would like to deliver that combination. While all 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2006
this  has  occurred,  moreover,  global  inflation  rates  have  declined,  become  less  variable  and  less 
dispersed among countries. There are very few countries with seriously high inflation now.  
                  Graph 2 
     
 
Yet  while  the  aggregate  performance  has  improved,  we  hear  more  talk  than  ever  before  about  so-
called  ‘imbalances'.  By  this,  people  mean  that  the  expansion  in  the  world  economy  has  been 
associated with a largish and growing deficit on trade and current accounts for the United States, the 
counterpart of which is a string of surpluses in a number of other countries. (Indeed, one of the few 
countries with which the US does not run a trade deficit is Australia.) It is historically a bit unusual for a 
country as large and wealthy as the US, issuer of the world's main reserve currency, to sustain deficits 
of this size, and increasing, over a lengthy period.  
 
          Graph 3 
    
 
There are three questions worth posing about all this. First, how did it come about? Second, was there 
an  alternative  path  available  for  the  United  States  (and  the  world)  which  would  have  been  more 
attractive? And third, what might happen from here?  
 BIS Review 12/2006 
 3
It is worth recalling that rising US trade deficits were regarded as a concern as far back as the mid 
1980s.2 It was a common view then that deficits much smaller than today's were unsustainable. There 
has been a trend going on here for 20 years at least. Hence, we should be wary of explanations that 
rely only on factors which have been at work just lately; something structural in American behaviour, 
prompting a lower rate of saving out of current income, has been going on for a long time. That is a 
topic for a whole speech on its own. For today, I will take it as a given.  
But if that were all there was to it, one would expect that long-term interest rates would be rising: other 
things equal, a lower rate of saving by the world's largest economy ought to be reflected in a higher 
scarcity value for saving. Yet over recent times, as the US current account deficit has continued to 
grow, long-term interest rates have remained low, and are lower today than 10 years ago. How so?  
Over the past seven or eight years, it seems that behaviour in other countries has had a lot to do with 
the pattern of capital flows. Internationally mobile capital that had flowed into east Asia earlier in the 
1990s reversed course and  flowed out after  mid  1997.  (Something  similar  happened  a  little  later  in 
Latin America.) Domestic investment activity collapsed, and there was a surplus of saving over desired 
investment.  
Subsequently, the Asian countries also made voluntary outflows of official capital. Seeing the crisis as 
a result of not having had enough foreign reserve assets to defend their currencies against speculative 
attack, and judging that the international insurance offered by the IMF was insufficient and came at 
unfavourable  terms,  many  policy-makers  in  Asia decided  to  self-insure  against  another  crisis  of  the 
same kind. They did so by intervening to build up large holdings of US dollars (and, in the process, 
offering  their  traded-goods  producers  a  competitive  advantage  as  a  way  of  fostering  recovery  from 
recession). China was not badly affected by the crisis but nonetheless for its own reasons has been 
following a similar strategy. While China's investment rate is extremely high, its saving seems even 
higher, and it has accumulated a large stock of dollar assets.  
So  it  appears  that  there  has  been  in  a  number  of  countries  an  excess  of  saving  over  national 
investment  needs,  which  has  flowed  abroad  looking  for  returns.  All  other  things  given,  this  puts 
downward pressure on the international cost of capital.  
In which regions of the world would such capital end up? The answer is that it would be expected to 
gravitate to those regions where the demand for capital is most likely to rise in response to a decline in 
its  price.  Those  regions  have  tended  to  be  mainly  (though  not  exclusively)  the  English-speaking 
countries with well-developed and innovative financial systems, optimistic populations and high levels 
of  home  ownership,  the  US  foremost  among  them  (but  also  including  the  UK  and  Australia).  The 
households  of  these  countries  responded  to  a  decline  in  the  cost  of  capital  by  using  more  of  it. 
Countries where populations were inherently pessimistic rather than optimistic about the future - some 
parts of continental Europe, say, or Japan - seemed less interested in using that cheaper capital.  
Other factors have also been at work, of course. No single cause ever explains everything. But the 
above, I think, explains a lot of the pattern of global growth and the payment ‘imbalances' that have 
characterised it in recent years.  
Was there a more ‘balanced' path of global expansion that could have been taken instead?  
It  is  far  from  clear  that  there  was.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  authorities  in  the  US,  concerned 
about  a  rising  trade  deficit,  had  slowed  their  economy  in  order  to  reduce  imports.  All  other  things 
equal, the world economy would have grown more slowly as a result. The recovery we have seen in 
Asia from the crisis would have been slower and more difficult, and there would have been insufficient 
global demand  to  utilise  the  available  productive  resources.  It  is possible  that  the  surplus countries 
would  have  reacted  by  expanding  their  domestic  demand  sufficiently  to  offset  the  weaker  demand 
from the US, but in my judgement this would have been unlikely. Hence, what might perhaps have 
                                                      
2   The following was fairly representative of the consensus at the time: “The United States cannot continue to have annual 
trade deficits of US$100 billion, financed by an ever-increasing inflow of foreign capital. The US trade deficit will therefore 
soon have to shrink … Indeed, within the next decade the United States will undoubtedly exchange its trade deficit for a 
trade surplus.” (Martin Feldstein, Foreign Affairs, 1987– available at 
http://www.foreignaffairs.org/19870301faessay7841/martin-feldstein/correcting-the-trade-deficit.html).  Since  that  time,  the 
US trade deficit has averaged US$227 billion per year, and is currently running at about US$730 billion per annum. The 
point here is not that deficits don't matter, but that the willingness of capital to flow across national boundaries seems to 
have greatly increased. Hence, notions of what was sustainable that were predicated on observations from an earlier era of 
limited capital mobility proved not to be very useful in making predictions. 
 4 
 BIS Review 12/2006
been a more balanced global path with smaller current account deficits and surpluses would almost 
certainly have been a weaker one for all countries.  
As  it  was,  policy-makers  in  the  US  (and  a  number  of  other  countries)  sought  to  combine  full 
employment  and  price  stability  by  allowing  domestic  demand  to  run  ahead  more  strongly.  This 
provided enough demand both to absorb the Asian trade surplus and keep the output of their domestic 
economies near full capacity. These policy-makers didn't do this out of altruism; they did it because 
they judged it to be in their nations' best interests. Nonetheless, their behaviour was, in my view, a 
stabilising force. ‘Unbalanced' growth has, so far, been better than the likely alternative.  
Has this strategy carried risks? Yes, it has. In the faster growing countries, household debt levels have 
increased, and asset prices have risen. Higher leverage, other things equal, means that households 
would be more exposed if economic activity turns down than they would have been otherwise. These 
risks  have  been  weighed  against  the  risks  in  the  alternative  path,  and  policy-makers  are  managing 
them as best they can.  
As  for  what  might  happen  from  here,  it  is  common  for  observers  to  warn  against  the  risk  that  the 
‘imbalances'  may  unwind  in  a  disruptive  fashion.  Often  this  is  not  spelled  out.  What  is  sometimes 
meant, I think, is that those currently accumulating dollar-denominated claims suddenly change their 
minds,  precipitating  abrupt  movements  in  exchange  rates  and  interest  rates.  Such  developments 
might, in this view, lead to a pronounced weakening of domestic demand in countries like the US if 
long-term interest rates rose abruptly, while a big decline in the dollar might affect the ability of areas 
like Europe to export.  
One can never rule out the possibility that financial markets will suffer a sudden and dramatic loss of 
confidence. But it is not as though markets are unaware of the various ‘imbalances' or the associated 
risks  –  they  read  about  them  on  a  daily  basis.  Yet  the  actual  pricing  for  risk  in  markets  apparently 
suggests an assessment that risks in general are of relatively little concern at present.  
 
           Graph 4 
    
 
In the event that there is some market discontinuity, I suspect that it is more likely to be sparked by 
some sort of credit event that prompts a change in appetite for risk in general, than by reactions to 
current account positions per se. It is not obvious that US interest rates would rise, or the dollar fall, in 
the face of such an event.  
That is not to say that there are no adjustments to various national strategies which would be in the 
interests  of  the  countries  concerned,  and  which  would  assist  in  re-balancing  global  growth  while 
retaining global full employment. But that proviso - retaining full employment - is key. If the adjustment 
is undertaken only by the countries with large current account deficits, it is hard to see how it could not 
be contractionary for growth everywhere. That would not be the ideal solution.  
BIS Review 12/2006 
 5
Australia's Domestic Economy and Monetary Policy  
There is not very much I can say that is new on the domestic economy, given the recent release of our 
Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  and  our  appearance  before  the  House  Economics  Committee  last 
week. Let me reiterate the main themes.  
                                 Graph 5 
     
 
Growth in domestic demand in Australia has moderated somewhat over the past year and a half. This 
is not unwelcome, as continued expansion at an annual pace of 6 per cent, which we saw for several 
years,  was  unlikely  to  be  able  to  continue  without  causing  overheating.  As  it  was,  some  individual 
sectors were overheating at times. The residential construction sector, for example, operated at peak 
levels  over  a  few  years,  and  saw  shortages  of  tradespeople,  construction  delays  and  substantial 
increases  in costs.  Pressure was  also  transmitted  to  those  parts of  the  manufacturing sector which 
supply materials. Had this been a more general story across the economy, we would have witnessed a 
significant rise in overall inflation, necessitating a much more active tightening of monetary policy. But 
because some other parts of the economy were for a time growing more slowly, and because prices of 
tradeable goods were reduced owing to global competition (and an appreciation in the currency), the 
policy response was very gradual. It was essentially limited to returning interest rates to approximately 
normal levels after a period in which they had been unusually low.  
The  shift  in  the  composition  of  demand  is  also  welcome.  Household  spending  had  risen  rapidly  for 
several  years,  outstripping  income  gains,  boosted  in  part  by  the  exuberance  associated  with  the 
housing boom. As that boom subsided - as it turns out, so far, in a very benign way - so household 
demand  has  gradually  slowed.  Businesses,  meanwhile,  have  continued  to  ramp  up  investment 
spending, in response to the widening incidence of capacity constraints in the economy - something 
which has been an increasingly prominent theme in our regular discussions with companies across the 
country  in  the  past  couple  of  years.  With  global  demand  for  resources  strong  and  prices  high,  the 
resource sector is prominent in the pick-up in investment, but other sectors too are responding to the 
need  for  more  capacity.  Business  profitability,  though  squeezed  in  some  areas  by  rising  costs  of 
materials and labour, remains in good shape, and of course the cost of external finance remains quite 
favourable. So conditions seem quite propitious for further growth in investment.  
Over  the  medium  term,  the  resulting  increase  in  capacity  will  help  to  accommodate  good,  non-
inflationary  growth.  In  the  short  term,  though,  the  act  of  adding  to  capacity  itself  adds  to  demand, 
potentially putting pressure on productive resources. So it is fortuitous that household demands have 
moderated at the same time as business investment has increased.  
Inflation is well contained at present, despite a number of forces being at work which ordinarily could 
be expected to push it noticeably higher. A tight labour market has been putting pressure on labour 
costs. A strong world economy has pushed up demand for various commodities, whose prices have 
responded, raising input costs for businesses.  
6 
 BIS Review 12/2006
          Graph 6 
     
 
Through all that, CPI inflation has risen to 2.8 per cent in 2005, from 2.4 per cent in 2003. The Bank 
computes a range of measures of core or underlying inflation, designed to abstract from temporary 
price movements so as to show the longer-term trends. In our most recent Statement on Monetary 
Policy, these were characterised as running at about 2½ per cent, little changed from the outcomes of 
the preceding couple of years. In summary, despite a fully employed economy and higher oil and raw 
materials prices, overall inflation has remained quite well behaved. If anything, it is probably running 
slightly  lower  than  we  expected  six  months  ago.  While  small  deviations  in  outcomes  from  those 
forecast are not unusual and are not necessarily of significance - we are talking about fractions of a 
percentage  point  here,  which  certainly  are  not  significant  in  the  statistical  sense  -  it  is  worth 
contemplating what might account for lower than expected inflation.  
There are two hypotheses on offer. The first is that the steady internationalisation of trade in goods 
and services continues to exert pricing discipline on domestic producers, and that this discipline is, at 
the  margin,  a  bit  more  powerful  when  growth  in  demand  has  softened,  as  it  seems  to  have  done. 
Hence,  this  hypothesis  holds,  while  a  number  of  costs  are  rising,  firms  are  working  hard  to  find 
offsetting savings and absorbing some of the impact in their margins. It might be argued that this price 
discipline coming from international trends will persist, as the emergence of China and India continues.  
The alternative hypothesis is one of lags: that the full impact of the cost increases seen over the past 
couple of years will show up in time even with the discipline of foreign competition. Unless demand 
conditions are particularly weak, firms will manage to pass on cost increases and restore margins. On 
this  view,  noticeably  higher  inflation  is  not  far  away,  even  if  it  is  taking  a  little  longer  to  arrive  than 
initially expected.  
In forming its judgement about the outlook, the Bank has contemplated both these possibilities. The 
forecast  for  inflation  we  set  out  in  the  recent  Statement  is  one  that  allows  for  some  passing  on  of 
higher  costs  that  have  already  been  incurred,  but  not  by  as  much  as  historical  experience  would 
indicate. This sees inflation running at 2½ to 3 per cent for the next couple of years. The risks around 
this forecast could be described as balanced. It is possible that a rise in inflation in response to the 
cost  imposts  of  the  past  few  years  will  arrive  more  suddenly;  but  it  is  also  possible  that  the 
international and domestic competitive forces will be strong enough for long enough that those imposts 
will be offset elsewhere, and never show up in prices.  
Given this outlook, it follows obviously that the Bank is more likely to tighten policy than to ease in the 
foreseeable future. An assessment of balanced risks, around a forecast of 2½ to 3 per cent inflation, 
means that it is more likely that a surprise will take inflation above the target of 2-3 per cent than below 
it. Hence, a rise in rates is more likely than a fall. That is a statement of probabilities, rather than one 
of near-term intent.  
In fact, that has been our thinking for some time. Through most of last year, we felt that inflation would 
probably tend to rise, and we would probably need to tighten further at some stage to limit the rise. But 
BIS Review 12/2006 
 7
we  also  thought  that  the  rise  would  be  gradual,  against  a  backdrop  in  which  inflation  expectations 
were pretty well anchored. Hence, we felt that in formulating our policy response, we had time on our 
side, a luxury previous generations of policy-makers usually did not have. We took advantage of that 
to wait, evaluating further information before acting. Thus far, I judge that to have been an appropriate 
strategy, especially given the inflation outcomes of late. Nonetheless, the Bank has to remain watchful 
in  the  face  of  a  number  of  factors  which  obviously  could  push  inflation  higher.  We  will  be  ready  to 
respond as needed so as to maintain low inflation.  
8 
 BIS Review 12/2006
