Jean-Claude Trichet: Issues related to central counterparty clearing 
Speech by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the joint European 
Central Bank - Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago conference, Frankfurt, 4 April 2006. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have the pleasure to conclude a very successful conference, a conference that has been special in 
many respects. First, this conference was jointly organised by the European Central Bank (ECB) and 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  (FRBC).  As  such,  it  marks  another  fruitful  example  of 
cooperation  among  central  banks  across  the  Atlantic.  Second,  it  has  featured  research  on  central 
counterparties  (CCPs),  a  topic  that  has  not  yet  received  a  great  deal  of  attention  from  academic 
researchers.  I  hope  that  this  conference  has  contributed  to  stimulating  more  research  on  this  very 
important  subject.  Finally,  it  has  brought  together  market  participants,  public  authorities  and 
academics. I am in no doubt that discussions involving people from these very different groups are 
beneficial  for  all  of  them.  However,  I  am  also  aware  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  initiate  such 
discussions.  This  conference  has  also  been  very  successful  in  this  respect.  I  wish  to  thank  the 
organizers of this conference at the FRBC and the ECB for all their hard work. 
Central counterparties play an important role in many financial markets. They interpose themselves 
between the buyer and the seller of financial assets, acting as the buyer to every seller and as the 
seller to every buyer of a specified set of contracts. This process mitigates counterparty credit risk, 
which  is  the  risk  that  one  party  of  a  trade  suffers  losses  because  the  other  party  cannot  fulfil  its 
obligations  from  the  trade.  Through  multilateral  netting,  central  counterparties  enhance  liquidity  and 
reduce liquidity costs. Finally, central counterparties ensure post-trade anonymity. 
Central banks are interested in the smooth functioning of central counterparties for three reasons: 
   central counterparties can enhance financial stability as long as they function smoothly. The 
failure  of  a  central  counterparty  however  can  significantly  destabilise  financial  markets.  It  is 
therefore important that central counterparties have appropriate risk management procedures 
in place; 
links  between  central  counterparties  operating  in  different  countries  can  foster  financial 
integration across those countries, by allowing the participants to trade in a foreign market and 
clearing that trade through existing national arrangements. Links between CCPs can take a 
variety  of  forms,  ranging  from  the  establishing  of  direct  relations  between  two  CCPs  to 
arrangements  between  central  counterparties  which  allow  their  participants  to  mitigate  the 
costs associated with risk control measures (e.g. cross-margining);  
central  counterparties  use  payment  systems  and  other  infrastructures  operated  by  central 
banks to carry out their activities. 
For  these  reasons,  central  banks  closely  follow  and  contribute  to  the  discussions  related  to  central 
counterparty clearing. This conference is an important element in this respect.  
Let me now outline a few central points of this discussion. 
Central counterparties must have adequate risk management procedures . 
Central counterparties play a systemically important role in many financial markets. The failure of a 
central  counterparty  can  severely  disrupt  financial  markets.  Central  counterparties  are  highly 
specialised  in  managing  risks  and  failures  have  been  rare.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency, and any efforts to improve risk management methods are most welcome. As mentioned 
already several times in this conference, in November 2004 the G-10 central banks and the IOSCO 
issued  a  report  which  set  out  15  comprehensive  international  recommendations  for  promoting  the 
safety and efficiency of central counterparties. The ESCB-CESR working group is working in close co-
operation  with  EU  CCPs  to  adapt  these  recommendations  to  the  European  context.  Academic 
research  can  provide  additional  hints  on  the  specific  situations  which  are  targeted  by  the 
recommendations. This has been shown at this conference by Alejandro García and Ramo Gençay or 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 1
John  Cotter  and  Kevin  Dowd  with  their  approaches  to  extreme  market  events,  and  by  Froukelien 
Wendt in her survey on intraday margining. 
The governance structure of central counterparties should in principle be market driven. 
The  governance  structure  may  have  a  significant  influence  on,  for  example,  risk  management  and 
other  strategic  decisions  of  central  counterparties,  as  pointed  out  by  Thorsten  Koeppl  and  Cyril 
Monnet.  Although  the  optimal  governance  structure  cannot  be  defined  ex-ante,  the  markets  may  in 
many cases be in a good position to identify and produce it. Public authorities must, however, step in 
whenever market failures become significant. In this respect, the ECB supports the views expressed in 
the CPSS-IOSCO recommendations according to which governance arrangements for a CCP should 
be clear and transparent in order to fulfil public interest requirements, support the objectives of owners 
and participants and, in particular, promote the effectiveness of a CCP’s risk management procedures.  
The features of post-trading structure should also in principle be market driven. 
We  are  witnessing  fast  developments  in  the  field  of  financial  market  infrastructures,  especially  in 
Europe,  but  also  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  With  respect  to  central  counterparties,  I  would  like  to 
mention four major developments: 
a) Consolidation of central counterparties 
Since the start of EMU, the number of central counterparties for financial instruments has fallen from 
14 to 7 in the euro area. This process of consolidation may have a positive impact on financial stability 
as larger central counterparties may find it easier to diversify risks. It may also have a positive impact 
on  the  efficiency  of  post-trading  arrangements  due  to  network  effects  and  issues  related  to 
interoperability.  However,  the  failure  of  large  central  counterparties  could  have  an  even  more 
disastrous impact on financial markets. Moreover, consolidation may eventually lead to a reduction in 
competitive  pressures  with  a  negative  impact  on  efficiency.  The  Eurosystem  has  formulated  this 
position in a policy statement on consolidation in central counterparty clearing, which was published as 
early as September 2001. As stated in the policy statement, the ECB supports any form of market-led 
integration or consolidation process that fulfils the ECB’s requirements in terms of financial stability, 
open access, price transparency and efficiency. 
b) Expansion of activities of central counterparties  
While in the past, most European central counterparties only cleared derivatives, many of them also 
now clear securities transactions. The effects of such an expanssion have been differently assessed 
by different speakers at this conference. On the one hand, John Jackson and Mark Manning found 
that central counterparties that diversify their activities across imperfectly correlated assets may often 
be able to better manage their risks than single-product clearers. At the same time, securities market 
participants benefit as their exposure to counterparty credit risk is reduced. This trend towards multi-
product central counterparties could therefore be beneficial from a financial stability perspective. On 
the  other  hand,  Diana  Chan  mentioned  in  the  first  panel  yesterday,  that  central  counterparts  that 
diversify their activities across imperfectly correlated assets and reduce the collateral requirements for 
their  participants  by  offsetting  margins  related  to  these  different  activities  could.  significantly 
underestimate  risk  exposure  and  collateralisation  requirements,  thereby  create  additional  and 
unknown risks. These developments need therefore to be carefully observed by market participants 
and relevant authorities. 
c) Creation and dismantling of vertical “silos” 
In  Europe,  vertical  silos  encompassing  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures  have  been 
created, while  other  silos have  been  dismantled.  The  discussion on  which structure  is  preferable  is 
ongoing,  and  the  answer  may  be  different  for  different  markets.  While  silos  may  help  infrastructure 
providers  to  reduce  operating  costs  and  to  better  coordinate  the  prices  of  the  different  integrated 
services (e.g. trading, clearing and settlement), they may reduce competition when they are misused, 
for example, to favour a central counterparty in the silo over its competitors outside of the silo. As the 
Eurosystem explained in its policy statement of September 2001, the disadvantages of vertical silos 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2006
“can be overcome provided that customers can choose between systems along the value chain […]. It 
is therefore crucial that access to essential facilities, whether vertically integrated or not, should not be 
unfairly impeded.” 
d) Growing need for adequate infrastructure in the field of credit derivatives 
Volume growth in derivatives – especially OTC derivatives – outpaces the cash markets, spurred on 
by increased interest in hedge funds and the ongoing innovation in the types of contract offered. While 
interest  rates  contracts  remain  the  key  hedge  instrument  (187  Tri  USD  outstanding),  credit  default 
contracts (6.3 Tri USD outstanding) are growing at approximately 90% per year, now reaching 10,000 
trades per day. Volume growth is expected to continue over the coming years, causing some concern 
among  operations  managers  on  the  OTC  market,  given  the  lack  of  straight-through-processing  and 
hence capacity to manage the volumes. This rapid multidimensional growth (i.e. in terms of products, 
volumes,  market  participants  and  secondary  markets)  calls  for  an  enhancement  of  the  post-trading 
infrastructure that may support more careful risk control by the various participants. As mentioned by 
Governor  Kroszner,  enhancing  the  post-trading  infrastructure  does  not  automatically  mean  to 
introduce  telles  quelles  the  same  techniques  that  CCPs  use  in  exchanged-traded  derivatives  but 
rather to identify the solutions which are equally effective and take into account the different features 
of OTC markets. 
All  these  developments  refer  to  the  market  structure  that  surrounds  central  counterparties  and  are 
highly  relevant  for  the  interests  of  central  banks  in  the  fields  of  financial  stability  and  financial 
integration. As central banks, we believe that the market structure should be market driven as long as 
market failures are not observed. Significant market failures however must be identified and in many 
cases require appropriate public intervention.  
This brings me to my last point. 
What is the role of public authorities and, in particular, central banks? 
Market forces need a sound legal, regulatory and oversight basis to work efficiently. In the euro area 
with its 12 countries, and in the European Union with its 25 countries, the creation of such a sound 
basis requires first and foremost a certain degree of harmonisation of public principles and standards 
across  countries.  Efforts  in  this  direction  are  ongoing  and  the  Eurosystem  provides  active  support. 
Here I should mention the joint work by the European System of Central Banks and the Commission of 
European Securities Regulators towards establishing standards for securities clearing and settlement 
in the European Union. As indicated in the ECB policy statement of 2001, standards are to be carefully 
set  and  then  implemented  by  public  authorities with a  clear  interest  and expertise  in  the  respective 
field. It appears evident that the Eurosystem, for example, should be involved in the oversight of any 
major infrastructure for euro-denominated assets with a view to being able to properly address serious 
threatens  to  financial  stability.  A  paper,  authored  by  a  Professor  at  the  Woodrow  Wilson  School  at 
Princeton University in 1990, addressing the performance of the derivatives clearing and settlement 
systems during the 1987 stock market break, concluded, inter alia, that “the Federal Reserve played a 
vital job in protecting the integrity of the clearing and settlement systems.” The name of that Professor 
is Ben Bernanke. 
Finally,  it  is  important  that  cross-fertilisation  of  experiences  and  expertise  of  market  participants, 
academics  and  public  authorities  in  this  field  continues  and,  as  I  said  before,  this  conference  has 
certainly contributed in this respect. 
With  this,  I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  attention,  close  the  conference  and  wish  you  a  pleasant 
journey home.  
BIS Review 29/2006 
 3
