Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy challenges and experiences in Norway 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  for  the 
Norwegian Shipping Club, Oslo, 4 September 2006. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 16 August, Inflation 
Report 2/06 and on previous speeches.  
 Introduction 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a 
flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in 
output and employment.  
Monetary policy functions through an interaction with other components of economic policy. Among 
other things, this interaction must take into account that the Norwegian economy is exposed to strong 
external influences, particularly through developments in oil and gas prices. Oil gives us an economic 
asset that is not available to many other countries, but it also poses considerable challenges.  
First,  when  oil  is  extracted  and  sold,  our  national  wealth  is  transformed  from  petroleum  wealth  into 
financial  assets.  Norway’s  national  wealth  belongs  not  only  to  our  generation,  but  also  to  future 
generations.  The  authorities  must  therefore  exercise  fiscal  discipline,  taking  into  account  long-term 
considerations.  
Moreover,  the  size  of  the  cash  flow  from  petroleum  activities  varies  considerably.  If  petroleum 
revenues  were  to  be  used  as  they  accrue,  this  would  lead  to  wide  fluctuations  in  demand  in  the 
Norwegian economy and thereby amplify cyclical fluctuations.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues will have an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business 
and industry. A high level and wide fluctuations in the use of petroleum revenues will have a negative 
impact on the operating parameters for internationally exposed industries.  
The  challenges  associated  with  the  emergence  of  the  petroleum  sector  have  contributed  to  the 
development of the four main pillars of Norway’s economic policy, which were established in the 1990s 
and  in  2001.  The  pillars  are:  the  oil  fund  mechanism,  the  fiscal  rule,  a  floating  exchange  rate  and 
inflation targeting.  
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  long-term 
considerations in the use of petroleum revenues. The first allocation to the Fund was made in 1996, 
and  the  market  value  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  as  the  Fund  is  now  called,  had 
reached over NOK 1500 billion at the end of June this year. Under the oil fund mechanism, increased 
government petroleum revenues are invested abroad. This curbs the impact of oil price fluctuations on 
domestic demand and output - and on inflation and the krone exchange rate.  
A  floating  krone  exchange  rate  also  has  a  stabilising  effect,  and  the  exchange  rate  normally 
appreciates in favourable periods and depreciates during adverse periods. A flexible exchange rate 
can reduce fluctuations in employment and output.  
In March 2001, the fiscal rule and new guidelines for monetary policy were introduced. The fiscal rule 
implies that the central government budget deficit shall be equivalent over time to the expected real 
return on the Fund, quantified as 4 per cent. The operational target of monetary policy as defined by 
the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time.  
This establishes a clear distribution of responsibilities among the different components of economic 
policy.  Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing swings in output and employment. The inflation target provides economic agents with an 
anchor for their decisions concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. Fiscal policy – growth in 
public expenditure – influences the krone and the size of the internationally exposed business sector 
in  the  medium  term.  Government  expenditure  and  revenues  must  be  in  balance  in  the  long  term. 
Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how well and how efficiently 
we utilise our labour resources and other economic resources.  
BIS Review 80/2006 
 1
The transition to inflation targeting in 2001 may have appeared at that time, and in Norway, to be a 
transition to a new and unfamiliar monetary policy system. But today’s monetary policy system springs 
from an historical recognition of what monetary policy can in fact achieve.  
In collaboration with the Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, Norges Bank 
has compiled price data from the mid-1600s onwards. History shows that price stability is the norm. 
High inflation is a phenomenon associated with monetary disturbances in times of war and need, and 
a 1970s and 1980s phenomenon associated with an unsound macroeconomic policy and undermining 
of the nominal anchor.  
In many countries, including Norway, the perception in the 1960s and 1970s was that strong growth 
and low unemployment could be achieved if only we were willing to accept somewhat higher inflation. 
But  experience  showed  that  this  was  not  an  option.  Counter-cyclical  policy  through  the  1970s  in 
Norway  and  a  number  of  other  countries  contributed  to  rising  inflation.  Inflation  expectations  were 
gradually revised upwards and inflation took hold at a high level.  
In  both  economic  theory  and  practical  policy,  it  was  gradually  recognised  that  there  is  no  trade-off 
between  inflation  and  unemployment  in  the  long  term.  In  the  early  1980s,  many  countries  again 
focused on the need to restore confidence in the nominal anchor. In Norway the shift in policy took 
place  in  1986.  Following  the  last  devaluation  of  the  krone  in  1986,  economic  policy  was  oriented 
towards  securing  confidence  in  the  fixed  exchange  rate  system.  A  fixed  exchange  rate  was  an 
intermediate  target  for  achieving  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  fixed  rate  policy  was  abandoned  in 
1992,  and  the  experience  of  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  demonstrated  that  monetary  policy  cannot 
fine-tune  the  exchange  rate.  Norges  Bank  therefore  placed  increasing  emphasis  on  low  and  stable 
inflation.  
After almost two decades of high inflation, the rise in prices stabilised in many countries in the 1990s. 
At the beginning of the 1980s, annual inflation in industrial countries was about 13 per cent. In the 
course of the following decade, it fell below 2 per cent.  
Monetary policy in other countries 
The formal framework for monetary policy varies somewhat across countries. Inflation targeting is the 
norm  in  small  and  medium-sized  open  economies,  and  has  been  introduced  in  more  than  20 
countries.  New  Zealand  was  the  first  to  do  so  –  in  1989.  Canada,  Sweden,  Australia  and  the  UK 
followed suit in the 1990s.  
A number of countries that have not formally introduced inflation targeting have nevertheless oriented 
their  monetary  policy  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  in  practice.  Among  them  are  the  euro  area 
countries and the US. Nor does the Bank of Japan have a formal inflation target, but since 9 March 
this year its monetary policy has been oriented towards achieving an inflation rate of between zero and 
two per cent in the medium and long term.  
In a number of countries, price stability is ranked above managing output and employment. Examples 
are the UK and the euro area. Price stability is regarded as a condition for monetary policy contributing 
to stable output and employment.  
In the Federal Reserve Act, in the US, the objectives of full employment, stable prices and moderate 
long-term interest rates are given equal weight. But the Federal Reserve states itself that in the long 
term stable prices are a condition for sustained output and employment growth.  
The introduction of formal inflation targeting has been under discussion in the US for several years. 
The  debate  was  rekindled  with  the  appointment  of  Ben  S.  Bernanke  as  Chairman  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  on  1  February  this  year.  He  has  argued  that  quantifying  the  concept  of  long-term  price 
stability may reduce the uncertainty associated with monetary policy and more effectively anchor long-
term inflation expectations. In his view, however, the introduction of a long-term inflation target is fully 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2006
consistent  with  current  US  monetary  policy1.  There  has  been  little  interest  in  US  political  circles  in 
changing the monetary policy framework2.  
Pursuant to the Regulation of March 2001, the mandate for monetary policy stipulates that monetary 
policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, and at the 
same  time underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to stable  developments  in  output  and  employment. 
The operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of approximately 2.5% over time. The mandate implies that inflation targeting shall be flexible, 
so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment.  
The concrete target for inflation varies somewhat among central banks. The inflation target may be 
formulated as an interval, for example 1-3 per cent, as in New Zealand or, as in Norway, as inflation of 
close to 2.5 per cent over time.  
Partly owing to various disturbances to the economy, inflation cannot be expected to remain at target 
constantly. Central banks have somewhat varying formulations as to how rapidly inflation should be 
brought back to the target. Some central banks state that inflation should be brought back to target 
within a “reasonable time horizon” or “over the medium term”. Others have quantified that the inflation 
target should normally be attained within two years, as in Sweden, or as in Norway, where the interest 
rate is set with a view to stabilising inflation at the target within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1 – 
3 years.  
In practice, the monetary policy conducted by most central banks is nonetheless similar. They orient 
monetary policy towards maintaining low and stable inflation. All central banks will reduce their policy 
rate when there are prospects of low inflation in the medium to long run and raise it when there are 
prospects of high inflation.  
What distinguishes Norges Bank from other central banks? 
Monetary policy in Norway is in line with the monetary policy conducted by a number of central banks 
in the OECD area.  
One difference, however, is that Norges Bank is conducting monetary policy in an oil economy. As a 
result of the high level of earnings and fluctuations in these petroleum revenues, the most important 
contribution fiscal policy can make to stabilising the Norwegian economy is to provide a sound, long-
term strategy for the use of petroleum revenues. In other words, fiscal policy is subject to the fiscal 
rule.  Attempts  to  use  the  central  government  budget  to  fine-tune  economic  activity  may  have  a 
destabilising  effect  if  these  attempts  are  perceived  as  a  breach  of  the  long-term  strategy  for  the 
phasing in of petroleum revenues.  
As  a  general  rule,  central  banks  influence  the  shortest  money  market  rates  via  the  policy  rate. 
However, economic agents’ consumption and investment decisions depend more on their interest rate 
expectations. Hence, monetary policy functions primarily by influencing expectations regarding future 
interest  rates.  Economic  agents  therefore  need  to  understand  the  central  bank’s  intentions  in  its 
interest-rate setting.  
In the November 2005 Inflation Report, Norges Bank published its own projection for the interest rate 
for  the  first  time.  The  aim  is  to  enhance  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy.  With  a  predictable 
monetary  policy,  market  participants  can  react  to  new  information  in  a  way  that  contributes  to 
stabilising developments in output and inflation.  
So  far,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  is  the  only  other  central  bank  that  has  experience  in 
publishing  its  own  interest  rate  projections.  Most  central  banks  that  publish  projections  base  their 
forecasts for developments in the economy on either a constant interest rate or on the assumption that 
the interest rate will shadow market interest rate expectations.  
                                                      
1   Testimony of Ben S. Bernanke, Nomination hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. 
Senate, November 15, 2005. 
2   Remarks by Governor Edward M. Gramlich, Federal Reserve Board, “The Politics of Inflation Targeting”, Paris, France, May 
26, 2005. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 3
Norges Bank’s practice in this respect is in line with the recommendations of leading academics in the 
field of monetary policy, such as Professor Lars Svensson3: “… announcing the optimal projection – 
including the instrument-rate projection – and the analysis behind it would have the largest impact on 
private-sector expectations and be the most effective way to implement monetary policy.”  
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  projection  is  based  on  seeking  to  achieve  an  interest  rate  path  that 
provides a reasonable balance between the objective of stabilising inflation at target and the objective 
of stabilising developments in output and employment within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1 – 3 
years. Interest-rate setting is also assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit.  
Norges  Bank  forecasts  inflation,  output  and  the  interest  rate  simultaneously.  There  is  considerable 
uncertainty associated with the estimates of capacity utilisation in the economy (the output gap), and 
there  is  no  simple  relationship  between  developments  in  capacity  utilisation  and  developments  in 
inflation. It cannot therefore be argued with great conviction that it is possible to identify one particular 
interest rate forecast that provides the indisputably “best” trade-off in monetary policy. More often than 
not, there will be a number of possible interest rate paths that might be said to provide a reasonable 
balance, in view of the uncertainty involved.  
The results of this trade-off are presented in the Inflation Report in the form of a chart that presents 
baseline  scenarios  for  the  interest  rate,  the  exchange  rate,  inflation  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy.  
The formulation of a precise inflation target, our projection for the interest rate 3 – 4 years ahead in 
time and our desire to achieve a balance between output stability and inflation may perhaps give an 
impression of excessive optimism with respect to managing the economy and invite a repeat of earlier 
attempts  to  fine-tune  the  economy.  But  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  lessons  drawn  from  the 
1970s and 1980s, i.e. high stabilisation policy ambitions may lead to wide fluctuations in the economy, 
with  high  and  variable  inflation.  In  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we  must  not  underestimate  the 
uncertainty surrounding the decisions taken.  
Even if the Bank publishes a forecast for the interest rate, this does not mean that the interest rate will 
follow the forecast throughout the projection period. Forecasts of inflation, output, the interest rate and 
other  variables  are  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  current  situation  and  a  perception  of  how  the 
economy  functions.  Disturbances  to  the  economy  may  result  in  changes  in  the  forecasts.  Data 
revisions imply that the current economic situation is not fully known. Our ambition must be to reduce 
uncertainty  with  regard  to  our  own  response  pattern.  That  actual  interest  rate  developments  will 
deviate  somewhat  from  Norges  Bank's  forecast  must  be  expected  to  be  the  rule  rather  than  the 
exception.  
We  therefore  also  attempt  to  shed  light  on  the  uncertainty  surrounding  these  variables.  The  charts 
show  the  interest  rate projection  in  the  latest  Inflation  Report.  The  uncertainty  is  illustrated  in  a  fan 
chart.  The  wider  the  fan  chart  is,  the  more  uncertain  the  forecast.  The  uncertainty  implies  that  the 
interest rate should normally be changed gradually, so that we can assess the effects of interest rate 
changes and other new information about economic developments.  
Changes  in  forecasts  are  nothing  new  to  financial  market  participants,  who  frequently  change  their 
expectations  concerning  future  interest  rates  as  the  economy  is  exposed  to  disturbances.  The 
deviation between market expectations and the actual interest rate has been substantial in periods. 
There is no reason to believe that Norges Bank will not also have to reassess its interest rate forecasts 
as new information emerges about economic developments.  
The current economic situation 
Allow  me  to  move  on  from  a  more  general  presentation  of  monetary  policy  to  a  closer  look  at  the 
current economic situation and monetary policy assessments.  
Since the marked deceleration of consumer price inflation as from 2003, monetary policy in Norway 
has been oriented towards bringing inflation up towards the target of 2.5 per cent. The low interest rate 
level has contributed to substantial growth in demand for goods and services. Petroleum investment, 
                                                      
3   Svensson, L.E.O. (2005): “Further developments of inflation targeting”. Memo to Sveriges Riksbank’s conference: “Inflation 
targeting: implementation, communication and effectiveness”10 – 12. June 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2006
favourable  prices  in  important  export  markets  and  a  strong  upturn  in  the  world  economy  have  also 
contributed  to  solid  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  So  far  in  the  cyclical  upturn,  the  mainland 
economy has grown by an average of close to 4 per cent annually.  
Although  the  underlying  rise  in  consumer  prices  has  picked  up  from  its  trough  two  years  ago,  it 
remains moderate and well below the inflation target, even three years into this cyclical upturn.  
The  global  economy  is  now  in  the  strongest  upturn  since  the  early  1970s.  Developments  are 
particularly  favourable  in  Asia,  and  the  situation  in  a  number  of  countries  in  Europe  appears  to  be 
improving. Growth in the US has been high for a long period, but has declined somewhat so far this 
year. There are prospects that a weaker US housing market may lead to increased household saving 
and lower consumer demand. The effect of these developments on the global economy will depend on 
the scale and timing of the correction. International equity markets have stabilised following a turbulent 
period in May and have edged up through the summer.  
Norges  Bank’s  assessment  is  that  global  growth  will  abate  somewhat  from  2006  to  2007,  but  will 
remain solid. However, many observers have pointed out that the risk of weaker developments may 
have increased somewhat recently.  
Interest rates remain low among several of our trading partners, even though they have been raised 
so far this year in a number of countries as a result of rising energy prices and higher consumer price 
inflation. In the US, there are now expectations that the interest rate has peaked, and that it will be 
lowered in the course of summer 2007. A rise in key rates is expected over the next year in the euro 
area, Sweden, the UK, Australia, Japan and Switzerland. One risk factor is that inflation in the US and 
the euro area may be higher than expected. In the event, interest rates internationally are likely to rise 
more than the current outlook would imply and curb growth among our trading partners.  
In the past two years, oil prices have doubled, measured in USD. With little spare production capacity, 
even minor disruptions in supply or demand can have a relatively strong impact on prices. It is likely 
that  global  growth  will  remain  buoyant.  This  may  contribute  to  keeping  oil  prices  at  a  high  level. 
Recently,  oil  prices  have  been  around  USD  70  per  barrel.  Brent  Blend  futures  prices  have  also 
climbed and indicate that oil prices will remain high for several years to come. Prices for a number of 
other commodities – including natural gas and some metals – have also risen sharply in recent years. 
So far, high oil prices have not led to slower growth in the world economy. However, there is a risk that 
rising or persistently high oil prices may gradually curb growth among important trading partners.  
In  its  June  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  assumed  that  money  market  rates  among  our  trading 
partners would rise gradually over the next three years. The path for domestic and external interest 
rates  does  not  imply  considerable  changes  in  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Given  solid  global  growth, 
demand  for  goods  and  services  from  Norwegian  export  companies  may  remain  at  a  high  level.  A 
growing number of export companies are facing capacity constraints, particularly in the production of 
metals  and  refined  petroleum  products.  Export  growth  in  the  years  ahead  will  probably  occur  in 
industries such as the engineering and shipbuilding industries. Production growth is now high in these 
industries and employment is rising after declining over several years.  
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  now  higher  than  normal.  Strong  global  growth  is 
supporting  both  high  demand  and  favourable  prices  for  the  Norwegian  export  sector.  Although 
petroleum investment is likely to peak this year, prospects of persistently high oil prices will contribute 
to  continued  strong  demand  from  the  petroleum  sector.  High  oil  prices  also  generate  substantial 
central government revenues and there are prospects of strong growth in the Government Pension 
Fund – Global in the next few years. This means that spending in line with the fiscal rule will lead to an 
increase in the structural, non-oil central government budget deficit. We assume that fiscal policy will 
provide some stimulus to aggregate demand and output in 2008 and 2009. A gradual increase in the 
interest rate will curb demand growth after a period.  
Household debt and house prices have increased markedly over many years to historically high levels. 
House  prices  may  now  seem  somewhat  high  in  relation  to  developments  in  income,  interest  rates, 
unemployment and housing construction. The prospects of a gradual normalisation of interest rates 
may restrain credit growth and the rise in house prices. The interest burden is low, but will increase as 
interest  rates  rise.  Intensified  competition  in  the  financial  sector  has  contributed  to  lower  interest 
margins on lending, which has curbed the rise in interest expenses to some extent.  
BIS Review 80/2006 
 5
Monetary policy assessments and strategy 
The Executive Board’s assessment in Inflation Report 2/06 was that the interest rate may gradually – 
in small, not too frequent steps – be brought back to a more normal level, and that the sight deposit 
rate should be in the interval 2¾ - 3¾ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Inflation 
Report  on  1  November,  conditional  on  economic  developments  that  are  broadly  in  line  with  the 
projections.  In  the  first  half  of  2006,  the  interest  rate  was  increased  in  two  increments  of  0.25 
percentage point, and the Inflation Report announced that there were prospects that the interest rate 
would rise further at approximately the same pace.  
In line with this strategy, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to raise the sight deposit rate by 
0.25 percentage point to 3.00 per cent at its meeting on 16 August. As a basis for the decision, it was 
pointed out that capacity constraints and a shortage of skilled labour are posing a mounting challenge 
to a number of industries. At the same time, corporate earnings are very high. Local government tax 
revenues  have  increased  substantially.  Household  and  corporate  borrowing  remains  high.  Property 
prices are rising markedly, and the level of building activity is high. Growth among our trading partners 
is  solid,  and  a  number  of  countries  have  raised  their  policy  rates.  These  factors  point  to  a  higher 
interest rate.  
At the same time, underlying consumer price inflation remains low. Clothing and footwear prices fell to 
a surprising extent in July. Different indicators of underlying inflation range from just under 1 per cent 
to  close  to  1¾  per  cent,  and  energy  prices  are  rising  sharply.  The  krone  exchange  rate  has 
depreciated somewhat recently, but is still fairly strong.  
The Executive Board pointed out that the objective of bringing inflation back towards the target and 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  implies  a  continued  expansionary  monetary  policy.  It  is  likely  that 
continued  high  growth  in  output  and  employment  will  result  in  a  gradual  pick-up  in  inflation.  The 
interest rate will therefore be set so that monetary policy gradually becomes less expansionary.  
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from 
occurring when the economy is exposed to disturbances. In some situations, it may be appropriate to 
hedge  against  particularly  unfavourable  developments.  Norges  Bank  will  continuously  assess  the 
effects of changes in interest rates and other new information concerning economic developments.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
6 
  BIS Review 80/2006
  7
BIS Review 80/2006 
   8 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  9
BIS Review 80/2006 
   10 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  11
BIS Review 80/2006 
   BIS Review 80/2006
12 
 BIS Review 80/2006 
  13
