Ewart S Williams: Inflation in Trinidad and Tobago 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the launch of the Bank’s Education Pamphlet No. 2 - “Inflation”, Port-of-Spain, 8 August 2006. 
 Welcome to the alumni from our Reuters journalism course of September 2005 and to other members 
of the media. We had promised to invite you back to check the progress. 
We thought that it would be nice to give you an opportunity to showcase some of the things you learnt 
at  the  course,  and  the  launch  of  our  second  “public  education  pamphlet”  on  a  topic  of  heightened 
national interest, seemed to provide the ideal occasion. 
We  are  hoping  that  you  help  us  in  another  respect.  As  we  say  in  our  foreword,  “Our  pamphlet 
series is targeted to a broad audience – students at secondary and tertiary institutions and members 
of the public that have an interest in increasing their knowledge of economics and business.” 
We would like to get your views as to whether we are getting close to our target audience. 
As to the theme of our second pamphlet we couldn’t be more timely and topical. The pamphlet seeks 
to  explain  the  (pernicious)  effect  of  inflation,  underlying  the  fact  that  it  affects  a  broad  cross 
section  of  the  population,  but  particularly  the  poor.  It  goes  on  to  trace  the  country’s  inflation 
performance from the 1970s to 2005. As you know, last year (2005) saw a jump in inflation (on an 
annual average basis) from 3.9 per cent to 6.7 per cent. The inflationary momentum has continued 
through 2006 with 12-month inflation reaching 8 per cent in July. 
The main driver of inflation has been the rise in food prices which reached 24 per cent on a 12-month 
basis in July. 
The pamphlet raises the spectra of inflationary expectations which could lead to wage pressures and 
perpetuate inflation. 
There is a passing caution against resorting to price controls, which carry their own problems. 
The  fact  is  that  the  only  way  to  address  our  inflation  problem  is  the  old-fashioned  way  –  through 
increasing agricultural output, tight monetary policy, greater fiscal restraint and wage discipline. 
A tall order – but that prescription works all the time. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
