Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Innovative and efficient delivery channels for banking 
services in the Philippines 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the launch of GlobeQUEST TouchPoint, Makati City, 4 August 2006. 
 Mr. Gerry Ablaza, Mr. Gil Genio, the officers and staff of Globe Telecom and Innove Communications, 
fellow bankers, special guests, good evening.  
As head of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the institution that oversees the banking sector, I am truly 
glad…efforts  to  develop  innovative  and  efficient  delivery  systems  for  banking  services  continue  in 
many fronts.  
Tonight,  we  witness  the  unveiling  of  Globequest  Touch  Point  which,  I  understand,  is  a  completely 
integrated  electronic  or  e-banking  package.  In  other  words,  it  is  an  end-to-end  technology  solution: 
from hardware to software, to I.T. experts, to data center services, down to network infrastructure. For 
all intents and purposes, it is equivalent to outsourcing an e-banking system.  
This is an exciting proposition that has a lot of growth potential, moving forward.  
Today, we have 872 banks, of which only 55 or 6.3% have electronic banking services approved by 
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. Please note that these 872 banks have more than 7,600 branches. 
What they need therefore are efficient and secure communication systems and infrastructure.  
The  economies  of  scale  that  I.T.  companies  such  as  Innove  offer,  therefore,  will  be  particularly 
valuable  to  smaller  banking  institutions  that  may  not  have  the  technological  expertise  and  enough 
resources to build their own e-banking facilities.  
Ladies and gentlemen, it was the advent of automated teller machines or ATMs that allowed banking 
services and transactions to continue beyond traditional banking hours. Now, ATMs no longer have 
this  monopoly;  new  and  better  electronic  banking  options  allow  us  to  do  transactions  outside  the 
confines of banks premises and beyond regular banking hours.  
Today, we have Internet banking, mobile banking or phone banking.  
Remote  access  through  the  Internet  and  mobile  devices  has  allowed  banks  to  provide  additional 
channels to deliver more services to their clients. Mobile banking through the use of cellular phones is 
now popular as text messaging has become a means to remit funds, pay bills and loans, and make 
deposits.  
Accessing  a  bank’s  web  portal  through  mobile  devices  is  also  expected  to  become  a  common 
occurrence as advances in technology further improve the capability of mobile devices to rival even 
current personal computers. 
It is interesting to note that there are also non-bank institutions 1 that deploy ATMs to serve the needs 
of the depositing public in remote areas of our country.  
Thus, today, banking services are within reach of segments of the population that previously had no 
access due to geographic and cost constraints.  
All these have resulted in greater convenience to the public who can now choose to bank anytime, 
anywhere.  
In  the  same  vein,  banks  have  also  benefited  from  these  technological  advances,  as  efficiencies 
improve and operational costs are reduced.  
Indeed, the Philippine banking industry continues to undergo rapid and extensive transformation, due 
largely to improvements and innovations in communications and information technology.  
Nevertheless, even as we mention its upside, we recognize that these technological innovations carry 
risks, which must closely be monitored, managed and balanced against the benefits. 
                                                      
1  Examples of private sector ATM deployers are Nationlink and EnCASH. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
In  response  to  this  need,  BSP  has  undertaken  the  following:  created  specialized  supervision  units 
such  as  that  for  information  technology;  issued  Circulars  to  guide  the  development  of  electronic 
banking  as  well  as  to  ensure  consumer  protection  and  awareness;  and  adopted  international  best 
practices to keep us at par with the rest of the world. 
The increasing interdependencies of banking, telecommunications, and information technology, pose 
a  challenge  for  BSP  to  continuously  adapt  to  a  rapidly  evolving  technological  and  business 
environment.  
Nevertheless, with the support and cooperation of all stakeholders, such as Globe and Innove….I am 
confident our vision of a globally competitive financial industry will be realized, eventually. 
Finally, let me conclude by congratulating globe telecom and Innove Communications on the launch of 
Globequest Touchpoint. This is indeed a vital empowering solution toward providing the public with 
anytime, anywhere access to banking services. I hope you will continue to generate even better and 
more cost-efficient technology solutions. 
Maraming salamat po at magandang gabi sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
