Mervyn King: Globalisation and relative price changes 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a dinner for Kent Business Contacts 
in conjunction with the Kent Messenger Group/Kent Business, Kent, 16 January 2006. 
 Two weeks ago Trafalgar Square was packed with revellers celebrating the New Year. A century ago 
it was crowded with hop-growers and pickers. On May 16th 1908 - “Hop Saturday” - around 30,000 
people working in the hop trade travelled to London to demonstrate against unfair foreign competition 
and  to  demand  the  introduction  of  a  tariff  on  imported  hops.  It  was  the  largest  demonstration  in 
Trafalgar  Square  for  many  years.  Special  trains  were  laid  on  to  London  Bridge  from  where  the 
demonstrators  marched  to  Trafalgar  Square,  accompanied  by  bands  playing  and  banners  flying. 
According to the Times, “One of the most conspicuous banners bore the words: ‘And shall hops picked 
by Chinamen make England's hop trade die, here's 50,000 Kentish men will know the reason why’". 
Another,  appropriately  above  the  plinth  of  Nelson’s  column,  read  “England  expects  that  every  hop 
shall pay a duty”. A resolution was proposed demanding the imposition of an import duty of 40 shillings 
per  cwt  on  all  foreign  hops.  Having  carried  the  resolution,  the  assembled  gathering  sang  "Rule 
Britannia",  after  which  the  massed  bands  played  the  National  Anthem  and  a  verse  of  "Auld  Lang 
Syne". 
Colourful and moving though the occasion was, the decline of the hop industry was inexorable and 
inevitable. Nothing could stem the tide of changes in technology and in tastes for new lighter - foreign - 
beers, and attempts by government through higher excise duties to reduce the consumption of beer. A 
willingness to adapt and embrace, rather than resist, change is the key to greater prosperity. That road 
may at times be hard going - as I know many of you will have experienced in your own businesses - 
but it leads ultimately to a more prosperous destination.  
To follow the right road we need signposts. In a market economy those signposts are movements in 
prices. If a particular product becomes more abundant or less in demand, its price will fall relative to 
the prices of other products. That relative price change is the signal which encourages consumers to 
buy more or producers to supply less. Over recent years, three new signposts have appeared. They 
mark a process that has transformed demand and supply conditions across the globe: the integration 
of China, India and other emerging market economies into the world trading system.  
The first signpost shows that prices of labour-intensive manufactured goods have fallen. China, India 
and the former Soviet Union between them have massively increased the supply of labour available to 
industry  around  the  world.  As  labour-intensive  goods  have  become  more  abundant,  they  have  also 
become cheaper. The signpost points us in a familiar direction: the need to change what we produce. 
Were  we  still  producing  the  same  labour-intensive  goods  as  before,  with  output  concentrated  in 
industries like agriculture (including hops), textiles, coal-mining and ship-building, we too would have 
seen the price of our own output fall, just as it did for hop growers a century ago. Instead we allowed 
output  and  employment  to  expand  in  those  industries  where  we  could  exploit  a  comparative 
advantage. In Kent, the expanding sectors include financial services, transport (with 18 million tons of 
freight  passing  through  the  Channel  Tunnel  each  year)  the  exploitation  of  life  sciences,  and  higher 
education (with five universities in the county). 
As consumers, we have benefited from falling prices of goods made in China and elsewhere in Asia. 
Between 1995 and 2005, the prices of imported manufactured goods fell by a sixth and, relative to the 
price of domestically produced output, by no less than a third. So over the past decade we have been 
able  to  increase  consumption  by  more  than  the  increase  in  production.  Openness  to  the  world 
economy has resulted in a higher standard of living.  
The second signpost marks the rise in oil and other commodity prices. Rapid growth of production in 
China, India and other newly integrated economies has led to a substantial rise in the demand for oil 
and other raw materials. Between 1995 and 2004, net imports of oil to China rose by a factor of seven. 
Unlike earlier episodes of high oil prices, which were driven largely by temporary supply constraints, 
the recent increase in the demand for oil has been reflected in higher prices for future delivery as well 
as higher spot prices. Similar rises are apparent in the market for gas. The signpost marked higher 
energy prices points us towards ways of using less energy, to alternative energy sources and to new 
sources of oil production such as the Canadian tar sands. 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 1
The first two signposts point us in the right direction. But the path has not been easy to follow. We 
have seen movements - in both directions - in inflation, consumer spending and output growth. Interest 
rates  too  have  moved  both  up  and  down  in  order  to  maintain  overall  stability  of  the  economy  by 
keeping consumer price inflation close to the 2% target. The reasons for those changes have been 
explained  in  the  minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings  and  in  our  Inflation  Report. 
Tonight, I want to look a little further ahead, to the challenges for monetary policy posed by a third 
signpost - the recent fall in long-term interest rates. The development of an integrated world capital 
market means that these now depend on savings and investment decisions elsewhere in the world as 
well as here at home.  
Investors seem to be willing to lend to governments at much lower interest rates than for many a year. 
In some cases they have lent money for fifty years at around 4%, and the interest rate on long-term 
UK government bonds is at its lowest level for over 50 years. Low and stable inflation clearly explains 
much  of  the fall  in  long-term  interest  rates which  fell  sharply when  the  Bank of  England was  made 
independent in 1997. But over the past three to four years long-term interest rates around the world 
have fallen further to remarkably low levels. In the UK, the annual interest rate on 20-year index-linked 
government bonds, after allowing for anticipated future inflation, is now around 1%. For most of the 
past  25  years,  that  so-called  “real”  rate  of  interest has  varied  between  2%  and  4%.  Long-term real 
interest rates of no more than 1% would normally be a signal to spend more, save less, and to invest 
in physical as well as financial assets. But it is not at all clear that rates will persist at such low levels. 
So is this particular signpost reliable?  
There are broadly two types of explanation for the fall in long-term real rates around the world. The 
first  explains  low  interest  rates  as  the  outcome  of  an  increased  propensity  to  save  and  lower 
willingness to invest in the world as a whole. The second explains them as the result of rapid growth in 
money and credit which, in a “search for yield”, drives asset prices up and interest rates down.  
There is no doubt that in the past few years saving has been particularly high in the Asian economies. 
In  part,  this  reflects  their  wish  to  build  up  large  balances  in  US  dollars  to  protect  themselves  from 
financial  crises  that  several  of  them  experienced  in  the  1990’s,  and  also  to  maintain  competitive 
exchange  rates  to  allow  export  industries  to  absorb  surplus  labour.  For  example,  although  China 
invests an extraordinary 45% of its national income each year, it saves even more than this - 49% of 
national income in 2004. The resulting current account surpluses have been saved overseas, much of 
them  in  US  government  bonds.  So,  rather  surprisingly,  capital  is  flowing  from  some  of  the  poorest 
countries of the world to some of the richest. Moreover, the rise in oil prices has raised the incomes of 
oil-producing countries, which have also chosen to save much of their additional revenues in overseas 
financial  assets.  Those  surplus  savings  have  depressed  long-term  real  interest  rates.  In  the 
industrialised world, consumers have realised that this is a good time to borrow and spend, resulting in 
the “imbalances” evident in the current account deficits of both the US and the UK.  
Whether  long-term  real  rates  around  1%  are  sustainable  is  an  interesting  question,  and  that 
uncertainty poses serious questions for monetary policy. On the one hand, the increased propensity to 
save  across  the  world  could  start  to  unwind.  As  their  people  become  more  prosperous,  domestic 
demand in China and elsewhere in Asia will become the primary driver of those countries’ growth, so 
they may want to save less. And business investment in the developed economies, which has been 
weak in recent years for reasons we do not fully understand, may pick up as in previous recoveries. 
The  resulting  rise  in  real  interest  rates  and  implied  fall  in  asset  prices  would  encourage  the 
industrialised world to save more. That would mean a shift of resources in those countries away from 
domestic demand to net trade accompanied by a change in real exchange rates. The “imbalances” in 
the world economy would start to unwind. Where that would leave sterling and the outlook for inflation 
in the UK is impossible to know in advance.  
On the other hand, it is quite possible that real interest rates could remain low for some time. Although 
there are signs of a pick-up in business investment in the US and Euro area, investment remains weak 
in the UK and a recovery of world investment spending is not assured. The growing recognition that 
increasing  longevity  will  mean  we  need  to  save  more  for  retirement  may  sustain  or  even  lift  world 
saving rates. And pension funds are now matching the risks of their assets with the risks of their future 
liabilities,  thus  raising  the  demand  for  safer  long-term  financial  assets  such  as  index-linked 
government  bonds.  Economists  have  long  found  it  difficult  to  explain  why,  given  the  risks  of  equity 
investments, governments should need to offer high real rates of return on their bonds in a world of 
low and stable inflation. So perhaps the world capital market is returning to an era of low real rates 
more  akin  to  the  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries.  If  annual  market  rates  on  index-linked 
securities in the UK were to remain around 1%, then, with a 2% inflation target, the level of official 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2006
interest rates required to balance overall demand and supply would, in the long run, be lower than was 
thought necessary in the past few decades.  
Even if we knew that long-term interest rates were low because of a change in the balance of saving 
and investment in the world, judging the appropriate level of interest rates would be a challenge. But 
monetary policy is made more difficult by the fact that there is another, very different, explanation of 
recent  low  long-term  interest  rates.  Rapid  growth  of  money  -  as  central  banks  have  kept  official 
interest rates very low - has helped to push up asset prices as investors “search for yield”. Data from 
the IMF suggest that world broad money in 2003 and 2004 was growing at its fastest rate since the 
late  1980s.  Across  the  world,  the  prices  of  all  kinds  of  assets  have  risen  -  not  just  of  government 
bonds, but also of equities, houses and other real estate, commodities and gold and other precious 
metals.  
Moreover, risk premia have become unusually compressed and the expansion of money and credit 
may have encouraged investors to take on more risk than hitherto without demanding a higher return. 
It is questionable whether such behaviour can persist. At some point the ratio of asset prices to the 
prices of goods and services will revert to more normal levels. That could come about in one of two 
ways:  either  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  rise  to  “catch  up”  with  asset  prices  as  the  increased 
money leads to higher inflation, or asset prices fall back as markets reassess the appropriate levels of 
risk premia. In neither case would it be easy to keep inflation close to the 2% target.  
I  do  not  pretend  to  know  whether  the  signpost  of  low  levels  of  long-term  interest  rates  is  primarily 
related to underlying preferences for saving and investment, or to the global growth of money and a 
possible under-pricing of risk, or, in all probability, to some combination of the two. Nor, since we do 
not know the causes of low long-term rates, can we be sure for how long they will persist. Monetary 
policy will, therefore, need to be alert to the information contained in a wide range of asset prices, to 
be  forward-looking  in  its  aim  of  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  to  be  ready  to  respond  to 
changes in the signposts.  
The remarkable degree of stability that the UK economy has enjoyed over the past decade has been 
less evident over the past twelve months. Growth slowed and inflation rose above target. But after a 
period driving along a smooth new highway, a change to a more challenging road surface does not, as 
I said recently to the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee, mean that the wheels are coming 
off the economy; rather, it tells us that there are somewhat more and somewhat larger bumps on the 
road.  Monetary  policy  can  try  to  avoid  some  of  the  worst  bumps,  but  it  cannot  ensure  a  flat  road 
surface. Nevertheless, growth has picked up and inflation has fallen back close to its 2% target. Our 
central view remains one of steady growth and low inflation. But there are risks to that central view 
emanating  from  the  rest  of  the  world  and  we  shall  watch  developments  in  world  capital  markets 
carefully.  By  keeping  inflation  close  to  the  target,  and  so  doing  what  it  can  to  maintain  economic 
stability,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  aims  to  allow  you  and  other  businesses  to  follow  the 
signposts which guide a market economy.  
I cannot finish without reminding you that tomorrow is the 300th anniversary of the birth of Benjamin 
Franklin, arguably the greatest of the American founding fathers. During his lengthy stays in England, 
Benjamin  Franklin  visited  Kent  many  times.  To  celebrate  his  tercentenary  the  American  Brewing 
Association has produced a new recipe for Franklin’s favourite beer. The hops recommended for the 
recipe are Kent Goldings. Despite the fears of the demonstrators on Hop Saturday in 1908, the Kent 
hop industry has not disappeared altogether. The area under planting is certainly much smaller, but 
research in centres such as Wye College has produced the new hedgerow hops which are recognised 
worldwide. Employment in Kent, though, has moved into new and more productive sectors. Adapting 
to changes in the external environment is not easy for any of us- whether running a business or setting 
monetary policy - but if we do adjust the benefits will accrue, if not to everyone immediately then to the 
great majority over the years to come. 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 3
