Durmuş Yilmaz: Central Bank monetary and exchange rate policies and 
economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at a meeting 
organised by the Aegean Industrialists and Businessmen Association, İzmir, 8 June 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is, indeed, a great pleasure for me to address another information meeting – yet another one in a 
series held since 2003 – organized in cooperation with Dünya Newspaper with a view to informing the 
business world. Today’s meeting is the first meeting of 2006. I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the Aegean Industrialists and Businessmen Association for their organization. 
Considering recent inflation figures, I am sure you are all expecting me to inform you of developments 
in the economy, especially those regarding inflation. However, before moving on to topical subjects, at 
this  very  first  meeting  of  2006,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  on  what  the  transformation  process  the 
Turkish economy has been undergoing since 2001 means to us. I also want to give you a framework 
of the macroeconomic outlook.  
My speech will cover the developments in inflation, the Central Bank’s interest rate and exchange rate 
policies, the developments in financial markets, growth, employment and the current account deficit.  
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  the  Turkish  economy  has  been undergoing a  structural  transformation 
process. This dynamic process, which started in 2001 and has reached a certain point today – though 
it still has a long way to go – is the process that will reveal the potential of our economy and determine 
its place in the world.  
Since that time only five years have passed. This is a short span of time for an economy that needs 
structural  changes  and  whose  policies  are  formulated  towards  to  this  end,  in  order  to  implement 
reforms, achieve results and ensure the sustainability of such results.  
Yet, the achievements attained in macroeconomic aggregates have been even beyond the program 
forecasts.  
CPI inflation declined to single digit figures after 35 years, from 68.5 percent as of end-2001. While 
inflation was in decline, high growth rates were achieved. Annual growth in GNP, which was realized 
as 3.9 percent on average between 1970 - 2001, became 7.8 percent between 2002 - 2005.  
The ratio of public net debt stock to GNP, which had led to concerns about the sustainability of public 
debt, decreased to 55.8 percent as of 2005, from 90.5 percent. 
With  the  contribution  of  all  these  favorable  developments  in  economic  aggregates,  the  Turkish 
economy has continued to integrate with the world and Turkey’s foreign trade volume has expanded 
by nearly 170 percent since 2001, reaching USD 196 billion on an annual basis, by April 2006. 
The  main  factors  that  lie  behind  this  rapid  change  that  is  clearly  observed  in  the  macroeconomic 
aggregates are; confidence, stability and the enhancement of predictability. The success attained in 
these  three  areas,  which  are  interlinked  with  each  other  and  shape  expectations,  has  activated 
Turkey’s economic potential.  
In my opinion, the milestone in attaining enhanced confidence, stability and predictability of economic 
policies and especially of monetary policies, was the Central Bank of Turkey becoming independent in 
2001 with  the  amendment  to  Central Bank Law,  and  its becoming  primarily  committed  to  achieving 
and maintaining price stability.  
Starting from 2001, when the Central Bank achieved its independence, Turkey has been experiencing 
a ‘disinflation process’. In the four years to follow, inflation targets were announced, these targets were 
achieved and a strong and reliable monetary policy history was established. 
With determined implementation of macroeconomic policies, particularly of fiscal policy, accompanying 
a large number of significant structural reforms, the strong support of international institutions and the 
perspective of the European Union, this process, as a whole, has established a more reliable, stable 
and predictable economic environment. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
This environment should definitely be maintained and any kind of efforts and discourses that may raise 
doubts about the determination of economic policies or worsen expectations should be avoided. 
The stage Turkish economy has reached is the concrete proof to what extent price stability-centered 
macroeconomic  stability  is  significant  and  vital  for  achieving  sustainable  growth,  an  increase  in 
employment and an improvement in welfare, which are the ultimate objectives of economic policies.  
Within this framework it can be clearly seen that price stability is not a monetary policy cliché. The 
efforts  towards  establishing  price  stability  are  the  efforts  towards  creating  an  environment  where 
people can find jobs and make a living; make investments; and look confidently to the future. 
Price stability, in this context, is not an option for economic policies, but a sine qua non condition. 
It is evident that the high and chronic inflationary environment, which has persisted for decades, has 
cost us very dearly not only in the economic field but also in the social field. High inflation has led to a 
large  number  of  problems  in  economic  and  social  fields,  such  as  the  deterioration  in  resource 
allocation,  inequitable  income  and  wealth  distribution,  low  growth  and  employment  rates  and  an 
increase  in  short-term  approaches  in  the  economy.  All  of  this  damage  caused  by  inflation  should 
always be kept in mind.  
Therefore, price stability is an indispensable objective that cannot be renounced for any other priority 
or  aim.  Accordingly,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  sets  its  policies  with  a  medium-term  perspective  – 
independent of daily policies and politics – entirely towards price stability, its primary objective.  
In 2006, the Central Bank of Turkey adopted the formal inflation targeting regime as monetary policy 
strategy within the framework of its objective to achieve and preserve price stability.  
It is of great importance to comprehend this regime and the accountability mechanism with regards to 
inflation  targets  and  the  course  of  inflation.  Therefore,  let  me  touch  on  a  few  elements  of  formal 
inflation targeting.  
Before all else, the point that I would like to emphasize is that our inflation targets are point targets. 
These targets have been set as consumer price index inflation. Our policies are established solely with 
the aim of achieving these targets.  
In  our  monetary  policy  implementations,  we  have  announced  our  inflation  targets  for  a  three-year 
period in order to increase the emphasis placed on medium-term. In this context, the inflation target is 
5 percent for 2006 and 4 percent for 2007 and 2008.  
To apply a rule to the Central Bank’s accountability in the event of any deviation or the possibility of 
deviation from the inflation target, a + 2 point-uncertainty band has been established around the point 
target. Once again, I would like to underline the significance of this issue. This band, which has been 
formed around the inflation target, aims at setting the accountability criteria.  
Looking at the practices around the world, we see that a 40 percent-uncertainty band has been formed 
around the point target in most countries. Our implementation is based on this approach. In the event 
that inflation is realized outside this band or, in case of such a possibility, the mechanisms specified 
with respect to accountability will start. 
With the introduction of the formal inflation targeting regime, interest rate decisions are made by voting 
at  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting.  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings  are  held  once  a 
month on pre-announced dates. Nevertheless, when deemed necessary, extraordinary meetings may 
be held, such as yesterday’s meeting. 
Despite  the  significant  distance  covered  in  the  fight  against  inflation,  price  stability  has  not  been 
achieved yet and there is still a long way to go. Recent inflation developments also confirm this fact.  
At this point, I would like to summarize the inflation and monetary policy developments of the recent 
period.  
The increase in inflation in the first quarter of the year was an expected development, which has been 
stated in the Bank’s reports since January. In April and May, the increase in inflation was above the 
expected level due to unforeseen developments in seasonal pricing behaviors. Compared to March, 
consumer  prices  increased  by  1.34  percent  and  1.88  percent  in  April  and  May,  respectively.  As  of 
May, annual inflation became 9.86 percent, which is obviously above the target path.  
In May, the direct effects of exchange rate movements on inflation started to be observed through the 
channels of fuel oil, gold and durable goods. During this period, the upward pressure exerted by the 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
depreciation in the New Turkish lira on inflation reached 0.5 points. Adding the exogenous movements 
in gold and oil prices, the total impact amounts to 0.65 point. In other words, some of the direct effects 
of exchange rate movements on prices became evident in May. However, these effects are expected 
to be high in June, too. In the light of evaluations made in this respect, annual inflation figures may 
increase  a  little  more  for  a  temporary  period  of  time  in  the  upcoming  months,  due  to  the  recent 
exchange rate movements observed after the fluctuations in financial markets. We foresee that these 
developments will mostly affect the short term, and the disinflation process will not be interrupted as 
long as the monetary and fiscal discipline continues in the medium-term.  
Nevertheless, we have experienced many times that short-term developments might affect longer-term 
variables via expectations, due to past habits and the short-term perspective in Turkey. As a matter of 
fact,  we  observe  that  short-term  developments  seem  likely  to  affect  the  medium-term  inflation 
expectations and pricing behaviors recently. In order to prevent the said short-term developments from 
creating permanent impacts on pricing behaviors and to maintain consistency between the medium-
term  inflation  trend  and  the  targets,  we  have  held  an  extra  meeting  and  increased  short-term 
borrowing interest rates to 15 percent from 13.25 percent. In this respect, the outlook we take as a 
basis is the one in which a relative slowdown is observed in domestic demand, the increase in unit 
costs stops and inflation enters a downward trend again in the coming months.  
In light of information currently available, it can be said that inflation will be above the point target in 
end-2006. In this framework, we have adopted a policy perspective in which inflation will come close to 
the target towards the end of 2007. In other words, the critical point for the Bank is to assure that the 
impacts  of  the  above-mentioned  developments  are  confined  to  2006  and  avoid  any  deterioration  in 
expectations,  which  stand  as  a  significant  determinant  of  the  inflationary  process,  for  the  sake  of 
achieving medium-term targets.  
At this point, I would like to draw your attention to a few important points about the interest rate policy 
of the Bank and underline some issues once again.  
Short-term interest rates are the main policy instrument of the Central Bank. The Central Bank makes 
its policies and interest rate decisions in line with its main goal of achieving price stability and inflation 
targets.  
The Bank makes all its policies and decisions in view of medium-term trends rather than daily or short-
term ones, and these policies and decisions are grounded on main trends.   
In  this  framework,  while  making  its  interest  rate  decisions,  the  Bank  uses  a  very  wide  data  set 
including  supply-demand  conditions,  costs,  model  forecasts,  expectations,  domestic  and  external 
developments;  and  evaluates  all  these  data  with  a  forward-looking  perspective.  This  process  is 
certainly  a  dynamic  one,  and  every  new  piece  of  data  and  development  is  being  closely  monitored 
within the framework of the Bank’s inflation forecasts. Another significant fact about the interest rate 
decisions of the Bank is that the impacts of these decisions are observed with a time lag. The impact 
of  the  decisions  on  economic  activity  becomes  evident  within  a  period  of  3-9  months,  while  their 
impact on inflation is observed within a period of 9-18 months.  
However, it can be said that this period of time is much shorter in case of the expectations channel, 
which  is  a  part  of  the  transmission  mechanism  and  operates  in  a  very  effective  manner  in  our 
economy.  
At this point, I would like to emphasize that the Turkish economy has entered a normalization process. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  comparison  with  previous  periods,  the  banking  sector  has  a  more  robust 
structure  and  fiscal  dominance  has  decreased  considerably.  As  a  result  of  this  structure,  any 
measures to be taken regarding the policy instrument should be evaluated in terms of the impacts of 
the  monetary  policy  on  inflation,  rather  than  in  view  of  the  likely  effects  of  these  measures’ 
consequences  on  the  above-mentioned  areas.  In  other  words,  the  increase  in  short-term  interest 
rates,  which  are  the  policy  instrument,  should  be  evaluated  merely  as  a  necessary  reaction  of 
monetary policy for achieving the medium-term inflation targets.  
When the sub-indicators demonstrating the main trends in inflation are analyzed, it is observed that 
the targets for 2007 and 2008 seem achievable in light of the medium-term outlook as of the present 
date, as long as the cautious stance in monetary policy is maintained.  
Certainly,  for  the  course  of  inflation  to  follow  a  path  in  line  with  the  forecasts  of  the  Bank,  certain 
conditions  need  to  be  satisfied.  In  other  words,  there  are  some  risks  to  the  sustainability  of  the 
disinflation process in the medium-term.  
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
The first one of these risks is the continuance of the increase in oil and commodity prices.  
Moreover, continuance of the controlled course of the increase in total demand provided by tight fiscal 
and monetary policies is a must for preventing a demand-based inflationary pressure.  
Prices of public goods and services, indirect taxes and the incomes policy should be consistent with 
inflation targets.  
Developments in the risk premium, which result from monetary policies of developed countries and are 
likely to cause fluctuations in global liquidity conditions, also pose risks to the disinflation process.  
As I have mentioned before, attempts and statements that may damage expectations can also lead to 
unfavorable  effects  on  the  disinflation  process.  In  this  framework,  relations  with  the  IMF  and  the 
European Union are two critical anchors in terms of medium and long-term expectations. Support from 
international  institutions  is a  significant  factor  bringing  about  additional confidence.  European  Union 
negotiations  for  full  membership  provide  support  to  the  national  program  in  the  framework  of  the 
improvement of the Turkish economy’s investment environment and increase the predictability of the 
economy in the medium and long term.  
Uninterrupted  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is  of  critical  importance.  The  continuance  of  the 
reform  process  is  the  only  way  to  sustain  and  build  on  the  achievements  made  up  to  now.  Social 
Security Reform is a significant step in this respect.  
The ongoing rigidity in prices of the services group and the volatilities in prices of agricultural products 
due to weather conditions are being closely monitored for the achievability of inflation targets.  
After dwelling on the latest developments in inflation and the interest rate policy of our bank, I would 
like to present the general outlook of the floating exchange rate regime and the exchange rate policy. 
The floating exchange rate regime applied under formal inflation targeting is the main element of our 
policies as it has been during the past five years.  
When the legal framework for setting the exchange rate regime is analyzed, we see that the exchange 
rate regime is set with the Government, while the design and application of the exchange rate policy to 
be conducted in the framework of the regime is under the authority and responsibility of the Central 
Bank.  
The essence of the floating exchange rate regime is that the value of the Turkish lira against foreign 
currencies is formed under market conditions and according to developments in supply and demand 
conditions.  
In  this  respect,  the  Central  Bank conducts  two  kinds  of  transactions  in  markets:  Firstly,  the  Central 
Bank purchases foreign exchange to build up reserves. These purchases are made via FX purchase 
auctions. In 2006, the daily purchase amount for these auctions including options is USD 60 million. 
These  auctions  were  suspended  on  May  16,  2006  due  to  market  conditions  and  the  decline  in  FX 
supply.  When  the  conditions  for  these  auctions  mature,  they  will  be  resumed.  As  a  result  of  our 
strategy to increase reserves, which is applied in this framework, the amount of our reserves reached 
USD 60 billion as of May 26, 2006.  
Secondly, the Central Bank conducts interventions due to volatility. Taking into account the factors that 
cause volatility in either direction or potential developments, the Central Bank may intervene directly in 
the market or use announcements and warnings. These implementations do not have a mechanical 
nature.  As  the  conditions  of  each  intervention  differ  from  each  other,  neither  do  they  have  a 
symmetrical nature.  
At this point, I would like to share my views about the activity observed in the value of the Turkish Lira 
lately.  
The international liquidity conditions, which change according to the monetary policies pursued by the 
central banks of developed countries, and the perceptions of uncertainty that emerged due to internal 
and external developments, had considerable effect on the exchange rate movements that have been 
observed almost for a month. In the short term, this activity is perceived to be more negative than the 
information it contains.  
However,  there  is  no  deterioration  in  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  There  is  no  change  in  the 
program projections and targets. The movement of the exchange rate is mainly caused by external 
developments. Similar movements are observed in other developing countries, as well.  
4 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Today, the floating exchange rate regime performs its shock-absorbing function. We have observed 
similar developments in the past five years, as well. Exchange rates displayed similar fluctuations and 
movements in the short term, surpassed their immediate levels, but the main tendency did not change. 
Due  to  the  nature  of  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  and  the  exchange  rate  policy,  similar 
movements may also be observed in the future, as a result of similar or different factors.  
The  similar  impacts  of  internal  and  external  shocks  on  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates  and 
therefore, on the economy, will be weaker and last for a shorter period of time, on condition that the 
policies and implementations of the program continue without any compromise, the dynamism and the 
self-feeding nature of the reform process is kept in mind, the related steps are taken decisively in time 
and macroeconomic foundations get stronger.  
It should not be forgotten that the macroeconomic foundations, current policies, structural reforms and 
long-term expectations have an impact on the long-term movements of the Turkish lira.  
However, as the exchange rate is a variable that bears importance with respect to our economy and is 
a component of financial stability, the activity in the exchange rates is monitored closely by the Central 
Bank.  
It should be kept in mind that such movements in the exchange rate pose a risk as well as causing 
uncertainty. It is possible to protect us from the upward and downward fluctuations in exchange rates. 
The techniques for risk aversion should definitely be used. The İzmir Derivatives Exchange provides 
an important opportunity in this respect.  
After focusing on the developments in inflation and our policies regarding interest rates and exchange 
rates, now I would like to talk about the growth of the Turkish economy.  
As you all know, the Turkish economy has been displaying a high growth performance for the last four 
years. Since 2001, cumulative real growth has been 35.1 percent, whereas the average annual growth 
has been 7.8 percent.  
The point that stands out in the growth figures is that growth is led by the private sector and that the 
investment-originated base is growing.  
In  the  2001-2005  period,  investment  expenditures  of  the  private  sector  increased  by  105  percent, 
while those of the public sector increased by 15.5 percent. On the consumption side, expenditures of 
the private sector increased by 30.3 percent in the same period, whereas those of the public sector 
increased by 5.9 percent.  
These developments indicate that the ongoing strong investment trend enhanced the growth potential 
and that the dynamics and actors of growth changed parallel to Turkey’s structural change process. 
Growing with public resources is no longer the case.  
In  this  respect,  it  is  clear  today  that  the  public  sector  assumes  and  should  assume,  a  strong 
supervisory and regulatory role in the framework of good governance principles. This is emphasized 
evidently  in  the  Ninth  Development  Plan  Strategy,  which  comprises  the  period  between  2007  and 
2013. The seven-year development strategy draws the framework of a plan that “focuses on planning 
a strategy and adopting a perspective for today where the changes are rapid and multi-dimensional 
and the competition is huge”.  
In this framework, public policies are focused on enhancing the competitiveness of our economy. With 
this aim, it is aimed at ensuring the permanency of macroeconomic stability, enhancing the business 
environment, reducing unregistered economic activity and developing the financial system.  
As a result of this role that is given to the public sector and the implementations of tight fiscal policy, 
public savings increase. This environment gives the private sector an opportunity to obtain new and 
low-cost resources with longer maturity.  
The  private  sector  undertakes  a  number  of  tasks  in  this  respect.  The  private  sector  should  create 
strong and transparent balance sheets and pay attention to risk management principles. Hence, the 
private sector should try to use capital markets and develop new financial instruments.  
Now, I would like to underline a point. As you all know, total saving rates are low in our country. As we 
do not have the opportunity to increase private saving rates in the short term, the utilization of foreign 
savings to increase investments and competitiveness becomes a necessity for obtaining high growth 
rates.  Hence,  it  is  necessary  to  close  the  savings  gap  directly  with  foreign  investments  in  order  to 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 5
reach  high  growth  rates.  In  this  scope,  activities  regarding  the  improvement  of  the  investment 
environment are highly significant.  
Another change, which is created by the ongoing structural change in our country in growth dynamics, 
is closely related to the increases in productivity. According to SPO data, the contribution of total factor 
productivity to growth reached 51.3 percent in the 2002-2004 period, while this rate was 3.3 percent in 
the 1990-2000 period.   
In  other  words,  the  largest  contribution  to  growth  comes  from  the  increases  in  productivity.  In  the 
2001-2005 period, productivity increases in the private manufacturing industry reached 36 percent, in 
cumulate terms. Hence, the increase in productivity was the main determinant of growth, during this 
period.  Moreover,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  increases  in  productivity  not  only  enhance  the 
quality of growth, but also contribute to the sustainability of growth.  
I would like to talk about another factor in the scope of the changing growth dynamics in the Turkish 
economy. That is the fact that our economy is getting more and more integrated with the world. High 
export rates have made a remarkable contribution to growth in the past four years. In this period, the 
average  annual  rate  of  increase  of  exports  realized  as  24  percent.  In  the  2002-2005  period,  our 
exports  increased  by  104  percent.  Parallel  to  this  development,  firms  are  increasingly  shifting  to 
exports and reaching international markets by quitting local production processes and local markets.  
As  our  economy  opens  to  the  outside  world,  profit  margins  narrow,  due  to  increasing  internal  and 
external competition in the sectors. In such an environment, the increase in productivity becomes the 
main determinant of competition.  
When  the  data  pertaining  to  sectors’  productivity,  growth  and  exports  in  the  2001-2005  period  are 
analyzed, it is seen that the sectors, which grew most rapidly and increased their exports the most, are 
also  the  sectors  that  increased  their  productivity  the  most.  This  development  clearly  points  to  the 
importance of the continuation of the measures that increase productivity in sectors.  
As  you  may  assume,  short-term  approaches  would  not  work  in  such  a  strongly  competitive 
environment.  It  is  necessary  to  develop  medium  term  and  long  term  strategies  in  order  to  be 
permanent  and  to  gain  a  place.  In  this  scope,  public  and  private  sectors  should  act  together.  The 
public sector should try to create a suitable environment for the private sector to compete with its rivals 
in international markets under market conditions. 
Today, the Turkish economy is at a point where a significant progress has been made on the road to 
macroeconomic  stability.  Provided  the  achievements  so  far  are  maintained,  the  reform  process  is 
continued  without  interruption  and  reinforced  by  taking  the  necessary  micro-measures,  the  growth 
potential would increase and growth would be sustainable.  
After summarizing the growth process in Turkey and the changing dynamics, now I would like to move 
on to the developments pertaining to employment and the labor market.  
It  is  conceded  that  employment  is  one  of  the  top  items  on  the  agenda  of  the  Turkish  economy. 
Unemployment rates have been very high for some time. Unfortunately it is not possible to repeat the 
outstanding performance observed in macroeconomic aggregates in the labor market.  
In February 2006, the unemployment rate increased by 0.2 percentage points compared to February 
2005  and  reached  11.9  percent.  Meanwhile,  non-agricultural  unemployment  decreased  by  0.6 
percentage points compared to the same period last year and came down to 14.8 percent. In the last 
one-year-period, the number of people working in sectors other than the agricultural sector increased 
by 829 thousand.  
The rise in employment can mostly be attributed to structural factors. Non-agricultural sectors have a 
bigger potential for creating jobs. However, it is a fact that there are structural problems in the labor 
market, especially in the agricultural sector. Now, let me share these problems with you briefly.  
The data pertaining to the labor market in Turkey point to a rapid shift of workers from the agricultural 
sector  to  other  sectors  for  the  last  four  years.  The  share  of  agricultural  employment  in  total 
employment, which was 38 percent in 2001, came down to 25.1 percent by February 2006. However, 
when the EU-15 average of 3.7 percent recorded in 2004 is taken into account, it is obvious that 25.1 
percent is still very high. Meanwhile, it is expected that the shift from the agricultural sector to non-
agricultural  sectors  will  continue  and  the  share  of  the  agricultural  sector  in  total  employment  will 
gradually decrease. The decline in agricultural employment prevents a decline in the unemployment 
rate.  
6 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Another important factor affecting employment in Turkey is the country’s demographical structure. In 
Turkey, population growth is fast and the ratio of young population to total population is high, which 
together  lead  to  a  high  unemployment  rate  in  young  population.  In  February  2006,  unemployment 
among the young population in Turkey was recorded as 21.9 percent.  
The low labor force participation rate of women is another structural problem of the Turkish economy. 
This constitutes a serious loss in the labor force, leads to a dependence relationship between men 
and women, and increases the disturbance created by unemployment.  
Meanwhile, the high rates of employment taxes coupled with very common informal economic activity 
prevents a permanent rise in employment and increases volatility. The low rate of employment among 
those who have  received  vocational  training  points  to  the  fact  that  there  is a  lack  of  qualified  labor 
force to support the structural change.  
These structural problems call for the implementation of medium and long-term supply-side policies in 
order  to  reduce  unemployment  rates.  Within  this  scope,  the  framework  drawn  in  the  Ninth 
Development  Plan  Strategy,  which  was  prepared  in  line  with  the  European  Union’s  employment 
strategy and aimed at increasing employment, is kind of a road map for the solution.  
The  Ninth  Development  Plan  Strategy  contains  strategies  for  developing  the  labor  market  and 
increasing the responsiveness of education to the demand for labor with the final aim of increasing 
employment. To put it in another way, the framework in question is intended to establish a balance 
between flexibility and safety, gradually easing the burden on employment, increasing the firms’ and 
workers’ capacity to adopt to changes, increasing the quality of workers that are transferred from the 
agricultural sector, and developing active labor policies to meet labor market’s needs.  
In the last part of my presentation, I would like to briefly mention the current account deficit problem.  
As it is known, in line with the high growth rate, an upward trend is observed in the current account 
deficit. Today, the primary reason of the current account deficit is that investments grow faster than 
savings.  
In 2005, the current account deficit was recorded as USD billion 23.1 billion and the ratio of current 
account deficit to national income was 6.4 percent. In this ratio, the impact of energy prices, which is 
composed of the prices of crude oil, natural gas and coal, was 1.4 points and the impact of the rise in 
crude oil prices alone was 1.1 points.  
By April 2006, the current account deficit increased to USD 26.8 billion. However, the question is not 
the  level  itself  but  its  sustainability.  When  global  trends  are  analyzed,  it  is  observed  that  countries, 
which  have  succeeded 
reinforced 
macroeconomic stability, are able to sustain higher current account deficits compared to the past. The 
ratio of current account deficit to GDP is 11.8 percent in Bulgaria, 8.7 percent in Romania, 7.9 percent 
in Hungary and 7.2 percent in the Slovak Republic1.  
Another point that I would like to highlight about the current account deficit is that sustainability of high 
current account deficit depends on the financing quality of the deficit. Within this framework, I would 
like to present some figures on the maturity structure of capital inflows to Turkey.  
In April 2006, net capital inflow excluding IMF credits was USD 53.6 billion. The share of direct foreign 
investments  and  long-term  capital  in  financing  of  current  account  deficit  increases  rapidly.  In  April 
2006, long-term capital inflow became USD 23.2 billion and credit utilization of the non-banking private 
sector became USD 21.1 billion.  
The primary source of the capital inflow was long-term capital and credit utilization of the non-banking 
sector; 85 percent of which was long-term.  
Making a projection, we expect this financing structure to continue. According to the “Foreign Direct 
Investment Confidence Index”, which questions the countries’ capacity to attract investments over a 1-
3  year  period  and  which  is  an  indicator  of  foreign  direct  investments  that  will  come  to  the  country, 
Turkey  was  the  13th  most  attractive  foreign  direct  investment  destination  among  25  countries  in 
financial  and  economic 
integration  and 
increasing 
in 
                                                      
1 
IMF, World Economic Forum, April 2006. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 7
20052. According to the same survey again, Turkey took the 7th place among European investors and 
was the 8th destination that international executives are most optimistic about the economic outlook.  
Lastly, I would like to touch upon the much-debated hot money issue pertaining to the financing of the 
current account deficit.  
Hot  money  has  several  definitions.  The  basic  definition  of  hot  money  is  the  sum  of  foreigners’ 
purchase  of  securities,  portfolio  investments,  short-term  capital  inflows  and  the  net  errors  and 
omissions item. According to this definition, by April 2006, the annual hot money inflow has reached 
USD 17.3 billion. The most important component of hot money is portfolio investments composed of 
securities and government papers.  
Some  outflow  was  observed,  with  the  last  fluctuations.  However,  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime 
and strong macroeconomic fundamentals reduce the negative impacts of the outflow.  
The structural transformation process that the Turkish economy is undergoing is very important with 
respect to the sustainability of higher current account deficits.  
We are happy to see that within the framework of the transformation process, the finance sector is 
much stronger. In other words, open positions in the banking sector are fairly limited. Nevertheless, 
the private sector should be very careful about open positions.  
Secondly,  macroeconomic  fundamentals  grow  stronger  every  day  and  a  tight  fiscal  discipline  and 
monetary  policy  are  being  implemented.  We  have  a  high  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The 
floating  exchange  rate  regime  has  a  shock-absorbing  ability.  The  authorities  responsible  for  the 
economy are in coordination and they are monitoring developments pertaining to the current account 
deficit very closely.  
As long as the steadfast implementation of the current program is continued without concessions, the 
current account deficit’s potential to pose a risk will diminish.  
Today,  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  explain  the  latest 
developments in the Turkish economy, as well as the Central Bank’s policies. I would like to take this 
opportunity to reiterate the message that our active communication strategy will continue together with 
the same transparent and steadfast attitude.  
Thank you very much. 
                                                      
2   A.T. Kearney, FDI Confidence Index, Global Business Policy Council 2005, Vol. 8. 
8 
 BIS Review 68/2006
