Jaime Caruana: The practical implementation of Basel II - current challenges 
and the way forward 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the "Basel II & Banking Regulation Forum" organised by GARP (Global 
Association of Risk Professionals), Barcelona, 16 May 2006.  
 Introduction and overview  
It is an honour to be invited to join you for what looks to be a very timely and interesting conference, 
and it is also my great pleasure to welcome you to Spain.  
I hope that you will have the opportunity to explore the great city of Barcelona during your time here. It 
is one of the most innovative cities in the world for art, architecture, cuisine, and even…football.  
You  may  be  aware  that  Barcelona  underwent  a  major  transformation  when  it  hosted  the  Summer 
Olympics  in  1992.  What  you  may  not  know  is  that  the  history  of  Barcelona  is  filled  with  similar 
transformations.  It  is  a  city  that  risk  professionals  should  be  able  to  appreciate,  as  it  has  not  only 
survived  countless  “tail  events”  over  the  years,  but  has  managed  to  thrive  and  continually  reinvent 
itself in response. With that in mind, I would like to talk today about how supervisors and the industry 
have been responding to risk and positioning ourselves to continue to grow and evolve.  
My talk today is likely to be one of my last public addresses as Chairman of the Basel Committee. 
Therefore, while the focus of my comments will be on the current situation and looking forward to the 
future,  I  hope  you  will  allow  me  also  to  reflect  on  some  of  the  things  I  have  learned  over  the  past 
years.  
In the first part of my intervention today, I will discuss the current state of the new framework for bank 
capital adequacy, or Basel II, as well as how supervisors are carrying out work related to Basel II and 
sound risk management practices.  
Second, I would like to discuss some of the key lessons that I’ve learned in the development of Basel 
II,  which  are  factors  that  I  believe  will  contribute  not  only  to  its  successful  implementation  and 
longevity, but also more generally to financial stability and effective banking supervision.  
And I will close with some more detailed comments on a lesson we have learned during this process 
that I think has broader implications for risk management in general – that is, the importance of taking 
account of the macroeconomic perspective and the effects of the cycle.  
Basel II update  
One of Barcelona’s greatest claims to fame is its modernista architecture, exemplified by the work of 
Antoni  Gaudí.  The  modernistas  looked  to  the  past  for  inspiration,  but  applied  modern  tools  and 
techniques  to  create  something  new  with  a  focus  on  intricate  details.  Of  course,  the  Basel  II 
Framework does not have the beauty of Gaudí’s Sagrada Família, but I nevertheless think that both 
supervisors and the industry have accomplished something similar. Basel II builds on long-standing 
principles of bank safety and soundness, but with greater emphasis on modern tools of financial risk 
management  and  differentiation  of  drivers  of  risk.  And,  like  the  Sagrada  Família,  the  framework  for 
Basel II is firmly in place but much work still remains until the plans are finally executed.  
As  I’m  sure  you’re  aware,  with  the  publication  of  documents  on  trading  book/double-default  and 
downturn  LGDs  last  year,  the  Basel  Committee  has  completed  its  work  on  Basel  II  policy 
development.  Our  efforts  are  now  firmly  focused  on  the  challenging  task  of  implementing  the 
Framework as efficiently and effectively as possible. With that in mind, I would like to now touch on 
some  issues  relating  to  the  calibration  and  implementation  of  Basel  II,  as  well  as  work  in  both  the 
Committee and the industry on complex financial products and risk management  
BIS Review 46/2006 
 1
Calibration  
One of the Committee’s objectives throughout the development of Basel II has been to maintain the 
overall level of capital in the banking system. To meet this objective, the Committee introduced a so-
called “scaling factor” of 1.06 into the Framework, with the agreement that this would be reviewed prior 
to final implementation.  
The Committee has just completed its fifth Quantitative Impact Study, or QIS 5, and I would like to 
express my gratitude to those of you here today whose banks submitted data as part of this exercise. 
The Basel Committee will be meeting in Berlin next week, and one of the main items on our agenda 
will be to discuss the results. We hope to be able to say more about calibration shortly thereafter.  
What  I  can  say  at  this  moment  is  that  I  have  not  seen  anything  that  would  call  into  question  the 
framework, or which cannot be addressed through implementation. . We are carefully reviewing any 
dispersion of results to better understand the underlying reasons. Some dispersion is to be expected 
within a risk-based system, but it is important that material dispersions are driven by actual differences 
in risk. In addition, while there is still a need for better data quality in the future, it appears that the 
quality of data submitted in QIS 5 was greatly improved over the data submitted in the previous QIS 
exercises. This is certainly a positive development, and I hope banks continue to make strides in this 
area.  
What is important to keep in mind about QIS 5 is that it represents a point-in-time view. We know that 
models and validations processes are still under development, just as banks are working to take into 
account the recent updates to the trading book regime and the guidance on incorporating economic 
downturn effects in LGD estimates. We cannot know the true impact of Basel II until it has actually 
been  implemented,  which  is  why  we  have  built  safeguards  such  as  transitional  floors  into  the 
Framework. That is one reason the Committee is placing so much importance on an effective Basel II 
implementation process, which brings me to my next point.  
Implementation issues  
From the outset, one of the key objectives of both Basel II and, indeed, the current Accord, has been 
to maintain a level playing field across jurisdictions. Since experience has shown that this was difficult 
to  achieve  even  under  the  fairly  rigid  Basel  I  rules,  the  challenge  will  be  even  greater  in  the  more 
flexible Basel II regime. One of the key lessons we have learned in this whole process is that having 
similar national rules, which are based on common international agreements, does not of itself create 
a level playing field.  
What is essential is how the rules will be applied. The success of Basel II will depend to a large extent 
on our ability to achieve greater convergence in our supervisory practices in implementing these rules. 
This will require a much higher level of cooperation among supervisors than hitherto. Home country 
and  host  country  supervisors  will  need  to  work  closely  with  each  other  and  with  banks  to  provide 
effective supervision while minimising burden and duplication of effort. Although changes in financial 
markets mean that these efforts would in any case be necessary, Basel II has raised the stakes.  
To promote convergence, the Committee has established an Accord Implementation Group, or AIG, 
which  is  chaired  by  Nick  Le  Pan,  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  in  Canada  and  Vice-
Chairman of the Basel Committee.  
When the AIG began its work, it quickly became clear that there was no “one-size-fits-all” approach to 
implementing Basel II. Rather, implementation should be tailored to the specific circumstances of a 
bank and the jurisdictions it operates in. In this regard, one of the primary methods the AIG uses to 
promote convergence is to encourage home supervisors of the 50 or 60 largest internationally active 
banks in Basel Committee member countries to engage in practical outreach to host supervisors and 
the  banks  to  open  clear  lines  of  communication  and  cooperation  in  based  on  banks’  own 
implementation plans. Each home supervisor coordinates the work in a way that is most practical in 
light of the particular bank circumstances and its own supervisory approach. It is clear that successful 
implementation rests on adequate flows of information, as well as trust among supervisors.  
As  we  go  forward,  we  need  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  top-down  and  bottom-up 
consistency.  That  is,  the  top-down  rules  and  the  bottom-up  convergence  of  supervisory  practices 
should work together to reinforce a level playing field. This balance will naturally be dynamic. Early on, 
the scales were tipped toward developing a common set of rules. Now that these rules are in place, 
the  scale  is  tipping  the  other  way  toward  enhancing  communication  and  convergence  among 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2006
supervisors  in  the  implementation  of  these  rules.  I  expect  that  this  dynamic  process will  accelerate 
through work within the AIG, with supervisors outside of the Committee, and by banks in the months 
and years ahead.  
Risk management and complex products  
Our response to changes in risks must also be dynamic, and it is to this aspect that I would like to turn 
now.  In  recent  years,  we  have  seen  tremendous  growth  in  the  derivative  markets,  which  include  a 
range  of  quite  complex  products.  In  addition,  these  markets  have  attracted  new  participants,  in 
particular hedge funds, whose risk profiles and exposures may not be transparent to regulators or to 
other market participants. While these developments have had the beneficial effect of diversifying and 
spreading credit risk, they have also posed new risks. I would like to briefly discuss steps that both 
supervisors and the industry are taking to promote better management of these risks, and to ensure 
that supervision keeps track with market developments.  
Supervisory efforts  
One  important  area  where  we  are  working  within  the  Basel  Committee  to  promote  sound  risk 
management practices is through a review and, if necessary, update of the Committee’s 1999 paper 
on sound practices for banks’ interactions with highly leveraged institutions. As part of this review, we 
are  looking  at  emerging  best  practices  related  to  banks’  interactions with  credit  derivatives  markets 
and  hedge  funds.  In  addition,  we  have  had  informal  discussions  regarding  the  potential  impact  on 
bank safety and soundness of prime brokerage activities.  
We are also looking into how to better capture risks associated with banks’ trading book positions in 
credit  derivatives  and  highly  structured  and  complex  products.  The  AIG  has  established  a  working 
group that is following up on the Committee’s July 2005 trading book guidance. This working group, in 
consultation with the industry, is in the process of identifying possible principles for the implementation 
of so-called incremental default risk charge for trading book capital, and will be exploring other issues 
related to the measurement and modelling of risk in the trading book.  
And work is also going on outside the auspices of the Basel Committee. Many of you are probably 
aware  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  the  UK  Financial  Services  Authority,  in 
conjunction with other supervisors of major credit derivative dealers, have encouraged the industry to 
focus  greater  attention  on  sound  risk  management  practices  and  the  infrastructure  of  the  credit 
derivatives  markets  by  improving  controls  around  assignments,  reducing  confirmation  backlogs  and 
increasing  the  use  of  electronic  matching  platforms.  Other  supervisors  are  reviewing  bank  stress 
testing  practices  and  potential  risks  arising  from  banks’  private  equity  activities  and  exposures  to 
hedge funds. The Basel Committee supports these efforts, and members will continue to keep each 
other informed on the results of their reviews.  
Private sector initiatives  
The public good of financial stability is not just of interest to supervisors and public authorities, but also 
to the financial sector. The industry has therefore undertaken a number of valuable initiatives aimed at 
responding to financial risks in the marketplace. One key example is the Report of the Counterparty 
Risk Management Policy Group II, better known as the “Corrigan report.”  
There  is  no  question  that  the  global  financial  system  has  become  more  interlinked,  which,  when 
combined with the introduction of new and complex products, raises the question of how well market 
participants could absorb a potential major financial shock in the future. In response, a group of the 
largest  players  in  the  global  financial  markets  developed  a  series  of  recommendations  and  guiding 
principles to strengthen the resiliency of the financial system.  
Given the complexity of the subject, it is not surprising that the Corrigan report is a long and complex 
document. We found the same challenge in developing Basel II, I might add. But I think that this is a 
very  valuable  piece  of  work,  and  that  the  supervisory  community  can  very  much  welcome  its 
recommendations  and  guiding  principles.  We  are certainly  taking  it  into  account  in  our work  on  the 
issues that I have mentioned.  
In  reflecting  on  the  various  strands  of  work  that  are  underway  in  both  the  industry  and  in  the 
supervisory  community,  I  am  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  findings  of  industry  projects 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 3
such as the Corrigan report are consistent with the lessons we have learned from the Basel II process 
and from other strands of the Committee’s work.  
Lessons learned  
That brings me to my second broad topic, which is the lessons we have learned over the years as we 
have developed Basel II. I am not looking back simply for the sake of nostalgia. Rather, in looking to 
the past, I would like to share some thoughts on how the things we have learned and reflected in the 
process of developing Basel II will help to make Basel II successful in the future, to stand the test of 
time and to have the impact that we intended.  
Focus on risk management  
First, Basel II is fundamentally about establishing incentive-based approaches to risk and capital within 
the  three-pillar  framework.  We  should  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  Basel  II  is  built  around  both 
qualitative and quantitative risk management elements.  
Why  is  this  so  important?  As  a  bank  supervisor  and  central  banker,  what  most  concerns  me  is 
financial stability. When I review the various reports on this subject that cross my desk, one thing they 
almost  always  have  in  common  is  an  emphasis  on  the  link  between  sound  risk  management  and 
financial stability.  It  is  my  hope—indeed,  it  is  my  belief—that  the  incentives  for risk management  in 
Basel II will therefore promote greater financial stability in the future.  
Improved and more formalised risk management, as fostered by Basel II, will bring more awareness of 
risks and better quantification of these risks. To the extent that risk assessment and control methods 
become more formalised and rigorous, this will lessen the likelihood of making bad decisions. It will 
also  contribute  to  the  prompt  detection  of  errors  and  deviations  from  targets,  allowing  banks  to 
implement corrective measures and develop buffers as appropriate at an early stage. Banks should be 
encouraged  to  develop  systems  that  allow  managers  to  identify  and  understand  the  risks  they  are 
facing, consider the risks that may arise in the future, and respond promptly and actively to both. This 
will maximise the likelihood that they can continue to operate, even in the most difficult of conditions.  
Continued outreach and dialogue  
A  second  lesson  I  have  learned  through  the  development  of  Basel  II  is  that  communication  with 
interested parties is absolutely essential. One reason we were able to incorporate leading practices 
into Basel II is because of the open and transparent process by which the Framework was developed. 
There has been a steady dialogue with the industry since the Committee began discussing revisions to 
the capital Accord back in 1999. Many of the firms represented here today contributed extensive and 
valuable feedback to the Committee on its proposals over the years.  
The Committee has tried to explain to the industry as clearly as possible its objectives and methods 
during this process, and in turn firms and industry associations have shown a willingness to engage in 
a  serious  dialogue  to  find  practical,  prudent  solutions.  This  has  helped  supervisors  to  better 
understand the state of industry practice. Where we have found these practices to be reasonable and 
appropriate we have tried to incorporate them into the revised Framework in a sound manner. Looking 
ahead,  one  of  the  benefits  of  this  transparent  process  is  that  it  has  set  the  tone  for  discussions 
between banks and supervisors as industry practices evolve going forward.  
We have also greatly benefited from the dialogue we have maintained with our supervisory colleagues 
outside of the Basel Committee. I believe that it is in many countries’ best interest to adopt the new 
Framework when they are ready, so it is critical that supervisors in these countries be part of the Basel 
II conversations. The Basel Committee has established several mechanisms for heightened dialogue 
with our fellow supervisors, and we are fully committed to further enhancing this dialogue.  
Principles versus rules  
A third lesson I have learned is that it is important to strike the right balance between principles and 
rules.  Of  course,  we  want  to  ensure  that  banks  apply  principles  in  the  same  manner  and  that 
supervisors interpret them in the same way even in different jurisdictions.  
4 
 BIS Review 46/2006
But while the temptation is to do this through ever more detailed rules, I am reminded of the words of 
the famous Surrealist painter Salvador Dalí, who said: “Have no fear of perfection—you’ll never reach 
it.” We have learned from the Basel II process that adding detail to the rules does not guarantee a 
level playing field or equal application. The marginal utility of adding detail falls rapidly as you move 
ahead in a process such as Basel II, so we need more than detail and prescriptiveness. We need a 
bottom-up, cooperative approach that maintains a focus on principles of effective risk measurement 
and management.  
As we have moved into implementation, the Committee has placed greater emphasis on principles-
based  guidance,  for  example  through  the  use  of  so-called  Basel  Committee  Newsletters.  We  have 
found  that  these  Newsletters,  which  clarify  supervisory  expectations  rather  than  establishing  more 
rules  and  making  the  Framework  more  complicated,  have  been  well-received.  Examples  include 
recent Committee guidance on the use of vendor products in the IRB framework and the treatment of 
expected losses in an operational risk AMA. In my view, such an approach to communication with the 
industry  allows  for  a  range  of  sound  practices  and  encourages  further  work  by  both  banks  and 
supervisors, but does not “lower the bar” in terms of supervisory expectations for risk management 
and capital adequacy.  
The importance of the macroeconomic perspective  
Let  me  close  my  intervention  today  by  dedicating  a  little  more  time  to  something  which  has  been 
increasingly  recognised  over  recent  years,  and  which  I  think  will  become  even  more  critical  to  risk 
management in the future - the macroeconomic perspective.  
It is clear to me that taking a point-in-time approach to transactions, or looking at them from a narrow 
“micro” perspective, does not provide a sufficiently comprehensive picture of the underlying risks. It is 
important to take a broader “macro” approach, and one that builds in the impact of possible changes in 
the cycle.  
This  is  a  philosophy  that  we  have  built  into  Basel  II.  In  fact,  I  would  say  that  there  is  no  other 
international regulatory initiative that gives more attention to these questions. For the sake of brevity, I 
will give you just three examples of how the new framework encourages banks to consider how risk 
determinants change over the cycle and in stressed conditions.  
First, banks are expected to use sufficiently long time series of historical data in designing their rating 
systems. The aim is to capture as much data as possible about how relevant factors have behaved in 
the  past.  Furthermore,  when  assigning  ratings  to  borrowers,  they  should  also  consider  how  the 
borrower’s  ability  to  meet  contractual  obligations  may  change  in  the  future  as  a  result  of  possible 
changes in economic conditions over the course of the cycle.  
Second, banks’ LGD estimates should reflect economic downturn conditions. The potential for realised 
losses  to  be  higher  than  average  during  times  of  high  default  rates  may  be  a  material  source  of 
unexpected credit  losses  for some  exposures.  The Committee  has elaborated  principles  that  banks 
are expected to fulfil in this respect, and will continue to monitor industry practice and encourage the 
development of appropriate approaches to this issue.  
Third, Basel II places much emphasis on stress testing in the assessment of capital adequacy. Indeed, 
the new framework sets specific stress test requirements for banks using the advanced approaches to 
credit risk, but also encourages the use of these tests more generally. And the value of stress testing 
and scenario analysis is even more important in those situations where risk measurement is based on 
scarce or incomplete data or unproven quantitative tools.  
The above mentioned examples demonstrate the clear view we have taken in the Committee that the 
sound and stable functioning of credit institutions requires consideration not only of micro conditions, 
but also, and very importantly, incorporating a macro, long-term and forward-looking perspective.  
I  think  these  principles  also  make  good  business  sense.  I  believe  that  risk  managers,  should 
incorporate macro perspectives into their risk management models and into the design of the bank’s 
capital strategy. That is, to analyse how risks may change through the cycle and in stressed economic 
conditions, and incorporate these elements into the decision-making process.  
It is often thought that risks increase during times of economic downturn. But this is only partly true. 
Banks’ risks increase as they take on more business and extend more credit during times of economic 
expansion.  The  risks  may  not  crystallise  until  times  of  difficulty,  but  the  seeds  are  sown  during  the 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 5
good times. It seems to me to be both prudent policy and consistent with risk management objectives 
to take a long term perspective, using the results to make decisions that gain room for manoeuvre in 
the good times in order to face up to difficulties that arise in the bad times..  
In the end, the most risky behaviour is one characterised by over-optimism, and lack of consideration 
of all the relevant risks. This means that when shocks occur, entities are unprepared and tend to react 
abruptly, causing problems for their institution and, sometimes, for the whole system. On the contrary, 
adopting a forward-looking approach, which takes account of the possible impact of broader changes 
in the cycle, should help institutions to avoid mistakes and bad decisions, and to detect and respond to 
problems in a smoother fashion and at an earlier stage.  
Conclusion  
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  as  risk  professionals  for  your  inputs  to  the  various  Basel 
Committee initiatives during my Chairmanship, especially Basel II. A unique element of Basel II is that 
rather than imposing a purely regulatory approach, it incorporates what the Basel Committee views as 
leading  practices  in  bank  risk  management.  In  developing  the  revised  Framework,  the  Committee 
sought to incorporate rigorous and comprehensive risk management approaches into the regulatory 
structure. We could not have come as far as we have without the advances in risk management that 
you in the industry have developed. Moreover, as industry practices continue to evolve, I believe the 
Framework is flexible enough that these advances can be incorporated on an ongoing basis.  
These past several years have been among the most interesting and challenging in my career, and I 
will always look back on the accomplishments of the Basel Committee over this period with a mixture 
of pride and humility.  
Thank you very much, and I would be happy to take any questions.  
6 
 BIS Review 46/2006
