Radovan Jelasic: Overall goals of the National Bank of Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelasic, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Business Luncheon 
on  "Dialogue  Critical  for  Economic  Stability  and  Progress",  American  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Belgrade, 10 July 2006. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my pleasure to welcome all of you on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia and just before the 
start  of  the  summer  break  period.  I  am  sure  that  we  will  all  have  an  eventful  time  period  after  the 
summer break, so enjoy every minute of your vacation!  
Before I start to answer some of the questions I was asked to focus on during my speech today, I 
would like to emphasize some issues regarding the overall goals of the National Bank of Serbia during 
the time to come: 
1.  
Bring down inflation to single digit level without using exchange rate as the main 
anchor 
It is going to be a tough ride but we will succeed, as usual, despite the fact that this room is full of 
people that would be able to give dozens of reasons why this cannot happen (history, euroization, lack 
of confidence, etc.). All of these reasons against reestablishing the dinar I have heard, discussed and 
answered before. Therefore, I would like to emphasize once more that the National Bank of Serbia will 
bring  down  the  inflation  rate  and  that  is  not  going  to  be  painless!  Just  like  in  the  region,  traditional 
populism will be loud here as well: “lower economic growth”, “unreal exchange rate will hurt exporters” 
… But instead of trying to convince me why this cannot happen in Serbia as well, please help us with 
advice regarding the tools needed in order to make it happen and, parallel to that, hedge yourselves!  
Build up an efficient financial system 
2.  
The goal of the National Bank of Serbia is to build up an efficient financial system that, in addition to a 
stable capital base and first class owners, is also characterized by a) low margins and cheap services, 
b) high level of public confidence, c) efficient intermediation. We have come a long way during the last 
five years but it is far from being enough! We can and should do more, much more in improving the 
efficiency of the financial system, for which we need more transparency of the financial services and 
more  public  education  of  the  citizens.  The  ultimate  goal  of  the  financial  sector  restructuring  is  not 
privatisation but to build up an efficient system! I have no problems saying that, despite the fact that in 
the rest of the economy privatisation itself is proclaimed as the ultimate goal! But I never compare the 
financial sector to the rest of Serbia, as it should not be our benchmark! 
Finish the restructuring of the National Bank of Serbia 
3.  
National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  reduced  the  number  of  employees  by  almost  75%  since  October  5th, 
2000 and has been halved since I took the position of the Governor. Despite the fact that the average 
salary increased by almost 30% last year, the total amount (taking into account all employee salaries) 
remained the same. And I am convinced we can still do more!  
And now let me move on to some of the issues I was asked to highlight! Were our monetary policy 
measures effective during the last two years? Yes, they were because without them the inflation rate 
would  have  been  substantially  higher  and  loan  growth  even  more  explosive!  Has  the  central  bank 
administrative tools to stop completely the monetary expansion and credit growth? Of course it has. 
But  do  we  want  it?  The  answer  is  decisively  no!  I  have  no  problems  admitting  that  I  would  have 
preferred to see a lower level of euroization as of today, but it will come and we are already on a good 
track. As far as accumulation of new foreign commercial debt is concerned it is going to be a challenge 
in the medium term! But these challenges, I honestly hope, are shared by the financial community as 
well, because it is their money!  
BIS Review 82/2006 
 1
There  are  lots  of  talks,  including  speculations,  regarding  the  coordination  of  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies. Let me emphasize some issues here:  
• 
• 
I talk to the Minister of Finance just often enough and the coordination is fine; 
I do not judge the work of the Government based on public statements because it is simply 
impossible, but based on concrete numbers; 
I  do  not  agree  with  several  steps  the  Government  is  taking  in  the  area  of  enterprise 
restructuring  and  fiscal  policy,  but  I  do  not  hide  it  and,  whether  I  like  it  or  not,  the 
Government is independent and responsible not to the National Bank of Serbia but to the 
Parliament;  
Journalists are masters in provoking quarrels between Government (Minister of Finance) and 
Governor, but I do not see that myself or the institution could benefit from it, as the National 
Bank is not running for seats in the parliament;  
And yes, there is too much burden on monetary policy and the central bank and I would love 
to get a helping hand;  
Last but not least, I am also aware that if inflation comes down it will happen only “thanks to 
the  tough  fiscal  stance  of  the  Government”  but if  it  remains  high  it  will  be  “due  to  the  not 
restrictive enough monetary policy”. But I do not care about the comments, only results!  
    However,  I  do  get  more  than  annoyed  when  instead  of  appreciation  I  hear  accusations  from  some 
Government representatives that did not do their fair part and, in addition to that, even criticize the 
central  bank  for  being  hyperactive!  Recently  I  have  been  hearing  a  lot  of  tenuous  criticism  of  the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  regarding  bank  privatisation.  Let  me  set  it  clear:  I/We  did  not  cause  the 
interruption of the SAA talks with the EU, I did not contribute to the substantial increase of both USD 
and EUR yields on Serbia’s debt, nor did I say that Serbia does not need a new IMF arrangement. 
These  are  the  crucial  reasons  that  may  prompt  a  bank  to  come  or  not  to  come  to  Serbia,  and  not 
reserve requirements on short-term foreign borrowing up to two years! 
I definitely communicate differently with the industry compared to my predecessors. I do not like one-
on-one meetings and do not give oral promises; neither do I suggest to general managers what they 
need to do! I have no problems admitting that some events between the commercial banks and the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  could  and  should  have  been  avoided.  But  this  is  transition  and  do  not 
underestimate the role of the journalists that love to create headlines! 
Last but not least, the exchange rate. “More float and less management” has been emphasized and 
carried out by the National Bank since September last year. The events of the last days of 2005 and 
the  recent  week  are  just  a  proof  of  the  need  to  hedge  foreign  currency  positions  –  the  sooner  the 
better.  The  exchange  rate  is  not  even  mentioned  among  the  3  goals  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia 
should pursue! It will take some time to enter the EU, and thereafter the eurozone, so we do not have 
an alternative. The central bank will not allow excessive daily fluctuations either way, but the rate is 
being increasingly determined by the market! So do not fall into the “good old Serbian” habit: all gains 
from depreciation are, so to say, normal extra profit and are automatically pocketed, while in the case 
of appreciation the blame is on the central bank! If you are gambling, you cannot accuse the casino of 
losing your money! 
I would like to finish with a positive note that we all experience on a day-to-day basis: while the rest of 
the economy is only closing down facilities and reducing the number of employees, the financial sector 
is  hiring,  opening  new  branches  and  growing  fast.  Moreover,  the  financial sector  is  the  only  one  in 
Serbia in which the private sector is making more that the public one! Although this is something I am 
often questioned about by all of my colleagues at the central bank and I have a rough time explaining 
to them that we are normal and that the rest 2mn is abnormal! 
So much for the introduction. I look forward to answering your questions! 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2006
