Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The outlook for the Philippine economy and policy 
directions in 2006 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the regular 
membership meeting of the Rotary Club-Makati Central, Manila, 24 March 2006.  
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Makati  Central,  friends,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good afternoon. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  join  your  regular  membership  meeting  today  and  speak  on  the  Philippine 
economic outlook and its implications for the Bangko Sentral’s monetary and banking policies. I know 
we share the same goal of economic prosperity for more of our people, but I also realize that we have 
different roles to play in meeting that goal. An instructive way to be on the same roadmap is for us to 
consider  together  the  recent  economic  developments  and  prospects  and  anticipate  potential 
challenges along the way.  
Recent economic developments 
There  seems  to  be  a  general  sense  of  renewed,  although  cautious,  optimism  about  economic 
prospects  for  the  Philippines  at  present.  I  believe  this  is  largely  because  last  year,  our  economy 
continued to prove its resilience and fundamental strength. We had a respectable output growth of 5.1 
percent.  Although  this  magnitude  compares  favorably  with  what  our  neighbors  in  Asia  recorded,  I 
know that this has to be improved to make a dent in combating poverty in the Philippines.  
Second,  we  achieved  growth  with  a  relatively  subdued  inflation  rate.  The  emphasis  is  on  subdued. 
Unlike  the  other  countries,  we  have  stopped  subsidizing  the  oil  industry  since  1998.  Our  consumer 
basket  remains  dominated  by   weather-sensitive  food  commodities.  Yet,  with  real  growth  of  over  5 
percent, we average inflation rate in the Philippines was kept at 7.6 percent in 2005. We can compare 
this with Indonesia (10.4 percent) and Thailand (4.5 percent). 
Third,  the  government’s  overall  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  have  already  shown  good  results.  The 
National  Government  budget  deficit  stood  at  P146.5  billion  for  2005,  well  below  the  target  for  the 
period, and certainly lower compared to the year-ago level. The progress made in fiscal consolidation 
has continued this year as the government was able to curb the budget deficit for the first two months 
of the year. 
Fourth, our external payments position achieved a big surplus in 2005. This was made possible by the 
sustained dollar inflows from OFWs, foreign direct and portfolio investments, and export receipts. 
The significant increase in remittances and investments allowed the BSP to build up its international 
reserves to a new record high level of US$20.6 billion. At the same time, with all those big current and 
capital inflows, a stronger peso is another natural consequence.  
Fifth,  the  economy  continues  to  improve  its  external  indebtedness  picture.  Medium-  and  long-term 
debt  liabilities  comprise  the  bulk  of  the  country’s  external  debt.  Key  debt  service  ratios  have  also 
continued to improve, indicating better manageability and sustainability of the country’s external debt. 
Finally, another welcome development is the sustained improvement in the soundness of our banking 
system. Asset quality of banks continued to improve. Bad loans ratio has declined to single-digit level 
and is at its lowest in eight years. 
Outlook and challenges 
Despite the recent gains in macroeconomic performance and economic reforms, we remain conscious 
of  the  risks  and  challenges  to  the  economic  outlook.  On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  will  continue  to 
address the challenges attendant to our twin responsibilities of conducting sound monetary policy and 
banking supervision. The BSP will continue to address the risks to inflation and inflation expectations; 
strengthen the external position, and sustain the pace of reforms in the financial sector. 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 1
The main challenge for us is to effectively manage inflation and inflation expectations. We see average 
inflation  exceeding  the  government’s  inflation  target  of  4.0-5.0  percent  this  year  given  continued 
upside  risks.  Oil  prices  are  expected  to  remain  high  relative  to  their  historical  trend  while  the 
implementation of the additional two percentage points in the vat rate is expected to have a one-off 
impact on prices. In the second half of 2006, we expect inflation to follow a decelerating trend as the 
short-lived impact of the EVAT on prices of goods and services tapers off. Easing food prices, given 
improving weather conditions, should also help tame non-food price pressures. 
The sustained appreciation of the peso owing largely to strong dollar inflows should also help to keep 
the inflation path in check. The continued dollar  inflows, however, also imply a risk of a renewed surge 
in liquidity growth as inflows are converted into pesos and absorbed by the banking system.We will 
need to monitor this closely, together with the expected narrowing of interest differentials, as they can 
adversely affect inflation. 
All of these risks make monetary policy a difficult task. But we have done our homework much earlier. 
The  BSP  carefully  calibrated  monetary  policy  over  the  past  year  to  be  able  to  establish  a  balance 
between price stability and economic growth. Policy rates were adjusted to guide inflation expectations 
downward. 
We have also fine tuned our existing credit policies to ensure consistency of BSP credit with monetary 
policy. Towards this end, we issued new guidelines on the BSP’s grant of rediscount and emergency 
loans and other advances to banking institutions. We likewise continue to improve our early warning 
systems to effectively manage risks and ensure macrostability.  
Monetary policy going forward will proceed on a cautious footing. The BSP will keep a close eye on 
incipient  inflationary  pressures,  especially  those  coming  from  the  demand  side,  and  stand  ready  to 
undertake the necessary monetary action in a timely manner. The public can expect us to be vigilant in 
ensuring that these risks do not undermine economic growth. 
As a complement to monetary measures, direct action to address supply-side risks should remain a 
key policy priority. To this end, the BSP will intensify further representation with relevant government 
agencies in support of supply-side intervention measures to: (1) facilitate distribution of basic goods 
and  services  to  final  end-users;  (2)  promote  energy  conservation  and  efficiency;  and  (3)  support 
exploration and use of alternative/indigenous energy sources. 
Going  forward,  external  sector  policy  will  focus  on  further  sustaining  our  strong  external  position. 
Specifically, the BSP will focus on maintaining a comfortable level of reserves and monitoring closely 
the country’s foreign borrowings. Moreover, we will continue to support a market-determined exchange 
rate.  We  will  not  lean  against  the  wind  but  will  address  short-term   volatilities  that  will  affect  the 
decisions of economic agents. 
With respect to the financial sector, we expect the banking industry to be more dynamic, competitive 
and  stable.  With  the  impending  extension  of  the  SPV  Law,  the  BSP  aims  to  further  cut  down  the 
banks’ non-performing loans by another P100 billion. Over the medium term, we expect the NPL ratio 
of banks to be further trimmed to the pre-Asian financial crisis level of 4 percent as we continue to 
foster  an  environment  that  will  facilitate  further  disposal  of  banks’  non-performing  assets.  Just  this 
month,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  guidelines  allowing  banks  to  enter  into  Joint  Venture 
Agreements (JVA) with real estate development companies for the disposition of the banks’ foreclosed 
real  estate  property.  The  BSP  hopes  that  this  initiative  will  provide  banks  with  effective  means  of 
reducing  their  NPA  holdings.  The  asset  clean-up  of  banks   should  spur  credit  and  investments, 
thereby creating the basis for more sustainable growth in the medium term. 
Beyond asset clean-up, financial sector reforms will be pursued. Reform efforts will focus on further 
strengthening  corporate  governance,  risk  management  and  capital  adequacy  in  our  banks,  aligning 
prudential  regulation  with  international  standards  and  best  practices,  and  enhancing  our  payments 
system. 
With these reforms in place, we foresee further consolidation of banks. Eventually, we hope to see a 
banking landscape characterized by a handful of main banks complemented by many smaller banks 
with well-defined market niches. Recently, the Monetary Board decided to allow rural and cooperative 
banks to engage in FCDU operations. The decision was prompted by the board’s desire to enhance 
RB’s and CB’s ability to compete in the remittance business and in the buying and selling of foreign 
exchange.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2006
We will also continue to lobby for the passage of key legislations aimed at developing the local capital 
market.  Specifically,  we  are  working  closely  with  Congress  on  the  creation  of  a   centralized  credit 
information bureau system and the establishment of credit rating agencies. These should enhance the 
quality  of  financial  information  available  to  investors,  enhance  private  sector  access  to  credit,  and 
minimize exposure to risks of financial intermediaries. Our goal for capital market development is to 
build an environment where, on the one hand, savers are provided with varied investment alternatives 
to  meet  their  specific  risk  appetites,  and  on  the  other  hand,  borrowers  are  accorded  choices  for 
funding longer-term productive projects. 
Concluding remarks  
There is no doubt that the country has made solid economic gains. However, there is still much to be 
done  to  ensure  sustainable  growth  for  the  long  term.  The  economic  indicators  on  the  past  year’s 
performance give  us  reason  to   be  upbeat  about  the  year  ahead.  But  we  need  to  continue  to  work 
hard. Let me assure you that the Bangko Sentral remains committed to its strategic role of keeping 
inflation low, interest rates at reasonable levels, the peso broadly stable, and the banking system safe 
and sound. 
However, appropriate policy reforms of government do not by themselves translate into the desired 
growth  in  output  and  incomes.  Active  participation  of  the  private  sector  is  equally  important  in  the 
growth process. To this end, I would like to see that the partnership between industry groups like the 
rotary  club  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  continue  to  prosper.  We  go  forward  in  2006  with 
greater confidence that, with your continuing support and cooperation, we can achieve broad-based 
growth, with the fruits of development shared equitably among our people. 
As  one  thinker  once  said,  “All  it  takes  to  open  a  door  of  opportunities  is  to  keep  pushing”.  Let  us 
continue to push until we are convinced all doors of opportunities are opened to us for the taking. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 3
