Mark W Olson: Enterprise-wide compliance-risk management 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  W  Olson,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  At  the  Fiduciary  and  Investment  Risk  Management  Association’s  Twentieth  Anniversary 
Training Conference, Washington, DC, 10 April 2006. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you about one of the broad issues that you will be 
discussing during the next several days--the nature of risk and risk management. Today, I will offer my 
perspectives  about  risk  management  in  general  and  then  focus  on  enterprise-wide  compliance-risk 
management,  an  area  of  risk  management  that  has  been  receiving  a  good  deal  of  attention  lately. 
Risk, to state the obvious, is inherent in all activities in your industry. With the benefit of hindsight, the 
financial services regulators and the industry have been trying to distill the lessons learned from recent 
internal control breakdowns in the financial services sector. My remarks today will delve into some of 
the implications those breakdowns have for compliance-risk management.  
Over the past two decades, we have seen remarkable changes in the global financial system. Among 
these changes are (1) the financial sector's increasing reliance on risk-transfer strategies and (2) the 
dizzying array of new products being offered to customers. Investment options continue to proliferate, 
as new investment products are developed and alternative investments such as hedge funds, which 
now total $1 trillion by some estimates, continue to grow.  
Risk management in general 
One of the biggest risks facing businesses and governments today is the risk of not preparing for how 
the  world  will  change  over  the  next  five  years.  Note  that  I  said  "preparing"  for  change  and  not 
"predicting"  change.  Predicting  change  in  a  specific  way  is  highly  speculative,  but  planning  for  the 
inevitability of change is prudent management. A key question to ask is whether your organizations 
have the tools and risk-management processes that will allow them to cope with inevitable changes. 
As  fiduciary  and  investment  risk  managers,  you  pay  considerable  attention  to  measuring  and 
monitoring the risks your institutions face, and to managing and controlling those risks. You probably 
also devote considerable time and resources to keeping abreast of the latest advances in finance and 
risk  management.  And  if  you  are  like  most  risk  managers,  you  are  finding  it  increasingly  difficult  to 
keep  up  with  your  colleagues  and  competitors,  because  our  world--especially  those  aspects  of  our 
lives influenced by science and technology--is changing at an exponential rate. In this regard, one of 
the biggest risks faced by risk managers is not being sufficiently prepared for the future. As Yogi Berra 
once said, "The future ain't what it used to be." Yet risk managers face the challenge of ensuring their 
organizations are sufficiently prepared for whatever events the future holds.  
It's  true  that  we  cannot  predict  the  future  in  a  specific  way.  But  if  the  past  is  any  guide,  we  can 
comfortably expect that new technologies will enable us to overcome problems and challenges that 
today appear to be insurmountable. At the same time, however, innovation will bring new problems 
and challenges. As risk managers, the key question for us to answer is "How can we best cope with 
the dramatic changes and challenges that will inevitably occur?" Preparation is the easy answer, but 
foresight and discipline are also needed. At a fundamental level, managers need to make sure that 
their  organizations  have  in  place  the  risk-management  policies,  processes,  and  technologies  to 
properly measure, monitor, and control their risk exposures. Beyond the basics, the next imperative is 
to  do  some  hard  thinking  about  the  future.  More  specifically,  managers  need  to  conduct  scenario 
analysis and scenario planning--and this is one area of risk management that is sometimes overlooked 
or not taken seriously. Scenario analysis and scenario planning are difficult; they cannot be done on 
the fly.  
For  many  financial  organizations,  scenario  analysis  starts  and  ends  with  quantitative  exercises  that 
measure  exposures  to  specific  risk  factors,  such  as  changes  in  interest  rates  or  credit  spreads.  To 
realize  the  full  benefits  of  scenario  analysis,  however,  the  analysis  must  move  beyond  quantitative 
exercises. A comprehensive scenario analysis should encompass a thoughtful and thorough analysis 
of potential, but plausible, major changes in the economic, political, and social landscape. What are 
these changes? How will they affect your business? How will you respond to them if they occur? This 
analysis is the primary responsibility of risk management.  
BIS Review 31/2006 
 1
But scenario analysis is not the end goal. Something must be done with the results of the analysis. 
Management must ask itself whether the organization needs to restructure its balance sheet or modify 
its current risk-management strategy in order to be prepared for scenarios that may unfold in the near 
future. This strategizing is at the core of effective scenario planning. Some key scenarios you should 
consider  as  part  of  your  scenario  planning  include  how  forces  such  as  continued  globalization, 
technological  advances,  and  competition  from  product  innovation  will  affect  your  particular  line  of 
business.  For  example,  globalization  makes  group  management  and  risk  aggregation  more 
challenging, and the increasing power of information technology creates both new opportunities and 
new risks. Furthermore, new products and new distribution channels are likely to affect your business 
and risk profile.  
The fiduciary and investment world has not been immune to problems caused by ineffective controls. 
Well-publicized  accounts  of  late  trading  and  market  timing  at  mutual  fund  firms,  and  the  related 
investigations,  have  touched  many  businesses  including  banking,  securities,  and  insurance  firms. 
These  types  of  compliance  failures  result  in  sanctions  or  financial  loss  and  adversely  affect  the 
reputation and franchise value of a firm. As a result, we are seeing an increasing focus on enterprise-
wide compliance-risk management systems.  
The business lines and activities of financial services firms can cross many legal entities, making it 
more difficult for a supervisory agency acting alone to determine what went wrong and what processes 
may need to be improved. In some of the mutual fund cases, the Federal Reserve, as the consolidated 
supervisor of the relevant banking organization, worked closely with the primary bank regulator and 
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  to  investigate  control  breakdowns.  The  agencies 
exchanged  information  in  order  to  compare  their  findings.  Findings  from  SEC  examinations  of  the 
broker-dealers, investment advisers, and mutual fund distributors were analyzed together with findings 
from targeted joint reviews of the bank holding companies and the banks conducted by the Federal 
Reserve and the primary bank regulators. The banking agency reviews were focused on corporate-
wide compliance practices and bank lending practices.  
My observation is that the significant deficiencies in mutual fund practices resulted from a combination 
of factors and a breakdown in controls. First, mutual fund activities were not being effectively overseen 
by their mutual fund boards. Second, there were strong financial incentives at certain firms to increase 
the profitability of mutual fund activities, but the legal and reputational risks of these incentives were 
not  appropriately  addressed.  Third,  a  lack  of  adequate  employee  training  resulted  in  employees 
deviating from standard procedures, in order to accommodate certain large customers. For example, 
in some cases, employees granted key customers a routine waiver of redemption fees, which allowed 
them  to  engage  in  market  timing  at  the  expense  of  other  fund  shareholders.  A  stronger  corporate 
compliance  program  would  have  enabled  a  local  compliance  officer  to  identify  these  problems  and 
bring them to the attention of higher-level managers within the corporation.  
Based on our experience in investigating control breaches in these mutual fund cases, I would like to 
highlight  a  few  lessons  learned.  One  of  the  most  obvious  to  me  is  the  need  to  critically  evaluate 
unusual client  relationships  that require  variances from  standard procedures. There  is  an additional 
red flag if a high percentage of compensation is derived from a single client. Additionally, organizations 
should have a formal process for reviewing and approving unique products, customers, and services 
at the inception of the client relationship. And, finally, it is always a good idea to shine some light on 
areas historically labeled "low risk" to validate that assessment. The low occurrence of loss from an 
activity should not be the only factor considered when assessing risk.  
Compliance-risk management frameworks 
As these lessons suggest, compliance risk can arise when the organization fails to comply with laws, 
regulations, or standards of conduct. Fortunately, various models are available to help organizations 
manage compliance risk more effectively. A number of banking institutions have installed, or are in the 
process of enhancing, comprehensive, corporate-level compliance-risk management functions. Many 
organizations  are  also  bolstering  their  compliance-risk  management  programs  by  upgrading  their 
compliance  management  information  systems,  which  allows  for  more-integrated  and  transparent 
analysis  and  monitoring.  An  enterprise-wide  approach  to  compliance-risk  management  has  proven 
valuable  in  areas  such  as  Bank  Secrecy  Act  (BSA)  and  anti-money-laundering  (AML)  compliance, 
information security, privacy, transactions with affiliates, and conflicts of interest.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2006
A  common  trend  for  both  large  and  small  organizations  is  the  transition  away  from  task-oriented 
compliance  programs  to  process-oriented  compliance  programs.  Process-oriented  programs  require 
compliance to be tested and validated on an ongoing basis. In addition, fragmented and duplicative 
compliance activities are being scrapped for those that enable an understanding of compliance across 
the  organization.  This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  local  compliance  activities  in  business  units  are 
obsolete but rather they should be part of an integrated, global program. This promotes consistency in 
expectations, documentation, assessments, and reporting.  
An effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program is flexible to respond to change, 
and  it  is  tailored  to  an  organization's  corporate  strategies,  business  activities,  and  external 
environment. In addition, an effective enterprise-wide compliance-risk management program requires 
strong board and senior management oversight.  
The board of directors and senior management have different but complementary roles in ensuring the 
success  of  an  organization's  enterprise-wide  compliance-risk  management  program.  The  board  of 
directors is responsible for establishing a strong compliance culture that makes compliance an integral 
part of day-to-day operations; the board then entrusts this responsibility to managers and staff at all 
levels of the organization. A strong compliance culture encourages employees to raise concerns about 
compliance risks and the need for additional or improved controls.  
Conclusion 
Our review of industry best practices and an analysis of the experience of other industries suggests 
that  organizations  need  to  supplement  their  enterprise-wide  compliance-risk  management  systems 
with strategic and dynamic thinking. To prepare for what may be ahead, organizations should draw not 
only on past experience but also employ quantitative and qualitative scenario analysis and planning. 
To quote former Chairman Greenspan, "The advent of sophisticated risk models has not made people 
with gray hair, or none, wholly obsolete."  
BIS Review 31/2006 
 3
