Stefan Ingves: Can regional financial sector assessments provide additional 
values to the EU countries? 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  seminar  arranged  by  the 
National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, 13 June 2006. 
 What is needed for financial stability? 
I am honoured that you have invited me to speak tonight, setting the scene for tomorrow’s seminar. I 
am in the enviable position of having inside knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of the IMF-
FSAP  framework  and  at  the  same  time  in  my  new  position  being  free  to  think  ahead  without 
necessarily being mindful of internal IMF policies on every detail. That said, although I have moved 
from  the  IMF  I  feel  strongly  about  the  financial  stability  assessments,  such  as  the  FSAPs,  and  I 
sincerely think that they can make a difference.  
My message to you today could be summarised as follows: 
• 
The main value of the FSAPs so far conducted is that they link together the various parts of 
national financial systems; identifying strengths, weaknesses and vulnerabilities. 
However, the national focus becomes increasingly irrelevant due to the rapid development of 
cross-border establishments and other financial interlinkages. Hence, we need a multilateral 
approach, such as a regional one. 
The EU-area is well suited to perform regional financial stability assessments since cross-
border integration has come a long way in Europe. In fact, I believe that the EU countries 
should set up a system to conduct their own regional self-assessments. 
  The large numbers and high financial and social costs of the financial crises in many countries in the 
1980s  and  1990s  convinced  decision-makers  that  concerted  measures  had  to  be  taken  on  an 
international level. Through the increasingly global character of the financial system, problems in one 
country tended to spill over to other countries exacerbating the problems and the costs. The measures 
taken  included  setting  global  norms  and  standards  and  increasing  the  surveillance  of  financial 
systems. 
Agreements  were  reached  on  various  means  of  identifying  and  reducing  vulnerabilities  in  financial 
systems. International standard-setting bodies such as the Basel Committee, the IOSCO , the CPSS 
and the IAIS were requested to establish frameworks of sound regulatory practices in their respective 
fields. These so called core principles are now broadly accepted as minimum standards, to be applied 
by all countries. 
But good standards are not enough. We must also ensure that they are applied in an environment of 
adequate  preconditions,  such  as  the rule  of  law and  property  rights,  fair  and  competent accounting 
and auditing, and arrangements for predictable and fair resolution of the problem of failing institutions. 
There must also exist an adequate institutional framework, e.g. for an efficient division of roles and 
responsibilities  between  different  public  and  private  institutions.  A  crucial  part  of  the  financial 
institutional  framework,  whose  importance  is  sometimes  neglected,  is  the  payment  system  and  its 
infrastructure. 
A  country’s  financial  system  is  also  susceptible  to  the  vagaries  of  economic  and  political 
developments.  For  instance,  while  a  fixed-exchange  rate  regime  in  certain  circumstances  tends  to 
support financial stability in a country (or group of countries – to refer to the European context) there 
might  be  situations  in  which  such  a  system  could  have  the  opposite  effect.  To  underpin  financial 
stability, economic developments should be sustainable, transparent and predictable. This also applies 
to political decisions, which affect the financial system directly or indirectly.  
Completing  the  circle  and  reverting  to  my  first  observations  on  the  increased  global  linkages,  most 
countries’ financial systems are influenced by developments outside the domestic economy. Linkages 
come  through  different  channels:  macro  economic  events  having  international  repercussions,  for 
instance through international markets, or “micro events” such as via banks’ cross-border affiliates.  
BIS Review 52/2006 
 1
The FSAP – an attempt to tie together the loose ends 
Given  the  various  pieces  needed  to  shape  and  maintain  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system  we 
need a bird’s-eye view to see that they are all in place and that they do not counteract one another. 
The  approach  should  also  identify  weak  spots  from  which  the  financial  system  potentially  might  be 
destabilised. 
This need for a bird’s-eye view resulted in the creation of the FSAP. The FSAP is intended to cover 
the  pieces  I  just  mentioned  –  standards,  preconditions  and  institutional  setting  and  the  interplay  of 
these  factors  in  the  context  of  the  domestic  economy.  The  FSAP  is  also  expected  to  include 
implications of international interlinkages but I admit that this part has become gradually more difficult 
as  a  result  of  the  increased  scale,  scope  and  complexity  of  financial  institutions  and  markets 
conducting  cross-border  activities.  To  be  blunt:  How  do  you  assess  the  effects  on  the  Swedish 
financial system from our internationally-active banks which practice centralised funding activities and 
even  to  some  extent  credit  registration?   How  do  you  look  at  banks  organised  along  product  lines, 
while regulation and supervision mostly is national? This is the rationale for moving to regional FSAPs 
in order to catch issues we might miss if we focus on monitoring single country financial systems only. 
The FSAP has significant added value embedded in its integrated approach. The integrated approach 
implies  that  we  assess,  for  instance,  whether  weaknesses  in  public  institutions  or  in  other 
preconditions  undermine  efficient  regulation  and  supervision;  or  whether  volatile  macro  economic 
conditions  hinder  the  effective  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  institutions.  We  also  assess 
whether there is an appropriate balance in the financial sector; as an example, some countries are 
excessively  reliant  on  a  dominating  banking  sector.  Finally,  stress  tests  are  performed  to  identify 
possible  causes  for  threats  to  financial  sector  stability  and  also  to  identify  where  the  first  signs  of 
instability might emerge – such as in banks, other financial intermediaries or in the payments system. 
This approach links together the different parts and presents an integrated view of the overall situation. 
In the early days many did not like the stress tests, but this has changed and today stress tests are an 
established part of the toolbox. 
While nobody could argue that FSAP assessments will identify all weaknesses, I have observed that in 
most of the assessments shortcomings and vulnerabilities show up quite clearly. While on this theme, I 
would  also  like  to  express  my  strong  disagreement  with  the  view  expressed  by  some  that  “country 
circumstances  are  highly  different  so  it  is  fully  legitimate  that  they  have  very  different  legal  and 
institutional underpinnings”. While I am not opposed to different approaches, as long as they do the 
job, my impression after having visited or analysed the majority of the IMF’s 184 member countries is 
that  the  circumstances  are  usually  not  all  that  different.  My  conclusion  is  that  the  necessary 
prerequisites for financial stability are much the same in all countries and this includes sound fiscal 
balances  as  well  as  macro  economic  structures  and  developments.  Frankly,  the  talk  about  “special 
circumstances”  could  often  be  seen  as  an  excuse  for  not  being  prepared  to  apply  necessary  but 
unpopular measures. In this, we Europeans are not better than anybody else. 
This brings me to another added value of the FSAP – the fact that the assessment is conducted by 
somebody outside your own country, such as the IMF or the World Bank. I think we can all admit that 
even  with  the  best  of  intentions  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  take  a  fully  objective  view  of  our  domestic 
structure  of  laws  and  institutions,  in  particular  when  looking  for  weaknesses.  The  role  of  being  the 
scapegoat for bringing bad tidings from the results of the FSAP assessments is well-known to the IFIs 
from their traditional work and it is actually a much appreciated role by the domestic authorities. On an 
FSAP mission it is quite common that high officials from the country concerned, in private, remind the 
IFI  representatives  not  to  forget  to  mention  certain  shortcomings.  If  you  plan  to  conduct  FSAP-like 
assessments without the involvement of the IMF or World Bank, it is important that you establish a 
process which ensures the integrity of the assessment. 
The FSAP is not only a way to identify weaknesses but also a tool for prioritisation of remedying these 
weaknesses and for providing technical assistance. An important part of the FSAP outcome is to leave 
behind a list of recommended remedial action, setting out the priorities. Since the scope of the FSAP 
is broad, prioritisation should become easier and more balanced than if assessments were conducted 
following a piecemeal approach. The FSAP process also contributes by informing about new research 
findings and about good practices used in other countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2006
The future FSAPs 
By now, FSAPs have been performed in more than 130 countries. This covers almost all important 
countries in a global financial perspective, with a few notable exceptions such as the US and China. It 
is thus natural to start thinking about the future of the FSAP process. Several alternatives could be 
envisaged, and they are not mutually exclusive: 
• 
Simple  updates  of  earlier  FSAPs  to  ensure  that  countries  have  taken  care  of  their 
weaknesses and that no new ones have developed.   
A change in the scope of FSAPs, for instance to better take into account the cross-border 
aspects of financial sector strengths and vulnerabilities.  
A different dimension is whether future FSAPs should be open to all countries or mainly to 
those having a bearing on the stability of the international financial system.   
Another  discussion  involves  to  what  extent  there  could  be  closer  integration  between  the 
FSAPs and the Article IV processes.  
   Some  of  these  “future  FSAPs”  have  in  fact  already  started,  albeit  on  a  small  scale  and  could  be 
regarded as trial assessments in the search of the ideal format. There have been some FSAP update 
missions  and  the  IMF  is  at  this  very  moment  embarking  on  so-called  regional  missions,  in  the 
BeNeLux  and  Nordic-Baltic  regions.  From  what  I  have  seen so  far,  these  FSAPs  are  off  to  a  good 
start, focussing as they should on the interlinkages between the large cross-border financial groups 
operating in these regions. 
Moving to regional FSAPs will substantially increase the complexity of the assessments. These will 
include analysing the interplay of different regulatory and supervisory systems and also different legal 
and  institutional  arrangements,  for  instance  when  dealing  with  problems  in  cross-border  financial 
institutions.  There  will  also  be  assessments  of  the  implications  of  one  country’s  weaknesses  and 
vulnerabilities  on  some  financial  institutions  and  financial  infrastructures  which  are  active  in  that 
country but which have their main activities in another country – maybe even outside the region. The 
analysis  will  be  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  national  governments  and  authorities  may  select 
policies and approaches which are not compatible simply because their national interests differ. For 
regional  FSAPs  in  European  Union  and  EEA  countries  the  work  becomes  somewhat  easier  since 
there exists a common minimum framework of legislation. But there may also be complications such 
as in the Nordic-Baltic FSAP due to the mixture of currency arrangements – one country is already 
using the euro, some are outside and still others in a transitional mode.  
Notwithstanding  the  difficulties  of  conducting  regional  financial  stability  assessments  I  sincerely 
believe  that  they  imply  a  major  positive  and  even  necessary  shift.  In  today’s  world,  where  financial 
sectors are often closely knit across the borders, it makes little sense to analyse financial stability on a 
standalone domestic basis pretending that external events do not matter or can be reduced to simple 
parameters in the stress-testing models. 
How could FSAP-like assessments provide additional value in a European context? 
In order to answer this we first must define what the “European context” is. Whatever the criticisms, 
European integration has come a long way, not least in the financial field. The acronym “FSAP” in its 
specific  European  meaning  has  been  successful  in  bringing  increased  efficiency  and  access,  and 
lower costs to many, but more needs to be done, for instance for retail transactions.  
The flip side of integration is increased dependence and greater risk for contagion from developments 
in other countries. In the financial field we face this mainly in the cross-border operating banks and 
other  major  financial  institutions  and  also  in  the  infrastructure  for  the  conduct  of  payments  and 
settlements. But financial stability may also be indirectly affected by real sector developments, such as 
real estate prices. 
I can see two alternative ways of structuring a regional European FSAP. It could either be founded on 
a  “whole  region-approach”  identifying  the  general  situation  and  then  analysing  how  various 
developments  affect  overall  stability;  or  it  could  start  from  the  individual  countries  and  analyse  how 
each  country  might  be  affected  by  influences  from  abroad  –  be  it  through  their  financial  groups  at 
home,  abroad  or  through  other  channels,  including  the  payment  infrastructure  such  as  regional 
exchanges. The analyses of a number of countries could then be added together to form a relevant 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 3
region, which could be the EU, the euro area, the EEA, some subset thereof or even one of these 
regions plus one or more financially important systems in the neighbourhood, such as Switzerland.  
My  leaning  would  be  toward  the  second  one.  The  first  one,  which  we  may  call  the  pan-European 
approach,  has  tended  to  produce  a  lot  of  numbers  on  aggregates  and  averages  in  the  financial 
stability  analysis.  No  country  wants  to  stick  out  in  the  assessment;  they  hide  behind  these  broad 
numbers.  But  you  cannot  identify  weaknesses  and  vulnerabilities  through  averages.  “On  average”, 
banks’ credit portfolios and capital ratios may be robust but an FSAP should look for the outliers – the 
ones which will break first.  
Whichever approach you select, you would need to include a detailed analysis of those major financial 
groups which cross the borders between the European countries and sometimes also operate outside 
the region. These groups are in many cases so large that they could influence countries both positively 
and negatively depending on developments. Let me give you a recent example from my own country: 
Icelandic investors have bought large stakes in Swedish financial firms. The investments are rather 
small from the Swedish point-of-view but significant for their parents in Iceland. Recently, there has 
been volatility in the Icelandic financial and currency markets. Luckily, the investments in Sweden are 
doing  very  well  and  have  rather  contributed  to  strengthening  the  Icelandic  financial  system.  But  in 
another  situation  the  reverse  could  have  been  true  –  had  the  Icelanders  made  these  investments 
during  the  Swedish  banking  crisis  in  the  1990s  the  Swedish  holdings  would  have  contributed  to 
weakening the Icelandic economy. 
My  point  is  that,  in  addition  to  analysing  vulnerabilities  in  individual  countries  and  general  macro-
economic linkages between countries, you also need to look in particular at the major cross-border 
financial groups and financial infrastructure. The good news is that these are not so many, after all. Of 
the approximately 8,300 credit institutions in the EU, only nine are defined as truly pan-European and 
less  than  fifty  have  cross-border  establishments  in  more  than  two  countries.  When  assessing 
preconditions, regulation and supervision you need to look not merely at individual countries but also 
at  whether  there  are  major  differences  or  gaps  in  the  application  between  countries  or  between 
financial sub-sectors and if this might lead to vulnerabilities, in particular in a crisis situation. As we all 
know, a common European approach to bank problem resolution has so far not been developed. In a 
potential or actual crisis situation, we may face “the prisoners’ dilemma” in which the optimal solution 
may not be achieved since each country would tend first to look to its self-interest. 
Hence, it is important for a regional FSAP to identify vulnerabilities stemming from potential conflicts 
between home and host countries in the resolution of a failed financial group, which for instance might 
have systemic importance in the host country but not in the home country. The common thread in all 
this is that an FSAP should focus on two things: The weak spots as well as the channels for contagion 
of weakness. This is what the IMF is doing in its single-country FSAPs. In a multi-country FSAP you 
must  give  increased  emphasis  to  the  cross-border  weaknesses  and  channels  in  addition  to  the 
domestic ones. 
A regional FSAP might include an analysis of efficiency aspects. The financial system may be robust 
but is it efficient? It is possible to regulate a financial system to ensure a very low level of risk, but the 
cost in terms of reduced efficiency may not be worth the gain. But on the other hand, the cost of a 
crisis  can  be  so  large  that  building  adequate  prevention  makes  good  sense.  A  reasonable  balance 
must  thus  be  found  between  on  the  one  hand  efficiency  and  on  the  other  hand  the  degree  of 
regulation and the ways to implement it. 
Conclusion 
The whole FSAP process, which uses large resources in manpower and financial costs, was created 
to meet a specific purpose: to reduce the incidence of financial sector problems. It is as yet too early to 
prove whether this goal has been met. It is a fact that there have been fewer cases of major financial 
crises since 1999, when  the  FSAPs  started,  but  this might  also be  attributed to  the  fact  that  global 
economic development has been generally positive during this period. It is also a fact that compliance 
with  preconditions  and  with  regulatory  standards  has  improved  since  the  FSAPs  started  –  as  an 
important example, the minimum capital ratios for banks have increased globally. 
However,  we  can  all  see  that  much  remains  to  be  done  worldwide,  including  in  our  own  countries. 
What makes our task harder is that the goalposts are moving all the time. Ever increasing complexity 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2006
and  interlinkages  in  the  international  economic  and  financial  system  mean  that  legislators  and 
standard-setters must run just to try to catch the moving train. 
In  the  European  context,  cross-border  integration  has  progressed  further  than  in  other  parts  of  the 
world, which strengthens financial development and presumably also stability. But integration means 
increased risks for contagion and we must be vigilant to identify and deal with any vulnerability in the 
system. Regional FSAP-type assessments are at the same time broad and focused and thus useful for 
this purpose. 
In  my  view,  it  would  be  totally  wrong  to  regard  the  FSAP  as  a  process  where  the  IFIs  are  the 
providers,  the  countries  the  recipients  and  the  other  stakeholders  form  an  interested  but  passive 
audience.  We  need  an  ongoing  dialogue  to  understand  and  improve  the  process.  Hence,  I  am 
particularly  grateful  to  our  Belgian  hosts  for  having  arranged  this  seminar  which  will  give  us  an 
opportunity to discuss these important issues. 
Thus my final conclusion, which answers the question posed in the title of this speech, can be very 
short:  
Yes,  I  strongly  believe  that  regional  financial  stability  assessments  in  the  EU  and  EEA  areas  can 
provide additional values to financial stability and to a better understanding of how the cross-border 
interlinkages between the financial groups and the infrastructural financial arrangements under certain 
circumstances  may  add  to  the  vulnerability  of  the  systems.  The  IMF  may  certainly  to  some  extent 
assist  Europe  in  such  assessments,  but  the  EU  should  also  make  its  own  arrangements  for  self-
assessments. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 5
