Jaime Caruana: Overview of the Spanish economy in 2005 
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  on  the  occasion  of  the 
presentation of the Annual Report 2005, Madrid, 15 June 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The vigour of the world economy in 2005 confirmed that the current expansionary phase is proving 
one  of  the  most  dynamic  of  recent  decades.  In  the  past  few  years,  average  growth  rates  not  seen 
since  the  late  seventies  have  been  attained.  There  are  two  particularly  notable  facets  to  this 
expansion.  First,  unlike  in  previous  booms,  the  world  economy  has  benefited  from  the  salient 
contribution of the emerging economies. And further, this high growth rate has been accompanied by 
very moderate inflation rates, a most significant development in the light of their concurrence with a 
marked and persistent rise in oil prices.  
The vagaries of oil prices have, indeed, been central to international economic developments in recent 
years. The momentum of worldwide demand for energy, combined with its slowly expanding supply 
which is, moreover, fairly volatile owing to geopolitical tensions and climate-related shocks, pushed oil 
prices up throughout 2005 and the opening months of 2006 to an all-time high in early May. In turn, 
other  commodities,  including  most  notably  industrial  metals,  have  risen  substantially.  Although  the 
world economy has so far been able to absorb the impact of higher oil and commodity prices, they are 
a primary factor of risk, and economic policies should remain duly vigilant. 
Along  with  dearer  energy,  increasing  global  external  imbalances  (which,  far  from  being  corrected, 
continued to widen in 2005) are another characteristic feature of the international economic situation. 
The US external deficit reached a new high, the counterpart of which was the bigger surplus of the 
emerging  Asian  economies  and,  most  notably,  of  the  oil  exporting  countries.  This  build-up  of 
imbalances reflects  the  insufficiency  of  the  economic  policies  geared  to  their correction  in the  main 
economies involved, a point to which I shall return later. 
How can we explain the resilience of the world economy in the face of the adverse impact of dearer 
oil?  We  must  acknowledge  that  our  understanding  of  some  of  the  features  of  this  upturn  is  as  yet 
limited, owing among other reasons to the far-reaching structural changes taking place in the world 
economy, which hamper the diagnosis and interpretation of certain features of the recent expansion. 
As the main determinants of this resilience, however, we can identify the confluence of expansionary 
macroeconomic  policies,  generous  financial  conditions  and  strong  rises  in  real-estate  and  financial 
assets,  against  a  background  of  price  stability.  I  shall  now  address  these  factors  to  examine  their 
distinctive features. 
As stated, macroeconomic policies remained expansionary in 2005. This needs qualifying, however. 
Whereas the expansionary stance of fiscal policies scarcely altered in the main developed countries, 
where  public  debt  continued  on  a  rising  trend,  the  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policies 
(though, overall, they also helped sustain growth in 2005) was gradually toned down. The main central 
banks – especially in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in the euro area – progressively raised 
interest  rates  and  withdrew  the  unusual  monetary  stimulus  of  the  previous  years.  This  pattern  will 
possibly also extend to Japan this year, making it likely that, for the first time in 15 years, there will be 
a phase of monetary policy tightening in the three major developed areas.  
In this respect, I should stress that the gradualness of the decisions adopted and central banks' clarity 
in  transmitting  them  have  steered  financial  market expectations,  which  has  been  conducive  to  their 
stability and has cushioned the impact of these measures on world growth.  
But beyond the generally still-expansionary stance of macroeconomic policies, I believe a significant 
factor that helps explain the buoyancy of the world economy in recent years is the broadly generous 
financial conditions that most countries have faced. Real and nominal interest rates at various terms, 
financial and real-estate asset prices and risk premia have, in general, held at very favourable levels 
for consumption and investment. In turn, the favourable expectations of economic growth, in a setting 
of abundant liquidity, fed into rising stock market trends and the reduction in risk premia on corporate 
and emerging-market debt. The increases in official interest rates scarcely fed through in 2005 to long-
term interest rates, which led to the forceful flattening of the yield curve, an unusual occurrence at this 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 1
stage of the cycle, although the rise in long-term yields in the opening months of 2006 is contributing 
to lessening the scale of this discrepancy. Finally, the increase in household wealth, stemming from 
the rise in the value of financial and real-estate assets, eased the drag on real income arising from 
dearer energy products in the oil-importing countries.  
Yet there has been a significant contrast between this optimism on financial markets and the wariness 
of companies, mirrored by slack investment in the real sector which is particularly striking if regard is 
had to the favourable trend of corporate profits. Several explanations have been offered for the muted 
performance of business investment in recent years, such as the difficulties in valuing investment in 
intangible  assets  appropriately,  over-investment  in  the  second  half  of  the  nineties  (which  caused 
surplus  capacity  in  recent  years),  the  ongoing  reduction  in  corporations'  financial  leverage,  the 
uncertainty  generated  by  globalisation  and  companies'  caution  following  the  recent  changes  in  the 
legislative and accounting framework in the wake of the corporate scandals in some countries. Insofar 
as some of these factors are probably transitory, greater investment momentum may be expected in 
the coming years. 
The buoyant global demand for commodities and the attendant rise in their prices were conducive to 
the economic growth of the commodities-exporting countries, while widening the room for manoeuvre 
of  their  economic  policies.  The  Latin  American  countries  benefited  from  this  positive  effect  on  their 
terms of trade, enabling them to reconcile relatively high growth rates with current-account surpluses. 
In  this  respect,  a  clearly  contrasting  use  was  made  of  this  greater  flexibility  by  the  Latin  American 
countries: while some have sought to strengthen their macroeconomic fundamentals and reduce their 
vulnerability by limiting and improving the terms of their debt, others have given an interventionist bias 
to their policies which seriously undermines the maintenance of legal security and dents their medium-
term investment and growth prospects. 
As stated, an essential ingredient in the stability of the world economy has been the maintenance of 
moderate inflation, despite the rise in energy and other commodities prices. Admittedly, the dynamism 
of China and other emerging Asian economies has contributed to this increase in commodities prices; 
but their penetration in the international markets for manufactures has also helped contain wage and 
price  pressures.  The  greater  anti-inflationary  credibility  of  monetary  policies  is,  in  any  event, 
responsible  for  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  moderate  levels,  having  prevented  the  so-called 
"second-round  effects"  –  via  prices  and  wages  –  that  prompted  a  global  inflationary  spiral  in  the 
eighties in the wake of dearer energy. This diagnosis, far from making us complacent, should be a 
reminder  that  such  credibility  cannot  be  taken  for  granted;  rather,  it  has  been  attained  thanks  to 
policies clearly geared to safeguarding price stability, policies which we are bound as central banks to 
persevere with. 
What does the immediate future hold for us? The prospects for the current year point to continuing 
strong economic growth rates, with a more balanced geographical distribution (owing to the firming of 
the expansion in the euro area and Japan) and with inflation contained. As I indicated earlier, there are 
two main risks to this central forecast. 
The first is related to the possibility of a further hike in oil and industrial commodities prices. Unlike in 
the past two years, in which price increases have been prompted by the buoyancy of the demand for 
energy, dearer oil might be linked on this occasion to supply constraints, which would exert a sharper 
effect  on  activity  and  prices  and  might  bear  adversely  on  agents'  confidence.  To  ward  off  this 
possibility, steps must be taken to reduce the world economy's dependence on oil in the medium term, 
without  prejudice  to  promoting  an  expansion  in  production  and  refining  capacity.  Moreover, 
progressive constraints on production globally may generate a greater response by wages and prices 
to an increase in energy prices. In the face of these risks, and with monetary policies in the main areas 
closer  to  a  neutral  stance  (which  also  entails  greater  uncertainty  about  their  future  course),  central 
banks  must  persevere  with  those  decisions  that  bolster  the  credibility  of  these  policies,  since  price 
stability is the best contribution we can make to economic growth. 
A second main factor of risk is that continuing world growth might be jeopardised by the presence of 
growing  global  imbalances.  These  could  trigger  or  amplify  significant  adjustments  on  international 
financial markets, such as sharp increases in interest rates and in risk premia. 
Correcting the imbalances requires the adoption of appropriate economic policies in each of the main 
economic zones, policies which will, fortunately, also shore up the foundations for growth in each of 
these areas in the long run. A clear instance of this complementarity can be found in US fiscal policy, 
whose moderation would contribute to reducing its external imbalance and would improve its medium-
term  growth  prospects.  As  to  the  emerging  Asian  economies,  further  steps  towards  making  their 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2006
exchange-rate regimes more flexible will be needed, especially in China. This will not only contribute 
to more harmonious and sustainable world growth, but will be an essential ingredient for entrenching 
progress  in  China  towards  higher  levels  of  well-being.  Finally,  Japan  and  the  euro  area  should 
continue  on  the  path  of  structural  reforms  geared  to  increasing  their  flexibility  and  adaptability  and, 
ultimately,  their  potential  growth  rates,  giving  particular  priority  to  reforms  bearing  on  the  services 
sector. 
Turning  to  the  international  financial  system,  banks  have  gained  in  soundness  and  are  now  in  a 
position  to  face  a  correction  of  the  global  imbalances,  even  if  this  were  accompanied  by  some 
adjustment  of  financial  conditions  and  a  moderate  increase  in  volatility.  However,  further  headway 
must  be  made  in  improving  the  measurement  of  the  risks  implicit  in  the  complex  financial  linkages 
present in some segments of the international financial system. 
Although they provide for greater risk diversification, greater financial integration, new participants on 
the markets and the emergence of new financial instruments all make it more difficult to determine on 
which  agents  and  sectors  the  risks  finally  fall.  It  is  also  more  complicated  to  evaluate,  where 
necessary, the risks of excessive concentration in segments where supervision by regulatory bodies is 
lighter. It is thus important to foster awareness in companies, and in households too, of the risks they 
assume, and for regulators to exercise effective surveillance of financial intermediaries and markets. 
All the more so given that the uncertainty over the effects arising from future bouts of turbulence on 
the markets will be exacerbated by the fact that this relatively new financial structure has not so far 
been  tested  in  less  favourable  phases  of  the  business  cycle.  In  this  respect,  the  volatility  seen  on 
international  financial  markets  in  recent  weeks  serves  as  a  reminder  of  the  need  for  prudent  risk 
assessment  and  for  the  right  resources  to  adapt  to  a  broader  and  more  demanding  financial 
environment. 
But it is not only the conduct of national authorities that must rise to the challenges entailed by the 
ever-increasing complexity of our financial systems. At the international level, growing economic and 
financial  integration  requires  reconsideration  of  the  guiding  principles  of  the  multilateral  financial 
institutions, which have hitherto remained perhaps too anchored in the bilateral supervision of national 
policies, without paying sufficient heed to the increasingly complex links globally. The strengthening of 
multilateral surveillance, especially in the financial realm, would thereby provide for a more effective 
contribution by these agencies to embedding international monetary and financial stability. 
The European environment 
in  2005  the euro  area  economy  posted  a modest average  increase  in  GDP,  and one  lower  than  in 
2004 and than in the other developed economic areas. Nonetheless, year-on-year growth was on a 
rising  profile  throughout  2005,  attaining  a  rate  of  increase  in  line  with  potential  in  2006  Q1.  The 
economic performance differed, in fact, from the first to the second half of 2005. In the first six months 
output  was  markedly  sluggish,  the  result  among  other  factors  of  the  temporary  easing  in  the 
momentum  of  world  trade,  the  strong  increase  in  oil  prices  and  the  effects  stemming  from  the 
appreciation, in the previous years, of the effective exchange rate of the euro. After the summer, and 
although high oil prices persisted, the euro area economy gathered greater steam, driven externally by 
more  robust  world  demand  and  some  correction  in  the  euro  exchange  rate,  and  internally  by  the 
progressive  thrust  of  investment.  However,  and  although  stock  market  gains  and  house  price 
increases generated a positive wealth effect, consumption remained lacklustre, weighed down by the 
local  growth  rate  of  disposable  income,  against  a  background  of  scant  job  creation  and  continuing 
wage restraint. 
The  inflation  rate  was  influenced  throughout  the  year  by  the  swings  in  oil  prices.  Nonetheless, 
underlying  inflation  tended  to  slow,  reflecting  the  scant  buoyancy  of  aggregate  demand  and  of  the 
labour market, and the downward effects on final costs and prices of globalisation and the vigorous 
emergence on the world trade scene of the developing countries. Early this year, further oil price rises 
were  manifest  in  a  fresh  increase  in  inflation  in  the  area,  and  also  made  themselves  felt  in  the 
underlying component, which may denote a growing rootedness of upward pressures. 
In 2005, demand policies in the euro area retained, overall, an expansionary stance geared to reviving 
private spending in the economy. But in the second half of the year, monetary policy, in keeping with 
its aim to preserve price stability, adopted an increasingly watchful attitude in the light of the increase 
in inflationary risks. That led in December 2005, and in March and June 2006, to respective quarter-
point rises in official interest rates from the historically low level of 2% at which they had held since 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 3
June  2003.  Despite  these  rises  in  official  rates,  the  Eurosystem's  monetary  policy  stance  has 
remained propitious to the firming of the pick-up in activity and job creation. Nonetheless, the ECB is 
closely monitoring developments in the euro area to ensure inflation expectations remain in line with 
price stability over the medium term. 
Budgetary policies adopted a moderately contractionary stance in the area as a whole, although the 
persistent fiscal imbalances in several Member States continued. Consequently, the current firming of 
higher growth rates should drive more resolute action to correct these imbalances, the persistence of 
which  may,  in  some  Member  States,  have  dented  agents'  confidence  and  may  thus  affect  their 
spending decisions. The reform of the Stability Pact appears to have successfully concluded a phase 
of uncertainty over the application of regulations relating to the fiscal policy discipline of the euro area 
countries.  However,  preserving  the  credibility  of  the  new  framework  requires  an  unequivocal  and 
ongoing commitment by the national authorities to strict compliance with the Pact. 
The  recent  persistence  of  sluggish  growth  rates,  despite  highly  favourable  financial  conditions, 
highlights the pressing need to see through the European structural reform agenda with firmer resolve. 
The revision of the Lisbon strategy in 2005 may contribute to driving this process. Nonetheless, as in 
the case of budgetary policies, a common framework for action is only effective if accompanied by the 
sufficient political resolve to adopt the measures that enable programmed objectives to be met. In the 
case of structural policies, these are chiefly oriented to stepping up the use of the labour factor and to 
increasing  the  pace  of  productivity  through  the  promotion  of  knowledge,  innovation  and  the 
incorporation of new technologies. 
As  earlier  mentioned,  the  phase  of  more  dynamic  economic  growth  initiated  around  mid-2005 
continued in the opening months of 2006. The main international organisations have forecast a rate of 
increase in GDP in the euro area of slightly over 2% in 2006, i.e. around potential. This recovery will 
foreseeably  be  underpinned  by  the  strength  of  domestic  demand,  among  whose  components 
investment  is  expected  to  post  a  high  rate,  while  private  consumption  will  probably  trend  more 
moderately,  albeit  at  a  somewhat  higher  rate  than  in  recent  years,  in  step  with  the  gradual 
improvement expected in the labour market. 
However,  there  are  some  factors  of  risk  clouding  this  outlook.  In  the  external  environment,  such 
factors comprise the existing global imbalances and the persistence of high oil prices. On the domestic 
front, employment and consumption are the factors subject to most uncertainty. 
The inflationary outlook for 2006 and 2007 indicates that the rate of change of the HICP may be close 
to the price stability benchmark of 2%, or might even exceed it again. Yet upside risks persist here, 
stemming  mainly  from  the  possibility  of  further  increases  in  oil  prices  –  given  the  instability  of  the 
market  –  and  from  the  potential  emergence  of  second-round  affects  in  a  more  buoyant  economic 
setting. But the fact that the level of output is still below potential provides leeway for the recovery to 
continue  for  some  time  without  generating  excessive  inflationary  pressures.  In  any  event,  the 
European Central bank will remain watchful so as to prevent risks to price stability in the medium term 
from materialising. 
The Spanish economy  
Throughout  last  year  and  in  early  2006,  the  expansionary cycle  of  the  Spanish economy continued 
and intensified, in contrast to the difficulties experienced in the euro area as a whole in emerging from 
the phase of low growth currently in train. Spanish GDP increased by 3.4% in 2005, while employment 
advanced at an equally high rate of 3.1%. In both cases, these rates were several tenths of a point up 
on  the  previous  year's  figures.  Moreover,  2005  saw  the  publication  of  the  new  Spanish  National 
Accounts base 2000 figures, which meant a considerable upward revision of economic growth since 
1995 and, especially, since 2000. These new estimates reflect more appropriately the dynamism of 
the  population  and  of  employment  these  past  few  years,  and  they  show  a  more  buoyant  economy 
more closely in step with the expansionary behaviour seen in other economic variables such as credit 
or tax revenue. 
As a result of this trajectory, there has been fresh headway in Spain's real convergence with the EU 
and with the euro area. On the latest provisional estimates available, Spanish per capita GDP stood in 
2005 at over 98% of the EU average, more than five percentage point up on its level in 2000. There 
were  also  significant  improvements  in  the  form  of  greater  labour  market  participation  and  a  lower 
unemployment rate, aspects where the traditional differences with the core European countries have 
narrowed substantially. The decline in the unemployment rate is particularly noteworthy. It now stands 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2006
at a similar level to that observed in the main European countries, following several decades in which 
a  high  unemployment  rate  was  singled  out  as  the  most  characteristic  problem  of  the  Spanish 
economy, even in cyclical upturns. 
The  performance  of  the  Spanish  economy  in  2005  and  early  2006  reflects  the  continuity  of  the 
expansionary  impulses  operating  on  the  growth  rate  and  on  job  creation.  Monetary  and  financial 
conditions have remained markedly loose in the light of the economy's domestic situation, having been 
determined by the prevailing price stability and sluggishness of activity in the euro area as a whole. 
The  low  levels  of  interest  rates  have  continued  to  combine  in  Spain  with  the  significant  rises  in 
financial and real-estate asset prices (although in the latter case they have tended to ease off), which 
has  reinforced  their  impulse  to  spending.  In  these  circumstances  the  gradual  withdrawal  of  the 
Eurosystem’s expansionary monetary policy stance, begun in late 2005, has only partly reduced the 
looseness of financial conditions. 
Immigration flows, which remained very high in 2005 according to the information available, were a 
further  factor  behind  the  dynamism  of  economic  activity  and  employment.  They  also  added  some 
flexibility  to  production  and  working  arrangements.  On  one  hand,  the  increase  in  the  immigrant 
population  has  sustained  the  thrust  of  domestic  spending,  while  on  the  other,  the  resulting  greater 
supply  of  labour  has  increased  the  Spanish  economy's  productive  capacity,  enabling  increases  in 
output more closely tailored to the buoyancy of demand to be attained. Furthermore, the presence of 
this  additional  labour  –  which  has  a  comparatively  higher  degree  of  mobility  –  has  contributed  to 
restricting potential sectoral bottlenecks and the wage pressures that usually characterise situations of 
notably vigorous expenditure, such as that seen in recent years. 
The composition of growth in 2005 evidenced few changes in relation to previous years, in step with 
the continuity of the impulses received by the economy. Indeed, the growth pattern became slightly 
more unbalanced, as national demand grew by 5.1%, outpacing the related increase in 2004, while 
foreign trade gave rise once again to a substantial negative contribution to GDP growth. Household 
consumption and housing-related spending continued to be the main underpinning of the increase in 
demand, supported in turn by the sound growth of disposable income and of employment, and by the 
generosity of financial conditions in the economy. As a result, households continued to reduce their 
saving ratio and to increase their net demand for financing. 
The principal new development in 2005 was the marked recovery in corporate productive investment 
expenditure,  which  focused  particularly  on  the  acquisition  of  capital  goods.  This  pick-up  was 
accompanied by a strong increase in credit, favoured by accessible financing conditions. Credit was 
directed especially at small – and in principle more dynamic – companies, and it spread to all sectors 
of  the  economy,  including  manufacturing  industry.  Public-sector  demand  also  quickened  last  year, 
driven by the rise in investment that characterises the initial years of a legislature and by the increase 
in government consumption.  
As stated, the unbalanced features of this growth pattern were manifest again in 2005, especially in 
the  behaviour  of  the  external  sector.  Flat  goods  exports,  despite  the  burgeoning  growth  of  foreign 
markets, combined with a fresh and significant increase in imports to give rise to a further deterioration 
in the negative contribution of net external demand, which had already been very marked in 2004. A 
mix  of  factors  was  involved  here:  first,  the  increase  in  the  energy  bill  and  the  greater  buoyancy  of 
demand  in  Spain  compared  with  its  EU  neighbours,  which  partly  reflects  Spain’s  different  cyclical 
position; and further, the losses in competitiveness that have built up in recent years (and to whose 
source and consequences I shall refer later), along with other structural factors relating to the sectoral 
and trade composition of our economy. 
In annual average terms, the discrepancies between the behaviour of domestic spending and of net 
external demand were further accentuated in 2005; however, throughout the year there were incipient 
signs of a change in the composition of growth, as national demand embarked on a slight slowdown 
and as a likewise modest correction was seen in the contractionary contribution of the external sector. 
Nonetheless, initial estimates for the opening months of 2006 would suggest that this rebalancing of 
the  composition  of  expenditure  has  come  to  a  halt,  against  a  background  in  which  activity  has 
continued to grow sharply. 
In the absence of sufficiently appreciable changes in the drivers of the expansion and of significant 
corrections in the pattern of growth, the imbalances already building up in the Spanish economy have 
become bigger and certain factors of vulnerability to potential future shocks have been accentuated. 
The high growth rates of domestic demand have combined with the inertia persisting in cost and price 
determination  and  have  continued  fuelling  the  inflationary  pressures  that  have  been  eroding  the 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 5
economy's  competitiveness.  In  turn,  the  fact  that  private-sector  spending  has  outpaced  income-
generating capacity has made for fresh increases in corporate and, above all, household debt, and for 
a growing resort to external saving. Both factors resulted in an ongoing deterioration in the nation's 
borrowing requirements, despite the fact that the public sector has appreciably increased its saving 
capacity.  The  Annual  Report  I  present  today  analyses  closely  the  different  factors  bearing  on  this 
diagnosis, and I shall now refer briefly to them. 
Spanish inflation has continued trending at a high rate, above that of the euro area, with the differential 
between  the  two  widening.  Although  the  Spanish  economy  is  more  dependent  on  oil  imports  than 
other countries in the area, the inflationary performance cannot be attributed to the direct impact of the 
strong hike in oil prices in 2005 and early 2006. Indeed, the underlying inflation (excluding energy and 
unprocessed  food  prices)  differential  with  the  euro  area  has  widened  more  than  that  of  the  overall 
index,  a  pattern  that  has  been  exacerbated  in  the  opening  months  of  this  year  in  which  industrial 
goods prices have accelerated. 
Looking at the determinants of the inflation differential on the costs side, it can be seen that, unlike in 
previous stages, the relative increase in margins has contributed more to the deterioration than the 
rise in unit labour costs. The widening of margins behind this behaviour has been more marked in the 
activities less exposed to competition, such as construction and services, which is also where demand 
pressures have been sharpest. 
Wage  increases  agreed  under  collective  bargaining  have  not  diminished  and  the  impact  of  the 
indexation clauses is proving considerable both in 2005 and in 2006. However, average labour costs 
have  grown  at  relatively  moderate  rates  as  a  result  of  the  rise  in  employment  in  industries  with 
comparatively lower wages, which are those where the influx of immigrants is proving greater. In this 
respect, the sizeable immigrant inflows are acting as a factor of wage flexibility in certain labour market 
segments. In any event, while this behaviour of wages may be considered moderate, compared with 
their  historical,  upward  pattern,  growth  has  remained  higher  than  that  of  wages  in  other  euro  area 
countries.  Moreover,  these  developments  have  taken  place  against  a  background  of  very  low 
productivity  gains,  meaning  that  the  cost  growth  differential  with  the  euro  area  has  remained  wide. 
This differential is proving particularly harmful for manufacturing industry, which has continued under 
increasingly sharp pressure from foreign competition. 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that,  in  the  euro  area,  the  consequences  of  losses  in  competitiveness 
induced  by  continuing  demand  pressure  may  be  difficult  to  reverse.  This  is  because  they  require a 
direct adjustment of relative prices and costs based on the effective moderation and the sufficiently 
flexible  behaviour  of  wages.  In  Spain's  case,  moreover,  given  the  specialisation  of  the  productive 
structure  in  industries where  demand  is  more  sensitive  to  relative  prices  and in  which  the pressure 
exerted  by  products  from  the  emerging  economies  is  very  high,  companies  may  find  themselves 
having to make a sharper adjustment to make up for lost ground on international markets and on the 
domestic market. That all shows how important it is for the economy to have flexible price- and wage-
setting mechanisms. And there is a general need to reinforce the capacity of the productive system to 
compete, through improvements in specialisation, efficiency and higher productivity gains. 
As earlier indicated, the growing mismatch between household and corporate expenditure and income 
last  year  has  been  accompanied  by  fresh  increases  in  these  sectors'  debt.  What  has  proven 
conducive  to  this  has  been  the  maintenance  of  financial  conditions  which  have  continued  to  be 
markedly loose for the situation of strong demand pressure in the economy. This growth in household 
and corporate liabilities is naturally bearing on the financial position and burden of both sectors. 
The financial pressure borne by households has, however, been alleviated by the increase in their net 
wealth, sustained by the growth of stock market prices and, above all, of house prices. In the case of 
companies,  the  notable  increase  in  profits  has  strengthened  the  sector's  capacity  to  withstand  the 
increase in their financial commitments. Accordingly, the financial position of both sectors, considered 
overall,  remains  sound  and  does  not  therefore  pose  a  serious  obstacle  to  the  continuity  of  the 
economic upturn currently in train. 
The foregoing should not, however, conceal the evident fact that the expansion of domestic spending, 
particularly in the case of households, will not be able to base itself for much longer on growth in debt 
at  rates  such  as  those  currently  seen.  Moreover,  the  ongoing  rise  in  indebtedness  levels  and  the 
prevalence  of  debt  incurred  at  variable  interest  rates  entails  a  greater  sensitivity  of  the  Spanish 
economy  to  monetary  policy  decisions,  against  a  background  in  which  the  present  generosity  of 
monetary  conditions  may  be  expected  to  move  to  a  more  normal  footing.  The  influence  of  interest 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2006
rates on expenditure is undoubtedly sharper in the case of relatively more indebted households, which 
are in the lower strata of the income distribution. 
Along  these  same  lines,  the  strong  concentration  of  household  wealth  in  property  and  the  relative 
weight of productive activities related to the residential sector are resulting in a greater exposure of the 
economy as a whole to the changes in property-market activity and prices. Regarding the latter, 2005 
appears to have marked the start of a slowdown in house prices, raising (all the more so the more 
firmly  the  deceleration  becomes  entrenched)  the  likelihood  of  the  current  overvaluation  of  housing 
being  progressively  reabsorbed,  as  in  previous  booms.  Let  me  remind  you,  however,  that  some 
element of risk is always present in all scenarios involving the absorption of a phase of overvaluation. 
This  is  a  consideration  that  all  agents  should  bear  in  mind  when  deciding  where  to  place  their 
investments. 
Any assessment of the consequences arising from the greater exposure of the Spanish economy to 
changes in house prices and in interest rates would be incomplete were it not also to allude to the 
parallel developments reinforcing the economy’s capacity to face potentially adverse shocks in any of 
these variables. In this respect, it should be underscored that the behaviour seen in recent years in the 
main  indicators  of  the  activity,  profitability  and  solvency  of  domestic  credit  institutions  is  helping 
mitigate  the  financial  risks  bearing  on  the  course  of  our  economy  in  the  medium  term.  These 
institutions  are  therefore  well  positioned  to  absorb  the  potential  impact  of  shocks  such  as  those 
indicated without seeing their capacity to ensure the financing of economic growth affected. 
Undoubtedly,  the  prolongation  of  the  phase  of  robust  demand  has  contributed  to  widening  the 
economy's external imbalance, increasing the need to resort to foreign saving to finance private-sector 
spending.  Overall,  the  external  deficit,  whether  measured  by  the  current  account  balance or  by  net 
borrowing, reached a new all-time high last year. 
As is known, belonging to a monetary union substantially changes the meaning and consequences of 
the current account balance. The breaking of the link between the exchange rate and the economy's 
external  imbalance  gives  greater  prominence  to  how  this  imbalance  is  financed.  Here,  the  funds 
needed to bridge the gap between national investment and saving are being routed essentially via the 
issuance of securities by banks and, especially, non-bank financial institutions. These securities, such 
as mortgage-backed bonds, are linked to credits guaranteed by property assets. 
However,  the  fact  that  the  external  deficit  is  easier  to  finance  within  a  monetary  union  should  not 
conceal  the  factors  of  uncertainty  derived  from  the  losses  in  competitiveness  and  the  growing 
indebtedness of households and firms underlying the deficit, because they may ultimately affect the 
sustainability of medium-term growth. 
In the short run, forecasts are for the continuity of the expansion. The central scenario for the coming 
quarters  is  set  against  the  substantial  buoyancy  of  the  world  economy,  the  smooth  adjustment  of 
monetary and financial conditions and the gradual re-absorption of the overvaluation of housing. And it 
continues to point to a gradual rebalancing of spending, with a slowdown in domestic demand and an 
improvement  in  the  contribution  of  external  demand.  We  are  thus  before  a  scenario  that  offers,  in 
principle, sufficient room to face the vulnerabilities that have emerged and to address the measures 
needed  to  consolidate  the  continuity  of  the  expansion.  But  there  is  a  risk  that  the  restructuring  of 
spending will not be of sufficient intensity or that it will not increase the responsiveness of supply to the 
extent  needed,  meaning  that  the  imbalances  will  continue  to  grow  deeper,  thereby  raising  the 
probability of a more marked adjustment in the medium run.  
Economic policy challenges 
Given  the  situation  described,  an  economic  policy  commitment  to  rebalancing  demand  and,  in 
particular,  to  containing  domestic  expenditure  is  particularly  necessary.  The  aim  is  to  ensure  the 
Spanish economy continues moving towards the income levels of the core European countries and 
that it is in a position to become successfully integrated into an increasingly competitive and globalised 
international  environment.  To  do  this,  the  potential  for  economic  growth  must  be  broadened, 
reinforcing the significant contribution made by the increase in employment in recent years with the 
attainment of real productivity gains. 
Under demand policies, monetary policy may be expected gradually to resume a more neutral stance 
and somewhat higher interest rates. The mild tightening of monetary conditions will contribute to some 
extent to containing consumer and residential-investment spending. But it is unlikely, in a setting in 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 7
which cyclical divergences of some intensity persist between the countries comprising the euro area, 
that  this  will  suffice  to  promote  the  necessary  adjustment  from  the  domestic  standpoint.  The 
contribution of fiscal policy is therefore crucial, and the room for manoeuvre available should be used 
to reduce the pressure of domestic demand, through the pursuit of more ambitious budgetary targets.  
In this respect, the sound fiscal figures obtained in 2005 – a surplus of 1.1% of GDP and a fresh cut in 
the public debt ratio, which has dipped to close to 40% of GDP – should be built on and improved in 
2006.  Indeed,  the  figures  for  the  opening  months  of  this  year  suggest  the  marked  buoyancy  of  tax 
revenue  will  continue,  raising  the  likelihood  that  public  revenue  will  once  again  outpace  budgetary 
projections. In this case, and from the perspective of the macroeconomic scenario of sustained growth 
projected for 2006, the general government surplus should feasibly and desirably stand a few tenths of 
a  point  above  the  2005  figure,  improving  on  the  target  of  0.9%  set  in  the  last  Stability  Programme 
update. Such a result would further the strategy pursued in recent years aimed at strengthening the 
stabilising nature of fiscal policy, which will be bolstered by the entry into force next year of the new 
budgetary stability legislation. 
The  healthy  position  of  Spanish  public  finances  is  evident  from  comparison  with  those  of  the  other 
European  countries,  subject  to  the  common  fiscal  discipline  rules  established  by  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact.  But  this  situation  should  not  sideline  significant  challenges  ahead.  Most  immediately, 
public-sector  participation  in  various  structural  reform  programmes,  such  as  the  National  Reforms 
Plan, and compliance with the commitments made to improve the quality of certain services, such as 
healthcare,  and  the  provision  of  new  welfare  benefits  (some  far-reaching,  such  as  the  coverage  of 
situations of dependency) will require further efforts to achieve more efficient management of spending 
and of public revenue. 
From  the  standpoint  of  public  revenue,  the  direct  tax  reform  due  to  be  enacted  in  2007  contains 
features  conducive  to  greater  efficiency  in  the  allocation  of  resources.  As  regards  income  tax,  the 
reform is a significant step towards tax neutrality for saving. In respect of corporate income tax it is 
intended, in addition to reducing the rate in line with international trends, to make more rational use of 
the system of tax allowances and deductions. Although it is estimated that the impact of tax reform on 
revenue will be small, its effect on activity will be slightly expansionary. Accordingly, if the economy 
retains  its  current  dynamism,  it might  be  necessary  to  introduce  some compensatory  adjustment.  It 
should  be  recalled  that  the  entry  into  force  of  the  EU  Financial  Perspectives  2007-2013  will  entail 
fewer  financial  flows  from  Community  coffers.  That  all  reinforces  the  need  in  the  coming  years  to 
design budgets that add to the stabilising role of fiscal policy. 
On the public spending side, now most spending powers have been decentralised, the co-ordination 
mechanisms  between  the  different  tiers  of  government  must  be  strengthened.  I  should  moreover 
stress the importance, once very high levels of decentralisation are in place, of achieving a greater 
degree of commitment by all levels of government to budgetary stability. The failure by many regional 
governments  to  meet  the  budgetary  stability  target  in  2005  and  the  deficit  projections  for  2006  are 
warning signs for potential shortfalls, which should be prevented and avoided. The new stability laws 
should  contribute  to  identifying  and  correcting  these  potential  situations,  promoting  prompt  and 
transparent information on regional public finances. 
Lastly,  some  comments  on  the  challenges  posed  to  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  over  the 
medium and long term, derived from population ageing. I would say that the delay in adopting reforms 
for public social protection systems reinforces the need to achieve healthier positions in the short term, 
providing  for  further  cuts  in  the  public  debt  ratio  or,  alternatively,  for  making  appropriations  to  the 
pension reserve fund with greater speed and intensity. Moreover, this need increases in the absence 
of more ambitious reforms in the labour market to further promote the use of still-idle labour resources, 
despite the progress in increasing participation and reducing unemployment. 
I  talked  earlier  of  the  advisability  of  having  more  efficient  cost-  and  price-setting  mechanisms  to 
smooth the adjustments the economy has to make in the context of EMU. In this respect, the fact that 
issues relating to the structure of collective bargaining have been relegated on the agenda of potential 
labour  market  reforms  is  a  cause  for  concern.  The  wage  bargaining  arrangements  included  in  the 
Inter-Confederal Agreements for Collective Bargaining, habitually signed by social agents, restrict the 
capacity to adjust wage increases to industry- or firm-wide productivity developments, in addition to 
setting a floor for the increase in nominal wages. The indexation clauses included in a high proportion 
of agreements have particularly harmful effects when exogenous price-rise shocks occur, as with the 
current  hike  in  oil  prices,  since  they  tend  to  reinforce  the  upward  inertia  of  wages.  Collective 
bargaining arrangements should be made more flexible to provide a framework in which, establishing 
8 
 BIS Review 60/2006
the necessary guarantees for workers, wage and working conditions are adapted more readily to the 
needs of an efficient and competitive functioning of firms and industries.  
It  is  also crucial  to  promote  permanent  hiring,  to  correct  the  duality  persisting in  the  labour  market, 
since the ratio of temporary to total employees has continued to increase in 2005 and in 2006 to date. 
The agreement on labour market reform recently signed by the social agents and the government is a 
very timid step in this direction; although it seeks to discourage temporary hiring (with results that are 
difficult to assess in advance), it leaves some of the core problems underlying the restrictive use of 
permanent hiring largely unchanged. In particular, although a more transparent system of rebates has 
been introduced for this type of hiring, the dismissal costs linked thereto have not been changed. In 
this connection, mention may be made of the extension to 2007 of the period in which employers can 
convert temporary contracts into permanent ones, availing themselves of the employment-promoting 
contract, which envisages a smaller redundancy payment. 
The issues pending in the field of labour reform are very important, since this is a very significant area 
for  the  effectiveness  of  the  numerous  liberalisation  measures  implemented  first,  under  the  Plan  de 
Dinamización (plan to bring about a more dynamic economy), and further under the National Reforms 
Programme. The proper implementation of these programmes, which have been favourably assessed 
in the European Commission's follow-up of the Lisbon agenda, is vital if the Spanish economy is to 
leave behind the path of low productivity growth on which it has been moving. Undoubtedly, the high 
availability of labour is a factor that partly explains the low increases in productivity. But this should not 
mask the difficulties faced in increasing and modernising productive capital, in properly training labour 
and  in  incorporating  technological  advances,  difficulties  that  must  be  overcome  to  improve  the 
competitiveness of the productive system. 
Market  flexibility  and  efficiency  is  a  vital  requirement  for  sustaining  long-term  growth  in  an  area  of 
monetary stability. And it is all the more vital if, as in the case of the Spanish economy, the starting 
point involves a lag in technology and a relatively low level of productivity. This is why it is so important 
to  move  forward  the  Lisbon  strategy  in  our country.  The  challenge  lies,  therefore,  in  translating  the 
programmes  designed  into  effective  government  action  that  is  capable  of  mobilising  the  innovative 
energy  of  the  private  sector  and  of  extending  action  to  other  key  areas  still  requiring  a  liberalising 
boost, such as the retail trade sector and the land, housing and rentals markets. 
The financial system 
During 2005 Spanish deposit institutions operated in a benign domestic and international environment, 
both from the macroeconomic and financial-market perspective. Against this background, 2005 was 
marked  by  the  continuing  strong  growth  of  financing  to  the  resident  private  sector,  especially  the 
financing of activities linked to the property market. Nonetheless, the change in the monetary policy 
stance and the increased volatility of financial markets in recent weeks have renewed doubts about 
the continuity of this setting. 
The growth of mortgage credit has been accompanied by the emergence of new bank products. It has 
thus been possible recently to observe a lengthening of the terms at which mortgages are granted, to 
limits considerably in excess of those banks are accustomed to handling, and greater flexibility in the 
deferral  of  principal  and  interest  payments,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  being  able  to  draw 
automatically on amounts repaid in order to finance other needs. 
These  financial  innovations,  which  are  characteristic  of  mature  financial  markets,  enable  financial 
institutions  to  satisfy  customer  requirements  with  greater  flexibility,  and  the  possibilities  of  financing 
individuals  and  firms  may  be  increased.  However,  substantial  extra  efforts  are  required  by  bank 
managers to properly measure and control the additional factors of risk and also to provide customers 
with the necessary information so that they may assess their ability to pay under various alternative 
scenarios. 
The increase in financing granted to property market-related activities is not confined to that extended 
to  households  for  house  purchases;  financing  extended  to  construction  and  property  development 
companies  has  also  grown  notably.  The  degree  of  concentration  of  entities'  credit  portfolios  in 
construction  and  property  development  activities  increased  once  again  in  2005.  That  also  requires 
managers' attention, in a setting in which there is a greater likelihood that the accommodative stance 
of monetary conditions will progressively be normalised and that the slowdown in house prices that 
appears to have begun will continue and even intensify. 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 9
The forceful increase in banking activity, and particularly in credit to the resident private sector, has not 
been accompanied to the same degree of intensity by the raising of funds through traditional liabilities-
side  instruments  such  as  deposits.  In  this  respect,  there  was  a  stronger  tendency  in  2005  to  seek 
additional financing on the financial markets through the issue of mortgage covered bonds and other 
securities, or through asset securitisation. Although this usually entails more costly financing than the 
raising of more traditional resources, it is no less true that Spain's incorporation into a stable zone, 
such  as  the  euro  area,  has  provided  our  institutions  with  access  to  efficient  capital  and  interbank 
markets. 
Access to international markets, mainly in the euro area, has assigned to credit institutions a central 
role  in  the  channelling  of  saving  from  the  rest  of  the  world  to  our  economy,  and,  in  the  case  of 
securitisation,  it  has  helped  transfer  part  of  the  risk  to  foreign  investors.  This  may  mean  that  the 
external financing conditions for credit institutions and for the Spanish economy may be more sensitive 
to  the  circumstances  of  capital  markets  and  to  developments  on  property  markets  in  our  country. 
Institutions  should  thus  make  allowances  for  less  favourable  future  scenarios  of  access  to  these 
international markets than those seen in recent years. 
The  expansion  of  activity  during  2005  was  not  restricted,  however,  to  credit  extended;  banks  also 
offered  a  wider  range  of  non-typical  banking  products,  such  as  insurance,  and  mutual  and  pension 
funds. Likewise, activities pursued abroad contributed to making bank balance sheets more dynamic. 
In this respect, the geographical composition of Spanish deposit institutions' financial assets abroad 
changed  considerably  last  year.  While  Latin  America  continues  to  hold  a  relevant  position,  the 
European Union has become notably more prominent, and now accounts for the highest proportion of 
assets. 
In  2005  Spanish  deposit  institutions’  results,  the  first  line  of  defence  against  potential  difficulties, 
posted sizeable growth rates, confirming the sound position seen in previous years. It should not be 
forgotten, however, that a greater degree of dispersion and volatility is to be expected further to the 
application of the new accounting principles introduced by Banco de España Circular 4/2004. 
In any event, the considerable increase in business volume, the greater leverage of credit institutions 
and  the  drive  to  contain  operating  cost  increases  have  allowed  high  profitability  ratios  to  be 
maintained, despite the moderation of the financial margins. The clearest expression of this was the 
return on equity; once again in 2005, its spread over long-term public debt continued to widen. 
Spanish deposit institutions have been operating reasonably comfortably above the minimum capital 
ratio,  although  the  sharp  growth  of  activity  has  reduced  the  solvency  ratio  to  below  what  has 
historically  been  the  case  in  our  banking  system.  This  comfort  margin  provides  some  room  for 
manoeuvre in the face of potential shocks, especially when regard is had to the quality of such capital 
and its regular generation. 
Growth  in  activity  such  as  that  hitherto  described,  against  such  a  favourable  macroeconomic  and 
financial-market background, should not lead bank managers to feel complacent. On the contrary, the 
difficulties  of  sustaining  the  growth  rate  of  activity,  the  foreseeable  normalisation  of  favourable 
monetary and financial conditions and the recent increase in volatility on international financial markets 
against a backdrop of historically low risk premia requires watchfulness and reflectiveness concerning 
the  business  strategy  in  different  environments.  The  analysis  of  adverse  scenarios  is  a  vital  tool  in 
situations of rapid and far-reaching change, so that responsiveness to combinations of adverse shocks 
may be determined; though such shocks are not the foreseeable central scenario, they should be part 
of any financial institution’s risk analysis. 
From  the regulatory  standpoint,  2005 was  also  an intense  year.  Throughout  2005 credit  institutions 
successfully  applied  the  new  accounting  Circular,  working  on  their  adaptation  to  the  New  Capital 
Accord. These implementation efforts were not confined to 2005, but must continue over the coming 
years, with a follow-up on the most novel aspects of the new accounting rules, especially in respect of 
capital, transparency and management accountability. 
The growing importance of transparency and corporate responsibility is not restricted to the accounting 
realm. Indeed, corporate governance is a key aspect in all financial systems. This is acknowledged by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  has  approved  a  specific  guide  for  deposit 
institutions.  The  guide  seeks 
to  complement  other  codes,  placing  particular  emphasis  on 
organisational, risk-control and transparency aspects. 
Growing cross-industry and cross-country integration also has consequences for supervisors, who can 
increasingly  less  exercise  their  powers  in  isolation.  Accordingly,  national  supervisory  activity  should 
10 
 BIS Review 60/2006
best form part of the set of initiatives and activities at the international level, especially the activities of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors, 
which were both chaired in 2005 by the Banco de España.  
Once  the  chapter  dedicated  to  the  capital  framework  and  the  trading  book  was  concluded  in  July 
2005, both Committees directed their efforts at supervisory co-operation and at enhancing consistency 
of  implementation,  thus  supporting  the  idea  that  a  regulatory  pause  might  improve  the  quality  of 
implementation  of  this  regulation.  The  call  for  regulatory  convergence  to  be  accompanied  by  a 
convergence  of  supervisory  practices  is  particularly  intense  in  the  EU.  Fora  such  as  the  Basel 
Committee’s  AIG  (Accord  Implementation  Group)  or  the  CEBS  (Committee  of  European  Banking 
Supervisors) in the EU are a response to this call. But growing co-operation with counterparts in other 
countries  is  also  vital  for  supervisors,  because  a  global  financial  system  cannot  be  effectively 
supervised  without  a  suitable  degree  of  co-operation  providing  for  mutual  trust  and  information 
exchange. International co-operation, in sum, is a cornerstone of global financial stability and of the 
extension of best international practices in this field. 
Within  Europe,  the  new  capital  directive  reinforces  this  approach  by  establishing  colleges  of 
supervisors  for  transnational  financial  groups,  but  also  through  the  role  of  lead  supervisor  on  a 
consolidated basis. Moreover, the extension of the so-called Lamfalussy approach from the securities 
industry to banking and insurance is a clear commitment to a co-operative and evolutionary approach, 
constructed  on  the  strength  and  knowledge  of  national  supervisors.  This  supervisory  co-operation-
intensive model increases the responsibility of national supervisors, since it is only sustainable insofar 
as  it  provides  appropriate  responses,  eliminates  obstacles  and  encourages  the  necessary  financial 
integration. 
Although only about 40 of the 8,000 European deposit institutions engage in significant transnational 
activity, the European banking market is integrating at considerable speed. Even though the pace of 
integration may seem limited, with few cross-border operations annually, international competition in 
each  of  our  domestic  financial  systems  is  increasingly  patent  and  intense.  Further,  some  market 
segments have undergone unprecedented growth. The euro interbank market and the asset-backed 
bond  market  are  now  fully  integrated  and  fully  accessible  to  more  than  these  pan-European 
institutions.  Such  is  the  European  financial system,  which combines  integrated  segments with  retail 
banking markets that are not even national but local, and transnational institutions among the biggest 
in the world with small banks with just a handful of employees. Accordingly, the lifting of barriers to 
integration must remain high on the agenda of Community and national authorities. 
I would not wish to conclude this section without referring to the efforts of the Banco de España to 
inform  bank  customers.  But  before  discussing  our  initiatives  in  this  area,  we  should  stress  that  our 
efforts here are aimed at reinforcing financial stability. Just as solvent, efficient and competitive entities 
are the best guarantee of stability in a financial system open to international competition, customers 
with sufficient financial acumen who are demanding in their dealings with banks are also a basic pillar 
of the efficiency of the financial system and of its stability. 
In  2005  the  Banco  de  España  instituted  its  bank  customer’s  portal.  This  provides  consumers  with 
overall  information  on  the  risk  characteristics  of  different  products,  on  their  rights  and  on  the 
commissions applied by institutions to their customers. A provisional evaluation of the results is very 
favourable,  but  at  the same  time  leaves no room  for complacency.  This  is  an  area where  we  must 
make  greater  efforts,  improving  co-ordination  with  other  supervisory  and  consumer  protection 
agencies. Issues as basic as the advisability of diversifying saving between entities and products, or 
the  absence  of  high  returns  unless  greater  risk  is  involved,  are  not  yet  part  of  consumers’  basic 
financial culture. And while this remains so, consumers will be exposing themselves to risks without 
being aware they are incurring them. 
National  co-ordination  mechanisms  between  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  supervisors  were  also 
strengthened in 2005. In response to ECOFIN’s recommendations, a memorandum of understanding 
was  signed  by  the  Ministry  of  Economy  (not  only  in  its  main  function,  but  also  in  its  capacity  as 
supervisor of the insurance industry), the Banco de España and the CNMV (National Securities Market 
Commission) on co-operation in financial stability. This agreement, which is the natural extension to 
the national realm of that signed in the EU by the Ministries of Finance, central banks and banking 
supervisors, without modifying their respective powers, simply gives written expression to what were 
already  fluid  relations  between  the  Ministry  and  supervisors.  As  a  direct  consequence  of  this 
agreement, a national Financial Stability Committee was set up and has since begun operating.  
BIS Review 60/2006 
 11
As  usual,  the  final  part  of  my  address  shall  be  devoted  to  the  recognition  and  appreciation  of  the 
Banco  de  España  staff  for  their  effort  and  dedication,  and  to  the  members  of  the  Executive 
Commission and of the Governing Council for their support and collaboration. Especially so on this 
occasion, as this speech marks the end of an intense and enriching professional experience for me. It 
has been a privilege to work, along with the Deputy Governor, the Directors-General and the members 
of this Council, at the helm of this institution over the past six years. I believe that during this period we 
have  succeeded  in  preparing  this  institution  for  the  role  it  must  play  as  a  consequence  of  the  new 
institutional  framework  EMU  membership  entails  and  the  role  the  Spanish  economy  is  called  on  to 
perform  on  the  global  stage.  This  has  all  been  possible  thanks  to  the  efforts  and  dedication  of  our 
staff, and also thanks to your professionalism, steadfastness, independent judgment and institutional 
loyalty, which make the Banco de España a very special place. 
Looking back, I would like to extend my gratitude to the former council members. And I have a very 
special memory of Eugenio Domingo Solans, who rendered so many services to this institution, both in 
his two spells on the Executive Commission and during his stay at the European Central Bank. 
Allow me to conclude briefly by expressing my personal gratitude to the deputy governor, to whom I 
shall always be indebted. Our co-operation and understanding over these years has been so intense 
and  mutually  supportive  that  in  appreciating  his  work  I  feel  as  though  I  were  praising  myself.  So, 
Gonzalo, getting straight to the point as we both prefer, let me say in public just two short words: thank 
you. 
12 
 BIS Review 60/2006
