Y V Reddy: Use of technology in the financial sector - significance of concerted 
efforts 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banking Technology Awards 
Function  2006,  at  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology,  Hyderabad, 
2 September 2006. 
 Shri Arvind Sharma, Director, IDRBT, members of the Governing Council of the IDRBT, fellow bankers 
and distinguished guests,  
It gives me immense pleasure to be here with friends from the banking fraternity. In fact, being here is 
part of my annual pilgrimage to the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology 
(IDRBT).  At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  compliment  the  Governing  Council,  faculty  and  staff  of  the 
IDRBT for continuing with their mission with distinction.  
The  foundation  for  large-scale  induction  of  IT  in  the  banking  sector  was  provided  by  the 
recommendations of the committees headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, in 1984 and 1989. Subsequently, 
in  1994,  the  Reserve  Bank  constituted  a  committee  on  'Technology  Upgradation  in  the  Banking 
Sector'.  The  committee  made  a  number  of  recommendations  covering  payment  systems  including 
setting up of an autonomous centre for development and research in banking technology. The IDRBT 
was created as a sequel. The Institute has established and operates the INdian FInancial NETwork 
(INFINET),  performs  research  in  banking  technology  and  provides  consultancy  services  apart  from 
providing educational and training facilities for the banking sector.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the need  for  concerted  efforts to  enhance  the  use  of 
technology in the financial sector to ensure efficiency, stability, competition and above all service to 
the common person. 
Technology and the RBI 
I  would  like  to  enumerate  for  record  a  few  technology-related  initiatives  of  the  RBI.  First,  the 
establishment  of  the  mechanised  cheque  processing  systems  using  the  Magnetic  Ink  Character 
Recognition (MICR) technology in India. These have been acknowledged the world over as systems 
which  have  stabilised  well  with  overall  reject  rates  of  around  1%  while,  I  understand,  that  the 
international  rates  are  around  2%.  Those  who  operate  these  systems,  therefore,  deserve  to  be 
complimented. 
Second, the technological infrastructure created by the IDRBT since the establishment of the INFINET 
in 1999. This was aimed at sharing expensive IT resources so as to achieve the economies of scale. 
One  of  the  notable  achievements  of  the  IDRBT  has  been  the  implementation  of  Public  Key 
Infrastructure (PKI)-based electronic data transfer with very high security levels.  
Third, the introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System. It has not only resulted in 
compliance  with  the  Core  Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS), Basle but has also paved the way for risk-free, credit push-based fund 
transfers settled on a real time basis and in the central bank money. We had an occasion to compare 
our RTGS system with other RTGS systems for placing before our Board for Payment and Settlement 
Systems. It emerged that the Indian RTGS system, which has the 'Y' topology, is considered to be the 
optimal  choice  and  this  topology  has  also  been  adopted  by  several  central  banks,  which  have 
implemented RTGS. Our approach towards intra-day liquidity and potential gridlock resolution follow 
international  patterns.  An  evaluation  of  the  various  components  of  the  RTGS  system  vis-à-vis  the 
critical evaluation parameters set by the Bank for International Settlements, Basle indicates that we 
are close to the best on most of the parameters.  
The facility for inter-bank funds settlement through RTGS is available today across more than 23,700 
branches of banks spanning more than 500 centres in the country. While it is reassuring to note that 
transactions  with  large  aggregate  value  are  being  settled  through  the  RTGS  system,  with  average 
daily settlement amounting to more than Rs. 60,000 crore, there is still scope for routing many more 
systemically  important  payments  through  the  RTGS.  For  the  purpose,  enhancing  the  customer 
awareness  at  the  user  level  would  be  an  urgent  imperative.  It  is  essential  that  the  RBI,  banks  and 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 1
large players in the market make concerted efforts in this regard so as to ensure that all large-value 
customer payments across financial markets, which have systemic implications, flow into the RTGS, 
such as payments in the equity and debt markets. Once the system achieves a critical mass of usage 
by  the  participants,  a  tipping  point  would  be  reached  and  it  should  be  possible  for  the  financial 
regulators to consider making the RTGS as the preferred mode for specified large-value transactions 
in the financial markets.  
Fourth, creation of electronic fund transfer systems. It is not necessary that all the fund transactions 
are  settled  on  a  real  time  basis.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  expand  the  reach  of  other  electronic 
payment mechanisms for small-value customer transactions across the country. Towards this end, the 
Reserve  Bank  implemented  the  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (EFT)  System  in  the  mid  nineties,  which 
was later upgraded as the Special Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT) System in 2003 and has now 
been  further  enhanced  as  the  National  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  (NEFT)  System  since  November 
2005.  
The  NEFT  system,  an  improved  version  of  the  EFT  system,  has  enhanced  security  features  and 
facilitates  retail  funds  movement  with  multiple  daily  settlements,  which  enable  customers  to  receive 
funds within two hours of the settlement. Today, the NEFT facility covers more than 5000 branches of 
32 banks spread across 200 centres. The Reserve Bank has taken up as its mission, the expansion of 
the  reach  of  NEFT  to  cover  all  computerised  /  networked  branches  of  banks  as  outlined  in  the 
Payment  Systems  Vision  document.  The  plan  is  to  provide  NEFT  facilities  initially  at  all  the  RTGS 
customer-enabled  branches  and  thereafter,  extend  the  same  to  cover  almost  all  the  computerised 
branches of banks across the country.  
Finally, a major initiative, as far as funds movement is concerned, is cheque truncation. In order to 
improve efficiency and substantially reduce the time taken for cheque processing, the Reserve Bank 
has  initiated  steps  to  introduce  a  Cheque  Truncation  System  (CTS).  A  pilot  project  is  scheduled  to 
commence in the National Capital Region in Delhi by the end of this year.  
Over the years, the role of the Reserve Bank is changing in tune with the increased levels of maturity 
of the markets and the financial system as a whole. The role of the Reserve Bank in future would be of 
a  catalyst  of  change  as  detailed  in  the  Financial  Sector  Technology  Vision  Document  published  in 
2005. In realising this vision, the need for shared efforts towards setting up of world class IT systems 
will gain greater significance. As a first step, the Reserve Bank has, through the IDRBT, facilitated the 
setting up the National Financial Switch, which provides such an opportunity to the financial sector. I 
would  urge  the  banks  to  make  extensive  use  of  this  facility.  IDRBT  is  also  revamping  the  entire 
INFINET structure in consultation with the users to make it more efficient in tune with the international 
practices. Perhaps, a formal benchmarking of the functioning of our system with the global standards 
and practices may have to be done and the outcome placed in the public domain. 
 Technology challenges for the banking sector 
The entire approach towards technology-based banking has shown significant improvement since the 
initiation of reforms in the 1990s. The number of public sector banks which has migrated (or are in the 
process of migration) to Core Banking Systems (CBS), is an indication of the progress in this regard. 
The unique feature of the CBS is that the concept of branch-based banking gives way to the bank-
based banking treating the constituent as the customer not of a particular branch but of the bank as a 
whole. Today, 21 public sector banks have embarked on the use of such systems and the number of 
CBS-enabled branches exceeds 14,000 as against 14 banks with about 5000 CBS-branches a year 
ago.  Some  of  the  banks  are  reportedly  facing  teething  troubles  in  this  area  but  I  trust  every  effort 
would  be  made  to  stabilise  the  system  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  customers.  I  would  urge  that  an 
assessment of the efficiency of functioning of CBS in all the banks be attempted to facilitate necessary 
improvements.  
The  commercial  banks  have  to  address  various  emerging  challenges  including  those  arising  from 
large-scale IT deployment. These include the impact of CBS, more scientific risk management, better 
asset-liability  management,  ensuring  effective  anti  money  laundering  measures,  and  the  security 
concerns relating to implementation of IT in banks. 
One  issue,  which  often  gets  raised  in  any  discussion  on  technology  implementation,  is  the  cost  it 
entails. Products such as smart cards, which may not require significant initial capital costs and which 
can be easily implemented for a large customer base, hold the promise for the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2006
Let me highlight some of the critical factors, which need to be adequately addressed while dealing with 
IT.  Prime  amongst  them  is  the  need  to  ensure  appropriate  security  and  integrity  of  the  system. 
Security  in  IT  systems  is  only  as  effective  as  the  weakest  link  and  as  financial  intermediaries,  the 
banks have to ensure that security features incorporated in IT systems are the best of the breed. With 
ever-evolving information technology, the security concerns do not remain static and a system of an 
ongoing  critical  review  of  the  efficacy  of  security  features  and  measures  needs  to  be  instituted. 
Integrity of the data processed and stored in IT systems has to be ensured by the banks at all times 
and adequate back up, including real time replication, to the extent possible, provided for.  
Another  major  requirement  relates  to  disaster  recovery  management  and  the  fail-safe  business 
continuity  plans.  In  today's  world,  customer  expectations  are  high  and  ensuring  uninterrupted 
availability  of  the  IT  resources,  even  in  the  event  of  a  rather  extreme  contingency,  assumes 
significance. The banking community, therefore, needs to put in place appropriate contingency plans 
and test their adequacy at regular intervals.  
While  the  Reserve  Bank  is  providing  a  common  system-wide  communications  infrastructure,  the 
ultimate  objective  should  be  for  each  bank  to  develop  its  own  communications  network  so  that  the 
movement of funds within the banks is entirely managed through their own networks. This will avoid 
excessive dependence on INFINET and improve the overall systemic efficiency. Though a few banks 
have already done so, there is scope for further progress in this regard by others. 
There are several co-operative banks too in the system which extend banking services and some of 
them also have relatively large-scale operations. Perhaps, it is essential that the use of technology in 
the co-operative banking sector too is enhanced, as appropriate, to bring them closer to the level of 
the commercial banks.  
Technology and financial inclusion 
We  have  been  highlighting  the  need  for  financial  inclusion  which  involves  the  provision  of  banking 
services to the vast multitude of population so far excluded from such services. As far as increasing 
the scope and coverage of financial inclusion is concerned, some of the challenges which need to be 
effectively addressed include lack of adequate infrastructure in rural areas, relatively low volumes of 
transactions, comparatively higher transaction costs, and other factors such as the literacy levels of 
target customers. 
Technology offers an excellent tool to effectively address the above challenges. Lack of infrastructure 
is being addressed in a variety of innovative ways, leveraging technology. Some of these include use 
of computer systems which do not require uninterrupted electric power supply, networking using radio 
frequency and other non-conventional methods, centralisation of processing systems leading to lower 
processing  costs,  provision  of  home-grown  customised  systems  such  as  the  low  cost,  multi-lingual 
ATM  developed  by  the  IIT,  Chennai  -  all  of  which  provide  an  impetus  towards  greater  financial 
inclusion.  
In South Africa, technology has been deployed to widen the financial inclusion with the introduction of 
MZANSI account, which is a card-based, limited-service, affordable savings account integrated with 
the merchant point-of-sale outlets, ATMs and even Post Office outlets. In Philippines, the card-based 
retail  money  movement  system  has  won  great  acclaim.  In  India,  the  Reserve  Bank,  along  with  the 
IDRBT,  is  working  on  the  use  of  multi-application  smart-card  systems  which  can  serve  as  a  bank 
account and also function as a store of electronic cash, as a data repository for essential information 
relating to the card holder, with built-in security features such as biometric identification, and which can 
also double up as an entitlement identifier or as a social security card.  
It  is  gratifying  to  note  from  a  NABARD  report  that  a  pilot  project  on  smart  cards  has  already  been 
launched with Sri Visakha Grameena Bank in Andhra Pradesh, which has been one of the front-runner 
banks in financing Self Help Groups (SHGs). It is expected that with enhanced use of rural-oriented 
technology, the bank would be able to provide value addition to services offered to the rural clients 
and further expand its outreach in a sustainable manner. Banks could consider the feasibility of using 
smart cards for the 'No Frills Accounts' so as to help expand the coverage of the banking services and 
facilitate the garnering of the much-needed low-cost deposits. Here again, the approach of sharing of 
IT resources would have much to commend itself.  
BIS Review 81/2006 
 3
Technology and the government sector 
It would be appropriate to also outline certain aspects of application of technology to the Government 
business since RBI is the banker to the Central and State Governments. If we scan the technology 
initiatives of the States, we find a large divergence in technology absorption across the States. While 
States  like  Andhra  Pradesh,  Maharashtra,  and  Karnataka  are  generally  ahead  of  others  in  e-
Governance, this is just beginning to happen in the States like Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar 
and  the  North  East.  As  far  as  Central  Government  receipts  are  concerned,  the  Government's  tax 
collection  processes  underwent  a  metamorphosis  with  the  introduction  of  Online  Tax  Accounting 
System (OLTAS) for direct taxes. Enthused by the success of OLTAS, the Central Board of Excise 
and  Customs,  in  consultation  with  the  Reserve  Bank,  has  introduced  the  EASIEST  (Electronic 
Accounting System in Excise and Service Tax) project which envisages a comprehensive e-payment 
module  that  can  be  utilised  by  the  banks'  corporate  customers.  The  pilot  project  for  this  is  in  an 
advanced  stage  of  completion.  Acceptance  by  the  Government  of  electronic  challans,  based  on 
formats to be available on their web sites, would make the process tax-payer friendly. It would also 
substantially reduce paper usage, provide for Straight Through Processing and obviate errors arising 
from the reconciliation process, wrong data entry, etc. 
Another significant initiative taken in this sector by the Reserve Bank was the computerisation of State 
treasuries  throughout  the country.  After  detailed  examination  of  the  various  aspects, steps  are  now 
underway for the establishment of electronic linkage amongst the State Treasuries numbering 3022, 
agency banks, Finance Departments of the State Governments, Office of the Accountant General and 
the Reserve Bank of India. This will help in speedier accounting of receipts and payments of the State 
Government  departments,  apart  from  serving  as  a  road  map  for  achieving  end-to-end  connectivity 
amongst various accounting agencies involved. 
It needs to be noted in this context that while use of the state-of-the-art technology within the banking 
system is an asset, it also poses a challenge to the conventional banker and government accountants 
due to increase in the speed and complexity of transaction processing. The banks have to ensure that 
all transactions conducted as agents of Government are secure from end-to-end and are retrievable at 
any  point  of  time.  A  successful  example  of  this  is  the  electronic  import-licensing  system  of  the 
Directorate General of Foreign Trade which has an electronic payment facility integrated with the IT 
systems of the banks. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  mention  that  at  a  recent  conference  of  the  State  Finance 
Secretaries,  the  Finance  Secretaries  of  several  State  governments  expressed  the  view  that  the 
technological base and efficiency of services rendered by some of the banks handling Government 
business needed to be improved significantly. Relationship banking encompassing both, lending with 
a social focus and operating as a banker to the Government, is valuable but if the quality of service in 
handling Governments' transactions is not of high standards, some of the banks may not be able to 
retain their Government business at the current levels. Concerted efforts are, therefore, required by 
the States and their respective bankers in this regard. 
Technology and markets 
Technology  has  played  a  significant  role  in  improving  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  markets.  The 
Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) has been functioning well. The introduction of Order Matching NDS 
(NDS-OM),  has  helped  further  in  securing  better  price  discovery,  transparency  in  trading,  reporting 
and electronic bidding at auctions. The NDS, implemented since February 2002, provides a platform 
for screen-based trading in government securities to the member banks and primary dealers with a 
facility to strike on-line deals anonymously and, thus, experience more efficient price discovery. The 
process  involves  the  reporting  of  deals  to  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  (CCIL)  Ltd.  which 
generates the settlement - gross for the securities and net for the funds leg. At the end of the day, the 
settlement information is transmitted to the RBI for effecting the same in its books. The CCIL also acts 
as the central counterparty for the trades by guaranteeing the delivery of securities as well as funds. 
We are in the process of fully integrating the NDS settlements with the RTGS. In order to improve the 
functioning of the corporate bond market, a High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and 
Securitisation (Chairman: Dr. R.H. Patil) has suggested various measures to revitalise the corporate 
bond market through setting up of trade reporting systems, trading platforms, auction platforms and 
clearing & settlement systems. The trade reporting systems suggested for corporate bonds is on the 
lines of Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) of National Association of Security Dealers 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2006
(NASD)  in  the  US.  Such  on-line  real-time  data  dissemination  will  help  the  participants  in  making 
efficient  trading  decisions  and  at  the  same  time,  enable  the  regulators  to  obtain  and  monitor 
information  on  the  market  trends.  These  recommendations  are  under  examination  by  the  agencies 
concerned.    
Concluding remarks 
The  basic  objective  of  deployment  of  technology  in  the  financial  sector  should  be  to  progressively 
move away from paper-based transactions, which include use of currency notes, cheques or challans, 
and  to  the  extent  possible,  switch  over  to  electronic  means  using  RTGS  or  NEFT  or  any  other 
electronic mode.  
It is opportune that we are today recognising the valuable contributions of the path breakers in the field 
of  banking  technology.  The  identification  of  technology  leaders  and  their  recognition  in  the  form  of 
Technology Awards is a pointer that we are capable of excelling in our respective fields. The awards of 
today are not a destination but only mark a good beginning - of a more exciting and challenging era 
ahead of us in our march towards a technologically advanced and efficient, effective, progressive and 
inclusive financial system. 
I wish you all success in your future endeavours. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 5
