Peter Pang: Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation retail bond issues  
Opening remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and 
Executive Director of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation Limited, at the Signing Ceremony for the 
Retail  Bond 
Issuance  Programme,  Hong  Kong, 
1 September 2006. 
the  HKMC's  Retail  Bond 
Issue  under 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation, I welcome you all to this signing ceremony for the 
new retail bond to be offered to the public next Monday. 
Five  years  ago,  in  October  2001,  the  HKMC  introduced  a  mechanism  to  offer  retail  bonds  through 
placing  banks.  This  move  received  very  warm  welcome  from  both  the  banking  sector  and  retail 
investors. So far, we have issued eight retail bonds for a total amount of HK$11 billion. 
Two major factors are behind the success of the HKMC's retail bond issues. First it is our strong credit 
rating. In fact, our credit rating has recently been upgraded by S&P’s to AA with stable outlook and by 
Moody's to Aa3 with positive outlook. Secondly, the HKMC meets the needs of retail investors through 
continual product innovation. 
On this occasion, we again bring some new features to our retail bond issuance. Apart from issuing 
two-year notes in Hong Kong Dollar and in US Dollar, we are introducing a new 10-year Hong Kong 
Dollar Zero Coupon Bond. This is the first time that a zero coupon bond product is offered to the retail 
public in Hong Kong. It is also the first time we are issuing retail bond with a ten-year tenor. 
"Zero coupon" bonds are intended for investors who wish to save up funds for longer-term use. They 
do not need the cash flow from the interest payments on conventional bonds, but they would wish to 
save  up  the  principal  and  interest  for  future  retirement  or  children’s  education.  By  investing  around 
HK$32,000 in this zero coupon bond, the investor will receive HK$50,000 after ten years. If investors 
should find a need to sell the bonds prior to maturity, they are free to do so. We have a market making 
arrangement with our placing banks to provide quotes to buy such bonds to ensure secondary market 
liquidity. 
Apart from the zero coupon bond, the HKMC is also issuing two-year US Dollar retail bond, following 
our successful, inaugural issue of retail US Dollar bond last year. We are now offering two-year retail 
bond denominated in US Dollar as well as in Hong Kong dollar to provide more investor choice. Out of 
the total deposit base of over HK$4.3 trillion in our banking sector, about one-third are in US Dollars. 
We believe there should be good demand for these two-year notes, especially given the recent pause 
in interest rate hike by the US Federal Reserve. 
To sum up, the retail bonds offered today will provide the general public with an additional, relatively 
safe investment vehicle. I trust that our product innovation will also promote the development of the 
bond market in Hong Kong. This creates a win-win situation for the investors, the placing banks and 
the Corporation. 
I like to thank the banking community for supporting our bond issuance. In particular, HSBC and Bank 
of China (Hong Kong) are underwriting a portion of the bond issue as well as placing the notes. My 
appreciation  also  goes  to  the  other  placing  banks,  namely,  Bank  of  America  (Asia),  Bank  of 
Communications, Bank of East Asia, Chiyu Bank, CITIC Ka Wah Bank, Dah Sing Bank, DBS Bank 
(Hong  Kong),  Hang  Seng  Bank,  ICBC  (Asia),  Liu  Chong  Hing  Bank,  Nanyang  Commercial  Bank, 
Shanghai Commercial Bank, Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong), Wing Hang Bank and Wing Lung 
Bank. 
With your support, I am sure we will have another successful retail bond issue that is welcome by the 
investors. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 1
