Leonard Wilson Kamit: Monetary and financial sector reforms in Papua New 
Guinea  
Presentation by Mr Leonard Wilson Kamit, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, on Economic 
and Policy Update by the Australian National University, Port Moresby, 28 April 2006. 
 Introduction 
The Director, Asia Pacific School of Economics and Government of the Australian National University, 
Professor Andrew MacIntyre, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am delighted to be invited to today’s session to share my thoughts on the evolution of financial sector 
reforms in Papua New Guinea, and in particular the benefits from the reforms. 
Monetary policy prior to 2000 
Prior to 2000, the Minister of Finance significantly influenced Monetary Policy of the Bank of Papua 
New  Guinea.  Monetary  policy,  then,  was  submitted  to  the  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  who 
recommended it to the Minister for Finance for approval. This setting had a major set back because of 
its  conflicting  nature.  The  arrangement  allowed  for  automatic  financing  of  the  fiscal  deficit  through 
Temporary  Advances,  which  were  subsequently  converted  to  Treasury  bills  at  the  end  of  the  year. 
Fiscal deficit when financed by the Central Bank result in the following: 
Increase liquidity levels as new money was injected into the financial system; 
• 
•  Exert  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate. This  leads  to  inflationary  pressure  because  in  Papua 
New Guinea changes in inflation rate are closely associated with movements in the exchange 
rate; 
•  Deplete  the  international  reserves  of  the  country  as  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea 
intervenes in the foreign exchange market to support the kina. From 1992-1994, expansionary 
fiscal policy accompanied by high fiscal deficits of the Government led to complete depletion 
of  the  country’s  international  reserves  by  July  1994  with  only  half  a  month  of  import  cover 
remaining; and 
•  Negatively  impacts  on  investor  confidence  and  in  the  Government’s  management  of  the 
economy. 
Similarly,  when  the  fiscal  deficit  is  financed  by  the  private  sector,  the  increase  in  holdings  of 
Government securities crowd out private sector investments, which is vital for generating employment 
and growth. Commercial banks’ primary role as financial intermediaries is to accept deposits and lend 
for investment, which in the process create economic activity. This process becomes less efficient if 
commercial banks fail to meet private sector demand for credit. 
Financial sector reforms since 2000 
The most significant reform process in Papua New Guinea since 2000 was in the financial sector. It 
involved  the  Government  introducing  the  new  Central  Banking  Act  (CBA)  2000,  the  Banks  and 
Financial Institutions Act (BFIA) 2000, and the Superannuation and Life Insurance Acts 2002. 
Under the Central Banking Act 2000, the Central Bank has three important objectives. These are: 
•  The responsibility for monetary policy formulation and implementation; 
•  Financial system regulation and prudential supervision; and 
•  Oversight of the payments system. 
The Act also made significant changes to the relationship between the Central Bank and Government, 
eliminating  political  influence,  introducing  price  stability  as  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  and 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 1
provided greater independence to the Central Bank in the management and conduct of its affairs. The 
Governor is responsible for monetary policy and financial system supervision whilst the Board of the 
Bank is responsible for administrative oversight of the Central Bank. The Board of the Central Bank 
comprises  of  ex-officio  members  from  the  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the  Trade  Union  Congress,  the 
Securities Commission, Council of Churches, the Institute of Accountants and two appointees by the 
Minister for Treasury.  
The Central Banking Act 2000 made price stability the main objective of monetary policy. Consistent 
with  the  Act,  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  (MPS)  is  released  semiannually  taking  into  account 
monetary  policy  views  for the  year  and  the  medium  term. However,  as  monetary  policy shocks  are 
more frequent and for the Bank of Papua New Guinea to respond quickly to shocks, the Kina Facility 
Rate  (KFR)  is  announced  on  the  first  Monday  of  each  month,  which  provides  a  clear  signal  to  the 
market on the Bank’s monetary policy stance. This announcement is strengthened through operational 
instruments such as Treasury bills, Repurchase Agreements and Central Bank Bills, which are also 
used by many other central banks. 
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  the  financial  system  has  evolved  significantly  since 
2000. With the additional Superannuation and Life Insurance Acts, the main thrust of the policies has 
been  to  preserve  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  whilst  ensuring  that  the 
intermediation process continues to support economic growth. In this regard, the Bank has introduced 
international best practices on prudential supervision of banks, finance companies and other financial 
institutions such as savings and loan societies, superannuation funds and life insurance companies. 
This is to ensure prudent management of depositor’s funds, members’ contributions, and premiums on 
life  insurance  policies  held  with  these  financial  institutions.  In  addition,  a  part  of  the  standards 
introduced was focused on good governance practices and the assessment of Fit & Proper persons 
for Directors and Management of these financial institutions. 
To date, the reforms have vastly improved the conditions and outlook of the financial sector landscape 
of  the  country.  In  the  banking  sector,  there  is  marked  improvements  in  asset  quality  with  non-
performing  loans  as  a  percent  of  total  assets  declining  from  2.3  percent  in  2000  to  1.1  percent  in 
December  2005.  Return  on  assets of  the  banking  system,  which  was negative  1.1  percent  in  2002 
reversed sharply to over 4.2 percent at the end of December 2005. As a result return on equity has 
improved  significantly  to  50.5  percent  in  2005,  making  it  amongst  the  highest  in  the  region.  These 
indicators  reflect  that  the  banking  system  is  financially  sound  and  provides  a  strong  foundation  for 
sustained macroeconomic growth. 
In the Superannuation industry, the reforms have improved the overall performance of the industry. 
The  total  assets  of  the  industry,  which  increased  by  6  percent  to  K992  million  in  1999,  grew 
significantly  over  the  years  to  K2,583  million  in  2005.  One  of  the  major  Superannuation  funds, 
Nasfund, which suffered a contraction in total assets in 1999 to K169 million, from K209 million in 1998 
reversed  sharply  to  K753  million  in  2005.  The  rapid  growth  in  total  assets  over  the  last  few  years 
reflects  prudent  and  good  management.  As  a  result  profitability  of  the  industry  has  also  increased 
sharply  over  the  years.  Similarly,  improvements  are  continuing  to  be  instilled  in  the  Life  Insurance 
industry, whose total assets have grown steadily from K108 million in 2000 to K126 million in 2004. 
In the Savings and Loans societies, the contributors have benefited from improved management and 
stringent  supervision  including  the  fit  and  proper  person  requirement  by  the  Bank  of  Papua  New 
Guinea.  This  has  enabled  the  industry  to  record  improvement  in  its  overall  performance.  Between 
2000 and December 2005 total assets increased by over 139 percent to K312 million. The number of 
societies contracted during this period from 121 to 20 as the Bank de-licenced and liquidated dormant 
societies.  
Consistent with ensuring stability of the financial system, the rapid growth of fast money scams is a 
concern  to  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea.  In  response,  the  Bank  took  measures  to  close  their 
operations,  periodically  place  advertisements  in  the  media  about  the  dangers  in  investing  in  such 
scams. The Bank and law enforcer’s actions are limited against fast money scheme operators but we 
continue to warn the public to take necessary precaution and refrain from taking unnecessary risks 
through expectations of abnormally high rates of return. The public is urged that if you have paid any 
money to a fast money scheme operator, go and demand the immediate return of your money. 
The  rugged  geographical  terrain  of  the  country  makes  access  to  financial  services  difficult  for  the 
semi-formal,  informal  and  the  rural  population.  In  our  endeavours  to  bring  out  financial  services  to 
these sectors, the Bank of Papua New Guinea in collaboration with the Asian Development Bank, the 
National Government and AusAid established the “Wau Microbank” under the micro finance project. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2006
The  pilot  project  is  slowly  growing  into  a  viable  complementary  player  in  the  development  of  the 
financial  system.  In  addition,  the  PNG  Micro  Finance  Limited,  which  obtained  a  banking  license  in 
2004,  and  has  operations  in  NCD,  Western  and  Oro  Province.  The  micro-finance  industry 
development is a meaningful way of mobilizing savings and servicing a large section of the community 
to whom financial facilities are not readily available. 
The  Government  has  also  introduced  the  District  Treasury  Roll-out  Program,  which  will  further 
complements the provision of financial services in the rural parts of Papua New Guinea. This entails 
the provision of treasury, banking and post office services from one outlet mainly at local and district 
levels. 
The Bank of Papua New Guinea is also supportive of the Government’s initiatives to promote export 
driven  economic  growth  strategy  through  removal  of  impediments  to  trade  and  investment.  In 
recognition  of  this  initiative,  the  Bank  liberalized  the  foreign  exchange  control  regime  by  freeing  up 
controls in all but (4) areas which are:- 
•  Opening of foreign currency or kina accounts offshore by residents; 
•  Approval for capital transaction contracts; 
•  Gold export licenses; and 
•  Approval for dealing in foreign exchange. 
In addition, borrowing restrictions on domiciled foreign companies were removed to encourage growth 
in lending. 
To  date,  consistent  with  the  Banks  expectation,  the  liberalization  has  had  limited  impact  on  the 
balance of payments position of the country. This is the result of a close and ongoing dialogue and 
communication between the stakeholders and the Bank of Papua New Guinea. 
Macroeconomic outcome 
The  end  result  of  the  financial  sector  reforms  and  the  other  reforms  in  aggregate  have  resulted  in 
political and macroeconomic stability. The current Government will serve a full term in office, which is 
a  first  of  its  kind  since  independence.  The  reforms  have  also  helped  to  achieve  macroeconomic 
stability as reflected by the lower annual headline inflation of 4.6 percent in 2005, compared to 21.8 
percent in 1998, stable exchange rate at around US$0.3240, high international reserves of US$770 
million that is sufficient for 7-11 months of import cover, and a strong growth in private sector credit at 
an  annual  rate  of  over  20  percent.  This  performance  is  also  reflective  of  the  investors  and  public’s 
confidence of the management of the economy. In this regard, the private sector must be recognized 
and commended for the continuous confidence in the economy.  
However,  the  Government  needs  to  be  cautious  and  remain  within  the  Medium  Term  Development 
Strategy (MTDS) and the Budgetary framework, because these achievements to date can easily be 
undone if there is any fiscal slippage in the lead up to the National Elections next year. 
Going forward 
Papua New Guinea should not be complacent with the current macroeconomic stability but continue to 
work towards building a more efficient and competitive financial system that accommodates domestic 
and global challenges. The reforms of the financial sector is still on-going and the following reforms 
are currently being undertaken by the Bank:  
•  A  Taskforce  has  reviewed  the  Superannuation  and  Life  Insurance  industries  to  determine 
areas where parts of these new legislations could be more stakeholder/member friendly. The 
Report has been finalized and is waiting to be formally presented to the Treasurer and myself; 
•  Undertaking  a  review  of  the  legal  framework  for  the  Savings  &  Loan  Societies  and  Micro-
finance Institutions; 
•  The Bank continuous with the review of liberalization of foreign exchange controls with the aim 
of fully liberalizing the remaining controls; 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 3
•  The Bank encourages licensed non-bank financial institutions as authorized foreign exchange 
dealers to promote competition. 
•  The  Bank  has  commenced  a  major  review  of  the  payments  system  in  Papua  New  Guinea. 
Review of the payments system is necessary for a sound and efficient system that will reduce 
costs  to  businesses.  The  review  will  cover  different  forms  of  payments,  clearing-house, 
currency  banknotes  and  coin  distribution  and  withdrawal  methods.  Papua  New  Guinea  is  a 
predominantly cash economy and I want to see our people use clean banknotes and bright 
coins. I want to devise more efficient methods of withdrawing dirty and torn banknotes. 
These  financial  sector reforms  are  intended  to  sustain  macroeconomic stability  over  the  medium  to 
longer  term,  which  is  necessary  for  laying  the  foundation  for  economic  growth.  However,  these 
reforms themselves may not be able to achieve the desired outcomes if the Government reneges on 
delivering  the  budgetary  expectations.  This  expectation  also  takes  into  account  the  Government’s 
achievement  of  a  balanced  budget  in  the  medium  term  and  commitment  to  deliver  priority  areas 
identified in the Medium Term Development Strategy (MTDS). 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2006
