Su Ning: Development of the bankcard industry in China 
Speech  by  Mr  Su  Ning,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  National  Bankcard 
Work Conference, Beijing, 25 April 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
In  February  2001,  PBC  hosted  the  first  national  bankcard  work  conference.  At  that  conference,  a 
series  of  work  priorities  were  identified,  which  greatly  promoted  the  development  of  the  bankcard 
industry. The priorities include setting up a uniform business and technical standard, accelerating the 
development of national bankcard network, promoting a uniform CUP brand, and reforming bankcard 
management system. Today, the national bankcard work conference is held again jointly by the PBC 
and  other  ministries.  The  objective  of  this  conference  is  to,  under  the  guidance  of  Den  Xiaoping 
Theory  and  the  important thoughts  of  “Three  Represents”,  summarize  past  successful  experiences, 
analyze  current  challenges,  implement  policies  and  measures  set  forth  by  the  Several  Opinions 
Regarding the Development of the Bankcard Industry formulated by nine ministries, outline work plan 
for  future  development,  and  promote  rapid  and  healthy  development  of  the  bankcard  business  by 
adopting  a  scientific  development  concept  to  build  a  harmonious  society.  Mr.  Jiang  Dingzhi,  Vice 
Chairman  of  the  CBRC,  Mr.  Lou  Qinjian,  Vice  Minister  of  Commerce,  Mr.  Xu  Shanda,  Deputy 
Administrator  of  the  State  Taxation  Administration,  Mr.  Zheng  Shaodong,  Assistant  Minister  of  the 
Ministry of Public Security, Mr. Zhang Hongli, Assistant Minister of the Ministry of Commerce, and Mr. 
Li Dongrong, Deputy Administrator of SAFE attended this conference and delivered speeches. Now, 
on behalf of the PBC, I’d like to say a few words: 
First, achievements of bankcard industry 
The  CPC  Central  Committee  and  the  State  Council  have  always  attached  great  importance  to  the 
development of the bankcard industry. In December 2001, Comrade Wen Jiabao clarified the “three-
one-four”  objective  for  the  building  of  a  national  bankcard  network  and  the  bankcard  acceptance 
market in the tenth “five-year” plan period. As for other important issues such as the legal framework, 
the  prevention  of  bankcard  risk and  the  security  of financial  information,  Comrade Wen  Jiabao  and 
Comrade Huang Ju also made important instructions, clarifying the direction for future development. 
Especially  recently,  Comrade  Wen  Jiabao  made  important  instructions  on  extending  bankcard 
coverage and further improving Beijing’s bankcard environment as an Olympic host city. So under the 
leadership of the CPC Central Committee, with the support of relevant departments and government 
at various levels, China’s bankcard industry has made great achievements through joint efforts of the 
commercial banks, users and China Union Pay (CUP). 
First, bankcard has been used more frequently and extensively 
By the end of 2005, there are 175 issuers of bankcards with the total issuance of 960 million. In 2005, 
the  total  bankcard  transaction  volume  amounted  to  4700  billion  yuan,  including  960  billion  yuan  of 
consumption transaction, which is 10.4 times and 8.5 times as much as that of 2000. The number of 
merchants  accepting  bankcards,  POS  machines  and  ATMs  is  390,000,  610,000  and  80,000 
respectively, which is 3.5 times, 3.9 times and 2.1 times as much as that of five years ago. More and 
more  people  have  got  used  to  the  use  of  bankcards,  and  excluding  the  wholesale  and  real  estate 
transactions, the proportion of consumption related bankcard transactions out of the total retail sales of 
consumer goods increased from 2.1% five years ago to nearly 10%. In some economically developed 
cities, such as Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen, the proportion is more than 30%, which 
is  near  the  level  of  30%-50%  of  developed  countries.  As  commercial  banks  constantly  innovate 
bankcard products and services, its functions, transaction channels as well the coverage have been 
improved.  For  instance,  the  function  has  been  enriched  from  cash  deposit  &  withdrawal  and 
consumption  to  investment  and  financing.  The  transaction  channels  have  been  extended  from 
traditional platforms such as POS machines and ATMs to new payment channels like on-line banking, 
and  telephone  banking.  And  the  coverage  has  also  been  enlarged  from  consumption  area  such  as 
restaurants, hotels and retail shops to public services and wholesales such as hospitals and schools. 
The constant innovation of bankcard product, a wider coverage and diversified payment channels all 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
meet the payment demand of card holders and promote the use of bankcard. Currently, bankcard is 
the most frequently used non-cash payment instrument by individuals. 
Second, a national bankcard network has been basically set up  
To accelerate the build-up of a national bankcard network, as approved by the State Council, China 
Union Pay (CUP) is set up by the People’s Bank of China. CUP specializes in the construction and 
operation  of  a  national  integrated  system  of  information  exchange  of  bankcard  and  networking  the 
national  bankcard  as  a  whole.  Commercial  banks  greatly  support  this  system,  and  they  have 
standardized  and  updated  their  own  system  and  terminals,  which  is  crucial  to  the  emergence  of  a 
national  bankcard  network,  the  improvement  of  the  acceptance  environment  and  the  overall  sector 
development.  With  the  joint  efforts  of  PBC,  commercial  banks,  CUP  and  relevant  departments,  the 
“three-one-four” objective for building a national bankcard network was achieved. In 2003, the network 
covering  prefecture-level  (or  higher)  cities  has  been  basically  set  up,  and  in  2004  the  network 
gradually  covered  some  economically  developed  counties.  So  a  nationwide  bankcard  network  has 
been  basically  formed.  A  uniform  business  and  technical  standard  has  also  been  formulated.  The 
promulgation and implementation of Business Standard for Bankcard Network, Technical Standard for 
Bankcard  Network,  the  Information  Format  and  Usage  Standard  for  Bankcard  Magnetic  Stripe 
information,  the  Standard  for  Financial  IC  Card  (2.0)  provides  the  basis  for  the  national  integrated 
network. The upgrade and consolidation of bankcard system by commercial banks improved their card 
acceptance  and  risk-prevention  capability,  and  the  internationally  advanced  inter-bank  transaction 
network set up by CUP provided technical support for both centralized processing of domestic inter-
bank  transactions  and  cross-border  transactions.  In  November  2004,  the  inter-bank  transaction 
system was successfully connected with the PBC large-value payment system, which means the inter-
bank real time payment and settlement can be conducted through bankcards. In the past few years, 
the  quality  of  the  nationwide  system  has  greatly  enhanced,  the  efficiency  of  error  correction  has 
improved, and the success rate for local and trans-regional transaction has increased from 83.1% and 
61.7% to 96.8% and 95.3% at the end of 2005. 
Third, bankcard business chain has preliminarily emerged 
With the advance of information technology and clearer division of labor, bankcard service sector is 
becoming  more  and  more  professional.  The  payment  business  chain  covering  card  issuance, 
processing,  information  exchange  and  machine  production  has  emerged,  which  is  positive  for  the 
integration of resource, the exertion of comparative advantage, the realization of economic scale and 
the  optimization  of  bankcard  development  mode.  Some  banks  have  established  credit  card  center, 
specializing in credit card business. The design, marketing and risk management of credit card has 
improved.  CUP  also  provides  inter-bank  information  exchange  service,  and  the  inter-bank  use  of 
bankcard  as  well  the  share  of  market  resource  and  equipment  lower  operation  cost.  In  terms  of 
specific service agencies for the design of issuance system, bankcard production, bankcard marking, 
equipment  production,  equipment  installment  and  acceptance  environment,  these  agencies  have 
greatly increased efficiency, lowered cost, improved service and bettered the bankcard environment. 
The  contribution  of  bankcard  industry  to  other  industries  such  as  financial  industry,  commercial 
industry,  tourist  industry,  bankcard  and  equipment  manufacture  industry,  telecom  industry,  software 
industry and e-commerce has materialized.  
Fourth, further improvement of relevant measures and policy environment 
When  accelerating  the  legislative  procedures  of  the  Bankcard  Regulation,  with  the  aim  to  promote 
sustainable  development  of  bankcard  industry,  in  April  2005,  Several  Opinions  Regarding  the 
Promotion  of  Bankcard  Industry  issued  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  the  National 
Development  and  Reform  Commission,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Security,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the 
Ministry of Information Industry, the Ministry of Commerce, the State Taxation Administration, China 
Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) 
clarified some important issues such as guidelines, principle, direction, target and priorities, which fully 
exhibit the importance relevant departments attach to the bankcard industry.  
Relevant  ministries  of  the  State  Council  also  promulgated  and  implemented  a  series  of  feasible 
measures and policies. As the supervisor, administrator and organizer of the payment system, PBC 
has  made  great  efforts  in  formulating  rules  and  regulations,  standardizing  the  acceptance  market, 
safeguarding  bankcard  security,  promoting  international  use,  improving  technical  standard,  and 
disseminating  bankcard  knowledge.  Proposals  on  Promoting  Development  of 
the  Bankcard 
Acceptance  Market  was  issued  in  July  2005,  and  it  clarified  some  important  policy  issues.  As  the 
supervisor  of  banking  institutions,  CBRC  also  did  lots  of  work  in  improving  bankcard  issuance  and 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
internal control. Targeting some serious credit card fraud cases such as illegal encashment, the Notice 
on the Prevention of Credit Card Risk was jointly issued by the PBC and CBRC to prevent risk and 
guarantee asset security. Together with other government departments, the Ministry of Public Security 
organized nationwide campaigns against bankcard crimes. The Ministry of Public Security also set up 
the  bankcard  risk  prevention  working  mechanism  with  commercial  banks  and  CUP  to  safeguard 
bankcard security and to maintain financial order. The documents issued by SAFE such as the Notice 
on  the  Standardization  of  the  Administration  of  Foreign  Currency  Bankcard,  and  the  Notice  on  the 
Prevention  of  Credit  Card  Risk  met  overseas  card  use  demand  and  improved  standardized 
management. The Law of Electronic Signature, drafted by the Legal Office of the State Council, the 
Ministry  of  Information  Industry,  and  the  Information  Office  of  the  State  Council,  has  already  been 
passed by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress. It provided legal guarantee for 
bankcard  online  payment  with  instruments  such  as  computer  network  and  mobile  phones.  The 
National Development and Reform Commission was busily engaged in pricing policies. The Ministry of 
Commerce  revised  The  Administrative  Measures  for  the  Write-off  of  NPL  in  Financial  Companies, 
which  standardized  the  procedure  for  the  write-off  of  bankcard’s  NPLs.  The  Ministry  of  Commerce 
encouraged  marketing  and  distribution  companies  to  accept  bankcards.  The  State  Taxation 
Administration,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ministry  of  Information  Industry  also  organized  pilot 
projects to popularize the use of tax control POS machines. All these efforts provide a sound external 
environment for bankcard’s development. 
Fifth, overseas acceptance of RMB bankcard 
To  accommodate  the  national  strategy  of  stimulating  outbound  business  activities,  and  to  satisfy 
overseas travel and consumption need, China’s bankcard payment system becomes more and more 
integrated with  international  payment  system.  Since  2004,  with  the support of  relevant  departments 
and issuers, CUP actively explored overseas market. By now, nearly 20 countries and regions have 
accepted CUP cards. By the end of 2005, 29,4000 overseas shops and merchants accept CUP cards, 
totaling  45,300  POS  machines  and  62,300  ATM  machines.  And  the  value  of  annual  overseas 
transaction  reached  about  13  billion  Yuan.  The  overseas  acceptance  of  CUP  RMB  card  signaled 
China’s national bankcard branding has delivered expected results. 
All these achievements can not be separated from the guide of CPC Central Committee and the State 
Council, the attention and support provided by relevant departments, the innovation, coordination and 
great  efforts  of  commercial  banks,  shops  and  merchants,  and  China  Union  Pay,  as  well  as  the 
involvement and support of general public especially the consumers. So here I’d like to express my 
sincere thanks to commercial banks, shops and merchants, CUP and all friends who have contributed 
to and supported the development of bankcard industry.  
Second, the significance and challenge of bankcard industry 
The  development  of  bankcard  industry  is  beneficial  both  to  the  country  and  to  the  people.  It  bears 
great significance to stimulate consumption, reduce cash circulation, lower transaction cost, enhance 
anti-money laundering, broaden tax base, improve international image and promote the development 
of  relevant  industry.  Its  contribution  is  reflected  in  the  following  aspects:  First,  promote  economic 
development.  Cash  replacement  function  and  consumption  credit  function  of  bankcard  can  turn 
potential and random consumption into real expenditure, which in turn boost domestic demand and 
promote  the  development  of  tertiary  industry,  such  as  trade  and  commerce,  tourism,  hotel  and  e-
commerce.  The  improvement  of  bankcard  transaction  environment  will  promote  the  development  of 
relevant  sectors  such  as  telecom,  equipment  production  and  software  design.  According  to  the 
research  on  50  countries  whose  bankcard  industries  are  more  developed,  when  the  proportion  of 
bankcard  payment  among  aggregate  consumption  payment  is  increased  by  10%,  GDP  is  to  be 
expanded by 0.5%. Second, lower social transaction cost. More frequent use of bankcard can reduce 
expenditure  in  the  production,  transportation  and  reserve  of  cash,  and  therefore  improve  economic 
efficiency. Third, standardize market order. Bankcard payment can automatically form payment record. 
The  enhanced  payment  transparency  can  improve  tax  administration,  increase  tax  revenue,  control 
illegal income, prevent and curb corruption. Fourth, improve social courtesy. Bankcard is convenient, 
safe and clean, and it’s good to foster good payment habit and improve city image. The cyclical credit 
consumption function of credit cards can nurture honest habit, and promote social credit culture.  
Currently, bankcard industry is confronted with good opportunities. China is trying to build a well-off 
society and has entered the stage of building a socialist harmonious society. The national strategy to 
boost domestic demand and stimulate consumption provides favorable condition for the development 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
and  innovation  of  bankcards.  The  set-up  and  improvement  of  the  national  credit  database  for 
individuals  provides  good  credit  environment,  and  we  also  accumulate  lots  of  experiences.  More 
importantly,  the  11th  “five-year”  program  proposes  that  we  should  actively  develop  financial  service 
industry  and  raise  the  proportion  and  improve  the  performance  of  service  industry,  grasp  core  and 
crucial technology, to prompt its development and innovation. This will present new opportunities, and 
the bankcard industry will enter the consolidation and innovation stage. 
There are still some problems and challenges. First, the development of the acceptance market has 
become the bottleneck restricting bankcard sector. Compared with overseas mature bankcard market, 
some  indicators  such  as  the  consumption  ratio  for  cardholders,  the  frequency  of  card  use,  and  the 
number  of  merchants  accepting  bankcards  all  left  far  behind.  Currently,  the  accepting  environment 
doesn’t reach the financial service level as an Olympic host country. Bankcards are mainly used to 
deposit  and  withdraw  cash,  which  means  the  payment  function  doesn’t  exert  fully,  and  cash 
transaction remains a large proportion in retail payment. The acceptance market doesn’t develop in a 
balanced  way,  and  in  rural  areas  as  well  as  in  the  medium  and  small-sized  cities,  the  acceptance 
environment is weak, and the ratio for medium and small-sized merchants accepting bankcard is low. 
Second, the competition of the bankcard market still stands at the low level, and branding, service, as 
well  as  innovation  awareness  is  weak.  Third,  bankcard  risk  is  a  prominent  problem,  and  risk 
management  needs  to  be  improved.  Fourth,  legal  framework  is  not  compatible  with  sector 
development,  and  policy  support  is  not  enough.  Fifth,  as  China  opens  wider  to  the  outside  world, 
foreign-funded financial institutions will bring lots of competition pressure. Especially with the end of 
China’s post-WTO transitional period at the end of this year, domestic institutions have to face more 
severe competition.  
Faced  with  all  these  opportunities  and  challenges,  especially  all  these  problems,  we  should  make 
unremitting efforts to promote further development of the bankcard sector. 
Third, the outlook of bankcard industry 
The  major  task  for  next  stage  is  to  adopt  effective  measures  to  implement  The  Several  Opinions 
Regarding Promoting Development of the Bankcard Industry, stick to market-oriented direction, center 
on  the  improvement  of  acceptance  market,  enrich  bankcard  type  and  function,  promote  bankcard 
innovation and improve risk management. On this basis, we should further improve legal system, give 
more  industrial  support,  encourage  innovation,  enhance  technological  standard,  standardize  market 
order, lower risk, and provide safe, quick and good bankcard service. The working priorities should go 
to following aspect. 
First, improve bankcard acceptance. 
Acceptance market is the basis, and the improvement of accepting mechanism and environment as 
well as a wider coverage is the current priority. By 2008, China expects bankcard will be accepted by 
60%, the merchants with the annual turnover above1million and 25% of merchants with the annual 
turnover less then 1million respectively.  
To  achieve the above goals, the coverage of bankcards should be extended, new channels for the 
cooperation between banks and merchants should be explored and the use of bankcards in business 
distribution should be promoted. Besides, designated merchants in medium and small-sized cities as 
well as in counties with brisk economic activities will be nurtured to promote the use of bankcards, and 
in  this  way  an  unbalanced  acceptance  market  development  will  be  improved.  Bankcard  should  be 
encouraged  in  the  payment  of  tax,  public  service  and  other  services  such  as  public  health  and 
transportation. 
The national bankcard network should be furthered improved. CUP will enforce a uniform standard in 
business  operation  and  technology  in  prefecture-level  cities  (or  above)  and  economically  advanced 
counties.  On  the  condition  that  acquirers  can  choose  network  interface  by  their  own,  they  are 
encouraged to link with CUP network directly, while the CUP supports versatile direct or indirect links. 
A  uniform  standard  for  inter-bank  bankcard  transaction  will  be  enforced,  and  both  business  and 
technical  standard  will  be  standardized.  The  level  of  acceptance  in  hotel  and  hotel-like  business 
should be further improved, and no subjective obstacles are allowed to violate the uniform standard. 
Special support goes to the acceptance of the pre-authorization of bankcards by medium and small-
sized banks. The PBC will organize relevant departments to upgrade system and terminals and work 
on the monitoring, inspecting, punishing and rewarding mechanisms on standard enforcement. In this 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2006
way, the business and technical standard will be implemented strictly and the success rate of inter-
bank bankcard transaction is to be increased to be above 96% in 2008.  
Bankcard environment in Olympic game cities should be bettered. In line with the important instruction 
by  Premier  Wen  Jiabao  to  extend  the  coverage  of  bankcard  for  a  better  environment  for  the  2008 
Olympic  Games,  six  Olympic  game  cities  such  as  Beijing,  Shanghai,  Tianjin,  Shenyang,  Qin 
Huangdao,  and  Qingdao,  will  actively  take  measures  to  improve  both  acceptance  environment  and 
accommodating financial service facilities, so as to promote the use of bankcard in the whole country. 
Olympic  game  cities  should  figure  out  their  own  bankcard  development  plan  to  clarify  overall 
objectives,  major  tasks  and  implementation  measures.  The  scheme  to  improve  the  acceptance  of 
foreign currency denominated bankcard should be drawn up as soon as possible, and merchants are 
to  be  well  prepared  for  the  acceptance  of  international  IC  card.  Newly  installed  bankcard  machine 
should be compatible with both magnetic card and IC card. Inspection and monitoring of the technical 
conditions  should  be  improved  to  ensure  inter-bank  acctptance,  which  means  both  inter-bank 
information  transfer  system  and  intra-bank  system  should  operate  in  a  safe  and  steadily  way.  Risk 
management  should  also  be  improved,  and  commercial  banks  should  draft  technical  security  plan. 
Fiscal and taxation policies will be formulated to support the use of Olympic bankcard. The tax control 
POS  machines  will  be  popularized  and  medium  and  small-sized  merchants  will  be  encouraged  to 
accept  bankcard.  Centering  on  the  Olympic  theme,  bankcard  knowledge  will  be  disseminated  in 
various ways to create a better media environment.  
In terms of improving financial services for the development of rural area, the agricultural industry and 
the  farmers,  bankcard  industry  should  play  a  bigger  role.  The  experience  accumulated  from  pilot 
program in Guizhou for migrant workers should be popularized. More banks are encouraged to offer 
this kind of service, and its cover age should be extended to other migrant worker outflow provinces 
other than Guizhou. Rural Credit Cooperatives in migrant worker export area should offer good cash 
withdrawal service at counters, standardize business operation, and improve security control. As for 
migrant worker inflow area, migrant workers should become more aware of bankcard use, and issuers 
should also provide better service. The PBC will continue to coordinate, mobilize and guide relevant 
parties to place more attention to providing specific bankcard service for migrant workers.  
The management over card acceptance market should be standardized. The requirement set forth by 
Several  Opinions  Regarding  Promoting  Development  of  Bankcard  Industry  on  the  set-up  and 
improvement  of  pricing  mechanism  should  be  implemented  seriously,  and  acquiring  agencies  and 
merchants  should  negotiate  pricing  issues  on  market  basis.  Acquirors  should  sign  contract  with 
merchants  in  line  with  legal  requirements  and  market-oriented  principles,  fulfill  their  payment 
obligations,  gain  relevant  profits  and  undertake  correspondent  risk.  Qualified  institutions  and 
organizations  should  try  to  create  a  fair  playing  ground,  and strengthen risk  control.  The rights  and 
obligations between acquiring institutions, shops and third-party service provider should be clarified. 
The set-up of acceptance market in areas where CUP doesn’t have a branch should be accelerated, 
so the national inter-bank bankcard market could develop in a coordinated way. 
Second, issuing service will be improved to satisfy the need of customers 
Bankcard  business  is  an  important  component  of  intermidiary  business  and  personal  financial 
business.  Bankcards  issuing  institutions  such  as  commercial  banks  should  stick  to  the  principle  of 
“service  is  the  priority”,  and  constantly  improve  their  management  by  providing  qualified,  safe  and 
efficient service with cards of different types and functions.  
Increasing types and functions of bankcard and improving business profit. Issuers such as commercial 
banks should rely on the set-up of their own bankcard brand to enhance core competitiveness. Being 
active, innovative and initiative and catering to the needs of market, the management level should be 
enhanced  to  improve  business  profit.  Research  on  customer  needs  should  be  deepened,  and 
bankcard products to satisfy the daily payment should be developed. Efforts should also be made to 
expand the value-added service function of bankcard. Commercial banks are encouraged to full play 
their advantage, segmentize customer market, and increase cardholders by providing tailor-made and 
differentiated  service.  Service  awareness  should  also  be  enhanced,  and  good  service  will  lead  to 
wider  bankcard coverage. Special  attention  should  go  to  vulnerable  group  in  the  society,  which will 
contribute  to  the  good  image  of  banking  service.  Internal  management  should  also  be  improved, 
including the set-up of the cost accounting system(that records the cost and profit of all bankcards), 
the adoption of centralized, professional and scale management, and the activation of domain cards.  
On  the  condition  of  risk  prevention,  credit  card  industry  should  develop  steadily.  Credit  card 
development can expand consumption credit, which is positive to boost domestic demand. Because 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 5
Credit cards are riskier than debit cards, and the overdraft awareness of Chinese citizens are quite 
different  from  foreigners,  commercial  banks’  risk  control  and  management  capability  should  be 
improved. Currently, credit card only accounts for 4% of the total bankcards, and only 1% of credit 
cards  with  rolling  credit  limits.  So  Credit  card  has  great  potential  for  development,  and  we  should 
steadily promote its development on the basis of effective risk prevention. Issuers such as commercial 
banks  should  analyze  the  business  mode  with  respect  to  financial  management,  risk  control  and 
stimulation  mechanism,  and  actively  explore  management  system  and  development  mode  with 
Chinese characteristics. 
The development of public service card should be actively promoted. Management measures for pubic 
service  card of  central  budget  institutions  should  be  formulated  as  soon  as  possible,  and  bankcard 
should  be  widely  used  in  central  budget  institutions  where  state  treasury  management  reform  is 
conducted.  Daily  business  expenditure  such  as  business  expense  and  conference  fees  as  well  as 
some  purchase  cost  should  be  paid  via  bankcards.  The  experience  accumulated  form  such  pilot 
project should be summarized, and public service card should be popularized in big and medium-sized 
cities.  Pilot  grogram  can  be  carried  out  in  possible  cities,  and  experience  accumulated  from  such 
program should be digested. Issuers such as commercial banks and CUP should work closely with 
fiscal departments for the conduct of pilot program and popularization of credit service card. 
Multi-function IC card should be applied in a rational way. On the basis of stable development and 
operation  of  magnetic  card,  issuers  such  as  commercial  banks  are  encouraged  to  issue  electronic 
wallet-like IC card for small-value payment. Domestic issuance of IC card should be subject to both 
The Standard (2.0) of China’s Financial IC Card and the uniform business and technical standard, so 
technical advance, compatibility, and application can be guaranteed. Second, pilot grogram for IC card 
should  be  conducted  in  various  sectors.  The  PBC  will  strengthen  its  cooperation  with  competent 
departments  in  other  sectors,  set  up  management  coordination  mechanism,  draw  up  blueprint  for 
cross use of bankcard and sector card, actively guide the integration of different sector card standard 
with that of financial IC card, promote financial IC card to become the major IC card standard, and 
achieve  coordinated  development.  Third,  commercial  banks  are  encouraged  to  enter  other  sectors 
through the issuance of joint-branding card, which is basis for the final integration. Commercial banks 
should  also  pay  close  attention  to  the  operation,  financial  situation  and  fund  use  of  their  card  co-
issuing partners, so possible risks can be prevented. Fourth, the scope of use as well as the credit 
limit should be clarified to prevent fund risk. Duplicated investment and waste of resources should be 
avoided, because they could lead to disorderly competition. 
Stick to innovation and more efforts go to the set-up of bankcard with Chinese IPR.  
In line with the guide and requirement of the 11th “five-year” program, unremitting efforts should go to 
the  improvement  of  self-innovation  capability  of  bankcard  issuers.  Bankcard  standard  and  branding 
with Chinese IPR should be built up, because our international competitiveness can be enhanced only 
through our own efforts.  
Providing  a  favorable  policy  environment  to  improve  the  innovative  capability  of  bankcard  market 
players. Support should go to hi-tech industries, which has a close connection with the development of 
bankcard  sector,  such  as  telecom,  integrated  circuit  production,  software  design  and  operation 
service. Designated companies can enjoy preferential policies to translate hi-tech achievement to real 
production. Domestic technology and equipment are encouraged to be used in the bankcard industry, 
and patent protection for relevant technological and  business innovation is to be strengthened. The 
whole  system  for  the  analysis,  formulation,  checking,  verification,  and  maintenance  of  domestic 
bankcard’s standard should be set up, and the build-up of the verification system for related product 
should  also  be  accelerated.  The  dissemination  and  training  for  bankcard  standard  should  be 
strengthened, and the management for information security should also be improved. 
Accelerating  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  industrial  code  for  RMB-denominated  card.  The 
BIN standard is in compliance with the international standard, and has been applied by CUP to ISO. 
This technical standard not only provides internationally accepted technical basis, but also stands as 
the  key  to  build  up  China’s  own  bankcard  brand.  This  standard  should  also  become  the  only  core 
technical  standard  for  our  bankcard  innovation,  and  the  basis  for  RMB  card  standard  with  our  own 
IPR. The PBC plans to upgrade CUP BIN standard as the RMB card standard in the first half of this 
year, and initiates the project of upgrading this standard as the national standard. The newly issued 
bankcard  with  RMB  account  should  adopt  this  technical  standard,  and  change  non-standard 
bankcards into standard ones as soon as possible. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2006
The  issuance  and  acceptance  of  RMB  bankcard  should  be  standardized.  First,  the  newly  issued 
bankcards should comply with the standard of the national bankcard network, and have CUP identifier. 
Any RMB card in no compliance with the standard of international bankcard network is not allowed to 
be issued. Second, domestic inter-bank RMB transaction should be connected with CUP network, and 
no  domestic  RMB  transactions  are  to  be  processed  through  foreign  institutions.  Third,  strictly 
classifying foreign currency account and RMB account when international dual-currency debit cards 
are used abroad. 
Centering on the set-up of international brand, service should be better provided. CUP should build up 
all-around,  high-level  service  system  covering  member  institutions,  designated  merchants,  and 
cardholders.  Overseas  market,  which  has  already  accepted  CUP  bankcard,  should  be  further 
exploited, and the acceptance quality should be improved. Strictly complying with host country’s laws 
and  regulations,  cooperation  with  overseas  bankcard  institutions  should  be  enhanced  in  a  mutually 
beneficial way. 
Fourth, setting up risk management system to guarantee the security of bankcard information 
and usage.  
Risk management is significant both for a safe, efficient, and harmonious user’s environment and the 
long-term healthy development of the bankcard industry. In recent years, with the rapid development 
of  the  bankcard  industry,  risky  cases  increase  every  year.  Relevant  departments  should  efficiently 
conduct  risk  management,  strengthen  risk  prevention  system,  improve  risk  prevention  level,  set  up 
bankcard  risk  prevention  and  resolve  working  mechanism,  and  guarantee  the  security  of  bankcard 
information and use.  
The security of financial information should be greatly emphasized. Bankcard payment system is an 
important  part  of  the  national  payment  system.  The  analysis  and  process  of  transaction  data  and 
customer information can reveal some information of the economic activity of cardholders, companies 
and pubic service entities. To safeguard the security of financial information, domestic institutions are 
encouraged to play a bigger role in the bankcard payment system. Issuers should build up domestic 
data process and storage system. As for the domestic and overseas transaction of RMB cards and the 
domestic  transaction  of  foreign  currency  cards  issued  by  domestic  institutions,  the  process  of 
transaction date and fund settlement should be carried out and finished domestically. The provision of 
foreign financial institutions’ bankcard data service domestically should be strictly managed. 
Improving  risk  management  system  of  bankcard  business.  Some  fresh  payment  channels,  such  as 
online  and  mobile  payment  via  bankcard,  should  be  standardized,  and  access  management  over 
important  business  is  also  necessary.  Internal  control,  such  as  the  balance  between  business 
development  and  risk  prevention  as  well  as  the  risk  control  should  be  well  handled.  Bankcard  risk 
prevention  and  the  crackdown  of  illegal  cases  are  to  be  the  routine.  Risk  prevention  at  issuing, 
acceptance and fund clearing stage is to be well managed. Concerning applicant information, issuers 
should establish the verification system and relevant procedures, and bank account must be opened 
in  real  name.  Credit  card  issuers  should  strictly  verify  applicant’s  identification  and  credit,  and 
verification standard should be subject to authorized credit volume. At the accepting stage, acquirers 
should strengthen the verification of designated merchants’ identification and qualification, improve the 
management  of  designated  merchants  and  POS  machines,  set  up  daily  monitoring  and  inspecting 
system,  and  enhance  security  training  of  cashier。CUP  should  improve  security  check  and  risk 
management  of  inter-bank  transaction  network,  build  up  security  risk  evaluation  and  management 
mechanism  for  member  institutions,  and  prevent  settlement  risk.  The  management  over  third  party 
outsource  service  provider  should  be  strengthened,  and  their  responsibility  to  keep  customer 
information  and  transaction  information  confidential  should  be  clearly  defined.  Risk  evaluation  on 
outsource business and outsource service provider should be conducted regularly, and cardholders 
are educated to use bankcards in a safe way. Anti-money laundering law and regulations should be 
enforced strictly, and money laundering and illegal cross-border fund transfer via bankcard should be 
avoided. 
Improving  technical  method  to  prevent  bankcard  risk.  Processing  system  and  network  related  to 
bankcard information security should be subject to technical approval, and coding technology should 
be  applied  to  protect  bankcard  network.  Early  warning  and  monitoring  of  technical  risks  should  be 
enhanced, and current bankcard operation system will be upgraded to possess better risk prevention 
capability. Appropriate technology and methods will be applied to guarantee payment information is 
transmitted in a confidential, complete and timely way, and the ID verification system operates reliably. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 7
Following up latest technical development, and increase technology content of new service product. 
Bankcard  EMV  transfer  is  to  be  carried  out  prudently.  In  compliance  with  their  own  business 
development strategy, issuers could timely issue IC card on the basis of EMV transfer, and IC card 
issuance, acceptance, information transfer as well as product verification should all be subject to both 
The Standard for Financial IC Card (2.0) and relevant laws and regulations. Domestic operation as 
well  as  risk  and  responsibility  classification  for  overseas  use  of  domestic  cards  should  comply  with 
domestic laws. 
Ensuring  safe  and  stable  operation  of  bankcard  transaction  system.  Bankcard  transaction  system, 
especially the CUP inter-bank transaction system and transaction systems of commercial banks are 
the  core  systems  to  guarantee  the  normal  operation  of  bankcards,  and  their  safe  and  steady 
performance must be guaranteed. Daily maintenance mechanism must be set up, and responsibility 
system  should  be  built  up  to  ensure  timely  and  effective  handling  of  emergencies.  Emergency 
management and disaster back-up system should be improved, and emergency rehearsal should be 
practiced, i.e. business, technical and operation departments are organized to participate in the full-
scale  rehearsal  for  operation  system,  and  set  down  a  standardized  emergency  management 
mechanism.  The  monitoring  and  reporting  mechanism  for  risk  early-warning  should  be  further 
improved,  and  relevant  handling  process  should  be  initiated  on  the  basis  of  different  early-warning 
indicators.  
Risk prevention working mechanism should be strengthened. Relevant departments should exchange 
experience and cooperate on risk management, set up risk prevention and eary-warning mechanism, 
improve  monitoring  and  information  exchange,  and  jointly  avoid  bankcard  risk.  Commercial  banks 
should strengthen their cooperation with CUP, open up channels to be connected with legislative and 
judicial  departments,  establish  reporting  and  inquiring  mechanism  for  bankcard  related  crimes,  and 
pool more efforts to crack down fraud cases. Risky cases, which are typical and contagious, should 
become  publicly  known  to  avoid  its  spread.  Equal  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  fraud  cases 
prevention and cracking down, regulation and governance, so as to prevent crimes at root. 
Fifth, improving bankcard legal system and providing system guarantee for the development of 
bankcard industry. 
A. 
Improving  the  revision,  promulgation  and  implementation  of  The  Regulation  of  Bankcard. 
Relevant departments should formulate regulations within their own competence, and PBC 
will improve the management of bankcard clearing agencies and acquirers. 
Conducting  research  on  the  write-off  of  credit  card  NPLs.  There  are  a  lot  of  problems  in 
current  policies,  such  as  the  difficulty  in  NPL  classification,  the  complicated  write-off 
procedures, the disconnection between NPL provision and write-off, and the inadequate risk 
provision.  We  can  refer  to  the  legislative  experience  of  advanced  countries,  give  full 
consideration of the features of credit card lending such as small volume and large lending 
numbers, and actively improve credit card NPLs write-off policies. 
Favorable  policies  are  formulated  to  guide  commercial  banks  to  set  up  more  independent 
credit  card  profit  mode.  Commercial  banks  are  encouraged  to  set  up  credit  card  centers 
enjoying independent management and accounting  
Actively  explore  and  set  up  pricing  and  interest  sharing  mechanism  by  adopting  market-
oriented  measures.  The  interest  of  different  parties  should  be  balanced,  and  their 
enthusiasm and devotion should be mobilized. 
Considering some dishonest merchants use credit cards to get cash and related punishment 
is  lack  of  legal  support,  relevant  legal  system  should  be  improved.  Judicial  departments 
should possess legal enforcement support to effectively crack down such illegal behavior. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
As  China’s  bankcard  industry  become  more  and  more  market-oriented,  bank  card  self-regulatory 
organization has become an effective market monitoring mechanism and should play a bigger role in 
safeguarding  the  fair  and  orderly  competition.  Commercial  banks  and  relevant  departments  should 
have further negotiation, and allow bankcard self-regulatory organization to play the coordination and 
monitoring  role.  Some  nonstandard  relentless  measures  should  be  correct  for  the  virtuous  market 
development. 
8 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Sixth, guiding and promoting the development of bankcard industry 
The development of bankcard industry not only boosts consumption and domestic demand, but also 
reduces  cash  use,  improve  management  over  budgetary  fund,  increase  tax  revenue,  prevent 
corruption, and cultivate social credit. It’s beneficial both to the country and to the people. Although 
China’s bankcard industry has developed greatly, there is still a long way to become abreast with the 
need of building a socialist market economy. It’s no easy job to change the traditional habit of using 
cash. Relevant government should spare no efforts to jointly create a favorable social environment.  
Relevant ministries should make combined efforts to formulate a favorable policy environment. In line 
with  the  national  policy  to  encourage  the  use  of  tax  control  POS  machines,  preferential  taxation 
measures will be formulated to support their purchase. By listing the purchase expenditure and pre-
deducting  income  tax，merchants  are  encouraged  to  buy  tax  control  POS  machine  and  POS 
machines.  Tax  incentive  measures  should  be  adopted  to  encourage  more  and  more  medium  and 
small-sized  merchants  to  accept  bankcards.  Telecom  companies  should  be  guided  to  apply 
preferential policies for the collection of fees through bankcards. As for merchants with large annual 
turnover  that  refuse  to  accept  bankcards,  tax  inspection  should  be  strengthened  to  prompt  them 
voluntarily accept bankcards, and reduce cash circulation.  
Seventh, disseminate bankcard knowledge and guiding people to have a good understanding 
Since  February  2005,  the  PBC  organized  commercial  banks  and  the  CUP  to  hold  the  large-scale 
bankcard  knowledge  dissemination  and  education  program  named  “The  Spring  of  Bankcard---The 
History and Outlook of China’s Bankcard Industry”. Commercial banks also launched similar programs 
at different places. A lot of people participated in these programs, and the number and extent people 
involved  is  unprecedented.  All  the  above  efforts  have  helped spread  bankcard  knowledge,  cultivate 
the awareness of using card in the safe way, improve users’ environment, and create a good external 
environment.  Meanwhile,  more  work  needs  to  be  done,  and  various  media  such  as  network,  TV, 
broadcast, and newspaper can be employed to make the bankcard knowledge more publicly available. 
We  should  also  try  to  win  social  understanding  and  support,  improve  the  acceptance  of  bankcard, 
mobilize  different  parties  to  be  involved  in  bankcard’s  development,  and  so  promote  the  rapid 
development of the bankcard industry. 
Comrades, China’s bankcard industry has achieved a lot in a short period of time, and this market, 
with the most potential, has witnessed the fasteor growth in the world. Generally speaking, China’s 
bankcard  sector  is  still  at  the  initial  development  stage,  and  it’s  an  arduous  job  to  implement  the 
instruction of CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and to fulfill the task and priorities set 
fourth  by  Several  Opinions  Regarding  Promoting  Development  of  the  Bankcard  Industry.  This 
conference is a good opportunity for us to reach consensus and to move forward in an organized and 
coordinated way. I believe that China’s bankcard industry will move to a new stage with our combined 
efforts,  and  the  bankcard  industry  will  achieve  comprehensive,  rapid,  healthy  and  coordinated 
development. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 9
