John Gieve: Financial system risks in the UK – issues and challenges 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at a Centre for the Study of 
Financial Innovation Roundtable, London, 25 July 2006. 
 The Bank and financial stability 
The Bank of England’s central position in the economy owes a great deal to the development of its 
role in managing financial crises. The need for a central bank to provide liquidity to the market was 
identified as early as 1802, when Henry Thornton said: 
“…if the Bank of England, in future seasons of alarm, should be disposed to extend its discounts 
in a greater degree than heretofore, then the threatened calamity may be averted through the 
generosity of that institution.”1
It took until the 1870s for that role to be institutionalised. The arrangement to request a letter from the 
Chancellor permitting the Bank to issue notes not backed by gold at a time of crisis was important to 
the remarkable financial stability that ensued. Indeed, some academics suggest that a true financial 
panic has not taken place in the UK since Overend Gurney & Company collapsed in 1866.2
Of course a lot has changed since then but maintaining financial stability remains one of the Bank’s 
two  core  purposes.  The  current  institutional  arrangements  are  spelt  out  in  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding (MoU) between the Bank, the Treasury, and the FSA. It establishes a framework for 
cooperation  on  three  joint  responsibilities  –  first  identifying  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  UK  financial 
system, second reducing the risks where we can, and third managing crises if they occur. 
The Bank contributes to all three. 
•  We  bring  to  the  assessment  of  risks  both  the  expertise  in  economic  analysis  that  we  have 
developed as the monetary authority and the experience that gives us as a participant as well 
as an observer of financial markets. 
•  We can help to reduce risks directly through our engagement with payment systems and by 
working  with  the  FSA  at  home,  and  with  other  financial  authorities  abroad,  to  improve  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
•  As  Lender  of  Last  Resort,  we  can  contribute  to  the  resolution  of  crises  either  by  supplying 
liquidity to the market in general or, in rare circumstances, acting as the channel of support or 
facilitating transactions for individual institutions. The new MoU makes plain that the decision 
to authorise support operations rests with the Chancellor following independent advice from 
both the Bank and the FSA. 
Our  concern  is  with  the  stability  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Inevitably  that 
causes us to focus on the major UK banks, markets and infrastructure at the centre of our economy, 
not because they are the most likely to run into problems but because an incident that doesn’t affect 
them  will  not  become  a  crisis  for  the  system  as  a  whole.  While  our  responsibility  is  for  the  UK’s 
system, the pivotal position of London as a major international financial centre means that we have to 
take a wider view of global developments and can share that perspective with colleagues abroad. 
One way of reducing the probability and impact of the risks to the UK financial system is by helping the 
private sector to improve their identification and management of risks. We contribute to that by talking 
to market participants about their businesses and drawing those threads together with our economic 
analysis  of  financial  markets  and  trends.  This  enables  us  to  feed  back  to  market  participants  the 
broader picture to inform their understanding and management of their own risks.3
                                                      
1   Thornton, H (1802), An enquiry into the nature and effects of paper credit of Great Britain (Chapter 7), page 121. 
2   Allen, F & D Gale (2000), Comparing financial systems, MIT Press. 
3   Bernanke (2006) also highlights risk management lapses by the private sector as a key source of crisis and stresses the 
vital role of market discipline in preventing such lapses from recurring. See Bernanke, B (2006), Hedge funds and systemic 
risk, remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia, 16 May. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 1
In the latest edition of the Bank’s Financial Stability Report, we have sought to improve the way that 
we  present  our  assessment  of  risks.  It  is  shorter,  more  selective  and  clearer  on  what  we  think  is 
important and what isn’t. 
Of  course  it  is  not  difficult  to  draw  up  a  long  list  of  possible  “triggers”  for  changes  in  sentiment  in 
markets. Avian flu or worsening strife in the Middle East are two obvious ones at the moment. What 
we have  tried  to do  in  the  new FSR  is  to  identify  the  features of  the  economy  and  the structure of 
financial markets which could lead an initial shock to turn into a crisis. We set out six main sources of 
vulnerability. 
Two of these vulnerabilities are features of the global economy: unusually low premia for bearing risk 
and the large financial imbalances among major economies. Two relate to the balance sheets of the 
non-financial sector: rapid leveraging of some parts of the corporate sector and high UK household 
debt.  And  two  arise  from  structural  dependencies  within  the  financial  system:  the  rising  systemic 
importance of large complex financial institutions (or LCFIs for short) and the heavy dependence of 
financial institutions on some elements of market infrastructure. In each case the probability of the risk 
materialising is small but non negligible. 
Rather than go over all that ground today, I’d like to pick out two themes that span many of these six 
vulnerabilities: first the increased competitive pressure on financial firms, and second the way in which 
changes to the structure of our financial system that have made it more efficient at sharing risk may 
also have made it more efficient at transmitting shocks. 
A changing financial landscape 
Over the past decade technological change, financial innovation, cross border financial consolidation 
and  the  increasing  demands  of  investors  for  better  performance  have  had  a  profound  effect  on 
financial  markets  and  institutions  (Charts  1  and  2),  and  have  increased  the  flow  of  savings  across 
markets and national boundaries. 
These changes have brought with them a shift away from bank-dominated finance, with its emphasis 
on  a  “special  relationship”  between  lender  and  borrower,  towards  “anonymous”  markets  and  arms-
length  asset  management.  Traditional  worries  about  bank  runs  –  where  vulnerabilities  lay  on  the 
liability-side of the balance sheet – have not disappeared but these days there is equal concern about 
the reliability of apparent liquidity on the asset side of the balance sheet. 
The changing nature of financial activity is illustrated by developments in credit derivatives markets. 
The  availability  of  these  instruments  is  enabling  a  change  in  the  nature  of  banking  itself  towards 
business  models  based  on  origination  and  distribution  rather  than  the  retention  of  credit  risk.  The 
notional  amount  outstanding  on  CDS  contracts  globally  reached  $14  trillion  in  2005,  up  from  $40 
billion in 1996. And the issuance of asset-backed securities in the UK, which involve parcelling up and 
selling different claims on pools of assets such as consumer loans and mortgages, has risen to some 
$165 billion from $5.5 billion in 1995. The UK now accounts for around a third of the issuance volume 
in European ABS markets. 
On  the  whole,  such  developments  are  positive  for  financial  stability.  Coupled  with  greater 
macroeconomic  stability  (Chart  3),  they  have  made  the  financial  system  more  robust  by  allowing 
market participants greater scope to distribute and diversify risk and to manage it effectively. 
Experience of previous rounds of financial innovation also suggests grounds for optimism. Swaps and 
other  over-the-counter  interest  rate  derivatives,  for  example,  are  now  well  understood  and  widely 
recognised  as  increasing  economic  flexibility  and  the  productivity  of  capital.  More  recently  global 
financial systems and the newer asset markets appear also to have withstood several recent shocks, 
such as September 11, the Dotcom bubble, the GM related wobbles in May 2005, Refco, and the Iraq 
war. The fact that some investors, such as hedge funds, are willing to take on greater risk does not 
necessarily give rise to system-wide concerns. 
Systemic risk in modern financial systems 
But  there  are  limits  to  the  amount  of  risk  that  can  be  hedged  away.  The  financial  system  cannot 
reduce the amount of risk in the economy, but only repackage and transfer it. As more instruments 
that transfer risk are added to the balance sheets of financial institutions, so leverage and connectivity 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2006
grow. While some of these connections might constitute a "perfect hedge", they can leave the system 
more vulnerable to both counterparty risk and the liquidity of these markets. 
The precise extent to which market participants are now connected through interlocking obligations is 
difficult to gauge, but the UK interbank market provides some clues. Over 70% of the total lending in 
the market is accounted for by 15 institutions. And the major UK banks’ large exposures to the main 
foreign-owned LCFIs are almost two-thirds of Tier 1 capital. The rising correlation between the share 
prices  of  major  UK  banks  and  foreign-owned  LCFIs  also  provides  a  hint  of  the  growing 
interconnections (Chart 4). 
At the same time, rapid innovation in new financial instruments poses challenges within the financial 
system.  As  I  have  already  discussed,  these  developments  are  likely  to  be  positive  in  the  long  run, 
allowing market participants greater scope to diversify and manage risk. But in the short run, newer 
products, such as structured credit derivatives, do pose challenges. We simply do not have experience 
of how they behave in the full range of market conditions. The models that have been built by banks 
and  other  players  in  the  market  to  value  and  hedge  positions  in  these  instruments  are  more 
sophisticated  than  ever  before,  but  they  are  not  proven  in  adversity.  The  infrastructure  to  support 
credit default swaps, the building blocks of many of these new products, is developing rapidly thanks 
to the initiative of the FSA and the New York Fed but there is still some way to go. 
Competition between financial firms to establish positions in these new and fast growing markets is 
also rising. The business risk not just of losing profits this year but of being left behind in the longer 
term  by  competitors  looms  large  at  the  moment.  And  compensation  structures  that  strongly  reward 
financial  performance  are  also  influencing  risk-taking.4  There  is  a  tendency  for  rewards  from 
generating “excess returns” to far outstrip the penalties for poor performance. This intensifies the need 
to stay ahead of, or keep up with, the pack and stretches risk management systems in the process. 
The  more  aggressively  management  pursues  short  term  shareholder  value  in  the  form  of  rates  of 
return on equity, the greater the motivation to build leverage to meet its targets. Balance sheets have 
been growing strongly (Chart 5). In markets where a 20% return on capital is seen as disappointing, 
we are seeing efforts to emulate the business models of others and take on more risk through both 
proprietary trading (in fairly liquid markets) and principal position taking (in illiquid investments). 
The history of financial crises is replete with injudicious attempts to “keep up with the Joneses”. The 
very first CSFI survey in 1994 highlighted the important tension between financial risk and business 
risk when it observed: 
“…that banks are being forced by the quest for new sources of business to become a different 
sort of financial institution – sometimes without noticing it, and probably without the necessary 
skills.”5; 
As  1987  and  1998  remind  us,  the  best  laid  hedges  and  collateral  can  lose  much  of  their  reliability 
during times of stress. When financial institutions seek to liquidate portfolios to meet margin calls or 
solvency requirements, their attempts to lower risk exposures can cause a high degree of correlation 
amongst  assets  that  appeared  uncorrelated  in  normal  times.  We  saw  the  same  phenomenon  on  a 
much smaller scale in May and June this year. 
In less liquid markets the price impact of any shock tends to be larger, the knock-on to balance sheets 
greater, and the spillover effects across market participants wider. Our contacts in financial markets 
continue to suggest that market liquidity remains plentiful, but that there is a trend towards tying up 
funds in potentially illiquid assets in markets with relatively few players. And while hedge funds have 
played  a  positive  role  in  recent  episodes  of  turbulence  –  by  absorbing  some  of  the  losses  –  their 
capacity  and  willingness  to  provide  liquidity  in  the  event  of  a  large  shock  to  the  market  remains 
uncertain. 
To  summarise,  although  financial  innovation  and  macroeconomic  stability  have  strengthened  the 
financial  system,  the  pace  of  innovation  and  the  battle  for  market  share  may  have  also  deepened 
some vulnerabilities. 
                                                      
4   For a discussion of the role of compensation structures in systemic risk, see Rajan, R (2005), Has financial development 
made the world riskier? Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on “The Greenspan Era – 
Lessons for the Future”, Jackson Hole 25-27 August. 
5   Banking Banana Skins, CSFI, June 1994, page 2. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 3
More generally, and pulling together a number of issues that I have already discussed, the changing 
landscape  may  also  be  altering  the  character  of  the  financial  system.  In  a  system  with  more 
connections between firms, losses are likely to be more widely dispersed and so absorbed more easily 
by individual firms and the system itself. So the probability of a contagious crisis may have fallen. But 
should we ever find ourselves in a crisis, with more connections between firms the impact could be 
spread around the financial system more rapidly and widely.6 Thus we may be moving to a world of 
less frequent but higher impact crises. 
Dealing with systemic risk 
Of  course  regulation  and  market  infrastructure  have  not  stood  still  as  markets  have  developed  – 
whether on capital requirements, large exposure limits or the introduction of real time gross settlement. 
But the growth of financial firms active across different business lines and national boundaries does 
make designing policies to address systemic risks more challenging. Let me conclude by highlighting 
some actions we can take to guard against such risk. 
First, there is scope for more private and public sector cooperation on stress-testing. There is room to 
develop further our analysis of the combined effects of market and credit risk on the balance sheets of 
financial firms and at a system-wide level. And it is important that macroeconomic stress scenarios do 
not blindly extrapolate from the robust economic performance of recent years. The FSA is reviewing 
stress-testing practices of UK firms as part of a campaign to identify and encourage best practices. Of 
course each firm needs to tailor its tests to its own business, but I believe that there may also be merit 
in  looking  at  a  common  set  of  plausible  scenarios.  This  would  help  compare  risk  profiles  and 
publishing these results could potentially strengthen market discipline. 
Second, efforts are underway to improve further liquidity risk management. The fundamental reforms 
to the sterling money market introduced in May should make for greater flexibility in the day-to-day 
management  of  sterling  liquidity,  and  help  ease  potential  liquidity  bottlenecks  in  times  of  stress.7 
These changes build on the lessons of the Federal Reserve’s discount window in US dollars and the 
ECB’s  marginal  lending  facility  in  euros.  Handling  potential  liquidity  pressures  faced  by  LCFIs 
operating in multiple countries and currencies continues to be a focus of policy attention. 
Third, the UK authorities are improving the procedures and information needed to manage system-
wide  risks  should  they  crystallise.  The  Bank,  the  FSA  and  HMT  now  conduct  regular  crisis 
management  exercises  to  develop  the  coordination  needed  to  handle  operational  disruptions  and 
financial  crises.  Market-wide  testing  of  business  continuity  arrangements  takes  place  annually.  It 
involved some 70 firms and utilities in 2005 and another test is about to start. 
Finally,  the  changing  financial  landscape  has  increased  the  importance  of  international  crisis 
cooperation.  An  MoU  to  develop  such  coordination  in  the  EU  amongst  central  banks,  finance 
ministries, and regulators has been established and tested. We need to build on that to reach beyond 
Europe and to test crisis management arrangements especially with US authorities. 
Taken together, these measures should help reduce the likelihood of systemic instability in the UK. I 
hope that my remarks today help make clear that the private sector – through sound individual and 
collective risk management – has its part to play in lengthening those odds still further. 
                                                      
6   Recent work at the Bank has been exploring this issue. See, for example, the analysis in Wells, S (2002), UK Interbank 
Exposures: Systemic Risk Implications, Financial Stability Review, December, pages 175-182, and Cifuentes, R, Ferrucci, G 
and H S Shin (2005), Liquidity Risk and Contagion, Bank of England Working Paper No. 264. 
7   See Tucker, P (2004), Managing the central bank’s balance sheet: where monetary policy meets financial stability, lecture to 
mark the fifteenth anniversary of Lombard Street Research, 28 July. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2006
  BIS Review 70/2006 
 5
  6 
 BIS Review 70/2006
 BIS Review 70/2006 
 7
