Christian Noyer: The eurosystem’s single monetary policy - a view from the 
inside 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the GIC Conference hosted by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 18 January 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to address the GIC conference hosted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia.  
Before entering into the heart of today’s topic, given the date of this conference, it would be difficult for 
me  not  to  evoke  the  name  and  prodigious  work  of  Benjamin  Franklin  who,  to  my  mind,  is  the 
embodiment of the American dream. I could devote the whole of my address to Benjamin Franklin’s 
work, both because of its scope and the significance that it still has today, but that is not the subject of 
our  conference.  I  shall  therefore  confine  myself  to  recalling  some  of  the  major  events  and 
achievements  in  the  life  of  this  exceptional,  intelligent  man,  endowed  with  extraordinary  intellectual 
curiosity. 
If I were to sum up the life of this exceptional man in a few words, I would say, like most people, that 
he  was  an  autobiographer,  an  essayist,  a  pamphleteer,  a  politician,  a  librarian,  a  publisher,  an 
educationalist, a scientist, an inventor, a statesman, and a humorist. It is difficult to believe that one 
single man could be so multifaceted but Benjamin Franklin was all these things, and sometimes at the 
same time. Benjamin Franklin is the very example of what was known at the time as an “honest man”. 
Benjamin  Franklin  showed  a  marked  interest  in  Europe  from  a  very  early  age.  He  started  learning 
French,  Italian  and  Spanish  (in  addition  to  Latin)  in  1733.  He  journeyed  abroad  and  lived  both  in 
France and England. I would like to stress his interest in France by pointing out that he was elected 
Associé  Etranger  of  the  French  Academy  in  1772  and  became  Plenipotentiary  Minister  in  Paris  in 
1779. 
When referring to Benjamin Franklin, one often has in mind the great inventor, the philosopher, the 
essayist  or  the  polemicist  but  one  often  forgets  to  mention  that  he  also  published  a  number  of 
economic essays and studies. It is worth mentioning the book “Way to Wealth”, which some people 
consider as “the first American book on personal finance” or as “the best and the wisest money book 
ever written… ”. 
As you can probably imagine, Benjamin Franklin’s philosophy has crossed the Atlantic and still guides 
decision-makers today, including at the European Central Bank.  
In that regard, I would like to touch on a few ideas drawn from his autobiography. I need not remind 
you of his great fondness for quotations, especially in Poor Richard’s Almanack. In his autobiography, 
Benjamin  Franklin  defined  a  number  of  virtues  that  he  believed  to  be  cardinal.  They  included 
temperance, silence, order, resolution, frugality, industry, sincerity, justice, etc. I find his interpretation 
of  these  terms  interesting.  For  instance,  for  Benjamin  Franklin,  the  term  “temperance” should  be 
understood as follows: “Temperance first, as it tends to procure that coolness and clearness of head, 
which is so necessary where constant vigilance was to be kept up…”. This, to my mind, is one of the 
virtues that central bankers must impose on themselves. My Eurosystem colleagues and I have made 
it one of the guiding principles of our actions. 
Benjamin  Franklin  continues  his  description  of  these  virtues  in  the  following  terms  “Frugality  and 
Industry freeing me from my remaining debt, and producing affluence and independence, would make 
more easy the practice of Sincerity and  Justice, ...,”. He emphasises the importance of being freed 
from  one’s  debts  and  recovering  one’s  independence.  We  know  from  his  political  activity  that  he 
attaches a great deal of importance to the independence of the Nation, but here we are talking about 
that of individuals and therefore of the institutions for which they are responsible. As we will see later, 
this is the type of independence that lies at the heart of the Eurosystem. Furthermore, sincerity can be 
associated with transparency, another key principle of the Eurosystem. 
As  in  most  human  activities,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  involves  some  risk-taking  and  may, 
justifiably or not, be subject to debate and criticism, as we will see later on. I would like to conclude 
this brief tribute to Benjamin Franklin by quoting one of his phrases that makes an encouraging link 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 1
between success and risk: “there are many ways not to succeed, but the most certain is not to take 
risks”. 
Let me turn now to my main topic which is to provide you with an overview of the Single monetary 
policy of the Eurosystem that consists of the European Central Bank and the 12 national central banks 
of euro area member states and of its main features and achievements. 
Quite paradoxically, 
- The single currency for a long time met with the scepticism from many observers, who regarded it as 
unrealistic first to launch a new currency and second to envisage a single monetary policy for a group 
of  countries  that,  despite  rapid  convergence,  continued  to  display  major  differences.  Interestingly 
enough, the assumption made by some observers and market participants that the entry interest rates 
in the Euro on 1 January 1999 would be some kind of average of the interest rates of the composing 
currencies  proved  to  be  wrong.  On  the  contrary,  and  since  the  very  construction  of  the  Euro  was 
based  on  continuity  with  the  most  credible  national  currencies,  it  was  foreseeable  that  interest  rate 
convergence inside the future Euro area would take place progressively on the basis of a merge of 
different yield curves of the various currencies with the benchmark yield curve corresponding to the 
most performing and credible ones, as it effectively happened. 
-  The  recent  nay  votes  from  France  and  the  Netherlands  to  ratifying  the  EU  constitution  rattled 
Europeans concerns for the future. Some observers immediately conjectured that the single currency 
was directly responsible for the muted economic performance of the euro area and publicly questioned 
its  durability;  however,  the  track  record  of  the  Single  monetary  policy,  after  only  6  years  of 
implementation,  has  been  really  impressive:  the  inception  of  the  euro  has  been  associated  with  an 
increased  macroeconomic and  price  stability  within  the  euro zone,  despite  an unusual sequence  of 
unfavourable events, adverse supply shocks and periods of global financial turbulences.  
The  point  I  would  like  to  set  out  today  is  that  a  high  degree  of  credibility,  transparency  and 
predictability of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy is a key condition for its efficiency. 
I will provide you with an overview of the Eurosystem monetary policy strategy (part 1) and then will 
assess its main achievements (part 2).  
PART 1: The main features of the Eurosystem monetary policy strategy 
Let us see what are the main features of the single monetary policy, conducted by the Eurosystem, in 
terms of institutional and operational framework as well as on strategic issues themselves. 
1. The institutional and operational framework is founded on modern concepts 
Let me recall first that over the past decade, a large body of literature has been devoted to questions 
surrounding central bank independence, the concepts of transparency and monetary strategies, and 
the communication of monetary policy decisions. 
Drawing  on  this  analytical  expertise  and  the  experience  of  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
participating  countries,  the  Eurosystem  is  first  and  foremost  based  on  a  modern  institutional 
framework, founded on the principles of independence, transparency and accountability and, lastly, 
operational decentralisation. 
1.1. The independence of the Eurosystem fosters price stability 
The Eurosystem’s primary objective, as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, is to achieve and maintain 
price stability. As many empirical studies have shown, a country’s ability to fight inflation appears very 
closely  correlated  to  the  degree  of  independence  of  its  central  bank.  The  independence  of  the 
European Central Bank and the 12 national central banks of the Member States of the euro area is 
therefore anchored in the Treaty. 
In operational terms, this means that, in the conduct of their duties, neither the European Central Bank 
nor the national central banks of the Eurosystem may request or take instructions from the Community 
institutions, national governments or any other body. They are entirely institutionally, operationally and 
financially independent. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2006
1.2. Transparency and accountability are also essential for gaining credibility 
Naturally,  the  independence  of  these  institutions  requires  transparency  in  their  decision-making 
processes and accountability vis-à-vis the general public and their representatives. 
As  regards  new  institutions  such  as  the  ECB,  transparency  is  even  more  important  for  gaining 
credibility and building up economic agents’ confidence in the new currency. In order to establish this 
credibility and gain the confidence of agents, it is imperative to be understood, which in turn calls for 
transparency. 
 For  the  sake  of  transparency,  the  Governing  Council  has  specified  and  quantified  its  definition  of 
price stability (inflation below but close to 2% over the medium-term). 
Second,  the  ECB  has  gone  beyond  the  accountability  requirements  laid  down  by  the  Treaty  by 
instituting regular testimonies by the President of the ECB before the European Parliament and regular 
informal  meetings  with  the  Eurogroup  of  Finance  ministers.  Another  channel  for  transparency  is 
constituted  by  the  regular  publication  of  reports  on  economic  developments  and  Central  Bank 
analysis, of the Eurosystem’s and ECB’s staff projections exercises, most prominently in the ECB’s 
Monthly Bulletin. 
Finally and most importantly, following monetary policy decisions, the President and Vice-President of 
the  ECB  hold  a  press  conference  followed  by  an  open  discussion  with  journalists,  the  transcript  of 
which is published on the ECB’s website. It should be recalled that the ECB was the first central bank 
to  adopt  such  a  procedure,  which  provides  a  unique  opportunity  to  fully  explain  and  comment 
monetary decisions immediately.  
On the other hand, the Governing Council of the ECB has chosen not to publish the minutes of its 
meetings. The publication of these minutes would indeed present some drawbacks:  
- first, governing council members may “speak for the minutes” when these are very detailed, while, 
when they are not detailed, may not convey more information than a plain communiqué; 
-  second,  the  publication  of  the  minutes  might  also  create  more  difficulties  for  moving  from  initial 
positions to new ones in the light of the arguments developed; 
- finally and most importantly, in the case of the euro area, the analysis of the votes could be read and 
interpreted  as  reflecting  national  interests  or  preoccupations,  which  would  be  misleading  and  could 
jeopardise both the independence of the members of the Governing Council and the credibility of our 
decision-making processes. 
1.3. The Eurosystem is based on operational decentralisation 
The  third  imperative,  operational  decentralisation,  is  an  essential  feature  of  the  Eurosystem. 
According to this principle, monetary policy decisions taken in a centralised fashion by the Governing 
Council of the ECB are implemented in a decentralised way by the national central banks.  
Contrary  to  the  US,  the  use  of  modern  technology  and  communications  has  made  it  possible  for 
market  operations  not  to  be  concentrated  at  a  single  geographical  location,  but  to  be  carried  out 
simultaneously at all of the National Central Banks. The same type of arrangement applies in other 
monetary areas (cash management, payment systems, etc.). 
1.4. The Eurosystem benefits from an efficient operational framework 
The operational framework is based on two main guidelines: 
- a range of monetary policy instruments selected in accordance with the principles of an open market 
economy,  a  level  playing  field,  simplicity  and  transparency:  these  instruments  enable  the  smooth 
adjustment of banking liquidity and effective steering of short-term interest rates.  
-  procedures  guaranteeing  a  high  level  of  security  for  all  interbank  transactions  and  large-value 
payments within the euro area and with other countries in the European Union, with in particular the 
TARGET  system,  which  played  a  predominant  role  in  the  integration  process  of  the  euro  money 
market. 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 3
2. The strategic framework also contributes to the efficiency of the single monetary policy 
From  the  outset,  there  was  a  consensus  among  the  designers  of  the  Eurosystem  that  the  Single 
monetary policy would require a clear strategic framework. This framework can be characterised by 
two  main  principles:  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  and  a  medium-term  orientation  of 
monetary policy. 
2.1. The quantitative definition of price stability has been clarified after five years of experience 
The definition adopted by the ECB’s Governing Council in October 1998 was confirmed and clarified in 
May 2003 following an in-depth review of its strategic framework by the Eurosystem. In the wake of 
this  assessment  exercise,  the  Governing  Council  specified  that  price  stability  was  defined  as  an 
annual increase in the HICP close to, but below, 2% over the medium term. Several remarks should 
complement this definition: 
-  by  specifying  that  inflation  should  be  close  to  2%,  the  Governing  Council  intended  first  of  all  to 
confirm the symmetrical nature of its strategy by ruling out situations of deflation. This clarification also 
makes  it  possible  to  take  account  of  any  possible  measurement  bias  in  the  price  index,  as  well  as 
inflation differentials within the euro area; 
- the quantitative definition of monetary stability brings the Eurosystem’s strategic framework close to 
that  of  central  banks  that  rely  on  inflation  targeting,  especially  if  a  broad  definition  of  the  latter  is 
accepted, such as that expressed by the term “flexible inflation targeting”. The big difference is in the 
use  made  of  forecasts  derived  from  econometric  models,  which  play  a  predominant  role  in  “pure” 
inflation targeting strategies, whereas they are only one component in the decision-making process of 
the Governing Council of the Eurosystem; 
- especially in the early days, we were confronted with substantial criticism regarding our definition of 
price stability, considered by many observers as too ambitious. Two points are worth mentioning at 
this stage:  
-  First,  due  to  the  scepticism  I  already  mentioned  and  for  credibility  reasons,  it  would  have  been 
damaging for the euro not to build on the credibility of the most efficient and successful participating 
national  central  banks,  that  had  previously  chosen  2%  as  the  ceiling  for  their  definition  of  price 
stability; 
-  second,  this  criticism  has  abated  recently  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  definition  of  price 
stability has converged towards a level close to, if not below, 2%: in December 2003, Gordon Brown 
announced a new inflation target for the Bank of England, based on the HICP, and set at a level of 2% 
for the 12-month increase; in the US, Ben Bernanke, recently appointed to take over A. Greenspan at 
the end of the month, advocated for a quantitative definition of the FED’s price objective comprised 
between 1 and 2% over the medium-term. 
2.2. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy is “medium-term” oriented. 
What exactly are the implications of the medium-term orientation of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
strategy?  
The first is that the single monetary policy does not have a fixed horizon, defined once and for all ex 
ante, but aims, as far as possible, to take account of the “long and variable lags of monetary policy” 
dear to Milton Friedman. Taking account of this uncertainty is particularly important in the case of the 
euro area, whose “deep structural parameters” are somewhat uncertain to the extent that the inception 
of the euro may have been associated with a “regime shift”. 
More  prosaically,  this  medium-term  orientation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  recognises  that  it  is 
impossible for a central bank to control price developments with accuracy over the short-term. 
The  second  implication  is  that  the  relevant  indicators  for  monetary  policy  must  reflect,  almost 
exhaustively, the main sources of both short and long-term inflation. In the light of this, the monetary 
policy strategy seeks, as far as possible, to rely on a “full information approach”. 
This is what the concepts economic analysis and monetary analysis – also known as the two-pillar 
approach  –  used  notably  at  the  press  conferences  given  by  the  ECB  President  following  monetary 
policy decisions, reflect: 
-  the  economic  analysis  examines  cyclical,  economic  and  financial  indicators  related  to  the  main 
determinants of short-term inflation; 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2006
- the monetary analysis, is based on a monetary explanation of long-term inflation. It is signalled by the 
announcement of a reference value, which is not a committing target, of 4½% for the annual growth of 
the broad money aggregate. 
- The medium-term orientation of the single monetary policy makes necessary the cross-checking of 
these two complementary approaches. From this point of view, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is 
more comprehensive than pure inflation or monetary targeting strategies. 
External observers sometimes criticise the complexity of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy 
and argue in particular that the monetary pillar or analysis does not provide any useful information for 
our monetary policy decision. It is considered by some as superfluous, confusing if not as an obstacle 
to transparency. 
To give money an important role in its monetary policy analysis and strategy is however quite a natural 
thing  for  a  central  bank  geared  towards  price  stability  to  do,  as  inflation  is  “ultimately  always  and 
everywhere a monetary phenomenon”, to quote again Milton Friedman. It is worth mentioning that, in 
our  set-up,  with  a  clear  medium-term  focus,  the  Eurosystem  does  not  need  or  have  to  react 
mechanically to short-term deviations of monetary growth from the reference value. Instead, monetary 
developments,  i.e.  both  the  developments  of  the  components  of  M3  and  of  its  counterparts,  are 
analysed very carefully in order to examine and extract their information content for future inflation. 
 PART 2: The achievements of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy  
What preliminary assessment can we make of the first six years of the single monetary policy? I would 
like to underline the following points, considering successively price stability, macroeconomic stability 
and convergence, monetary stance and predictability. 
1. The achievement of the overriding policy objective: price stability 
Confronted with a series of adverse exogenous supply shocks (affecting in particular oil prices, food 
products and services prices) leading to a rise in the HICP of above 2% in year-on-year terms from 
2000 to 2002, the level around which the HICP has hovered since, the Eurosystem has been able to 
achieve its main objective: since the Eurosystem became responsible for monetary policy in the euro 
area, HICP inflation has averaged 2%, which is near to the “close to but below 2%” at which we aim 
over the medium term. Let me remind you that HICP inflation was around 4% in the 1980’s and about 
9% in the 1970s [see Figure 1].     
Until recently, the single monetary policy also succeeded in stabilising and anchoring medium to long-
term inflation expectations at around 1.8% to 1.9%, despite all the above mentioned shocks. That is to 
say, once again, at a level close to, but below, 2% in accordance with our definition of price stability – 
whether one takes the inflation expectations derived from surveys (for example, Consensus Forecast, 
or  the  ECB  survey  of  professional  forecasters  –  [see  Figure  2]  )  or  those  drawn  from  market  data, 
notably index-linked government bonds. Recently, the awareness of a durable higher cost of oil has 
pushed expectations slightly above 2%. The last December key ECB interest rate’s hike has however 
brought these market expectations back to 2% that is to say in line with our definition of price stability 
over the medium term.  
2. Macroeconomic stability and convergence   
Price stability has not come at the expense of higher unemployment. Moreover, there are no visible 
signs of costs in terms of higher real macroeconomic volatility. Quite on the contrary, the volatility of 
real variables has declined relative to the averages observed during the 1980s and 1990s. 
Does  one  size  fit  all?  It  is  often  argued  that  a  single  monetary  policy  combined  with  inflation 
differentials leads to different real interest rates across countries, which in turn may destabilisize the 
currency union by creating divergence in output growth that exacerbate inflation differentials. This is by 
no way what we have observed: 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 5
First,  inflation  dispersion  among  the  euro  area  countries  (measured  as  the  unweighted  standard 
deviation  of  annual  HICP  inflation  rates)  amounted  to  slightly  less  than  1 percentage  point  in  2005 
compared to around 6 percentage points in the 1990’s. Since the inception of the euro, the average 
inflation dispersion across the euro area countries has been around 1 percentage point. This figure is 
very close to the dispersion observed across the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas. 
 Concerning growth differentials, euro area averages naturally mask a variety of growth performances 
of  individual  countries  within  the  single  currency  area,  especially  in  a  context  where  structural 
convergence has not been completed yet. Growth dispersion  is a natural phenomenon in any large 
economic area. Looking at the main trend, the degree of dispersion in real GDP growth rates across 
the 12 euro area countries declined somewhat in 2004 (in annual average terms) to a historically low 
level (1.4% as measured by the unweighted standard deviation), while it had been fluctuating around 
2% since the 1970s. By comparison, the dispersion of real growth rates across the eight US statistical 
regions fluctuated around an average of 1.5 % between 1990 and 2002. 
This is not surprising since some stabilisation channels are at work in a currency area: in particular, a 
credible monetary policy should bring about a convergence of expected inflation towards the definition 
of  price  stability,  leading  progressively  to  the  convergence  of  ex  ante  real  rates  across  the  area; 
moreover, lower inflation relative to other trading partners increases price competitiveness, which in 
turn counteracts the initial effect of higher real interest rates.   
3. Appropriateness of the monetary policy stance   
Has  the  monetary  policy  stance  been  appropriate?  To  try  answering  that  delicate  question,  the 
literature of central bank watchers or observers has mainly focused on Taylor-type rules as a usual 
benchmark.  
Despite numerous caveats, such an approach can be very informative as it addresses several relevant 
issues such as: is the monetary policy decision process rule-based or rather discretionary? To what 
extent  is  the  central  bank  too  focused  on  price  stability  at  the  expense  of,  say,  growth  and 
employment? Is the central bank forward-looking or rather “behind the curve”?  
These  are  actually  some  of  the  recurrent  criticisms  I  have  heard  about  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary 
policy: too obscure, too narrow-focused, too late. Figure 3 displays a forward-looking Taylor-type rule 
for  the  ECB’s  minimum  bid  rate.  As  an  overall  assessment,  the  Taylor-type  rule  closely  matches 
Eurosystem’s monetary policy decisions.  
Under the proviso that this rule provides a good benchmark, it is quite unclear why the Eurosystem 
has attracted so much criticism: in particular, the output stabilisation “objective”, as encapsulated in a 
standard  Taylor  rule,  has  not  been  overlooked  by  the  overriding  objective  of  price  stability.  In  that 
regard, one should be aware that, in the euro area as elsewhere, price stability aims at providing the 
highest sustainable growth and employment in the longer run; finally, the decisions have been taken in 
a timely fashion, the Eurosystem conducting its monetary policy in a forward-looking and pre-emptive 
way. 
However, the same figure shows that policy decisions deviate from time to time from the Taylor rule 
benchmark. Actually, being rule-based doesn’t imply being rule-bound and monetary policy decisions 
are not taken on the basis of mechanical rules.  
I  already  mentioned  the  Eurosystem  adopted  a  full-information  approach,  which  besides  the  usual 
array of economic and financial indicators also gives a key role to monetary analysis not factored in 
usual Taylor rules. 
Figure 4 illustrates the importance of such an approach in the context of our monetary policy decision-
making process. It shows that the policy stance is also underpinned by the information stemming from 
our monetary pillar:  
- From 2001 to 2003, the annual growth of M3 was well above its reference value. However, an in-
depth analysis of M3’s components and of its main counterparts showed that the dynamics of M3 was 
mainly due to extraordinary portfolio shifts into M3, in a context of heightened economic, financial and 
geopolitical  uncertainty.  This  implied  low  medium-term  risks  for  price  stability,  as  captured  by  the 
monetary  indicators  presented  in  figures  4  and  5,  and  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  enter  an  easing 
cycle.  
6 
 BIS Review 4/2006
- The situation has changed since the second half of 2004 as reflected by the monetary indicators: 
first, broad money aggregates accelerated in parallel with increasing demand for loans to the private 
sector; second, this acceleration was mainly driven by the most liquid components of M3, pointing to a 
significant impact of low interest rates on monetary dynamics. Furthermore, the growth of borrowing, 
especially mortgage loans, remained very robust, fuelling a sharp increase of housing prices across 
the euro area. In such a situation, the risks revealed by the monetary analysis to price stability over the 
medium-term were strongly revised upward. 
4. Predictability and frequency of policy actions 
Contrary to some preconceptions, most monetary policy decisions have been perfectly anticipated by 
the markets. This assessment derives from studies conducted by the Eurosystem but also from the 
reports published by “ECB Watchers”, with whom, incidentally, the ECB has regular contact, notably in 
the context of annual conferences.  
Figures 5 and 6 show for example that on average, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy decisions were 
anticipated by financial markets, whatever their orientation, at least two weeks in advance, and fully 
factored in at least a week before.  
A  comparison  with  the  Fed,  moreover,  does  not  reveal  significant  differences  between  the  two 
institutions with regard to the ability of markets to anticipate the monetary policy decisions of the two 
institutions. This point to the transparency of the single monetary policy. In particular, the fact that 
the ECB has chosen channels other than the publication of minutes of the meetings of the Governing 
Council has not prevented it from reaching a high level of predictability. 
As regards the frequency, since the inception of the euro in 1999, the Eurosystem has changed its 
policy rates 16 times (8 cuts, 8 hikes), which is on average close to the usual average frequency of 
interest rate changes1  
However, compared to the Federal Reserve, in particular since 2001, the frequency of the changes is 
by far lower. Does this necessarily imply that the Eurosystem does not move enough or too low? I 
think there is a broad agreement on the fact that interest rate decisions are state-dependent rather 
than  time-dependent  and  as  a  consequence,  both  the  frequency  and  the  amplitude  of  the  policy 
changes are mainly driven by the underlying state of the economy. 
As far as the Eurosystem is concern, the more gradualist approach is nothing but the reflection that 
the economy of the euro area has been less affected by cyclical fluctuations than the US economy. 
Moreover, recent research carried out by the Eurosystem on inflation persistence tends to show that 
the  degree  of  inflation  persistence  in  the  euro  area  is  quite  moderate  while  the  degree  of  price 
stickiness  is  considerable  and  higher  than  in  the  United  States.  This  finding  may  provide  another 
justification for a gradualist monetary response to cost-push shocks as: first, the impact of an inflation 
shock will be small as agents anticipate a low persistence of this shock and therefore will reduce their 
expectations of future inflation; in turn, the negative response of the output gap will be limited implying 
a less persistent response of the real rate. 
5. As a result, the Eurosystem monetary policy has won European citizens’ confidence in and 
acceptance of the new currency 
Finally,  the  euro  has  been  readily  accepted  by  economic  agents  and  is  now  part  of  European 
consumers’ daily lives.  Surveys confirm that the general public has confidence in the euro, as a solid 
currency, and in the Eurosystem as their Central Bank. 
However, there remain two causes for concern:  
- one is the natural difficulty in moving to an entirely new set of price references – and it may take a 
number of years before this switch is fully made by the public at large.  
- and the second, probably related to the first one, is the feeling in the public that there have been 
excessive price increases linked to the cash changeover. Indeed, the public’s attention has focused on 
                                                      
1   On average, central banks of industrialised countries changed their policy rates every 5 months both in the 1980s and the 
1990s,  which  is  close  to  the  actual  frequency  of  the  ECB  interest  rate’s  changes  (4,8  months).  (Source  Clerc  et  Yates 
(1999): “Interest rate stepping: some puzzles and facts”, mimeo Bank of England). 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 7
a small number of goods and services in which abnormal increases occurred at the time of this event, 
leading to a misperception of the real rate of inflation. This gap between perceived inflation and real 
inflation has however been narrowing progressively and should hopefully disappear in the near future. 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, let me emphasise that seven years after its adoption, the euro has lived up to all of our 
expectations.  After  the  unprecedented  challenge  of  a  continent-wide  cash  changeover,  the  euro 
almost instantly replaced the legacy currencies without any disruptions.  
It has fostered both price and macroeconomic stability through its credibility and has shielded many 
euro area countries from significant exchange rate volatility and financial market turmoil. It is all the 
more important to acknowledge these achievements since it was said in some quarters that the euro 
would never see the light of day or that it would create severe economic disruptions. Those scenarios 
have not materialised.  
In the post-war European adventure, the euro represents a major milestone. That said, and whatever 
its  own  merits,  a  currency  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  even  though  the  new  EU  members  are  keen  on 
adopting  it  as  soon  as  possible.    Entry  into  Monetary  Union  must  be  founded  on  a  sustainable 
convergence process. Enlargement of the euro area also gives renewed impetus to addressing the 
challenges ahead as it makes it more pressing for policy-makers to tackle long-ignored weaknesses. 
This is a crucial contribution to building a stronger EU, in which I strongly believe. 
All in all, let me express my confidence in the future of the euro and of the single monetary policy of a 
large Eurozone. 
 
Figure 1: HICP inflation in the euro area 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1971
-2
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
Source: ECB - M. Ehrmann and F. Smets (2005). 
Note: The chart shows quarter-on-quarter (red) and year-on-year (blue) inflation, and its average value 
over three sub-periods that have been identified by breakpoint tests. 
 8 
 BIS Review 4/2006
ECB Survey of  Professional Forecasters: Expected inflation at various horizons (average)
Figure 2 
% 
2,8 
2,6 
2,4 
2,2 
2,0 
1,8 
1,6 
1,4 
1,2 
1,0 
1999q1 1999q3 2000q1 2000q3 2001q1 2001q3 2002q1 2002q3 2003q1 2003q3 2004q1 2004q3 2005q1 2005q3
Source: ECB – Production: Banque de France – update October 2005. 
n
n+4
Q+4
Q+8
 BIS Review 4/2006 
 9
Figure 3: 
ECB minimum bid rate and the Forward looking Taylor rate 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
15/03/2001
15/09/2001 15/03/2002
15/09/2002 15/03/2003
15/09/2003 15/03/2004
15/09/2004
15/03/2005
15/09/2005
ECB repo rate
Forw ard-looking taylor rate (neutral rate : TV natural rate MM3)
Source: ECB – Production: Banque de France
Note: The forward-looking Taylor rule is computed using the standard 0.5 weights for both the inflation 
and output stabilisation objectives. The inflation objective is set according to the ECB’s definition of 
price stability, that is to say a rate of inflation close to, but below, 2% over the medium term (1.8% in 
this application); The output gap and the neutral rate, which is a time-varying short- term natural rate, 
are both derived from Mesonnier and Renne (2004). Inflation expectations are updated according to 
the Eurosystem’s and ECB’s staff projection exercises, published in the ECB’s monthly Bulletin. 
10 
 BIS Review 4/2006
Figure 4 – Deviations (%) of M3 from the Reference value in real terms 
Real money gap estimates  
Source: ECB Monthly Bulletin - September 2005 
Note: The real money gap is calculated as the deviation of the actual stock of real M3 (deflated by the 
HICP) from the level consistent with real monetary growth at 3%, taking December 1998 as the base 
period. 
 BIS Review 4/2006 
 11
The Eurosystem’s predictability 
Interest rate cuts
-14 -13 -12 -11 -10
-9
-8
-7
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-6
days
ECB minimal bid rate
EURIBOR 6m
EURIBOR  1m
EURIBOR  9m
EURIBOR  3m
Interest rate hikes
Figure 5 
s
t
n
i
o
p
 
s
i
s
a
b
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
Figure 6: 
s
t
n
i
o
p
 
s
i
s
a
B
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-14 -13 -12 -11 -10
-9
-8
-7
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-6
days
ECB minimal bid rate
EURIBOR 6m
EURIBOR  1m
EURIBOR  9m
EURIBOR  3m
Source: Banque de France – Production : Banque de France 
  12 
 BIS Review 4/2006
