Sir K Dwight Venner: The ECCU economic review 2005 
Presentation by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the ECCB 
Headquarters, St. Kitts, 12 January 2006. 
 Good Evening Fellow Citizens of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union 
On  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Council,  Board  of  Directors,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Eastern 
Caribbean Central Bank, I bring you Greetings and Best Wishes for the New Year. 
I welcome this opportunity, once again, to address you on the economic performance of the Currency 
Union during the past year, and to share with you the Bank's views on the prospects for this year. 
The year 2006 will be one of the most defining periods in the lives of the people of the OECS and the 
wider English speaking Caribbean. The reason for this is simple. It lies in the wide variety and great 
intensity  of  the  challenges  we  will  face  as  very  small  states  in  a  rapidly  changing  regional  and 
international environment. 
There  will  be  tremendous  challenges  for  us  in  how  our  political,  economic  and  social  institutions 
exercise their capacity to respond to new and unexpected circumstances in a global environment, in 
which each national entity places its interests before those of others. 
In  fact,  recent  circumstances,  most  notably  the  negotiations  on  access  for  our  bananas  into  the 
European Union clearly indicate that our small size does not evoke much sympathy in international 
economic relations. This should make it abundantly clear to us that we need to proceed into the future 
with an increased sense of realism, objectivity and clarity. 
It is, therefore, perhaps more than symbolic that in 2006 we will be celebrating the 25th Anniversary of 
the signing of the Treaty of Basseterre. This treaty of cooperation between our countries has been in 
very large part responsible for their survival and growth over the intervening years. 
It is also important to note that we have been working on revisions to the Treaty, and that these will 
reflect our considered responses to the changes which have been taking place in the domestic and 
external environments. 
The year 2006 will witness some very specific events and circumstances which will require new and 
strategic responses from us as individuals, families, business firms, trade unions, civic organisations, 
countries and as a closely connected group of countries, that is the OECS. 
The major challenges in the international arena will come from the new trading regimes which are now 
being  negotiated  under  what  is  called  the  DOHA  round.  The  major  issues  involved  would  be 
liberalisation in the trading of agricultural commodities and services. These will have a major impact on 
the future prospects of our economies for which we will have to be prepared. 
The Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME) will in all probability come into existence during 
the  course  of  the  year.  This  arrangement  will  pose  a  major  challenge  for  the  OECS  countries  as 
deeper  forms  of  integration  are  proposed,  which  will  require  substantial  structural  and  institutional 
changes at the political and economic levels for their successful participation. 
These  events  are,  and  will  be  taking  place  against  the  backdrop  of  a  world  economy  which 
experienced  significant  growth  in  2005  and  by  all  accounts  will  continue  to  do  so  in  2006.  The 
economy  of  the  United  States  has  continued  to  grow  at  an  average  rate  of  4  percent  despite 
significant  trade  and  fiscal  imbalances;  the  Canadian  economy  is  experiencing  a  boom  due  to  its 
thriving  commodities  sector;  the  United  Kingdom  and  European  Union  economies  are  experiencing 
moderate growth; and Japan has experienced a major upsurge of growth after a decade of stagnation.  
However,  it  is  the  two  most  populous  countries  in  the  world,  China  and  India,  which  continue  to 
experience explosive growth rates and are having a major impact on the world economy. 
The  threats  to  this  expanding  global  economy  continue  to  be  international  terrorism,  rising  interest 
rates, high oil prices, and the management of the twin deficits being experienced by the US economy. 
A growing global economy is vital for the progress of our small economies as the prospects for our 
leading foreign exchange earner, tourism, depends on continued and sustainable global growth. 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 1
Increasing levels of crime and violence 
The apparent state of social alienation of the young male population 
On the domestic front, there are significant economic and social challenges, which our countries will 
have to confront in 2006 before they become endemic and completely out of our control. 
On the social front the following seem to stand out -  
• 
• 
•            Higher levels of drug use and abuse 
• 
Higher levels of HIV/AIDS infection. 
With  respect  to  the  economic  issues,  the  new  year  finds  a  number  of  our  countries  facing  major 
challenges.  
• 
Dominica  is  working  with  an  IMF  programme  in  response  to  a  severe  fiscal  crisis.  This 
programme  has  been  successfully  managed  by  the  Dominican  authorities  to  date,  and  has 
resulted in a reversal of the fiscal situation, and a return to positive growth. 
Grenada is still recovering from the devastation of hurricane Ivan and is emerging as a model 
of  post  disaster  recovery  through  the  role  and  function  of  the  Agency  for  Reconstruction 
Development. 
Antigua  and  Barbuda  is  at  the  beginning  of  a  painful  process  of  restructuring  its  public 
finances.  This  has  involved  critical  policy  decisions  on  the  revenue  and  expenditure  sides 
which should restore fiscal balance and confidence in the economy. 
Three countries, Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada are in the process of carrying 
out comprehensive debt restructurings to reduce their debt to GDP ratios. 
St Kitts and Nevis has taken the bold step to close the sugar industry in order to address the 
country's high debt to GDP ratio. 
All countries are confronted by fiscal and debt imbalances due to the high per capita cost of 
government, small populations; inelastic tax systems; and the excessive demands placed on 
governments in liberal democratic systems with competitive party politics.   
     Another major issue is the environment, as these small states which are increasingly dependent on 
tourism, have to find the resources to deal with the problems of waste disposal, coastal erosion, and 
the constant threats of hurricane and volcanic activity. 
One major event that will bring all of these issues together and focus our attention in 2006 will be the 
Cricket World Cup due to be staged in 2007. In 2006 we will have to complete all of our infrastructural 
and commercial arrangements, many of which are very large to host this important event. 
We must,  however,  review  our  2005 performance before we  look  forward  to  2006  to  determine  the 
strategies we should pursue in order to ensure that we will have successful outcomes. 
The Currency Union experienced growth in 2005, estimated at 4 per cent which was approximately the 
same  as  in  2004.  This  growth  was  attributed  to  a  sharp  expansion  in  public  and  private  sector 
construction activity, partly due to the preparations for the Cricket World Cup 2007. Increased activity 
in  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  transportation  and  communications,  and  the  banking  sector,  also 
contributed to growth in 2005. 
The  performance  of  tourism  in  2005  was  somewhat  weaker  than  in  2004.  Stay  over  arrivals  to  the 
currency union as a whole declined marginally, mainly due to the lingering effects of hurricane Ivan on 
Grenada. However, most of the other countries recorded increases in stay-over arrivals. The number 
of cruise visitors declined, but this followed a record level of cruise passengers in 2004. 
Output in the agricultural sector, which on average contributed 6.4 per cent of GDP in 2004, declined 
significantly  in  2005  due  to  the  weak  performance  of  the  traditional  export  crops.  Production  of 
bananas, sugar, nutmegs, and cocoa fell sharply. 
The rate of inflation in the currency union for 2005 has been provisionally estimated at 3.5 per cent.  
This is explained by a surge in the international price of oil and other commodities such as cement, 
steel, lumber and other building materials. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2006
In the monetary sphere, the ECCB paid particular attention to its objectives of maintaining currency 
and financial stability in the currency union. 
The low rate of inflation ensured the maintenance of the purchasing power of the currency, while the 
high level of foreign exchange reserves enhanced the external stability of the EC dollar. 
The banking system experienced growth in its assets, as well as an increase in capital and high levels 
of liquidity. No threats to the stability of the financial system emerged in 2005. 
As  we  have  highlighted  at  the  beginning  of  this  presentation,  the  year  2006  will  pose  significant 
challenges  to  policy  makers  in  the  Currency  Union.  There  is  expected  to  be  very  positive  activity 
during the year, particularly in the construction sector. However, our horizons must extend beyond the 
next  18  months  to  two  thousand  and  ten.  This  is  necessary  because  we  will  have  to  manage  our 
economies, which will be subject to a significant upturn in growth in 2006/2007 to bring them into soft 
landings and sustained growth in the period to 2010.   
Beyond  this,  the  United  Nations  has  set  the  year  two  thousand  and  fifteen  as  the  date  for  the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.   
Our  success  in  achieving  the  objectives  we  have  set  for  ourselves  would  be  dependent  on  the 
following: 
• 
• 
The appropriate policy and management framework given our particular circumstances; 
The highest level of integration among the OECS countries that the political and social traffic 
can bear; 
Our  capacity  to  utilise  the  two  conditions  above  to  successfully  insert  ourselves  in  a 
sequenced and strategic manner into the international economy. 
 Public Sector Transformation 
Private Sector Development 
Financial Sector Development. 
This  must,  of  course,  given  our  democratic  traditions,  be  based  on  the  widest  level  of  consensus 
among the citizens of the entire OECS. 
The economic history of the last half of the twentieth century has shown quite conclusively that it was 
countries  with  good  policies,  as  opposed  to  abundant  natural  resources  that  achieved  the  highest 
levels of sustained economic growth. 
This is a clear indicator and a substantial encouragement for the countries of the OECS to develop a 
strategic  approach  to  economic  policy  making  and  the  management  of  our  economies.  The  three 
critical elements which need addressing are: 
• 
• 
• 
These three have to be addressed within a policy framework and architecture, which must be clearly 
outlined and institutionalised at the country level as well as the OECS level. This will involve setting 
clear and measurable goals and objectives, identifying the range of policy instruments available, and 
creating  arrangements  to  deliver  high  quality,  accurate  and  timely  information  for  decision  making. 
Monitoring,  review  and  evaluation  mechanisms,  and  agencies  must  also  be  aligned  to  support  the 
process. 
The biggest challenge in this process would be coordination, collaboration and alignment at both the 
country and currency union levels. 
There are quite a number of good policies which have arisen from recent work by local, currency union 
and  international  agencies,  but  the  lack  of  synchronization  continues  to  minimize  the  tremendous 
impact these can make on both the local and regional economies. 
A very critical missing element is the capacity to manage, both within the public and private sectors. 
This management issue must be addressed with great urgency if we are to attain our objectives. A 
special project for management training and orientation must be fashioned to treat with this issue at 
the earliest. 
The size of these countries poses major problems with respect to economic viability. Markets are very 
small and the cost of administration per capita is very high. Even with the best policies in place, the 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 3
potential for the production of goods, which are internationally competitive is limited if each country did 
not have access to the international economy. 
Access is limited, however, by capacity and capacity is constrained by size. It is for this reason that the 
OECS countries have chosen to engage in deeper forms of integration. The countries have proposed 
to upgrade the Treaty of Basseterre to encompass an Economic Union, which is the highest form of 
integration, short of full political integration. 
The  OECS  countries  already  have  a  very  high  level  of  integration,  far  superior  to  that  of  the  wider 
CARICOM. This is manifested in the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A common court; 
A common currency and central bank; 
A common stock exchange; 
Common regulatory arrangements in the areas of - 
- Commercial banking 
- Civil aviation 
- Telecommunications 
Close functional cooperation in the areas of 
- Health 
- Education 
- Environment 
- Sports 
Common procurement of pharmaceuticals 
Joint overseas representation in Ottawa, Brussels and Geneva 
 Increased economies of scale in administration, production, marketing and distribution; 
The spread of risks across a number of countries instead of a single one; 
The increased capacity to negotiate with third countries or groups of countries. 
• 
• 
Further deepening of the integration process will have the following advantages: 
• 
• 
• 
Deepening  the  integration  process  in  the  OECS  will  allow  us  to  access  and  manage  the  CSME 
process much better than we could as single states. This is critical for the success of the CSME as a 
deeply  integrated  OECS  is  a  necessary,  though  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  the  success  of  this 
arrangement. 
The CSME is a vital stepping stone for our strategic integration into the international economy, but we 
must  be  able  to  establish  and  assert  our  specific  interests  at  the  level  of  the  CSME,  so  that  these 
interests could be robustly represented beyond the region and into the international arena.  
Economic development is not an end in itself, but is reflective of improvements in the economic, social 
and  human  conditions  within  nations  and  across  the  international  community.  The  international 
community through the United Nations, and as expressed in the Millennium Development Goals, has 
taken  responsibility  for  improving  the  human  condition  on  planet  earth.  This,  however,  does  not 
absolve individual nations and communities within nations from making efforts on their own behalf. In 
fact,  the  whole  concept  of  development  means  increased  self  reliance  and  increased  choices  for 
individuals, communities and nations. 
For  the  individual  citizens  of  the  OECS  this  means  acquiring  education,  skills  and  attitudes  which 
makes us marketable in a global economy. It also means acquiring information that will allow us to 
make  important  economic  and  political  choices  about  our  own  circumstances,  and  those  of  our 
countries  and  region.  We  must  be  able  to  understand  and  contribute  to  the  policy  choices  that  our 
governments have to make, and to participate in the formation of public opinion on important issues. 
Our private sector must acquire the managerial and technical skills, as well as the innovative impulses 
to  participate  in  business  ventures  within  their  own  countries,  the  currency  union  and  beyond.  The 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2006
bottom  line  for  the  private  sector  must  be  the  production  of  the  highest  quality  products,  whether 
commodities or services, at the lowest cost, with excellent customer service. 
Moreover,  with  the  removal  of  trade  and  other  restrictions,  the  domestic  market  will  not  be  easy  to 
distinguish from the international, and so to survive all standards of competitiveness will have to be 
international.  
Our governments are faced with some very difficult decisions and choices which they cannot make 
effectively  without  the  inputs  of  the  citizens  and  the  private  sector.  This  is  the  nature  of  our  liberal 
democratic systems which have served us well over these years. 
The questions and issues revolve around responses to the fiscal and debt challenges confronting very 
small states; the high price of oil which affects the entire economy; the provision of the appropriate 
enabling environment to facilitate private sector growth, investment and productivity; the provision of 
social and administrative services to the community at least cost and highest value (including social 
safety nets for the very poor and the indigent); the maintenance of law and order to protect lives and 
property; the capacity to negotiate with third countries or groups of countries with respect to access to 
markets for exports and financial services as well as the acquisition of technology. 
To address these issues effectively, it must once again be emphasized that the governments should 
establish  a  comprehensive  policy  framework  with  the  appropriate  reporting  and  accountability 
requirements, technical capacity and; consultative arrangements. 
The other major issue will be to decide, given the high cost and scarcity of management resources in 
each country, whether governments should - 
(a)      Perform these functions jointly, that is, at the OECS level in an act of shared sovereignty, or 
(b)  Perform them singularly at the member state level. 
As we discuss and make plans for our own economic union this choice will become fundamental to our 
deliberations.  
The OECS countries have made significant strides over the years and must now confront the rapid 
changes in the regional and international systems by making major and decisive choices. We have the 
choice  of  going  forward  together  as  we  have  in  the  past  with  limited  collective  arrangements,  or 
deepening our cooperation to respond to a rapidly changing environment. We have now reached in 
the OECS the point of the famous quotation by William Shakespeare - 
"To be or not to be that is the question." 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 5
