Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: Encountering money laundering and terrorist 
financing 
Inaugural speech by His Excellency Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of 
the  United  Arab  Emirates  and  Chairman  of  the  National  Anti-Money  Laundering  Committee  in  the 
United Arab Emirates, at the Joint Seminar of the National Anti-Money Laundering Committee and the 
Serious Organized Crime Agency (SOCA) – UK, Al-Ain, 2 July 2006. 
 Your Excellencies, Honored Guests,  
Fellow Members of the National Anti-Money Laundering Committee, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
After Greetings  
I would like to give you all a whole hearted welcome at the joint seminar of the National Anti-Money 
Laundering Committee in the UAE and Serious Organized Crimes Agency (SOCA) - UK which is held 
today  in  the  city  of  Al-Ain,  in  order  to  discuss  some  topics  relating  to:  "Encountering  Financial 
Crimes; including Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing". 
The  meeting  of  your  esteemed  committee  this  morning,  prior  to  the  joint  seminar,  signifies  the 
important  role  the  committee  undertakes  in  accordance  with  federal  Law  No.  (4)  for  the  year  2002 
regarding  Criminalization  of  Money  Laundering,  and  the  role  played  by  fellow  members  of  the 
committee in facilitating exchange of information, and ensuring coordination between the bodies they 
represent, and generally representing the UAE in issues and relating to combating money laundering 
and terrorist financing. 
At the outset of the joint seminar, I'm also pleased to welcome Mr. Paul Evans, the Executive Director 
of  the  Serious  Organized  Crimes  Agency  (SOCA)  and  the  accompanying  delegation,  and  also  Mr. 
Robert Dean, the Deputy Head of the Diplomatic Mission of the UK in Abu Dhabi, for their participation 
at this meeting, and for their appreciated coordination regarding the issues which would be discussed 
today. 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies & GentIemen, 
We highly appreciate the significant role of the National Anti-Money Laundering Committee in the UAE 
in  the  area  of  international  cooperation  and  their  keen  interest  to  learn  of  the  best  practices  for 
combating  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  and  the  techniques  applied  in  this  respect  by 
friendly countries. Delegations from your esteemed committee have visited the UK several times, and 
received fruitful cooperation from the competent authorities in the UK, including the Serious Organized 
Crimes Agency (SOCA). 
We  highly  appreciate,  as  well,  the  attitude  of  the  authorities  in  the  UK,  particularly  the  Serious 
Organized Crimes Agency (SOCA) for their continuous liaison with the authorities in the UAE, and for 
their contribution in preparing and organizing joint conferences, seminars and training programs. One 
of the essential outcomes resulting form this liaison is the participation of (SOCA) officials in the third 
annual conference of your esteemed committee in Al-Aqah, Fujairah on 27th & 28th December 2005, 
which  addressed:  "The  Transfer  of  Currencies  thorough  Land,  Sea,  and  Air  Borders  of  the  UAE. 
(SOCA)  officials  have  also  attended  the  joint  seminar  between  the  UAE  and  the  UK  regarding: 
"Encountering Money Laundering" which was held on 16th & 18th March 2006 at the Central Bank in 
Abu Dhabi, during which a memorandum of understanding has been signed between the Anti-Money 
Laundering & Suspicious Cases Unit at the Central Bank and the Serious Organized Crimes Agency 
(SOCA). 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
The UAE attaches great importance to the issue of international and regional cooperation. One of our 
priorities  is  to  familiarize officials  at  the  competent authorities  in  the  UAE  with  the  experiences  and 
techniques  applied  by  friendly  countries  in  the  area  of  combating  money  laundering  and  terrorist 
financing.  My  fellow  members  of  the  National  Anti-Money  Laundering  Committee  are  doing  a 
remarkable and important job in this respect. 
BIS Review 78/2006 
 1
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
During  today's  joint  seminar,  which  is  attended  by  the  Executive  Director  of  the  Serious  Organized 
Crimes Agency (SOCA) and the accompanying delegation, members of the committee shall present 
working papers focusing on the regulations and measures for combating money laundering, terrorist 
financing  and  financial  crimes  in  general,  covering  all  sectors  of  financial,  economic  and  security 
activities  in  the  UAE.  These  working  papers  will  underscore  UAE  efforts,  highlight  the  legal 
frameworks  and  practical  applications  by  the  competent  authorities  in  the  UAE,  and  illustrate  the 
achievements made so far by the UAE in this respect. 
Officials from the Serious Organized Crimes Agency (SOCA) shall also present a working paper on 
the new measures applied in the UK for combating money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, 
The topics which would be addressed during today's seminar reflect the determination of both the UAE 
and the UK to enhance and consolidate cooperation & coordination between the two countries and 
with  the  international  community,  contribute  to  the  international  efforts  aimed  at  combating  money 
laundering and terrorist financing, and assume an effective role in this domain. 
In conclusion, I would like to wish success to all participants. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2006
