L Wilson Kamit: The role of savings and loan societies in Papua New Guinea  
Speech by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, to the people of 
East  New  Britain  Province,  on  the  occasion  of  the  ground  breaking  ceremony  for  the  new  building 
complex for East New Britain Savings and Loan Society Ltd, Rabaul, 12 June 2006. 
 Introduction 
Thank you Master of Ceremony. 
Host Governor for East New Britain Province, Honourable Leo Dion MP; Minister for Foreign Affairs 
and  Immigration  and  Member  for  Kokopo,  Right  Honourable  Sir  Rabbie  Namaliu  MP;  Minister  for 
Public Service and Member for Gazelle, Honourable Sinai Brown MP; Honourable Bart Philemon MP, 
Treasurer; Mayor for Kokopo, Mr. Albert Buanga; Mayor for Rabaul, Mr. Changol Manuai; Lady Nerrie 
Tololo, wife of Late Sir Alkan Tololo (first chairman of the Board of East New Britain S&L Society); 
Chairman  of  East  New  Britain  Savings  &  Loan  Society,  Mr.  Ellison  Kaivovo;  The  Board  and 
management  of  ENB  S&L  Society;  Auxiliary  Bishop  Patrick  Taval,  Rabaul  Catholic  Diocese, 
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
There  are  three  reasons  for  being  here  today:  Firstly,  I  always  enjoy  coming  here.  Secondly,  to 
officiate  at  this  ground  breaking  ceremony  of  ENB  S&L  Society  and  thirdly,  to  check  out  the  new 
premises  of  the  Bank  of  South  Pacific  which  the  Central  Bank  might  use  to  establish  a  Cash 
Distribution Centre for the New Guinea Islands region to distribute new notes and coins. 
Update on the economic developments 
As part of my speech to you today, I would like to provide some key highlights of the achievements 
attained over the recent past. 
Inflation remained low over the year to March 2006. The headline inflation rate over the year to March 
2006  was  1.8  percent  following  an  increase  of  4.6  percent  over  the  year  to  December  2005.  The 
overall  inflation  continues  to  be  in  line  with  the  medium  term  outlook  as  published  in  the  Bank’s 
January 2006 Monetary Policy Statement (MPS). 
The  prevailing  low  inflation,  stable  exchange  rate,  low  domestic  interest  rates,  high  international 
reserves and sound fiscal management by the Government provide an enabling environment for the 
private  sector  to  invest  and  expand.  With  no  new  inflationary  pressure  emerging  I  reiterate  the 
statement  in  the  January  MPS  that  the  Bank  will  continue  to  take  a  cautious  neutral  stance  in 
monetary policy. 
The current macroeconomic stability provides an opportunity for the Government to improve the public 
utilities  and  introduce  microeconomic  reforms  to  remove  impediments  to  trade  and  investment  and 
efficiency in the delivery of public services. These reforms are necessary to promote economic growth. 
The level of gross foreign exchange reserves as at 9 June 2006 was K2,990 million (US$989 million), 
a record high in our history, sufficient for 7.0 months of total and 11.0 months of non-mineral import 
cover. The high level of reserves has further strengthened the Central Bank’s position to smooth any 
undesirable volatility in the foreign exchange market. 
Under the floating exchange rate regime adopted in 1994, the kina exchange rate is determined by the 
supply  and  demand  for  foreign  exchange.  Consistent  with  the  objective  of  price  stability,  the  Bank 
enters the foreign exchange market from time to time to smooth the effects of short-term volatility. In 
2006,  the  exchange  rate  is  expected  to  remain  stable  given  the  favourable  international  prices  for 
mineral and non-mineral export commodities. Non-mineral exports are expected to increase in 2006, 
due to the supply response to higher prices. Producers and exporters are continuously encouraged to 
increase  production  for  export  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  current  high  international  prices.  In 
addition, developments in the mineral sector, particularly the progress on the PNG Gas Project and 
the finalisation of the Ramu Nickel Project should contribute positively to investor confidence. 
Lending to the private sector continued to grow strongly. The growth in lending has been broad based 
covering the agriculture, forestry and fisheries, manufacturing, transport and communication, building 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
and construction and other businesses including hotels and restaurants, personal loans and advances 
for housing sectors. Firms have responded positively to the low interest rates and lending has reached 
unprecedented levels. 
We recently announced the withdrawal of the 1 and 2 toea coins from circulation. I urge the public to 
return the 1 and 2 toea coins as they will officially cease to be legal tender on the 19th April 2007. I 
also  encourage  the  business  houses  to  make  changes  necessary  for  a  smooth  transition.  In  this 
regard, I encourage firms to be fair and responsible in adjusting prices to the on-off policy change. 
The  Government’s  Budget  deficit  in  the  March  quarter  2006  was  0.3  percent  of  nominal  Gross 
Domestic Product. However, substantial mineral tax receipts, which were higher than expected at the 
end of April 2006, suggest that Government revenue is likely to be significantly greater that budgeted 
in 2006. While acknowledging the positive outlook of the Budget, I caution that the Government should 
consider slowing the pace of increase in expenditure, which grew by 33.8 percent in the March quarter 
of 2006, from the levels in the corresponding period in 2005. The Government should direct funds to 
priority  development  areas  identified  in  the  Medium  Term  Development  Strategies  (MTDS).  In  this 
respect, I have stated that the Government should consider using windfall revenue from mineral taxes 
for early retirement of some of its foreign debts. 
The major risk to the current macroeconomic stability remains the fiscal operations of the Government 
in 2006 and 2007. I would point out that the fast pace of growth in lending and high level of liquidity in 
the banking system introduces further vulnerability to the economy. They also provide new challenges 
to the Bank of Papua New Guinea in closer surveillance of the financial system and management of 
monetary  policy.  In  this  regard  any  major  fiscal  slippages  by  the  Government,  or  fall  in  commodity 
prices could lead to loss of macroeconomic stability. I stress that the Government’s adherence to the 
parameters  of  the  MTDS,  that  is  consistent  with  the  MTDS,  is  vital  for  sustained  macroeconomic 
stability and promotion of economic growth. 
Reforms to remove impediments to conducting businesses in PNG saw the removal of the majority of 
the Exchange Control Regulations. It is one year since we introduce the liberalization and we have not 
notice any stress on the foreign exchange system. 
Financial  sector  reforms  undertaken  at  the  beginning  of  this  decade  (in  2002)  are  bearing  great 
returns. 
The  banking  sector  asset  quality  has  improved,  likewise  finance  companies.  The  other  financial 
institutions  under  the  Central  Bank  supervision  also  are  performing  very  well.  The  Superannuation 
industry continues to report improvement and good results. Likewise work to improve the life insurance 
industry is continuing. 
The Savings & Loan Society movement 
The Savings and Loan Societies movement, which is currently comprised of 21 active Societies, has 
grown in terms of their asset base and membership. Over the past six (6) years, the total assets in the 
movement have grown from K126 million to over K332 million. The total membership has significantly 
grown  from  120,775  in  December  1999  to  152,438  members  by  the  end  of  2005.  The  movement, 
more  particularly  provincial  based  societies  such  as  the  East  New  Britain  S&L  Society,  is  an  ideal 
vehicle to reach and promote savings into the rural population. The movement plays an important role 
in  the  financial  system  in  promoting  thrift  to  its  members  and  more  importantly  in  extending  the 
monetization  of  the  PNG  economy  into  the  rural  sector,  so  that  the  rural  population  participates 
meaningfully  in  economic  development.  Savings  and  Loan  Societies  complement  other  financial 
service  providers  such  as  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  providing  basic  savings  and  loans 
products to members. 
The  difference  between  the  movement  and  other  financial  institutions  is  that  savings  and  loan 
societies operate on the principle of mutuality. That is the members are the owners of the societies, 
where each member has an equal say on the election of directors to the boards of the societies. They 
also have a direct say in the distribution of profits. 
Challenges 
The movement has faced many challenges in its evolution over the years. The Bank in its supervisory 
role has observed serious weaknesses in areas of governance and management. We have seen and 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
dealt with directors and managers who have conflict of interest when making decisions that were not in 
the best interest of members. We have also dealt with infightings between directors and managements 
and also between supervisory committees and boards members. 
In its supervisory role, the Bank has increased its enforcement efforts to ensure that the societies are 
constantly in compliance with directives and regulations so that the bad experiences of the past do not 
repeat themselves. In many cases where such instances have occurred, the Bank has not hesitated in 
suspending  or  removing  board  members,  managers  and/or  supervisory  committee  members  from 
those societies. 
Other  challenges  which  we  have  seen  Societies  faced  over  the  years  were  concerning  operational 
difficulties  in  ensuring  accurate  and  timely  reporting  of  financial  statements,  lack  of  effective 
management  of  asset  quality  such  as  nonperforming  loans,  weaknesses  in  controls  and  risk 
management systems and more seriously fraud. 
Directors,  Management  and  Committeemen  of  the  Societies  have  a  duty  to  continue  the  effort  in 
educating members to save for the future and to borrow within the required limits. Members must be 
educated to repay the loans that they borrow. 
Legislative framework  
The growth experienced by many societies over the years has also resulted in most societies moving 
away from the traditional savings and loans business. Many have now invested their surplus savings 
in other products such as in equities and government securities. 
In view of these developments and the challenges which I have just mentioned, I have established a 
working team within the Bank which has started looking at reviewing the existing legislative framework 
with the view to reform the entire savings and loan societies industry and microfinance/microbanking 
businesses. 
The work of the working team is progressing and at this stage the Bank is looking at securing funding 
for technical assistance to carry out the substantial work in improving the legislative framework. 
East New Britain Savings & Loan Society 
On the 12th of April this year the Chairman of the Board of East New Britain Savings & Loan Society, 
Mr. Kaivovo, his Deputy Mr. Jack Namaliu and their CEO Mrs. Essie Koniel met with Bank officials and 
I to show us a building plan which they had obtained from an architect. It was a double story building 
plan which they told me that it would cost about K3 million to construct. They mentioned that they were 
going to obtain some funding from an Incentive Fund to finance the construction. They were seeking 
approval from the Bank to construct this office complex which would be owned by the Society. 
The Bank assessed the proposal and gave its approval and today we are able to come together to 
mark  this  special  occasion.  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  officiate  in  this  ground  breaking 
ceremony  for  the  construction  of  the  new  building  complex  for  East  New  Britain  Savings  and  Loan 
Society Limited. This occasion is a significant milestone in the 13 years history of this provincial based 
Society since its inception on the 18th February 1993. It will be the first Provincial based savings and 
loan society to own its own office building. 
Over the past thirteen (13) years since its inception, East New Britain Savings & Loan Society has 
grown  to  become  the  third  largest  and  one  of  the  successfully  managed  societies  in  Papua  New 
Guinea. Much of the credit goes to the successive boards and management of the society. I also want 
to  thank  the  members  of  this  society  for  not  putting  unrealistic  demands  on  the  directors  and 
management. 
From December 1999 to December 2005 the following achievements were noted for the society: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Total Assets increased from K 10.6 million to K 22.9 million 
Total Loans increased from K3.3 million to K6.1 million 
Members Savings increased from K8 million to K19.6 million 
Total membership increased from over 20,000 to over 40,000. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 3
The positive performances which I just highlighted to you are clear evidence of a growing institution, 
but  we  should  not  be  complacent  with  this  performance.  We  must  continue  to  strive  forward  to 
increase wealth for our members and ensure viability and sustainability of our society. 
Fast Money Schemes 
I would like to turn to the issue of Illegal Fast Money Schemes. 
Fast Money Scams are rife in parts of PNG, including East New Britain Province. The Central Bank 
continues to warn against the fast-money schemes or pyramid schemes. Over the years, the Bank has 
placed  public  notices  to  warn  the  public  about  the  fast  money  schemes  or  scams.  Notices  have 
appeared in daily newspapers – yet despite these warnings, people are still duped into placing their 
moneys  into  fast  money  schemes.  The  operators  of  these  fast  money  schemes  have  been lying  to 
people  about  their  activities  so  that  they  continue  to  rob  the  unsuspecting  depositors  of  their  hard 
earned cash and savings. THESE ACTIONS ARE OUTRIGHT ACTS OF DECEIT, LIES AND FRAUD. 
To put the facts right: 
• 
• 
The Bank of PNG does not conduct transactions or deal with individuals; 
It does not issue guarantees or warrantees to individual, companies, financial institutions and 
even the government; 
Any person taking deposit from the public is conducting an illegal activity, because it is not 
licensed by the Bank of PNG and; 
The Bank of PNG is not responsible for returning your deposits from such money schemes, 
and  it  is  your  responsibility  to  report  such  persons  or  schemes  to  the  police,  or  go  and 
recover it yourself from the person you paid it to. 
  Directors,  Executives  and  members  of  East  New  Britain  Savings  and  Loan  Society  can  assist  by 
spreading the warning about the pitfalls of people placing their money in fast money schemes. You 
can quote examples of such operations as U-Vistract who took people’s money and have gone hiding 
while depositors are still waiting for their payout. Even Fijians are waiting for their pay out. 
Conclusion 
I take this opportunity to once again thank the members of the Board, Committeemen, Management 
and Staff of East New Britain Savings and Loan Society for continuing the hard work in providing the 
savings  and  loan  services  extensively  to  parts  of  East  New  Britain.  I  encourage  you  to  continue  in 
maintaining good governance and management of your Society. 
In  officiating  at  this  ground  breaking  ceremony  for  the  new  office  complex  for  the  East  New  Britain 
Savings & Loan Society, I wish to congratulate the Board, Management and Committeemen, members 
and people of East New Britain for achieving this milestone. 
Thank you choir groups and performers. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2006
