Rick Houenipwela: Launching of Solomon Islands new and revised bank notes 
Remarks by Mr Rick Houenipwela, Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, at the launching 
of Solomon Islands new $100 bank note and the upgraded $2 bank note, Honiara, 2 September 2006. 
 Hon Minister of Finance  
Hon Ministers of the Crown  
Hon Leader of the Opposition Group  
Hon Members of Parliament  
Heads and Representatives of Diplomatic Missions  
Chairman, CEMA  
Heads & representatives of financial institutions  
Ladies & Gentlemen  
On behalf of the Board of Directors, the Management and staff of the Central Bank, I am very pleased 
that you have accepted our invitation to this morning’s event - the launching of the Solomon Islands 
$100 bank note and the revised $2 bank note.  
At its introduction in April 1977, the national currency comprised of $2, $5 and $10 in bank notes; and 
in coins denomination there was 1cent, 2cents, 5 cents, 10 cents, 20 cents and $1 Nguzunguzu. The 
$20 bank note came in 1980, and six years later the $50 bank note was introduced. As regards coins, 
the 50 cents was the last introduction in 1988.  
Currency development is important the development of any sovereign country. For Solomon Islands, 
currency plays more than its traditional role as a medium of exchange. As I will discuss later, it has 
socio-economic dimensions to its use and purpose. But we do not print notes or mint coins at the whim 
of the Governor of the Central Bank. As a member of the global family of currency issuers, the Central 
Bank  observe  the  internationally  accepted  principle  that  the  highest  value  denomination  should 
account for not more than 20% of the number of notes in circulation and not more than 60% of the 
value of the notes in circulation.  
In  Solomon  Islands  currency  development  is  influenced  by  various  socio-economic  factors.  For 
example, in developing this high-value denomination we considered a variety of factors including the 
size and distribution of the population, trends in volumes and types of trading activities, wage levels, 
various means of payment, different mediums of cash disbursement, availability of banking facilities, 
inflation and the general economic situation in the country. As well, assessments of the demand on 
each  denomination  have  to  be  done,  and  these  showed  an  over  reliance  [83%  of  total  currency  in 
circulation]  on  the  $50,  indicating  the  need  for  a  higher  denomination.  But  equally  important  is  the 
need  to  ascertain  the  public’s  acceptance  and  readiness  for  a  higher  value  bank  note.  The  results 
convinced the Board it was time to introduce the $100 bank note.  
The  technical  work  then  kicked  in  with  consultations  on  a  theme  and  colour  schemes  with  various 
groups  and  individuals.  As  part  of  this  process,  the  Central  Bank  Board  appointed  a  “Bank  Note 
Committee”. [one of the members was the late Charles Manata]. This group, headed by the Deputy 
Governor, comprised of Solomon Islands artists, the Director of National Museum and selected CBSI 
managers, developed and advised the Board on the theme, various features and colouring schemes. 
Upon approval by the Board, the printers were then engaged in the drawings, developing security and 
other technical features.  
A number of options were developed. These went through fairly intensive scrutiny in the Bank, after 
which an endorsed sample of the note was printed, with all the specifications - size, colour scheme 
and  of  course  security  features  -  for  ministerial  approval.  Actual  printing  did  not  start  until  the  final 
proof note – which had the exact specifications approved by the Minister – received a final approval by 
the CBSI Board.  
From the time initial assessments on the need for a higher value denomination were made to the time 
when the final proof note went to print, it was about five years. It took another 8 months before we took 
delivery of the first consignment of the note on Thursday this week. I should add that the transportation 
and delivery of our currency stocks are handled under very heavy security arrangements – as it would 
have been witnessed on Thursday morning.  
BIS Review 88/2006 
 1
Ladies and gentlemen, I am recounting all this to reiterate three points: first, that printing our currency 
is a very complicated, highly security-conscious and sophisticated technical task, requiring long lead 
times,  involving  various  agencies  and  groups,  and  a  lot  of  tedious  processes.  Secondly,  this  is 
necessary to ensure not only a high quality product, but more so, a high level of security finished note. 
And thirdly, it is to assure the public that contrary to rumours floating in Honiara, the delivery of the 
new $100 bank note has nothing to do with the expectations by members of the cult group, the Family 
Charity Fund, of their millions of dollars. Our stocks of currency are real bank notes and they do not 
belong to FCF as has been claimed. I assure you, the notes are safe and secure in the Central Bank 
vault.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  given  recent  counterfeiting  incidences  of  the  $50,  I  wish  to  also  assure  the 
public  that  the  development  of  the  $100  bank  note  has  ensured  security  features  that  effectively 
reduce any chance for counterfeiting. The new note carries added visible security features that can be 
easily seen without the need for a machine. It incorporates additional security to both the paper and 
print specifications.  
As  noted  already,  all  our  currency  denominations  have  different  themes.  The  bank  notes  portray 
various themes and features of Solomon Islands. This time the new $100 bank note carries the theme 
of the rural sector and its contribution to the national economy. Portrayed by the coconut, this signifies 
rural  livelihood,  social  and  economic  activities.  The  Central  Bank  is  thrilled  that  today’s  launching 
coincides with the World Coconut Day event. The $100 bank note is a commemoration of the labour 
and contribution by all our farmers, fishermen, men, women and children in rural villages through our 
country.  Despite  all  odds,  you  have  demonstrated  resilience  and  commitment  year  in  year  out  just 
getting on with life. We salute you!  
Finally, before I forget, the Central Bank has also revised the $2 bank note back to paper note. This is 
due  to  the  disappointing  experience  we  have  with  the  polymer,  a  polypropylene  plastic.  While  the 
plastic  is  durable,  as  you  will  all  have  experienced,  the  colour  does  not  survive  its  expected  life  in 
circulation, which is costly to the economy. The CBSI Board has therefore decided to revert back to 
the old paper note. So this morning we also have the revised $2 bank note, which has all the normal 
features except the addition of the national flag, for re-launching.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me say again that I am very grateful that are able to come – and we at the 
Bank are especially honoured by your presence of the Hon Minister for this morning’s event.  
Thank you and may God bless you. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2006
