Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The state of the financial sector in Uganda 
Address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of Bank of Uganda, to the Annual General 
Meeting of the Uganda Institute of Bankers, Bank of Uganda, 23 June 2006. 
 The President, Uganda Institute of Bankers, 
The Council members, Uganda Institute of Bankers, 
Ordinary and Student members, 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is an honour for me as the patron of the Institute and Governor Bank of Uganda to make remarks to 
this Annual General Meeting. It also offers me the opportunity to share and exchange views with the 
banking fraternity the state of the financial sector over the last one year. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is almost one year since we last met here on June 24, 2005 to take stock of 
the  business  of  the  Institute  and  also  lay  strategies  for  addressing  challenges  within  the  banking 
industry. Bank of Uganda at that time made a commitment to foster a harmonious working relationship 
with all stakeholders of the financial sector in order to enhance safety, stability and efficiency in the 
sector. Mr. President and Council members, I am proud to report that Bank of Uganda has fulfilled that 
commitment and allow me to take this opportunity to restate our continued commitment to build and 
uphold a long term harmonious relationship with financial institutions and all stakeholders that have 
operated in partnership with Bank of Uganda to maintain a sound, safe and stable financial sector. 
At this juncture, let me assure this assembly that Uganda’s financial sector has continued to be more 
resilient  each  passing  year.  During  2005,  the  financial  sector  soundness  assessment  by  Bank  of 
Uganda revealed an overall satisfactory performance of the sector. These achievements have resulted 
from a combination of various efforts from the management of the financial institutions, the regulatory 
authority  and  all  other  stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector.  The  obtaining  stable  macro  economic 
environment has also gone a long way to augment the above efforts in fostering safety, soundness 
and stability of the financial sector. 
Arising  from  the  safety,  soundness  and  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  a  number  of  technological 
innovations of banking products have emerged in the recent past. Most banks now operate automated 
teller  machines  (ATMs),  and  points  of  sales  facilities  (POS).  The  use  of  credit  and  debit  cards  is 
increasingly being recognized as an important payment system option. This is beginning to take root in 
the economy. Bankom Ltd which was launched in June 2005 to operate an electronic national inter-
bank switching system has already attracted the participation of four (4) commercial banks and others 
are in the process of joining. This development will go along way to enhance the payment system by 
facilitating customer payments for utilities and purchases using debit cards. Licensing of the inter-bank 
switching system marks a significant step in Bank of Uganda’s efforts to widen the financial sector, 
which will result into the creation of a wider range of delivery channels to banks. 
As you are all aware continued efforts to improve efficiency and mitigate risks in the payment system 
resulted  into  the  implementation  of  a  number  of  initiatives  including  a  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS)  System  known  as  Uganda  National  Inter-bank  Settlement  (UNIS)  in  February  2005.  As  of 
now, about 80% of large value and time critical payment transactions pass through the system leaving 
20% to pass through the traditional clearing system. 
Likewise,  to  broaden  the  outlet  and  variety  of  institutions,  which  offer  financial  services,  three  new 
micro deposit taking institutions (MDIs) were licensed in 2005 bringing the total number of licensed 
MDIs  to  four.  The  significance  of  licensing  MDIs  has  far  reaching  impact  on  promoting  the  savings 
culture  and  thereby  fostering  the  accumulation  of  funds  for  investment  purposes.  Bank  of  Uganda 
therefore encourages the Council of the Institute of Bankers to initiate appropriate educational training 
programmes  from  which  these  new  institutions  can  access  information  and  expertise  necessary  for 
their future development. Bank of Uganda on its part will continue to promote the development of MDIs 
through prudential regulation and supervision so that they conduct their businesses in a manner that 
ensures safety of depositors’ funds. 
Notwithstanding the above developments, the financial sector still continues to face new challenges in 
their operations including globalization, relatively high interest rates, frauds and forgeries and lately the 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
energy  crisis.  With  respect  to  globalization,  this  has  resulted  into  a  fast  pace  of  technological 
advancements  in  products  and  systems  deployed  in  the  global  markets.  These  technological 
advancements have dramatically diversified the risk profiles of financial institutions. To address this 
new  development,  Bank  of  Uganda  has  compelled  all  supervised  financial  institutions  to  institute 
credible risk management frameworks which can adequately identify, measure, monitor and control all 
risks inherent in financial institution business in a timely and ongoing manner. 
Regarding the high interest rates charged on loans, although these have remained relatively stable in 
the last two years or so and while inflation has been maintained at single digits for over a decade, 
lending rates have continued to remain at high levels and at times as high as 26% p.a in some banks. 
Yet, the weighted interest rates on deposits continue to be extremely low, hence denying the saver 
favourable returns on savings. High interest rates have adverse impact on the financial sector in the 
form of impairing the borrowers’ capacities to service the loans as accumulated interest often become 
unbearable. All stakeholders in the financial sector are called upon to combine efforts in seeking for a 
solution to high interest rates charged on loans and avoid the potential for political intervention. 
Frauds and forgeries are yet another set of evils which has continued to pose serious challenges to 
the  safety  of  the  financial  sector.  Unfortunately  most  of  the  reported  and  investigated  frauds  and 
forgeries  seem  to  reveal  internal  involvement  of  bank  staff.  Banks  together  with  law  enforcement 
agencies must therefore do everything possible to ensure that this evil is controlled. Frauds, not only 
deplete the banks’ earnings and capital, but also create high reputational risk and erode confidence in 
our sector. In addition to the menace of frauds and forgeries, there are emerging incidents of money 
laundering that require firm action. Unfortunately, the absence of an Anti-Money Laundering law is still 
a serious impediment to combating this evil. Suffice to note that the Anti-Money Laundering Bill has 
been  approved  by  cabinet  and  we  hope  the  8th  Parliament  will  enact  it  into  law  at  the  earliest 
opportunity. 
Lastly, as the patron of Uganda Institute of Bankers, I am aware that the Institute has a large number 
of  alumni  which  keeps  increasing  every  year.  Banks  should  therefore  take  advantages  of  trained 
alumni of the institute while recruiting and promoting officers to challenging positions. In this way, the 
banking sector and the Institute will form partnership in addressing the existing operational risks within 
the  banking  sector.  In  the  next  few  months,  the  institute  will  be  conducting  the  6th  East  African 
Banking School here in Uganda whose theme is ‘Managing Risk in Financial Services’. The banking 
sector is encouraged to make use of this opportunity and sponsor participants to this course. 
Mr.  President  and  Council  members  of  the  Institute,  I  wish  to  end  by  informing  you  that  Bank  of 
Uganda will be celebrating its 40th Anniversary during the month of August this year and all details will 
be communicated to you in the due course. 
I thank you all for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
