Zamani Abdul Ghani: Building a progressive takaful sector in the overall 
Islamic financial system 
Keynote Address by Mr Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
2nd Seminar on Regulation of Takaful, Langkawi, 23 February 2006. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim.  
His Excellency Dr. Bassel Hindawi 
Vice Chairman, Director General of the Commission 
Insurance Commission of Jordan 
Mr. Anwar Khalifa Ebrahim Al-Sadah 
Deputy Governor, Bahrain Monetary Agency 
Professor Rifaat Ahmed Abdel Karim 
Secretary-General, Islamic Financial Services Board 
Distinguished guests and participants, 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh and good morning.  
2. It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning to welcome you to Malaysia and to this beautiful 
island of Langkawi. I am also pleased to be invited by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) to 
address  this  major  event  that  brings  together  those  among  us  who  share  deep  interest  in  the 
development  of  global  takaful  and  Islamic  finance.  Alhamdulillah,  we  have  among  us  today 
distinguished  market  players,  regulators,  scholars,  consultants  as  well  as  participants  from  almost 
twenty (20) countries around the world. I also wish to congratulate the IFSB for its efforts in organizing, 
for the second consecutive year, this international seminar focusing on the regulation of takaful. Let 
me  at  the  outset  reiterate  the  importance  of  this  Seminar  as  a  source  of  collaboration  for  ideas, 
sharing  of  knowledge  and  exchange  of  experiences  for  the  continuous  developments  and 
improvements of the Islamic finance industry. This event is especially important as it touches on new 
areas  such  as  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  takaful  industry  as  only  minimum  guidance  is 
currently available.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
3. Before I continue with this keynote address, let us all take a moment to remember Allahyarham Dr. 
Mohamed  Aboulkhair  Zaki  Badawi,  a  great  thinker  and  collaborator  for  the  cause  of  Islam,  and 
particularly in the area of Islamic finance . He has devoted so much of his time and energy for the 
benefit of the Ummah. We will always remember his numerous contributions to the development of 
Islamic finance. We cherish his involvement, among others, in the introduction of Shariah-compliant 
mortgage,  the  establishment  of  the  Shariah  council  to  reconcile  conflicts  between  Islamic  and 
conventional laws and the establishment of the first Islamic financial institution licensed in the United 
Kingdom. In Malaysia, he has made his mark a long time ago with efforts in setting up a dedicated 
Muslim College and the teaching of Islamic Studies at the University of Malaya, Malaysia. He was also 
involved  in  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  by  being  the  Shariah  advisor  to  RHB 
Islamic  Bank  and  the  Labuan  Offshore  Financial  Services  Authority.  In  appreciation  for  his 
contribution, let us pray that God Almighty grants him a place in His paradise with the prophets, the 
martyrs, and the righteous, insyaAllah.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
4.  Islamic  finance  has  grown  by  leaps  and  bounds,  from  only  one  Islamic  financial  institution  three 
decades ago to over 300 today in more than 75 countries, including non-Islamic countries in Europe 
and  the  United  States.  The  total  assets  of  Islamic  finance  worldwide  is  estimated  to  exceed  $250 
billion, and is growing at an estimated annual rate of 15 percent. Islamic finance has been transformed 
from  a  "nice  to  have"  into  a  "must-have"  system,  evident  by  the  growing  number  of  jurisdictions 
allowing their financial institutions to offer Islamic financial services and increasing number of global 
financial players now offering Islamic financial services as part of their spectrum of services. Islamic 
finance  continues  to  provide  tremendous  potential  for  growth  and  development  due  to  a  number  of 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 1
factors.  These  factors  include  the  strong  demand  for  Shariah-compliant  financial  services  and 
transactions  ,  the  availability  of  a  wider  choice  of  products  that  meet  consumers'  discerning 
expectations, as well as growing acceptance of Islamic finance as a form of financial intermediation. In 
Malaysia,  the  advancement  and  progress  that  have  been  achieved  in  Islamic  finance  has 
demonstrated its potential as an effective form of financial intermediation that supports the needs of 
the  economy.  The  industry  has  become  a  major  contributor  to  the  overall  economic  growth,  with 
assets  encompassing  nearly  25%  of  the  country's  gross  national  product.  This  is  a  significant 
achievement  considering  the  stiff  competition  offered  by  the  conventional  banking  and  insurance 
sectors.  
5. The takaful industry in particular has shown remarkable growth. This is evidenced by the increasing 
number  of  takaful  players  world  wide  and  the  ability  of  these  players  in  providing  a comprehensive 
range of product and services, matching those offered by the conventional counterpart. In Malaysia, 
the takaful industry has experienced rapid growth and transformation since its inception more than 20 
years ago. The industry continued to show positive growth, registering an average growth rate of 58% 
per annum in terms of asset. The growth is expected to be further strengthened with the increase in 
the number of takaful players. The Malaysian takaful operators are also actively venturing abroad to 
widen their global presence through the acquisition of equity interest in foreign takaful operators as 
well  as  exporting  technical  expertise  to  their  foreign  counterparts.  Currently  our  domestic  takaful 
operators have equity participation in Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Indonesia and Pakistan.  
6. On the regulatory front, Islamic finance continues to pose unprecedented challenges to regulators in 
their quest to be at par with conventional regulatory framework while, at the same time, upholding the 
true  concept  of  Shariah.  Of  importance  is  the  development  of  capital  adequacy  and  solvency,  risk 
assessment  and  management  and  corporate  governance,  which  are  very  much  relevant  to  Islamic 
banking and takaful. There is also a challenge to develop internationally acceptable standards for the 
regulation of Islamic banking and takaful sectors, specifically in areas which involve different Shariah 
interpretations.  Currently,  there  are  several  international  institutions  that  are  working  towards 
international  Shariah-compliant  standards  which  include  the  IFSB  and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing 
Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI).  
7. Recognising the current state of Islamic finance and its different pace of development in different 
jurisdictions, it is important for us to step back a bit and carefully plan the efforts going forward. In this 
regard, let me share with you my thought on four areas of focus whereby greater attention should be 
given in order for us to achieve further progress in the development of takaful in particular, and Islamic 
finance in general. I will also take this opportunity to share with you on the experience and approach 
that Malaysia has adopted in our endeavor to develop a comprehensive and effective Islamic finance 
system.  
Firstly, there should be greater inter linkages of components of Islamic finance supported by 
strong legal and regulatory framework.  
8. The effective functioning of the Islamic financial system will largely depend on the development of a 
comprehensive package of the core components of the overall Islamic financial system. This would 
involve the development of the Islamic banking sector, the takaful sector, the Islamic inter-bank and 
capital  markets  as  well  as  other  non-banking  financial  institutions.  The  future  development  of  the 
Islamic finance will rely on the strength of these core components and their interlinkages, due to the 
interdependence of the respective components within the package. The interdependence between the 
different  components  can  be  seen  in  cases  where  Islamic  banking  relies  on  takaful  operators  to 
provide  protection  and  coverage  for  Islamic  financing  products  offered  by  the  Islamic  banks.  In  the 
case of takaful operators, they would rely on the Islamic banks, through bancatakaful arrangement, to 
have automatic access to the banks' wide customer base and to leverage on the banks' reputation and 
prominent position to effectively distribute takaful products. The Islamic capital market will also depend 
on the takaful operators, and to some extent the Islamic banks, to participate in subscribing to Islamic 
financial  instruments  which  fulfil  the  medium  to  long-term  financing  needs.  In  return,  the  adequate 
supply and availability of a wide range of financial instruments offered in the Islamic capital market has 
facilitated takaful operator to effectively manage its asset portfolio to match the liability and risk profile 
of the takaful fund as well as enhances the ability of takaful operator to generate attractive investment 
return to stakeholders.  
9. Allow me now to take this opportunity to share with you Malaysia's experience in the development 
of  the  Islamic  financial  system  that  has  earned  Malaysia,  Alhamdulillah,  the  recognition  by  the 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2006
international financial community as a leading Islamic financial hub. In developing the Islamic financial 
system, Malaysia has adopted a phased-in approach which can be divided into three different phases. 
The first phase of the development of Islamic finance in Malaysia began more than three decades ago 
with the establishment of an Islamic savings institution known as the Pilgrim Fund Board, or Tabung 
Haji.  Tabung  Haji  is  the  first  Islamic  financial  institution  in  Malaysia.  This  was  followed  by  the 
establishment of the first full-fledged Islamic bank in 1983 and the first takaful operator in 1984. The 
establishment  of  the  first  takaful  operator  in  Malaysia  was  inspired  by  the  prevailing  needs  of  the 
Muslim public for a Shariah-compliant alternative to conventional insurance, as well as to complement 
the operation of the Islamic bank. InsyaAllah, by the end of this year we will have a complement of 
twelve (12) Islamic banks and nine (9) takaful operators with equity participation by Malaysians as well 
as renowned international market players.  
10. In the second phase of the development of Islamic finance, Malaysia initiated the development of a 
private  Islamic  financial  securities  market.  The  issuance  of  a  broad  range  of  Islamic  financial 
instruments  contributed  in  creating  a  more  conducive  investment  environment  for  investors  who 
preferred  Shariah-compliant  instruments.  Another  significant  development  in  the  domestic  Islamic 
financial  market  was  the  issuance  of  ringgit-denominated  Islamic  debt  securities  by  two  multilateral 
financial  institutions,  the  International  Finance  Corporation  and  the  World  Bank.  The  issuance  was 
made  possible  following  the  liberalisation  of  the  foreign  exchange  administration  rules  to  facilitate 
multilateral development banks, multilateral financial institutions and multinational corporations to raise 
ringgit-denominated  bonds  in  the  Malaysian  capital  market.  At  the  end  of  2005,  Shariah-compliant 
private  debt  securities  comprised  40%  of  the  outstanding  private  debt  securities  issue  of  RM281 
billion.  
11.  Other  major  developments  that  took  place  in  the  second  phase  include  the  offering  of  Islamic 
banking  products  and  services  by  the  conventional  banking  institutions  on  a  window  basis,  the 
establishment  of  external  credit  rating  agencies  such  as  the  Rating  Agency  Malaysia  (RAM)  and 
Malaysian  Rating  Corporation  Berhad  (MARC)  and  the  establishment  of  the  development  financial 
institutions and a national mortgage corporation, that is, Cagamas Berhad, both also offering Islamic 
financial products.  
12. The third phase of the development involves a review of the existing 'window' institutional structure 
of  the  banks  to  create  an  enabling  structure  that  can  assimilate  future  developments  in  the  Islamic 
financial  regulatory  infrastructure  over  the  longer  term.  Arising  from  this  review,  a  new  institutional 
structure known as 'Islamic subsidiary' was introduced in 2004. With this development, the Malaysian 
Islamic financial system has evolved into a strong and comprehensive Islamic financial system.  
13. The comprehensive Islamic financial industry in Malaysia is also well supported by a conducive 
legal and Shariah framework that began more than 20 years ago. In terms of the legal infrastructure, 
dedicated legislations namely the Islamic Banking Act 1983 and Takaful Act 1984, were enacted to 
govern the conduct of the Islamic banking institutions and takaful operators respectively. A dedicated 
High  Court  judge  has  also  been  assigned  to  preside  over  cases  relating  to  Islamic  banking  and 
finance, complementing the mediation, arbitration and other dispute resolution mechanism already in 
existence for the Islamic financial system.  
14. Great emphasis has also been given to enhance the Shariah framework in Malaysia. The Shariah 
Advisory Council in Bank Negara Malaysia is recognised as a sole authority on all Shariah matters 
pertaining to Islamic banking and finance. At the company level, it is a legal requirement for Islamic 
banking  and  takaful  operators  to  establish  their  own  Shariah  Committees  as  part  of  internal 
governance in order to ensure compliance with the Shariah.  
The second focus area is that there must be efforts to have structured human talent 
development in the area of Islamic finance.  
15. The essence of a takaful system lies in the relationship between the participants and the mudharib 
or wakeel, that is the person responsible for managing the takaful fund. The key success factor lies in 
takaful  operators  having  high  level  of  expertise  in  all  relevant  areas  in  the  management  of  takaful 
business  including  technical,  actuarial,  distribution,  underwriting,  investment  as  well  as  strong 
leadership  at  the  helm  of  a  takaful  operator.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  need  for  a  structured 
development of human talent at all levels which include the leaders, technical personnel as well as the 
regulators. The takaful sector needs to develop strategic and high-performing leaders who will be able 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 3
to lead the way and are committed towards building a stronger organization that is able to contribute 
towards the tremendous growth potential for takaful.  
16. In the area of technical expertise, the takaful sector has to intensify its efforts in the training and 
development  of  expertise  in  such  areas  as  actuarial,  underwriting,  specialist  claims  and  product 
development capabilities. In the actuarial area, for example, an issue that needs to be addressed is 
the scarcity of qualified actuaries to serve the takaful sector. The expertise of actuaries is needed to 
quantify the appropriate contribution rate to be charged to the pool of takaful participants. Additionally, 
the proper pricing of the contribution rate will ensure the ability of the takaful fund to fulfill the requisite 
obligation to participants. The actuarial methodology is also required to ensure prudent distribution of 
surplus  to  participants.  The  increasing  roles  of  the  actuary  in  the  family  as  well  as  general  takaful 
underscore the importance of developing takaful actuaries who have the understanding of the takaful 
business and the unique characteristic of the takaful operation.  
17. Perhaps it is timely for me to share initiatives taken by Malaysia in talent development at all levels 
in Islamic finance. At the strategic leadership level, Malaysia has established the International Centre 
for  Leadership  in  Finance  or  ICLIF  as  part  of  an  effort  to  spearhead  the  development  of  a  new 
generation of world class leaders in Islamic banking and finance who can steer the financial services 
sector including the Islamic finance towards high performance and excellence. An endowment fund of 
RM500 million has been allocated for this institution.  
18.  In  the  development  of  technical  expertise,  the  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia 
(IBFIM)  and  the  Securities  Industry  Development  Centre  (SIDC),  which  are  the  industries'  training 
arms, have played an active role in producing well-trained, high caliber individuals and management 
teams with the required expertise in the Islamic finance. IBFIM and the SIDC work closely with the 
industries  to  ensure  that  their  training and  education  programmes  are  tailored  to  meet  the  evolving 
needs of the industry. In the case of IBFIM, the programmes on offer include the fundamental aspects 
of  Shariah,  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  and  risk  management  in  Islamic  financing.  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia has provided a benevolent loan to IBFIM to complement industry contributions.  
19. Recognising the need to simultaneously equip the regulators with the necessary skills in Islamic 
finance, we have in the pipeline for introduction shortly, a special programme for regulators called the 
Central  Banking  Course  in  Islamic  Finance.  This  programme  will  be  tailor-made  to  provide 
international regulators with knowledge on conceptual and practical aspects of Islamic finance as well 
as the update on the regulation and supervision of Islamic financial institutions.  
20. The pressing need for sufficient pool of intellectual human capital will be more evidenced with the 
continuous  expansion  of  takaful  business  and  the  growing  numbers  of  new  takaful  operators  being 
established.  To  be  able  to  assist  in  meeting  this  increasing  demand  for  intellectual  capital  and  not 
cannibalising  on  existing  ones,  Malaysia  has  taken  the  initiative  of  establishing  the  International 
Centre for Education in Islamic Finance or INCEIF. INCEIF aims at meeting the objective of providing 
a  talent  development  solution  for  the  global  Islamic  financial  services  industry  as  well  as  the 
educational needs of the different levels of Islamic finance practitioners, including professionals and 
specialists  in  Islamic  finance.  INCEIF  will  also  forge  strategic  alliances  with  domestic  and  foreign 
academic institutions to offer post-graduate programmes, namely Masters and Doctorates in Islamic 
finance in specific areas of specialization. A professional association for Islamic finance professionals 
will  also  be  established  for  the  alumni  of  INCEIF  to  keep  abreast  with  the  latest  developments  in 
Islamic finance. An endowment fund of RM500 million has also been allocated for INCEIF.  
Third area of focus is to promote greater international collaboration and cooperation in the 
establishment of sound infrastructure for the development of Islamic finance.  
21.  This  is  aimed  at  contributing  towards  a  progressive  takaful  industry  by  promoting  greater 
international  cooperation  among  the  regulators,  practitioners  and  scholars.  Initiatives  have  and  will 
continue  to  be  taken  to  leverage  on  international  cooperation  in  terms  of  technical  assistance  and 
sharing and exchanging of information to further accelerate the development of takaful globally. This is 
particularly important due to the different phase of development of the various countries in the takaful 
sector.  The  sharing  and  learning  of  the  experience  of  the  more  advanced  jurisdictions  will  not  only 
accelerate  the  development  of  takaful  but  will  also  allow  for  the  maximization  of  efficient  usage  of 
limited resources. The Islamic Development Bank (IDB) together with the IFSB should be commended 
for having initiated the move to chart a 10-year Masterplan for the Islamic financial services industry, 
one  that  could  assist  member  countries  in  their  quest  to  develop  a  well-structured  Islamic  financial 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2006
system.  Malaysia  and  the  IDB  have  also  signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding  to  enhance 
cooperation among member countries of the Organisation of Islamic Conference, or OIC, in the areas 
of trade, investment, Islamic finance and ICT development. In the area of takaful, a working committee 
has  been  created  to  encourage  the  establishment  of  takaful  companies  in  member  countries  and 
promote retakaful business amongst IDB members.  
22. For the regulators in charge of Islamic finance, the setting up of the IFSB remained one of the 
landmark  developments  in  this  decade.  Established  in  2002,  the  IFSB's  core  role  is  to  promote 
prudent,  transparent  and  robust  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  through  the 
promulgation  of  international  prudential  standards  that  are  consistent  with  the principles of Shariah. 
This would be the foundation for the stable and sustainable development of Islamic finance. The IFSB 
also provides the platform for cooperation among the regulators through meetings, conference and the 
setting-up  of  working  groups  that  give  the  opportunity  for  regulators  to  discuss  and  exchange 
information on issues confronting the Islamic finance. Having a wide network comprising 84 members 
from all over the world, the IFSB provides members with access to broader information and guidance. 
In  addition,  the  IFSB,  through  its  linkages  with  other  international  bodies,  which  includes  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), Bank for International Settlements (BIS), AAOIFI , the International 
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and International Organisation of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO),  will  be  able  to  create  synergies  in  the  future  development  of  international  standard  for 
Islamic finance.  
23. In the area of takaful regulation and standard, we have seen excellent progress taken by IFSB. Of 
recent  development  is  the  cooperation  between  IAIS  and  IFSB  in  the  formulation  of  international 
standards for takaful. In this regard, a joint working group comprising representatives from IAIS and 
IFSB has been formed to assess the applicability of the IAIS insurance core principles for takaful. The 
joint working group has made significant progress through the issuance of an Issue Paper on Issues in 
Regulation and Supervision of Takaful. The Issue Paper has identified four major areas that require 
immediate  attention.  These  are  the  corporate  governance,  financial  and  prudential  regulation, 
transparency,  reporting  and  market  conduct  as  well  as  supervisory  process,  which  may  lead  to  the 
issuance  of  a  specific  guidance  paper  or  standard  that  corresponds  with  the  IAIS  insurance  core 
principles.  
24.  Another  major  area  requiring  international  collaborative  efforts  is  the  harmonization  of  Shariah 
interpretations.  It  is  imperative  for  Shariah  scholars  globally  to  undertake  in-depth  studies  and 
research to accelerate innovation and enhance the global integration of the Islamic financial system. 
Harmonisation of the differing views among the scholars from different schools of thought is necessary 
to  enhance  the  global  development  of  Islamic  finance.  Although variations  in the  Shariah principles 
and interpretation for takaful contract and practices are currently not a major concern, efforts should 
be  undertaken  to  further  minimize  these  variations  in  interpretation  that  may  hinder  the  smooth 
progress and innovation in the development of takaful. In this regard, Malaysia has taken the initiative 
in promoting greater cooperation among Shariah scholars. In 2005, Bank Negara Malaysia organized 
an annual Shariah Scholars Dialogue that brings together renowned scholars from many parts of the 
world  to  discuss  as  well  share  and  learn  from  each  other's  experience.  In  addition,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia has established an endowment fund amounting to RM200 million to facilitate the activities of 
Shariah scholars. Other than financing the periodic dialogues among the Shariah scholars, the fund 
would  also  promote  research,  provide  scholarships  and  establish  better  interaction  among  these 
Shariah scholars and industry practitioners. It is hoped that this effort would contribute effectively to 
further enhance interaction and understanding in the area of Shariah and Islamic finance.  
The final area of focus in creating a progressive takaful industry is the need to build greater 
international linkages and strategic alliance among the Islamic financial institutions.  
25.  Fostering  strategic  alliances  with  the  right  entities  will  not  only  accelerate  innovation  and 
development but will also bring about considerable values in the formulation and implementation of 
new approaches, new technologies and specialisation in new product. These in turn, will pave the way 
for takaful operator to be competitive and in a position to be industry leaders at the national and global 
front.  Let  me  share  with  you  Malaysia's  recent  initiatives  on  this  front.  In  January  this  year,  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  agreed  to  award  four  new  licences  for  takaful  operators,  bringing  the  total 
number  of  takaful  operators  to  nine  (9).  The  new  takaful  licences  are  offered  to  joint  ventures  or 
consortiums  of  sound  financial  institutions  with  experience  in  Islamic  banking,  takaful  or  insurance 
business.  Such  joint  ventures  or  consortiums  that  include  foreign  partners  would  enable  the  new 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 5
takaful operators to leverage on the expertise, experience and infrastructure of their partner financial 
institutions. These are strong institutions from the Middle East, the United Kingdom and Japan that 
agreed to combine efforts and share expertise and resources with Malaysian institutions in these new 
ventures. In line with the liberalisation in the Islamic banking industry, foreign equity interest of up to 
49%  is  allowed  in  the  takaful  entity  to  secure  commitment  of  strong  shareholders,  and  foster 
meaningful  strategic  alliances.  For  Islamic  banking,  the  Bank  has  further  liberalized  our  Islamic 
financial  industry  by  allowing  the  establishment  of  three  new  fully  foreign-owned  Islamic  banking 
institutions as part of the strategy to enhance integration with the international financial system and to 
strengthen inter-linkages with other economies. These foreign partners will provide strategic linkage 
for  the  expansion  of  the  takaful  and  Islamic  banking  businesses  overseas.  Going  forward,  our 
aspirations are for Malaysia to be the centre for efficient, progressive and robust Islamic banking and 
takaful sectors which are internationally integrated. In realizing this vision, the industry has to play its 
role in giving unwavering commitments and collaborative efforts towards elevating the industry to new 
levels of dynamism.  
26. Let me conclude by saying that the future success of Islamic finance will depend on the combined 
collaborative efforts of all stakeholders, namely the regulators, the scholars, the industry and market 
participants.  In  this  regard,  all  parties  should  put  in  relentless  efforts  to  continuously  promote  the 
development of Islamic finance into one which is progressive, dynamic, responsive and sustainable. I 
sincerely  believe  that  for  all  our  sincere  efforts  towards  realizing  this  objective,  InsyaAllah,  the 
Almighty will shower us with his blessings, guidance and assistance. This reminds me of the essence 
of verse 69 of Surah al Ankabut: "And those who strive in Our (cause), - We will certainly guide them 
to our Paths. For verily Allah is with those who do right." On this note, I wish you a successful and 
productive seminar and wabillah hitaufik walhidayah.  
Thank you. 
 
 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2006
