David Dodge: The right policies for today's global economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chile-Canada  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Santiago, Chile, 19 July 2006.  
 Canada and Chile both rely heavily on international trade and foreign investment for economic growth, 
and are both major producers of commodities. Because we share these attributes, we also share a 
keen interest in the health of the global economy. So, what I would like to do this morning is talk about 
how the global economy has unfolded and what we can expect to see in the future. In doing so, I'll talk 
about some of the major forces at work in the global economy and the key challenges that they pose. 
Then, I'd like to discuss the policies that will best help countries like ours to deal with these challenges, 
from both a domestic and an international perspective. 
The global economic context 
Over the past few years, we have seen a strong expansion of the global economy. Indeed, the rate of 
expansion  has  exceeded  the  growth  rate  of  global  potential  output.  This  strong  growth  has  led  to 
higher prices for many of the primary commodities that our two countries produce. In turn, this has 
meant an improvement in our terms of trade and rising national incomes. 
This  global  growth  has  been  rooted  primarily  in  the  economic  strength  of  the  United  States  and 
emerging  Asia.  In  the  U.S.  economy,  growth  has  come  from  strong  household  demand,  while  net 
national savings have been negative. But in emerging Asia, household demand has been weak, while 
net national savings have been very high. These forces have contributed to the global current account 
imbalances that are now such a concern. To be clear, when I say "global imbalances," I am referring 
to the large and persistent U.S. current account deficit, which is mirrored by current account surpluses 
in  Asia  and  in  many  oil-exporting  countries.  These  imbalances  have  grown  to  the  point  where  the 
United States needs to attract 70 per cent of the world's capital flows to finance its current account 
deficit - clearly an unsustainable situation. 
I'll have more to say about imbalances, and how they can be resolved, in just a moment. But first, I 
should mention another important consideration in today's global economic picture. Following events 
such as the Asian and Russian financial crises of the late 1990s and the bursting of the tech bubble 
earlier this decade, central banks around the world injected a lot of liquidity into the global economy. 
Clearly, this liquidity helped to encourage the strong growth of recent years. But now, central banks 
are in the process of removing some of it. The interest rate increases seen to date, and the prospects 
for  more  increases  to  come  in  some  countries,  have  been  associated  with  somewhat  increased 
volatility in financial markets, as investors adjust their expectations about future growth. 
This withdrawal of liquidity is completely appropriate, given that the global economy is now likely not 
too far away from the limits of its capacity. Thus, it seems very likely that global growth will slow to a 
more  sustainable  pace.  Ideally,  this  would  take  place  in  a  relatively  smooth  way.  But  there  are  a 
number of risks surrounding this scenario, and there is a possibility that global growth will slow more 
sharply than desired, to the detriment of our two economies. The most important risk has to do with 
the way global imbalances are ultimately resolved. There are a couple of concerns here. First, in order 
to  reduce  its  current  account  deficit  to  sustainable  levels,  the  U.S.  economy  needs  to  reduce  its 
domestic demand. But as I mentioned, U.S. demand has been a key support for the global economy. 
So it is crucial that other major players boost their domestic demand to pick up the slack. Specifically, 
it is important that China and the economies of emerging Asia take steps to reduce their savings by 
strengthening household demand. It is also important that demand in Europe and Japan continue to 
strengthen,  to  help  global  economic  growth  smoothly  "rotate"  away  from  the  United  States  without 
global demand slowing too much or too quickly. 
It  is  crucial  that  financial markets remain  confident  that  policy-makers  are serious about putting  the 
right  policies  in  place  to  allow  for  an  orderly  resolution  of  imbalances.  As  long  as  they  have  this 
confidence, financial markets are likely to continue to function smoothly. But my main concern is that if 
we  don't  make  more  progress  in  implementing  the  right  policies,  then  we  run  an  increased  risk  of 
global financial instability. And such instability could then spill over into trade in goods and services, 
leading to a dramatic decline in global growth.  
BIS Review 69/2006 
 1
So, what are the right policies? This will be the subject of the rest of my remarks. Let me begin by 
looking at this question from the perspective of domestic policies before turning to international issues.  
The right domestic policies 
My counterpart at the Banco Central de Chile, Vittorio Corbo, spoke at a conference on central banks 
and  global  imbalances  last  month  in Spain.  In  his  remarks,  Governor  Corbo  discussed  the  need  to 
have the right domestic policies in place to help deal with the resolution of imbalances. These policies 
include structural reform, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. Let me say a few words about each of 
these. 
Structural reform is a broad area with many priorities. But in general, we can say that policy-makers 
should  aim  to  encourage  efficiency  and  flexibility  in  their  economies.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the 
financial  sector,  where  it  is  vital  that  all  countries  work  to  strengthen  their  financial  markets  and 
institutions.  The  ultimate  goal  should  be  an  efficient  and  stable  financial  system,  so  that  scarce 
resources can be channelled into the most productive investments, and so that problems in the global 
economy are less likely to disrupt national economies. While both Canada and Chile have reasonably 
flexible economies, there is still much more to be done. In my own country, we continue to grapple 
with the need to make labour markets more flexible and to foster competition. We are also working to 
make financial markets as efficient as possible. 
As regards fiscal policy, the key for macroeconomic policy is to focus on the sustainability of public 
debt over the medium term. Canada has run a budgetary surplus at the federal government level for 
nine consecutive years. Because of this record, the federal government's public debt-to-GDP ratio has 
fallen from a peak of over 70 per cent to about 35 per cent now, and is on track to reach just 25 per 
cent in 2013-14. In Chile, the government has had great success since 2000 with its structural surplus 
rule. This policy has proven to be an effective stabilizer throughout the business cycle and has helped 
the country maintain an enviable debt position.  
A fiscal policy that delivers public debt sustainability is particularly useful in today's economic climate, 
because it gives governments the flexibility to respond to evolving circumstances. For Canada, this will 
become increasingly important given that we will be facing demographic pressures in the years ahead 
as our population ages.  
In terms of monetary policy, both the Bank of Canada and the Banco Central de Chile were pioneers 
in adopting a policy of inflation targeting backed by a floating exchange rate. Both central banks agree 
that  preserving  confidence  in  the  value  of  money  is  the  best  contribution  that  we  can  make  to  the 
economic and financial welfare of our countries. The inflation-targeting system has been enormously 
beneficial in providing an anchor for monetary policy. In both countries, the high and variable inflation 
rates of the 1980s have given way to low, stable, and predictable inflation, and inflation expectations 
are firmly anchored. We both approach the inflation target in a symmetrical way. This helps to smooth 
the ups and downs of the business cycle and, more generally, has led to stronger economic growth in 
the long term. 
How does inflation targeting help in the context of today's global economy? First of all, by reducing 
uncertainty about the future value of money, a climate of low and stable inflation maximizes the clarity 
of signals that are sent by prices. This helps businesses to make appropriate investments. Further, 
central banks pursue inflation targeting by adjusting interest rates with the goal of keeping total supply 
and demand in the economy in rough balance. In doing so, monetary policy can make it easier for 
resources  to  shift  from  sector  to  sector.  This  is  particularly  important  in  times  such  as  these,  when 
large swings in  relative  prices  highlight the  need  for rapid  adjustments  in  economic  activity.  One  of 
these relative prices is the exchange rate. A flexible exchange rate is very useful because it helps the 
economy adjust to shocks, especially external shocks that affect different economies in different ways. 
But large movements in the exchange rate can pose difficulties for particular sectors. And it can be 
harder for policy-makers to keep following the right policies when some important economies are seen 
to be circumventing what could be called "the rules of the game."  
The right international policies 
I'll come back to this point, and discuss the international financial system in just a moment. But first, let 
me say a few words about international trade.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2006
Our  reliance  on  international  trade  means  that  both  Chile  and  Canada  have  a  particular  interest  in 
promoting the free flow of goods and services. All countries should be working to push the Doha round 
of  multilateral  trade  negotiations  to  a  successful  conclusion  and  to  strengthen  the  World  Trade 
Organization in order to ensure proper compliance with the rules of trade. And policy-makers need to 
be  vocal  in resisting calls  for  protectionism. Unfortunately,  progress  on  trade  appears  to be  stalled, 
and protectionism is a real and rising threat.  
The calls for protectionist action are, perhaps, a natural by-product of today's globalized economy. As 
the world economy has developed, domestic firms have found themselves having to adjust to global 
forces  much  more  quickly  than  in  the  past.  With  the  globalization  of  markets  has  come  intense 
competition  in  many  sectors.  Without  question,  this  globalized  economy  has  brought  tremendous 
benefits  to  our  citizens.  But  in  the  face  of  competition,  policy-makers  have  heard  calls  to  shield 
businesses  or  sectors  from  market  forces.  And  in  some  cases,  we  have  seen  policies  that  try  to 
prevent market-based economic adjustments, restrict foreign ownership in certain sectors, or restrict 
capital flows. 
These policies may have short-term appeal, but, in the long run, they are counterproductive. Instead, 
governments need to adopt the right policies - those that will encourage free and open markets and 
facilitate market-based economic adjustments. Indeed, the strong growth seen in Canada and Chile is 
clear evidence of the benefits that come from opening our economies to global competition.  
Central banks cannot do much directly to implement policies that encourage free and open markets 
and  facilitate  market-based  economic  adjustments.  But  central  bankers  do  have  a  responsibility  to 
advocate these policies. And we have a responsibility to work with each other in international settings 
to ensure that the world's financial system is conducive to the free flow of goods, services, and capital. 
We have a responsibility to ensure that systemically important countries are doing their part to support 
a well-functioning international financial system.  
This  is  why  we  in  Canada  have  been  pushing  hard  for  a  renewal  and  modernization  of  the 
International Monetary Fund. Just as the WTO is charged with promoting free and fair trade in goods 
and  services,  so  should  the  IMF  be  the  international  organization  dedicated  to  promoting  a  well-
functioning, market-based international financial system. We need an IMF where all members commit 
to playing by the rules of the game - a set of guidelines for policies that best support a market-based 
international financial system. 
For  the  IMF  to  fulfill  this  role,  we need  to  rekindle the  spirit  of  internationalism  that  was  evident  60 
years ago when the Fund was first established. But it is difficult to build a shared sense of trust and 
responsibility if key players feel that they don't have an adequate voice. What Canada and others have 
been advocating is a multi-step approach to making the Fund more representative. First, at the annual 
meetings this year in Singapore, the Fund should move to grant an "ad hoc" increase in quota to the 
four  key  countries  that  are  clearly  underweight  in  terms  of  quota  and  voting  power:  China,  South 
Korea,  Mexico,  and  Turkey.  Then,  the  Fund  needs  to  move  with  some  urgency  to  determine  and 
implement  a  process  for  adjusting  quotas  in  order  to  more  systematically  recognize  the  changing 
realities of the global economy.  
But  how  would  a  more  representative  IMF  go  about  promoting  a  well-functioning  international 
monetary system? Let me mention three issues. The first is to have countries commit themselves to 
following the rules of the game. What does this commitment mean in concrete terms? It means that 
members  should  commit  to  establishing  frameworks  for  their  monetary,  fiscal,  exchange  rate,  and 
financial  sector  policies  that  are  coherent,  consistent  with  maintaining  internal  balance,  and  that 
support  an  efficient  and  stable  market-based  international  financial  system.  Further,  their  policies 
should  facilitate  adjustment  to  shocks  and  should  aim  to  mitigate  negative  spillovers  to  other 
economies. 
I should be clear that following the rules of the game does not mean that a country must adhere to a 
narrow range of policy choices. The important principle is that all countries, whether they are OECD 
members  or  economies  in  transition,  should  share  a  commitment  to  a  market-based  international 
financial  system.  This  means  a  commitment  to  strengthening  domestic  institutions  and  policy 
frameworks so that markets are allowed to work freely, and to eschewing policies that thwart market-
based  adjustments.  This  includes  a  commitment  not  to  undertake  sterilized  foreign  exchange 
intervention that impedes the adjustment of real exchange rates over the medium term. 
The  second  issue  is  IMF  surveillance.  The  Fund  should  conduct  bilateral  surveillance  that  would 
assess how well each member is living up to its commitments. But there is also a clear need for the 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 3
IMF to strengthen its multilateral surveillance of the global economy. The Fund is uniquely placed to 
perform this task. Essentially, multilateral surveillance should identify the key risks facing the global 
economy and the scope for policy actions - either by individual members or collectively - to mitigate 
these  risks.  If  national  policies  are  causing  negative  spillovers  to  other  countries,  this  should  be 
addressed through the surveillance process. And the Fund should be prepared to share its analysis of 
these spillovers with national authorities. 
The third issue is that the IMF must be more effective in its role as a forum where national authorities 
come together to discuss global financial and economic issues. The Fund should be considered as the 
place  where  national  authorities  can  gather  around  the  same  table  for  a  frank  exchange  about 
common policy issues. The Fund must cultivate the same co-operative spirit seen at its inception and 
seen at the OECD in the 1960s and 1970s as that institution helped to build a liberal economic order 
and a framework for freer trade. 
Canada has called for this modernization of the IMF because it is clearly in our interest that there be 
an effective institution to promote a market-based international financial order. I believe that such an 
institution is in Chile's interest as well.  
Conclusion 
Canada and Chile have benefited greatly from the strong global economic growth of recent years. But 
the global economy could suffer if policy actions are not taken to deal with global imbalances. In this 
context, I have spoken of domestic policies that are particularly important for countries such as ours: 
structural reforms to encourage economic efficiency and flexibility, a sustainable fiscal policy, and a 
monetary policy based on inflation targeting. By following these domestic policies, both Canada and 
Chile will be well placed to handle developments in the global economy, whatever those may be. But 
we also need to work together to shape that global economy. We need to support free trade in goods 
and services and to resist protectionism. And, as I said, we - together with other countries - need to 
make the international financial system as efficient and effective as possible. An important part of this 
effort  will  be  to  modernize  the  IMF.  With  strong  domestic  policy  frameworks  and  a  strengthened 
international financial system, Chileans and Canadians can look forward to continued strong economic 
growth in the years ahead. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2006
