T T Mboweni: Education transforms lives – it changed mine 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Friends of St Mark’s 
fundraising dinner, Rand Club Johannesburg, Johannesburg, 28 July 2006.  
 Honoured guests, ladies and gentlemen 
I am honoured to be present here this evening and to be a part of this special annual dinner which has 
been  turned  into  a  very  worthwhile  cause.  The  Old  Diocesan  Union  defines  its  objects  as  bringing 
together  past  students  of  the  Diocesan  College  and  the  Diocesan  Preparatory  and  Pre-Preparatory 
Schools, to keep them in touch with Bishops and the present students, to promote the interests and 
welfare of Bishops and to administer a fund to provide financial assistance for descendants of present 
and past members of the Union to be educated at Bishops. The formation of the Friends of St Mark’s 
and its activities over the years is glowing evidence, if any was required, that the role of Bishops has 
been redefined to shed its elitist image of the past. 
Situated  in  the  midst  of  grinding  poverty,  in  an  area  with  unemployment  rates  at  80  per  cent,  the 
modest fees at the College are still beyond the reach of many locals. Fundraisers provide scholarships 
to disadvantaged pupils and help improve facilities at the school. Also, St Mark’s boasts a laudable 
community  outreach  programme  that,  among  others,  includes  a  Saturday  school  for  children  from 
disadvantaged state schools, a maths and science teachers’ support programme, availing the school’s 
science laboratories for use by other schools in the neighbourhood, and adult literacy classes.  
The Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu describes St Mark’s College as being like water in a desert – 
transforming  rural  hopelessness  into  an  oasis  where  young  people  can  bloom.  “Without  St  Mark’s 
College the chances of even literacy for children in this area are slim. These children could become 
just another statistic in the cycle of poverty. Education is the key to unlocking their potential – and what 
potential!” the Archbishop Emeritus, the patron of St Mark’s, exclaims.  
In the same vein, a Chinese proverb says: “If you are planning for a year, sow rice; if you are planning 
for  a  decade,  plant  trees;  if  you  are  planning  for  a  lifetime,  educate  people.”  This  is  echoed  in  the 
motto of St Mark’s: “Thuto ke lesedi”, which, broadly translated, means: “Education is light”. To which I 
may add that education changes lives – it definitely changed mine! 
The Strength of St Mark’s is the alumni association of St Mark’s College in Jane Furse. Addressing 
their  20th  anniversary  fundraising  dinner  in  December  2005,  I  was  impressed  by  the  effort  and 
remarked that it was indeed rare for former pupils of a black school to honour their school and commit 
themselves  to  raising  funds  for  the  institution.  While  education  remains  primarily  a  responsibility  of 
government, private financial commitment is indispensable. Strong alumni associations in the US, for 
example, contribute substantial sums of money to their institutions. In South Africa, especially among 
blacks, there seems to be little interest among alumni to look back and support their old institutions.  
I do, however, acknowledge the nascent pockets of alumni associations of former black schools that 
are emerging in some parts of the country. This is a culture that we should endeavour to nurture. The 
relationship with a school does not and should not end with matriculation. We must seek to inculcate in 
learners that when they proceed to higher education, join the world of work or business, they remain 
representatives of their former schools in the community, country and the world at large.  
It  is  therefore  heartening  to  be  part  of  this  fundraising  drive,  particularly  because  the  Friends  of  St 
Mark’  s  have  opened  their  hearts  and  wallets  to  deepen  and  widen  an  existing  initiative  by  former 
pupils of St Mark’s who have taken it upon themselves never to allow their Alma Mater to die. These 
are alumni who are proud of, and seek to build an everlasting relationship with their Alma Mater – a 
relationship to be treasured, nurtured and cultivated. These are men and women who value so much 
what they got out of St Mark’ s that they have developed a sense of community around the ownership 
of the St Mark’s brand. They have decided that the St Mark’s brand will be preserved and enhanced 
for current and future generations. 
The  importance  of  building  strong  alumni  associations  cannot  be  overemphasised.  The  continued 
involvement  and  support  of  alumni  have  proved  to  be  the  hallmarks  of  long-term  success  and 
sustainability of schools and colleges in many parts of the world. As pressure on education budgets 
mounts  the  world  over,  fundraising  events  like  these  are  no  longer  intended  to  raise  supplemental 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
income to fund “extras”, but have become essential components of schools’ budgets. Fundraisers are 
the financial lifeline for St Mark’s College – a matter of life and death.  
While  alumni  associations  may  be  instrumental  in  generating  financial  resources  for  institutions, 
fundraising is not their raison d’être. We can also think of “fun” raising, i.e. entertaining and exciting 
ways of building alumni relationships. Various projects, too numerous to mention, can be undertaken. 
Also, benefits of staying connected to one’s Alma Mater, other alumni and peers are immeasurable. 
Networking is developed through strong alumni associations. This includes circulating information on 
internship, employment and other opportunities available in the various areas of enterprise alumni are 
engaged in. To my mind the benefits seem to outweigh the costs. 
Your effort as we gather here tonight dovetails with one of the government’s key programmes. As you 
may be aware, the government has set itself the goals of halving poverty and unemployment by 2014. 
To meet these challenges, the government seeks an annual average growth rate of 4,5 per cent or 
higher between 2005 and 2009, and an average growth rate of at least 6 per cent between 2010 and 
2014. There are strong indications that the South African economy has reached a higher growth path. 
The growth rate averaged 3 per cent per annum between 1994 and 2003 as compared to 1 per cent 
during the decade preceding the country’s advent to democracy. However, growth rates in 2004 and 
2005  have  averaged  4,5  per  cent  and  4,9  per  cent  respectively.  While  growth  is  expected  to 
decelerate somewhat this year, it is still expected to exceed 4 per cent. There is thus little doubt that 
the sustained application of prudent macroeconomic policies is bearing fruits.  
Monetary  policy  has  played  its  part  by  contributing  to  a  low  inflationary  environment  -  inflation  has 
been within the target range of 3-6 per cent for CPIX for the past 34 months - which in turn has been 
supportive  of  economic  growth.  The  maintenance  of  price  stability,  however,  is  not  without  its 
challenges. The globalisation of the South African economy is well documented. There is no escaping 
the  impact  of  global  influences  on  the  SA  economy.  The  recent  volatility  in  our  financial  markets 
following the increased risk aversion of global investors towards emerging countries is an example in 
this regard. In addition, the recent successive monthly increases in the price of petrol as a result of the 
sustained  increase  in  international  oil  prices  bear  further  testimony  to  the  sensitivity  of  the  South 
African economy to global developments. As is the case internationally, the high oil price, if sustained, 
poses  a  significant  threat  to  inflation  and  economic  growth  in  South  Africa.  There  are  domestically 
generated  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  as well.  In  particular,  the current  high  levels of consumption 
expenditure,  balance  of  payments  imbalances  and  higher  than  expected  producer  prices  pose  an 
even greater threat to the low inflationary environment we have been enjoying in South Africa. These 
developments demand vigilance on the part of the Bank if the hard-fought economic gains are to be 
sustained.  
The  Bank’s  continued  contribution  to  the  growth  process,  therefore,  is  to  maintain  a  low  inflation 
environment and contribute towards a sound financial system. Although some maintain that the recent 
interest  rate  increase  will  undermine  growth,  we  are  of  the  considered  view  essential  for  the 
maintenance of  the  stable framework  for  growth.  But  low  inflation  or  macroeconomic  stability  on  its 
own  does  not  guarantee  higher  growth.  The  government’s  Accelerated  Shared  Growth  Initiative  of 
South  Africa  (ASGISA)  plans  to  achieve  and  sustain  a  higher  growth  rate  through  an  ambitious 
investment programme which focuses on improving and expanding the infrastructure of the economy. 
The  government  has  highlighted  the  shortage  of  skilled  labour  as  one  of  the  binding  constraints  to 
achieving  the  desired  levels  of  economic  growth.  Both  government  and  the  private  sector  have  an 
important role to play in meeting the skills shortage of the economy. Though it may seem modest, this 
fundraising  dinner 
the 
disadvantaged, thus adding to the skills base and increasing economic opportunity and upliftment in 
areas around St Mark’s. Initiatives such as this one, if sustained and replicated across the country, will 
make a meaningful contribution to the ultimate objective of a better life for all. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  time,  effort  and  money  donated  towards  making  this  evening  such  a 
resounding success,  is  an  eloquent  expression  of  passion  for  extending  educational  benefits  to  the 
least well-off and most vulnerable. No cause can be worthier. I thank you all for listening to your hearts 
and opening your purses to make a difference.  
Thank you. 
furthers  empowerment 
learning  opportunities 
through  granting 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
