V Leeladhar: Indian banks and the global challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the seminar 
on “Indian Banks and the Global Challenges”, organized jointly by the Indian Merchants’ Chamber and 
the Indian Banks’ Association, Mumbai, 31 January 2006. 
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  and  privilege  to  participate  in  the  Seminar  jointly  hosted  by  Indian 
Merchants' Chamber and IBA at a juncture when financial services sector across jurisdictions is going 
through  a  strong  phase  of  increasing  globalisation.  Integration  of  economies  leads  to  integration  of 
financial  markets  catalyzing  the  globalisation  process.  The  growing  role  of  the  financial  sector  in 
allocation of resources has significant potential advantages for the efficiency with which our economy 
functions. Consequently, the adverse consequences of malfunction of the financial system are likely to 
be more severe than they used to be in the past. Hence, all our efforts today are focused at ensuring 
greater financial stability. Given the significance of the Indian banking system, one cannot afford to 
underplay the importance of a robust and resilient banking system.  
2.  The  enhanced  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  Indian  economy,  the  increasing  levels  of 
deregulation along with the increasing levels of competition have facilitated globalisation of the India 
banking system and placed numerous demands on banks. Operating in this demanding environment 
has  exposed  banks  to  various  challenges.  The  last  decade  has  witnessed  major  changes  in  the 
financial  sector  -  new  banks,  new  financial  institutions,  new  instruments,  new  windows,  and  new 
opportunities - and, along with all this, new challenges. While deregulation has opened up new vistas 
for  banks  to  augment  revenues,  it  has  entailed  greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks. 
Demand for new products, particularly derivatives, has required banks to diversify their product mix 
and also effect rapid changes in their processes and operations in order to remain competitive in the 
globalised environment.  
Globalisation – a challenge as well as an opportunity 
3. The benefits of globalisation have been well documented and are being increasingly recognised. 
Globalisation of domestic banks has also been facilitated by tremendous advancement in information 
and communications technology. Globalisation has thrown up lot of opportunities but accompanied by 
concomitant  risks.  There  is  a  growing  realisation  that  the  ability  of  countries  to  conduct  business 
across national borders and the ability to cope with the possible downside risks would depend, inter-
alia, on the soundness of the financial system and the strength of the individual participants. Adoption 
of  appropriate  prudential,  regulatory,  supervisory,  and  technological  framework  on  par  with 
international best practices enables strengthening of the domestic banking system, which would help 
in fortifying it against the risks that might arise out of globalisation. In India, we had strengthened the 
banking sector to face the pressures that may arise out of globalisation by adopting the banking sector 
reforms in a calibrated manner, which followed the twin governing principles of non-disruptive progress 
and consultative process1.  
Global challenges in banking  
4.  Recently  I  was  afforded  an  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  challenges  faced  by  the  Indian  banking 
industry.  To  recapitulate,  I  had  identified  a  few  broad  challenges  faced  by  the  Indian  banks  in  the 
following areas, viz., enhancement of customer service; application of technology; implementation of 
Basel  II;  improvement  of  risk  management  systems;  implementation  of  new  accounting  standards; 
enhancement of transparency & disclosures; and compliance with KYC aspects. If we were to identify 
a few global challenges which banks face today, I am sure we would cover some common ground. An 
overview  of  the  global  challenges  would  include  the  following:  Basel  II  implementation;  enhancing 
                                                      
1   Dr. Y.V. Reddy on Banking Sector Reforms in India An Overview at the Institute of Bankers of Pakistan, Karachi, Pakistan, 
May 18, 2005.  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
corporate  governance;  alignment  of  regulatory  and  accounting  requirements;  outsourcing  risks;  and 
application of advanced technology. I propose to cover these aspects now. 
Basel II implementation 
5. Basel II implementation is widely acknowledged as a significant challenge faced by both banks and 
the  regulators  internationally.  It  is  true  that  Basel  II  implementation  may  be  seen  as  a  compliance 
challenge. While it may be so for some banks, I would venture to mention that Basel II implementation 
has another dimension which offers considerable opportunities to banks. I would like to highlight two 
opportunities  that  are  offered  to  banks,  viz.,  refinement  of  risk  management  systems;  and 
improvement in capital efficiency.  
6. Comprehensive risk management: Under Basel I banks were focused on credit and market risks. 
Basel II has brought into focus a larger number of risks requiring banks to focus on a larger canvas. 
Besides the increase in the number of risks, banks are now beginning to focus on their inter-linkages 
with a view to achieve a more comprehensive risk management framework. Basel II implementation, 
therefore,  is  being  increasingly  seen  as  a  medium  through  which  banks  constantly  endeavour  to 
upgrade  the  risk  management  systems  to  address  the  changing  environment.  Further,  in  the  initial 
stages,  banks  were  managing  each  risk  in  isolation.  It  is  no  longer  adequate  to  manage  each  risk 
independently. Enterprises worldwide are, therefore, now putting in place an integrated framework for 
risk management which is proactive, systematic and spans across the entire organisation. Banks in 
India are also moving from the individual silo system to an enterprise wide risk management system. 
While  the  first  milestone  would  be  risk  integration  across  the  entity,  banks  are  also  aware  of  the 
desirability of risk aggregation across the group both in the specific risk areas as also across the risks. 
Banks would, therefore, be required to allocate significant resources towards this endeavour.  
7. Capital efficiency: Basel II prescriptions have ushered in a transition from the traditional regulatory 
measure of capital adequacy to an evaluation of whether a bank has found the most efficient use of its 
capital  to  support  its  business  i.e.,  a  transition  from  capital  adequacy  to  capital  efficiency.  In  this 
transition,  how  effectively  capital  is  used  will  determine  return  on  equity  and  a  consequent 
enhancement of shareholder value. In effect, banks may adopt a more dynamic approach to use of 
capital, in which capital will flow quickly to its most efficient use. This revised efficiency approach is 
expected  to  guide  the  return-on-equity  strategy  and  influence  banks’  business  plans.  With  the 
extension of capital charge for market risks to the AFS portfolio this year and the coming into force of 
Basel II norms in March 2007, banks would need to shore up the capital levels not only for complying 
with these requirements but also for supporting the balance sheet growth. With a view to enhancing 
the  options  available  to  banks  for  augmenting  their  capital  levels,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently 
permitted banks to issue new capital instruments, including perpetual instruments. A notable feature of 
these  instruments  is  that  these  are  designed  to  help  banks  in  not  only  managing  their  capital 
effectively but also efficiently.  
Enhancing corporate governance 
8.  The  issues  related  to  corporate  governance  have  continued  to  attract  considerable  national  and 
international attention in light of a number of high-profile breakdowns in corporate governance. This 
becomes  all  the  more  relevant  for  banks  since  they  not  only  accept  and  deploy  large  amount  of 
uncollateralized public funds in fiduciary capacity, but also leverage such funds through credit creation.  
Banks are also important participants in the payment and settlement systems. In view of the above, 
legal prescriptions for ownership and governance of banks in Banking Regulation Act, 1949 have been 
supplemented by regulatory prescriptions issued by RBI from time to time.  
9. In view of the importance of the banking system for financial stability, sound corporate governance 
is not only relevant at the level of the individual bank, but is also a critical ingredient at the system 
level. Effective risk management systems determine the health of the financial system and its ability to 
survive economic shocks. To a large extent, many risk management failures reflect a breakdown in 
corporate  governance  which  arise  due  to  poor  management  of  conflicts  of  interest,  inadequate 
understanding of key banking risks, and poor Board oversight of the mechanisms for risk management 
and internal audit. Corporate governance is, therefore, the foundation for effective risk managements 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2006
in banks and thus the foundation for a sound financial system2. Therefore, the choices which banks 
make when they establish their risk management and corporate governance systems have important 
ramifications  for  financial  stability.  These  systems  can  affect  how  the  institution  functions  and  how 
others perceive it in the marketplace3.  
10. A good “governance culture” is crucial for financial stability but since it is an ‘intangible’, rules may 
not  be  able  to  capture  its  essence  effectively.  Therefore,  banks  may  have  to  cultivate  a  good 
governance  culture  building  in  appropriate  checks  and  balances  in  their  operations.  There  are  four 
important  forms  of  oversight  that  should  be  included  in  the  organisational  structure  of  any  bank  in 
order  to  ensure  appropriate  checks  and  balances:  (1)  oversight  by  the  board  of  directors  or 
supervisory board; (2) oversight by individuals not involved in the day-to-day running of the various 
business  areas;  (3)  direct  line  supervision  of  different  business  areas;  and  (4)  independent  risk 
management, compliance and audit functions. In addition, it is important that key personnel are fit and 
proper  for  their  jobs.  Although  some  ownership  structures  might  have  the  potential  to  alter  the 
strategies and objectives of a bank, these banks will also face many of the same risks associated with 
weak  corporate  governance.  Consequently,  the  general  principles  of  sound  corporate  governance 
should also be applied to all banks irrespective of their unique ownership structures4.  
Compliance with international accounting standards 
11.  One  of  the  prime  international  standards  considered  relevant  for  ensuring  a  safe  and  sound 
banking  system  is  the  ‘Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision’  issued  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). Accounting standards are now a part of the set of twelve 
standards that have been identified by the Financial Stability Forum as conducive to a robust financial 
infrastructure. Financial reporting and prudential supervision have slightly different perspectives. While 
the former is oriented towards capturing the historical position, the latter has a forward looking element 
particularly  with  reference  to  measurement  of  impairment  and  capital.  An  important  challenge, 
therefore, is to ensure that accounting standards and prudential frameworks are mutually consistent. 
While working towards achieving this consistency between the two sets of standards, it is essential for 
the regulators to be in a position to address any implications that the changes in accounting standards 
may have for the safety and soundness of banks5. 
12.  Derivative  activity  in  banks  in  India  has  been  increasing  at  a  brisk  pace.  While  the  risk 
management  framework  for  derivative  trading,  which  is  a  relatively  new  area  for  Indian  banks 
(particularly more in respect of structured products), is an essential pre-requisite, the absence of clear 
accounting  guidelines  in  this  area  is  matter  of  significant  concern.  It  is  widely  accepted  that  as  the 
volume  of  transactions  increases,  which  is  happening  in  the  Indian  banking  system,  the  need  to 
upgrade the accounting framework needs no emphasis.  The World Bank’s ROSC on Accounting and 
Auditing  in  India  has  commented  on  the  absence  of  an  accounting  standard  which  deals  with 
recognition,  measurement,  presentation  and  disclosures  pertaining  to  financial  instruments.  The 
Accounting Standards Board of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is considering 
issue of Accounting Standards on the above aspects pertaining to financial Instruments. These will be 
the Indian parallel to International Financial Reporting Standard 7, International Accounting Standards 
32  and  39.  The  proposed  Accounting  Standards  will  be  of  considerable  significance  for  financial 
entities and could therefore have implications for the financial sector. The formal introduction of these 
Accounting Standards by the ICAI is likely to take some time in view of the processes involved. In the 
meanwhile,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  considering  the  need  for  banks  and  financial  entities  adopting  the 
broad underlying principles of IAS 39. Since this is likely to give rise to some regulatory / prudential 
issues all relevant aspects are being comprehensively examined. The proposals in this regard would, 
as  is  normal,  be  discussed  with  the  market  participants  before  introduction.  Adoption  and 
                                                      
2   Dr. Alan Bollard, Corporate governance in the financial sector, Christchurch, New Zealand, 7 April 2003. 
3   Mark  W.  Olson,  Business  Trends  and  Management  Challenges  for  the  Banking  Industry,  Annual  Economic  Outlook 
Conference, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, Tennessee, 16 September 2005. 
4   Enhancing corporate governance for banking organisations, Consultative document issued by BCBS, July 2005. 
5   Malcolm D Knight, Banking and insurance regulation and supervision: Greater convergence, common challenges, Madrid, 
22-23 September 2004. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 3
implementation  of  these  principles  are  likely  to  pose  a  great  challenge  to  both  the  banks  and  the 
Reserve Bank.  
Outsourcing risks 
13.  Banks  are  increasingly  using  outsourcing  for  achieving  strategic  aims  leading  to  either 
rationalisation  of  operational  costs  or  tapping  specialist  expertise  which  is  not  available  internally.  
'Outsourcing'  may  be  defined  as  a  bank's  use  of  a  third  party,  including  an  affiliated  entity  within  a 
corporate group, to perform activities on a continuing basis that would normally be undertaken by the 
bank  itself.  Typically  outsourced  financial  services  include  applications  processing  (loan  origination, 
credit card), document processing, investment management, marketing and research, supervision of 
loans, data processing and back office related activities etc. 
14.  Outsourcing  might  give  rise  to  several  risks  including,  strategic  risk,  reputation  risk,  compliance 
risk, operational risk, exit strategy risk, counterparty risk, country risk, access risk, concentration risk 
and systemic risk.  The failure of a service provider to provide a specified service, ensure security/ 
confidentiality, comply with legal and regulatory requirements can lead to financial losses/ reputational 
risk for the bank and could also lead to systemic risks for the entire banking system in a country. It 
would therefore be imperative for the bank outsourcing its activities to ensure effective management of 
these risks. 
15. It is in this background that RBI has issued draft guidelines on outsourcing, which is intended to 
provide  direction  and  guidance  to  banks  to  effectively  manage  risks  arising  from  such  outsourcing 
activities.  The  underlying  principles  for  any  outsourcing  arrangement  by  a  bank  are  that  such 
arrangements should neither diminish the bank’s ability to fulfill its obligations to its customers and the 
RBI  nor  impede  effective  supervision  by  RBI.  Outsourcing  banks,  therefore,  should  take  steps  to 
ensure that the service provider employs the same high standard of care in performing the services as 
would be employed by the banks if the activities were conducted within the banks and not outsourced. 
Accordingly, banks are not expected to outsource any activity that would result in their internal control, 
business conduct, or reputation being compromised or weakened. 
Application of advanced technology 
16.  Technology  is  a  key  driver  in  the  banking  industry,  which  creates  new  business  models  and 
processes,  and  also  revolutionises  distribution  channels.  Banks  which  have  made  inadequate 
investment  in  technology  have  consequently  faced  an  erosion  of  their  market  shares.  The 
beneficiaries  are  those  banks  which  have  invested  in  technology.  Adoption  of  technology  also 
enhances the quality of risk management systems in banks. Recognising the benefits of modernising 
their technology infrastructure banks are taking the right initiatives.  While doing so, banks have four 
options to choose from: they can build a new system themselves, or buy best of the modules, or buy a 
comprehensive  solution,  or  outsource.  In  this  context  banks  need  to  clearly  define  their  core 
competencies to be sure that they are investing in areas that will distinguish them from other market 
players, and give them a competitive advantage6. A further challenge which banks face in this regard 
is  to  ensure  that  they  derive  maximum  advantage  from  their  investments  in  technology  and  avoid 
wasteful  expenditure  which  might  arise  on  account  of  uncoordinated  and  piecemeal  adoption  of 
technology; adoption of inappropriate/ inconsistent technology and adoption of obsolete technology. 
Capacity building 
17. As dictated by the changing environment, banks need to focus on appropriate capacity building 
measures  to  equip  their  staff  to  handle  advanced  risk  management  systems  and  supervisors  also 
need  to  equally  equip  themselves  with  appropriate  skills  to  have  effective  supervision  of  banks 
adopting those systems. In the likelihood of a high level of attrition in the system, banks need to focus 
on motivating their skilled staff and retaining them7. Skill requirements would be significantly higher for 
                                                      
6   UBS AG, The Bank for Banks Industry Challenges. August 2004 
7   Ms. K.J.Udeshi, Financial System Stability and Basel II  - Way Forward, Sri Lanka, August 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2006
banks planning to migrate to the advanced approaches under Basel II. Capacity building gains greater 
relevance in these banks, so as to equip themselves to take advantage of the incentives offered under 
the advanced approaches.  
18.  A  relevant  point  in  this  regard  is  that  capacity  building  should  be  across  the  institution  and  not 
confined to any particular level or any particular area. The demand for better skills can be met either 
from  within  or  from  outside.  It  would  perhaps  be  worthwhile  to  first  glean  through  the  existing 
resources  to  identify  misplaced  or  hidden  or  forgotten  resources  and  re-position  them  to  boost  the 
bank’s efforts to capitalise on available skills. This does not undermine the benefits that a bank may 
derive by meeting their requirements from the market, but is only intended to prioritise the process.  
Conclusion 
19. The global challenges which banks face are not confined only to the global banks. These aspects 
are also highly relevant for banks which are part of a globalised banking system. Further, overcoming 
these challenges by the other banks is expected to not only stand them in good stead during difficult 
times but also augurs well for the banking system to which they belong and will also equip them to 
launch themselves as a global bank.  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 5
