Philipp Hildebrand: Swiss monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Annual Meeting of the IFZ (Institute for Financial Services Zug), Zug, 1 June 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Having  successfully  pursued  a  strategy  of  money  supply  targets  for  around  25  years,  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  (SNB)  decided  to  adopt  a  fundamentally  new  monetary  policy  approach  in  1999. 
Although it integrated some of the important elements of inflation targeting, it did so less strictly, thus 
allowing greater flexibility. Money stocks and credits continued to play a vital role in the new concept. 
Unlike the European Central Bank, the SNB chose not to make the monetary analysis a separate pillar 
in its concept.  
An  important  distinction  to  inflation  targeting  is  that  monetary  policy  focuses  on  maintaining  price 
stability in the medium to long term, while inflation targeting is generally oriented towards short-term 
and, in some cases, variable inflation targets. The SNB's monetary policy uses an inflation forecast as 
a central indicator and sets its operational goal in the form of a target range for the three-month Libor. 
A monetary policy that is geared to the medium and long term affords leeway for a certain degree of 
stabilisation of the real economy.  
The new concept has so far proven to be very effective in a turbulent environment, enabling the SNB 
to react to major shocks independently and flexibly. Moreover, it has strengthened confidence in the 
successful preservation of monetary stability.  
Compared with the SNB’s last quarterly assessment in March, many indicators now suggest stronger-
than-expected  growth.  However,  high  commodity  prices,  rising  capital  market  interest  rates  and 
turbulences in the equity and foreign exchange markets may also present new risks. On the whole, we 
still consider our strategy of gradual normalisation to be appropriate. Should the environment change, 
however, the SNB will not hesitate to review its monetary stance and adjust it, if necessary.  
The  current  cyclical  boom  should  not  obscure  the  fact  that  the  Swiss  domestic  market  still  needs 
further structural reforms to ensure sustained economic growth, thus safeguarding our prosperity and 
preparing the economy for the demographic challenges ahead.  
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
