Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Turning challenges into opportunities  
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, during the 
50th  Anniversary  Celebratory  Luncheon  of  Rang-ay  Rural  Bank,  Inc.  (Rang-ay  Bank),  Sevilla,  San 
Fernando City, La Union, 14 January 2006.  
 Governor Victor Ortega and Mayor Mary Jane Ortega, officers and staff of Rang-ay Bank led 
by Chairperson Eufrosina Nisce and Rang-ay President Ives Nisce, co-workers in the banking sector 
and colleagues from the government sector, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:  
Naimbag nga malem ‘yo amin (Good afternoon)!  
I am indeed honored to be among the witnesses of this momentous occasion.  Thank you for 
this privilege of being with you in celebrating your 50th anniversary.  
Today, we all are witnesses to the realization of your founders’ vision 50 years ago. And it is 
certainly  one  exhilarating  experience.   This  feat  has  significant  impact  to  the  banking  industry  and 
most especially to the community that Rang-ay has been serving for half a century.  Thus, I also take 
this opportunity, to express Bangko Sentral’s appreciation to the entire family of Rang-ay, particularly 
for being consistently in congruence with all our policy and regulatory reform initiatives all these years.  
Rang-ay at 50  
Rang-ay Bank has undoubtedly lived up to its name. It has been bringing progress or should I say 
“karangyaan” to the community it serves from the first moment it opened its doors as a pioneer private 
bank in San Fernando, La Union on January 16, 1956.  
Today,  you  understandably  have  the  right  to  be  proud  of  your  accomplishments.  The  last 
time  we  looked,  you  are  still  this  region’s  number  one  bank  and  among  the  top  25  rural  banks 
nationwide in terms of both physical and financial resources.  
Your  strong  presence  in  Region  1  as  well  as  in  the  nearby  Cordillera  Region  is  made 
possible by your network of ten branches (including that of a former affiliate - RB of Burgos).  
You continue to enjoy the trust and confidence of over 15,000 depositors1 whose savings are 
now close to half a billion.  
Likewise,  you  have  a  relatively  strong  capitalization  of  120  million.   Rang-ay’s  risk-based 
capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of 18.5 percent is also well above industry and regulatory standards. 
Your total loan portfolio is nearly half a billion which accounts to 65.5 percent of your total 
assets. Your lending activities have surely provided farmers and  other entrepreneurial rural folks with 
wider latitude in accessing credit which translated to better lives for the rural community.  
With  your  wide  array  of  deposit  products  and  credit  lending  programs,  you  managed  to 
sustain bottom line figures at very good levels.  
Rang-ay’s  performance  definitely  did  not  go  unnoticed  as  evidenced  by  the  various 
accolades from financial and non-financial organizations2, the Bangko Sentral included.  
As such, one can say that rang-ay is poised to further improve its level of efficiency to ensure 
continuous market leadership during these challenging but equally rewarding times. 
                                                      
1   To date, the Rang-ay Bank has 1 head office, 9 bank branches and 1 affiliate bank (Rural Bank of Burgos, which will be 
consolidated with Rang-ay, Inc. following the grant of the certificate of authority to operate by the BSP  
2   Rang-ay received 1 award from the BSP, 7 awards from other banks, 1 award from Rural Credit and Guarantee Corporation 
and 3 awards from a private non-government organization (NGO).
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
Industry outlook  
Let me therefore take the next few minutes to outline the banking industry prospects in 2006 to help 
you firm up your strategic plans for this year and beyond.  
We  are  optimistic  that  the  rural  banking  industry  will  sustain  its  positive  performance  this  year  and 
remain in the forefront of reforms as catalysts of a broad-based development in the countryside.  
For our part at the regulatory front, the BSP remains committed to the continuous implementation of 
our reform program to sustain financial stability and growth.  Specifically, our objective is to have a 
more stable, more efficient and a more depositor and friendly banking system.  
We  are  still  advocating  clean  up  of  banks’  balance  sheets  through  the  expedient  and  innovative 
disposition  of  non-performing  assets.  This  is  central  to  restoring  the  credit  supply  to  the  productive 
sectors of the economy.  
Our goal is to bring the banking industry’s NPA/NPL ratio to single-digit level. As of end-June 2005, 
the rural banking industry’s NPA/NPL ratios stood at 11.9 and 14.7 percent, respectively. This is still 
double the pre-crisis period since the sale of NPAs under the SPV Law only created a small dent on 
the inventory of acquired assets arising from soured loans.  
We, thus, welcome the approval by the House of Representatives of the extension of the SPV Law3_ 
by another two years. We are hopeful that the senate will approve the counterpart bill soonest so that 
banks can immediately resume the wholesale clean up of bad assets. We expect that this extension 
will result in the unloading of at least another 100 billion in bad assets so that NPL ratio will more or 
less be lowered to about 7 percent.    
We are also studying if Joint Venture Agreements (JVA) can give greater flexibility to banks to dispose 
of their bad assets apart from availment of incentives under the SPV Law. The unloading of foreclosed 
real  estate  properties  through  joint  venture  agreements4  (JVAs)  that  will  develop  and  enhance  the 
marketability  of  banks’  acquired  assets,  particularly  undeveloped  properties,  will  not  only  clean  up 
banks’  balance sheets but also potentially boost the housing market and even tourism.  
Beyond  asset  clean  up,  the  BSP  is  following  through  with  its  regulatory  reforms  aimed  at  further 
strengthening corporate governance, risk management and capital adequacy in our banks through a 
more effective and efficient enforcement. 
Last  year,  we  began  the  changeover  to  International  Accounting  Standards/Financial  Reporting 
Standards.  This  would  further  strengthen  the  current  transparency  and  disclosure  requirements  in 
financial reporting. The pivotal role of external auditors during this transition period is also being given 
higher importance.  
Recently, we have issued new regulations on internal audit designed to adopt a code of ethics and 
establish mechanisms for the reporting of financial improprieties, malpractices and acts of misconduct 
(corporate whistle-blowing).   
We are also sustaining our lobbying efforts in congress for the passage of the amendment to the BSP 
Charter and the enactment of the Credit Information System Act.  The first will make the BSP a more 
effective  monetary  authority  and  banking  regulator  while  the  other  will  pave  the  way  for  the 
establishment of a truly comprehensive credit information system that is expected to lower the cost of 
borrowing, provide greater access to credit in general and reduce the dependency on collateral based 
lending.  
Beyond  regulatory  initiatives,  the  BSP  is  also  equally  committed  in  its  advocacy  to  promote  a 
sustainable microfinance program as a tool to alleviate poverty.  
The  present  poverty  situation  in  the  Philippines  has  given  rural  financing  a  new  dimension, 
concretizing the significant role of rural banks in countryside development5 Toward this end, we have 
                                                      
3   Target is first quarter of 2006 
4   A  proposal  is  currently  under  study  for  approval  of  the  Monetary  Board.  Upon  approval,  this  will  initially  allow  U/KBs  to 
dispose  their  Real  and  Other  Properties  Owned  or  Acquired  (ROPOA)s  to  various  JVAs  with  real  estate  developers.  At 
present, ROPOA still accounts to 46.0 percent of the banking system’s overall level of NPAs. 
5   At present, there are 4 microfinance-oriented rural banks and 158 rural banks engaged in some level of microfinance with a 
total loan portfolio of P2.3 billion catering to a total of 441,963 borrowers. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
recently allowed the selective6 lifting of moratorium on bank branching to facilitate the expansion of 
financial  services  in  underserved  areas.  Under  Circular  No.  505,  we  foresee,  among  others;  the 
growth of bank microfinancing to benefit rural folks with greater access to formal banking services that 
in turn, mobilizes savings and investments.  
Moreover,  we  foresee  an  accelerated  consolidation  process  in  the  banking  industry  in  the  next  3 
years.  This will be brought about by (1) a stronger regulatory framework that will hasten the exit of 
weak  banks,  hopefully  on  a  voluntary  and  market-based  basis;  (2)  the  increasingly  stronger 
competition  by  new  foreign  investors  coming  in,  in  existing  banks;  and  (3)  the  rigorous  technical 
demands posed by modern banking and finance standards.  
All these changes will dramatically transform the competitive environment. Down the road, we see a 
banking  landscape  characterized  by  a  handful  of  main  banks  complemented  by  an  abundance  of 
smaller banks that serve various well defined market niches.  
Final note  
In closing, let me call on this generation of  the family behind rang-ay bank to transform these reform 
initiatives into opportunities and further stretch your vision over the next years to come.  
With your wealth of experience, rang-ay can lead in turning the heavy flywheel of remaining reforms 
for the rural banking industry.   
I  trust  that  rang-ay  will  harness  its  core  expertise,  geographic  advantage  and  strong  ties  with  the 
community in promoting a safe, sound and responsive banking system.  
Let us all work together in keeping the wheels of change turning.  
Agyamannak (thank you) and happy anniversary!  
                                                      
6   Prohibition on bank branching remains in the cities of Makati, Mandaluyong, Manila, Paranaque, Pasay, Pasig and Quezon 
including the municipality of San Juan. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
