Donald L Kohn: Reflections on globalization and policies  
Remarks by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  at  the  European  Economics  and  Financial  Centre  Seminar,  House  of  Commons,  London, 
England, 6 July 2006. 
 I am pleased to have the opportunity to return to the Houses of Parliament. I say "return" because I 
appeared  here  once  previously,  before  the  Treasury  Select  Committee  to  testify  on  my  report  on 
monetary policy processes at the Bank of England. Two memories stand out from that visit: One is of 
the mouse that ran across the floor as we were eating lunch - I am sure it could not have been a rat in 
these  precincts;  the  other  is  of  the  thoughtful,  informed  character  of  the  give  and  take  with  the 
members of the committee, who, perhaps, were just being relatively nice to a visitor from a central 
bank with only ninety years of history at the time.  
In  the  past  few  years,  the  global  economy  has  enjoyed  low  inflation  and  robust  growth.  This  is  an 
experience to which policymakers of all varieties have contributed. But today I am not going to address 
the prospects for the global economy to extend that progress in the near term. Chairman Bernanke, in 
his congressional testimony later this month, will address the immediate outlook for activity and prices 
in  the  United  States  and  the  global  economy  more  generally,  and  the  recent  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  Instead,  I  thought  I  would  step  back  and  think  about  the  implications  of  some  longer-term 
trends  for  economic  performance  and  for  policies,  monetary  and  other.  In  particular  I  want  to 
concentrate on several aspects of the reduction of barriers to trade, capital flows, and labor migration - 
often encapsulated in the word "globalization." First, I will talk about the extent to which globalization 
has itself contributed to the low-inflation environment in the United States. But the freer flows around 
the globe have probably also contributed to the size and persistence of global imbalances - the current 
account deficit of the United States and the surplus of the rest of the world. I will next spend a few 
minutes on the causes of these imbalances, how they might unwind, and the policies that should be 
put in place to raise the odds on orderly adjustment.1  
Globalization and inflation 
Although inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, it is important to stress the word "ultimately" 
in that formulation. The long run in which monetary policy exerts its influence on nominal magnitudes 
is  the  summation  of  individual  short  runs  in  which  pressures  in  labor  and  product  markets  help  to 
shape price dynamics. In the world in which we live, it seems natural to expect, as others have argued, 
that  the  greater  integration  of  product  and  financial  markets  would  have  exerted  some  downward 
pressure on inflation. I cannot look back at the experience in the United States over the past decade 
without  discerning  the  imprint  of  such  forces.  The  opening  up  of  China  and  India,  in  particular, 
represents a potentially huge increase in the global supply of mainly lower-skilled workers. And it is 
clear that the low cost of production in these and other emerging economies has led to a geographic 
shift in production toward them; from a U.S. perspective, the ratio of imported goods to domestically 
produced goods has risen noticeably in recent years. 
However, the extent of the disinflationary forces let loose by this shift in the pace of globalization is 
less obvious. The United States is more open, but it is also large in size and scope. Many U.S. goods 
and most services are still produced domestically with little competition from abroad. In addition, the 
significant expansion of production in China and elsewhere has put substantial upward pressure on 
the prices of oil and other commodities, many of which are imported for use as inputs to production in 
the United States. While we can point to types of goods for which prices are restrained by forces from 
abroad, the net effects of globalization on domestic inflation of all goods and services need not even 
be negative, especially in today’s environment of strong global growth.  
One challenge in assessing the effect of increased globalization is the paucity of empirical research on 
this  issue,  which  is  understandable  given  the  shortness  of  the  span  over  which  these  forces  have 
                                                      
1   These views are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 1
been particularly acute. Nevertheless, the existing research does highlight several channels through 
which globalization might have helped to hold down domestic inflation in recent years. These channels 
include  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  on  domestic  inflation  of  lower  import  prices,  a  heightened 
sensitivity of domestic inflation to foreign demand conditions and perhaps less sensitivity to domestic 
demand conditions, downward pressure on domestic wage growth, and upward pressure on domestic 
productivity growth.  
Let me summarize the empirical evidence from work on U.S. inflation my colleagues and I have done 
at the Federal Reserve Board, as well as from our readings of other studies. In the United States, the 
increase in core import prices since the mid-1990s has averaged about 1-1/2 percentage points less 
per year than the increase in core consumer prices. According to our model, the direct and indirect 
effects of this decline in the relative price of imports held down core inflation by between 1/2 and 1 
percentage point per year over this period, an estimated effect that is substantially larger than it would 
have been in earlier decades. However, much of the decline in import prices during this period was 
probably  driven  by  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar  in  the  late  1990s  and  the  effects  of  technological 
change on goods prices rather than by the growing integration of world markets. In addition, import 
prices have risen at least as rapidly as core consumer prices over the past several years and thus no 
longer appear to be acting as a significant restraint on inflation in the United States.  
A  second  aspect  of  the  hypothesis  is  that  as  economies  become  more  integrated,  their  domestic 
inflation will be less sensitive to domestic demand pressures and more sensitive to foreign demand 
conditions  than  it was  earlier. While  this seems  eminently  plausible,  recognize  that  this  is  a  partial-
equilibrium effect, identifying one, among many, determinants of inflation, and consequently difficult to 
verify empirically.  
Most researchers, in fact, agree that inflation in the United States is less sensitive to domestic demand 
conditions  today  than  it  was  twenty  years  ago.  But  numerous  researchers  have  attributed  this 
persistently  low  inflation  to  the  improved  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  In  that  regard,  most  of  the 
decline in the sensitivity of U.S. inflation to the domestic unemployment gap occurred in the 1980s - 
too  early  to  be  associated  with  the  more  recent  acceleration  in  the  pace  of  globalization  and  more 
coincident with the sea change in the attitude toward inflation worldwide.  
This aspect of the globalization hypothesis, however, would be bolstered if the decline in the sensitivity 
of  inflation  to  domestic  demand  was  accompanied  by  an  increased  sensitivity  to  foreign  demand. 
Efforts  to  find  such  a  link  have  met  with  mixed  results,  with  some  researchers  having  found  large 
effects and others having found no effect. Our own analysis of this issue indicates that these results 
are  sensitive  to  how  the  foreign  output  gap  is  defined  and  to  how  the  inflation  model  is  specified, 
suggesting that any effect may not be especially robust. That said, the difficulties with measuring slack 
in the U.S. economy are compounded when describing the global economy, making settlement of this 
issue especially difficult.  
Similarly, the evidence that globalization has helped to restrain unit labor costs in recent years is not 
definitive. One hypothesis is that the increase in the supply of low-skilled workers associated with the 
emergence of China and other East Asian countries as low-cost centers of production has damped the 
growth  of  nominal  wages  in  the  United  States.  But  a  stable  statistical  relationship  between  labor 
compensation and various measures of globalization has eluded researchers. However, many of the 
changes  are  relatively  recent,  giving  empiricists  few  observations.  And,  in  that  regard,  the  recent 
behavior of some, though not all, measures of aggregate compensation seem to have been somewhat 
lower  than  models  would  have  predicted.  Of  course,  several  purely  domestic  factors  could  help  to 
account for any shortfall, such as the aftereffects of the unusually sluggish recovery in job growth early 
in this expansion or a possible downward drift in the natural rate of unemployment. But it  also is a 
pattern that would be consistent with downward pressures from an expansion in global labor supply. In 
support of this link, some studies have found a relationship between industry wage growth and import 
penetration, and between the relative decline in wages of low-skilled workers and trade, but the effects 
are generally small.  
A  second  possibility  is  that  globalization  has  restrained  unit  labor  costs  by  raising  productivity. 
Increasing volumes of trade should bolster productivity as economies concentrate their resources in 
those sectors in which they are relatively more efficient. But I have seen little direct evidence on the 
extent to which globalization may have boosted aggregate productivity growth in the United States in 
recent  years.  Nevertheless,  research  at  the  Board  finds  that  multinational  corporations,  which  may 
have  greater  opportunities  to  realize  efficiencies  by  shifting  production  locations,  accounted  for  a 
disproportionate share of aggregate productivity growth in the late 1990s. And some microeconomic 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2006
studies have found a relationship between global engagement and productivity at the firm level. Thus, 
it seems possible that the persistently high growth rates of multifactor productivity in recent years in 
the United States may partly be due to the productivity-enhancing effects of globalization. However, 
these  effects  should  not  be  unique  to  the  United  States.  The  fact  that  many  other  advanced 
economies  facing  similar  competitive  pressures  are  not  experiencing  the  same  outcome  gives  me 
pause.  
This evidence suggests that the old line of Churchill - that two economists give three different answers 
to any question - still holds. My own assessment is that, quite naturally, the greater integration of the 
U.S.  economy  into  a  rapidly  evolving  world  economy  has  affected  the  dynamics  of  inflation 
determination. Unfortunately, huge gaps and puzzles remain in our analysis and empirical testing of 
various hypotheses related to these effects. But, for the most part, the evidence seems to suggest that 
to date the effects have been gradual and limited: a greater role for the direct and indirect effects of 
import prices; possibly some damping of unit labor costs, though less so for prices from this channel 
judging  from  high  profit  margins;  and  potentially  a  smaller  effect  of  the  domestic  output  gap  and  a 
greater effect of foreign output gaps, but here too the evidence is far from conclusive. In particular, the 
entry  of  China,  India,  and  others  into  the  global  trading  system  probably  has  exerted  a  modest 
disinflationary force on prices in the United States in recent years.  
Moreover, we should recognize that these could be one-off effects to the extent that they reflect the 
global  imbalances  that  I  will  speak  about  next,  rather  than  just  the  integration  of  emerging-market 
economies into the global-trading system. If so, any disinflationary effects could dissipate or even be 
reversed  in  coming  years.  For  example,  the  fact  that  China  and  some  other  emerging-market 
economies have resisted upward pressure on their exchange rates and are running trade surpluses 
has undoubtedly contributed to their disinflationary effects on the rest of the world. The prices of their 
exports are lower than they would be if market forces were given greater scope in foreign exchange 
markets,  and  they  are  supplying  more  goods  and  services  to  the  rest  of  the  world  than  they 
themselves are demanding. These imbalances are not likely to be sustained indefinitely. The elevated 
rates of national saving in these economies - and, in some, relatively restrained rates of investment - 
are  not  likely  to  persist  in  the  face  of  ongoing  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  their  financial 
markets, increases in the depth of their product markets, and fuller development of economic safety 
nets.  As  individuals  in  these  countries  are  increasingly  drawn  to  investing  at  home  and  consuming 
more of their wealth and as their real wages catch up to past productivity gains, the upward pressures 
on  these  countries’  currencies  will  intensify,  their  demand  will  come  into  better  alignment  with  their 
capacity  to  produce,  cost  advantages  will  decline,  and  these  economies  will  exert  less,  if  any, 
downward pressure on inflation in the United States or other advanced economies. 
Global imbalances 
The first thing to keep in mind about global imbalances is their scale. The U.S. current account deficit 
is enormous - on the order of $800 billion or 6-1/2 percent of gross domestic product - and it is not 
likely  to  shrink  substantially  in  the  immediate  future,  given  the  current  configuration  of  economic 
activity and prices around the world. Obviously, the U.S. deficit has as a counterpart an equal current 
account surplus in the rest of the world combined, after allowance for gaps in the statistical reporting 
system.  
The size and persistence of these imbalances reflects two interrelated forces. First is the gap between 
spending  and  production  in  the  United  States  and  a  similar  gap  of  opposite  sign  in  the  rest  of  the 
world. The United States as a whole is spending much more than it is producing. Saving rates are 
especially low in our household and federal government sectors - both of which are spending more 
than  their  current  income.  This  configuration  is  not  so  unusual  for  the  government,  but  it  is  for 
households,  where  low  interest  rates  (until  recently)  and  the  rising  value  and  easier  accessibility  of 
housing wealth apparently have boosted spending relative to income. 
Outside  the  United  States,  the  shortfall  of  domestic  demand  relative  to  production  capacity  has 
importantly reflected weak business investment along with high saving rates, a mechanism identified 
by my colleague, Chairman Bernanke. Low levels of investment relative to profits, sales, and the cost 
of capital are global, including in the United States. Indeed, it is one reason interest rates have been 
so  low  through  much of  the  recent  global  expansion.  In  the  United  States,  the  shortfall  in business 
demand  has  been  made  up  for  largely  by  the  household  sector,  as  I  just  noted;  for  a  variety  of 
reasons, that has been less the case in many other countries, especially in Asia, and these countries 
have, in effect, relied on exports to fill the gap between demand and potential production.  
BIS Review 63/2006 
 3
The  second  force  affecting  global  imbalances  has  been  the  continuing  strong  demand  for  dollar 
assets, without which exchange rates and other prices already would have adjusted to limit the growth 
of  the  imbalances.  Arguably,  it  was  this  strong  demand,  in  response  to  the  step-up  in  productivity 
growth in the United States and the Asian financial crisis, that appreciated the dollar in the late 1990s 
and  initiated  the  string  of  large  U.S.  current  account  deficits.  But  the  demand  has  continued  this 
decade, albeit with some fluctuations, financing the growing U.S. current account deficit.  
Private investors apparently perceive opportunities for relatively high returns on dollar assets in light of 
the more rapid growth of productivity in the United States than in many other industrialized economies. 
The attraction of dollar assets likely also is enhanced by the liquid nature of the markets in which they 
trade and because as collateral these assets are protected by the rule of law and have been a safe 
haven  in  times  of  stress.  The  globalization  of  financial  markets  and  the  increased  willingness  of 
investors to look beyond their own borders for opportunities may well have facilitated the transfer of 
savings  needed  to  sustain  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit.  In  that  regard,  both  the  pull  of  global 
demands for our assets as well as the push of our needs to finance our trade imbalance explains the 
current conjuncture. 
Foreign official holdings of dollar assets also have risen substantially, especially in Asia. Governments 
there apparently read one lesson of the financial crisis of the 1990s as the need for a large war chest 
of reserves. In addition, against the backdrop of very high private saving rates, they may be concerned 
about  their  ability  to  generate  sufficient  domestic  demand  to  provide  employment  opportunities,  in 
some cases for the growing numbers of people who want to shift from agriculture to higher productivity 
jobs often in urban areas. 
Although private and government demands for dollar assets have allowed the U.S. current account 
deficit and foreign surpluses to persist, these imbalances are not sustainable indefinitely. In the United 
States,  both  public  and  private  saving  will  need  to  rise  to  meet  the  oncoming  needs  of  an  aging 
population. At some point, risk-adjusted returns on investments in the rest of the world will begin to 
look favorable relative to holding dollar assets. Dollar assets are becoming an increasing proportion of 
non-U.S. portfolios; this can continue for a time, but not forever. At some point, the United States is 
going to need to finance its imports with the proceeds of its exports, not with foreign saving.  
Experience with current account adjustments by industrialized economies - for example, by the United 
States in the 1980s - suggests that the transition to a more sustainable configuration is not likely to be 
disruptive. But we cannot be sure, particularly because the U.S. experience is unique given the dollar’s 
role  as  a  reserve  currency  and  Americans’  relatively  favorable  returns  on  assets  held  abroad.  The 
world  economy  is  in  uncharted  territory  with  regard  to  the  size  of  the  imbalances.  Various  asset 
markets have experienced rather sharp fluctuations in prices in recent decades, some of which have 
threatened disruption in the United States and have contributed to sluggish growth elsewhere, as in 
Japan following the real estate boom and bust; we certainly cannot rule out the possibility of further 
sharp asset price movements as product prices and spending adjust. Recent research reinforces the 
common-sense  conclusion  that  no  single  policy  or  private  action  will  be  sufficient  to  effect  the 
necessary  changes.  Adjustment  will  need  to  proceed  along  several  dimensions  at  the  same  time, 
including changes in relative prices and in domestic demand around the globe.  
The role of policy 
That observation brings me to my final topic - the role of public policy in addressing these imbalances. 
Sound public policies will enhance the chances that any transition will be smooth. They can contribute 
by facilitating needed adjustments in spending, production, and relative prices and by taking steps to 
foster strong, flexible product and financial markets that are resilient to more abrupt changes in asset 
prices  and  spending  patterns,  cushioning  the  effect  of  any  such  fluctuations  on  output  and  product 
prices.  
A permanent correction to the spending imbalances in the United States must involve further progress 
on fiscal discipline and a long-run solution to the financing problems of entitlement programs - Social 
Security,  Medicare,  and  Medicaid.  Without  a  resolution  of  these  fiscal  problems,  it  would  be  all  the 
more  difficult  to  bring  aggregate  production  and  spending  into  balance  and  the  resultant  intensified 
pressures on interest rates, as the flow of foreign saving into the United States levels out or declines, 
would exacerbate adjustment difficulties in other sectors.  
Smooth adjustment of global current account imbalances cannot be brought about by actions of the 
United  States  alone.  Our  trading  partners  also  need  to  take  steps.  Indeed,  were  U.S.  domestic 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2006
demand to moderate and provide less stimulus abroad in the form of reduced demand for exports from 
our  trading  partners,  central  banks  in  those  countries  would  need  to  adjust  the  stance  of  monetary 
policy  to  maintain  full  utilization  of  resources.  Moreover,  in  many  cases,  the  root  cause  of  deficient 
domestic demand seems to be more structural than cyclical in nature, calling for more micro-oriented 
measures  to  promote  flexible  and  efficient  labor  and  product  markets.  Such  initiatives  should  yield 
higher productivity growth and more vigorous spending, boosting rates of return on capital investment 
outside the United States. These changes in turn would boost the demand for U.S. exports and would 
likely shift portfolio preferences away from dollar-denominated assets.  
Other public policies, here and abroad, can have an important influence on the transition process by 
working  to  facilitate  market  flexibility.  For  example,  increased  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  key  Asian 
currencies  will  be  essential  to  enable  the  monetary  authorities  to  contain  inflation  through  market-
oriented policies rather than inefficient direct controls. Greater flexibility also will enhance the ability of 
all  the  world’s  economies  to  adapt  to  the  huge  increases  in  the  effective  supply  of  labor  and  its 
productivity  and  in  demand  that  has  resulted  from  these  economies  becoming  part  of  the  global 
trading system.  In  addition,  the  United  States  and  its  trading  partners should  vigorously  protect  the 
current degree of the openness of their labor and product markets and should continue to pursue the 
difficult goal of reducing trade barriers further.  
These and other types of market flexibility help facilitate needed shifts in spending and prices; without 
them, rigidities might impede such stabilizing changes, causing adjustments to break out forcefully in 
other,  more  disruptive  ways.  Increased  market  flexibility  would  also  ease  the  macroeconomic 
stabilization  burden  placed  on  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  -  an  important  consideration,  given  that 
policymakers cannot anticipate the nature and incidence of all the elements of the adjustment process.  
In this regard, prudential regulation is also important because it increases the ability of policymakers to 
focus  on  stabilizing  aggregate  output  and  inflation.  By  ensuring  that  financial  institutions  are 
adequately  capitalized  and  are  managing  risks  well,  and  are  in  general  well  prepared  to  deal  with 
major  changes  in  asset  prices,  they  are  in  a  better  position  to  weather  any  necessary  changes  in 
policy  settings.  Prudential  regulation  also  decreases  the  risk  that  the  actions  of  impaired  financial 
institutions  could  disrupt  the  flow  of  credit  and  thereby  intensify  what  might  already  be  difficult 
adjustments. A surge in financial market innovations and shift in trading participants has paralleled the 
rise in global imbalances in recent years. The Federal Reserve, under the leadership of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  has  been  working  with  other  regulators  in  the  United  States  and 
elsewhere,  including  the  Financial  Services  Authority  in  London,  along  with  the  private  sector  to 
strengthen the infrastructures and risk management around these new markets and participants.  
Finally, monetary policy plays a role in reacting to these imbalances and their inevitable unwinding. I 
start  my  thinking  on  this  topic  from  the  premise  that  monetary  policy  -  in  the  United  States  or 
elsewhere - has not been a major factor behind the increases in global imbalances. As I argued a little 
while ago, the imbalances reflect saving and investment behavior along with demands for assets in 
various  economies.  To  be  sure,  spending  and  production  respond  to  changes  in  interest  rates,  but 
how the balance between the two is affected by policy is not clear. Policies to affect demand might 
have  offsetting  influences  on  relative  prices.  For  example,  a  tighter  monetary  policy  in  the  United 
States might damp demand but could also appreciate the exchange rate, with ambiguous effects on 
the  current  account.  As  a  consequence,  monetary  policies  are  not  well  suited  to  initiate  current 
account adjustments.  
These imbalances certainly affect the forces of supply and demand and have consequences for price 
stability. At the Federal Reserve and at other central banks, we have been reacting to the changes in 
spending and prices that have accompanied the buildup of these imbalances in ways intended to keep 
inflation low and stable and our economies producing near their maximum sustainable potential. The 
imbalances are important to us in so far as they affect the macroeconomy, and in this regard they are 
just a few of the factors that the Federal Reserve considers in assessing the prospects for price and 
output stability. Similarly, we will need to take account of any influences on the macroeconomy of the 
unwinding of the imbalances when that occurs.  
Continued strong demand for dollar assets will be critical to keeping that unwinding smooth and not 
disruptive.  The  Federal  Reserve  can  contribute  by  being  sure  the  public  remains  confident  that  the 
purchasing power of their dollar assets will not erode unexpectedly. As long as inflation expectations 
remain  contained,  relatively  faster  growth  of  the  prices  of  imported  goods  for  a  time  would  be 
associated with only a temporary bulge in inflation and would result in a needed change in relative 
prices. The lesson from the 1970s, however, is that an unchecked or permanent increase in inflation 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 5
would  only  feed  back  adversely  on  demand  for  dollars.  Such  an  unmooring  of  the  anchor  of  price 
stability could only elevate the odds on abrupt changes in interest rates and asset prices, instability in 
the U.S. economy, and disorder in global adjustments. 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2006
