Tiff Macklem: Floating dollar, anchored inflation - the role of the exchange rate 
in Canada’s monetary policy framework 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Lunenburg Board of 
Trade, Lunenburg, Nova Scotia, 8 June 2006. 
 The first thing I'd like to say is . . . Happy Birthday! And many, many more. Two hundred and fifty-three 
years of hard work and civic pride have made Lunenburg the beautiful and historically rich place it is 
today. I'm very pleased to be here with you on this occasion.  
I'm happy to have been invited by the Board of Trade to speak about the role of the exchange rate in 
Canada's monetary policy framework. The Canadian dollar is very much in the news these days. And 
so I want to put exchange rate movements into context, and Nova Scotia is a good place to do that. 
With a commercial history that goes back centuries, Nova Scotians have a long experience with trade 
and currencies. From the early 1700s, when they were alleged to possess, and I quote, "a canniness 
in trade that staggered even the Scotch,"1 to the energy and agri-food exports of today, Nova Scotians 
have always been outward-looking, engaged in trade, and thus interested in the value of currencies. 
Over the next 20 minutes, I'd like to explain the role of the flexible exchange rate in our economy. I'll 
start by providing a useful backdrop—the Bank of Canada's monetary policy framework. Next, I'll take 
a close look at the flexible exchange rate, and discuss how the Bank considers currency movements 
in its monetary policy decisions. I'll then comment on the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, 
and conclude by discussing the challenges that the rapid appreciation of our currency is posing. At the 
end of my remarks, there will be time for comments and questions. 
The monetary policy framework 
The  ultimate  goal  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of 
Canadians. To achieve this goal, we need a clear, effective policy framework. 
The two key components of the Bank's monetary policy framework are an "anchor," the inflation target, 
and  a  "float,"  the  flexible  exchange  rate.  Living  by  the  ocean,  you  know  better  than  I  that  a  good 
mooring is one that keeps a boat in place, yet allows some give and take for the wind and the tide. 
And so it is for our framework. We need an inflation target to anchor our policy with a clear objective. 
We also need the flexible exchange rate to pass on valuable price signals and to absorb some of the 
ups and downs of the global economy. The two components work hand in hand and reinforce each 
other  to  promote  the  economic  well-being  of  the  nation.  Let  me  elaborate  first  on  the  "anchor,"  the 
inflation target. 
Out of the bitter experience of the 1970s and early 1980s, we learned that the best contribution that 
monetary policy can make to the welfare of Canadians is to keep inflation low and stable. In 1991, the 
Bank and the Government of Canada formalized this commitment to low inflation by announcing an 
explicit inflation target. Since 1995, the target has been the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent 
inflation control range. The inflation target has proven to be very effective—indeed, it has been the 
most successful regime in Canadian monetary policy history. Inflation has been low and stable, and 
we've experienced solid growth and less volatility in output and employment.  
To keep inflation at 2 per cent, the Bank tries to maintain a balance between the overall (or aggregate) 
demand for, and supply of, goods and services. When aggregate demand and supply are in balance, 
the economy can operate at its full production capacity, and inflation is stable. To achieve this balance, 
the  Bank  raises  interest  rates  when  aggregate  demand  pushes  the  economy  above  its  sustainable 
production capacity, causing price pressures to build and inflation to rise above the target. And, in a 
 1 
John C. Miller, Origins of the American Revolution (Stanford University Press 1959, 12) 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 1
symmetric fashion, the Bank lowers interest rates when unused capacity puts downward pressure on 
inflation, pushing it below the target.  
Inflation control contributes to better economic performance in several ways, but let me highlight two of 
them. First, low and stable inflation enables firms and individuals to have confidence in the value of 
money and to read price signals clearly, helping them to make sound long-term economic decisions. 
Second, when inflation is contained, and the economy is running close to capacity, we can deal more 
effectively  with  economic  shocks.  Resources  can  more  easily  be  reallocated  from  sectors  where 
demand is relatively weak to sectors where demand is relatively strong. This is especially important at 
times,  like  now,  when  there  are  large  movements  in  relative  prices—that  is,  in  the  prices  of  some 
goods, such as energy products, relative to other prices. 
Meeting the inflation target helps to anchor expectations of inflation, and that in itself helps to keep 
inflation low and the economy relatively stable. Also, and importantly, the explicit goal of the inflation 
target acts as an anchor in our decision-making process at the Bank of Canada.  
Let me now turn to the other key component of Canada's monetary policy framework—the "float"—the 
flexible exchange rate.  
Let's  start  with  a  basic  question:  Why  allow  the  dollar  to  float?  The  fundamental  reason  is  that  a 
flexible  currency  allows  us  to  follow  an  independent  monetary  policy,  a  policy  suited  to  our  own 
economic circumstances. We wouldn't be able to address the particulars of the Canadian economy if 
we set monetary policy with the goal of maintaining a fixed exchange rate. With just one instrument to 
carry out monetary policy, we can have only one target—and we target inflation. 
But there's another important reason for having a flexible exchange rate. Just as a properly moored 
ship has some play in the mooring lines to absorb changes in the wind and the tide, the floating dollar 
helps the economy to absorb shocks—especially external shocks that affect our economy differently 
than the economies of our major trading partners. That is, it helps us adjust to shifting currents in the 
global economy. It's useful to think of the exchange rate as a relative price, a price that provides a 
good  deal  of  useful  information.  Movements  in  the  exchange  rate  send  signals  to  businesses  and 
consumers, signals that help the economy adjust to changing circumstances.  
But just because the Bank of Canada does not have a target for the Canadian dollar does not mean 
that we ignore the exchange rate. Far from it. For any significant currency movement, we try to assess 
the implications for aggregate demand in Canada, and thus the implications for monetary policy. And, 
as part of this analysis, we try to determine the factors driving a given movement. Let me expand on 
this.  
Interpreting currency movements 
The Canadian dollar can rise or fall for a number of reasons. But, in principle, we can divide exchange 
rate movements into two categories—Type One and Type Two. Type One exchange rate movements 
reflect  changes  in  the  aggregate  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services.  Type  Two  movements 
reflect  other  factors.  The  key  point  is  that  these  two  types  of  currency  movement  have  different 
implications for monetary policy. In general, there's less of a need for monetary policy to respond to a 
Type  One  movement  than  to  a  Type  Two  movement.  But  just  to  make  life  interesting  for  central 
bankers, both types of movement may occur at the same time. Interpreting currency movements is not 
a science; it requires judgment.  
In Canada, Type One currency movements often relate to the health of the global economy, which in 
turn is reflected in the foreign demand for, and world prices of, the commodities we produce in this 
country. When global demand is strong, and world commodity prices rise, the value of the goods that 
Canada  exports  increases,  and  this  tends  to  cause  the  Canadian  dollar  to  appreciate.  This 
appreciation  provides  an  offsetting  force,  dampening  foreign  and  domestic  demand  for  Canadian-
produced  goods  and  services.  To  the  extent  that  this  dampening  effect  offsets  the  initial  direct 
increase in demand, there's no need for a policy response. Aggregate demand and supply remain in 
balance, and inflation stays on target. 
A Type Two exchange rate movement is one that is not triggered by a change in aggregate demand 
for Canadian goods and services. But, as you might expect, the currency movement itself affects the 
demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services,  by  making  them  more,  or  less,  competitive  relative  to 
goods  and  services  produced  elsewhere.  Other  things  being  equal,  this  is  a  situation  to  which 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2006
monetary policy needs to respond to keep aggregate demand and supply in balance, and inflation on 
target. 
Type  Two  exchange  rate  movements  are  more  difficult  to  describe,  both  because  they  are  best 
defined as anything that is not Type One, and because the distinction is not always as clear in practice 
as it is in theory. 
One  example  of  a  Type  Two  exchange  rate  movement  is  the  "portfolio  shock"  that  can  arise when 
there is a sudden reassessment of risk by global investors, often in response to an economic crisis 
somewhere in the world. When this happens, there is a so-called "flight to quality." That is, investors 
move out of assets denominated in riskier currencies—typically those of highly indebted countries—
and  this  can  lead  to  a  sharp  depreciation  of  these  currencies.  To  the  extent  that  the  depreciation 
reflects  the  pure  portfolio  effect  that  is  due  to  "financial  contagion,"  and  not  the  result  of  a  fall  in 
demand for the goods and services produced by the country, it is a Type Two depreciation. In the first 
half of the 1990s, when inflation targeting was still very new in Canada, and our government debt was 
rising unsustainably, Canada was more susceptible to this kind of exchange rate movement. 
Another example of a Type Two force, this time in the opposite direction for the Canadian dollar, is the 
adjustment of the U.S. dollar against most major currencies, reflecting concerns about the U.S. current 
account deficit. I'd like to elaborate on this as I discuss the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar.  
The recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar  
Since the beginning of 2003, the Canadian dollar has appreciated by about 40 per cent relative to the 
U.S. dollar, and by a lesser amount against a trade-weighted basket of the currencies of our major 
trading partners. This sharp appreciation appears to be largely the result of two factors: strong foreign 
demand for Canadian products, especially commodities, and broad-based weakness in the U.S. dollar. 
That is to say, both Type One and Type Two forces have been at play.  
Global economic growth has been strong over this period. Sustained strength in the U.S. economy, 
combined  with  tremendous  growth  in  China  and  other  parts  of  Asia,  has  led  to  a  surge  in  world 
demand  and  prices  for  oil  and  gas,  metals,  and  other  commodities  that  Canada  exports.  In  many 
respects, what we have been seeing since 2003 is the reverse of what happened as a result of the 
fallout of the Asian Crisis in the second half of the 1990s, when world growth weakened, commodity 
prices  plunged,  and  the  Canadian  dollar  dropped  to  a  low  of  about  64  cents  U.S.  Indeed,  our  own 
research has long found a relationship, in the same direction, between non-energy commodity prices 
and the value of the Canadian dollar. And our more recent research suggests that, with the substantial 
growth in our net trade surplus in energy since the early 1990s, energy prices now appear to have an 
influence (also in the same direction) on the value of the Canadian dollar. So, with the boom in the 
prices  of  energy  and  non-energy  commodities  since  2003,  we  have  seen  a  marked  Type  One 
appreciation of our currency. 
But this is not the whole story. Another factor driving the Canadian dollar higher since 2003 has been 
a broad-based weakening of the U.S. dollar. The American dollar has fallen against many currencies 
as a result of concerns about the large and growing U.S. current account deficit. This situation cannot 
be  sustained  indefinitely,  and  investors  appear  to  believe  that  a  depreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar  is 
needed to help resolve this aspect of the "global imbalances." This multilateral currency realignment 
also appears to be playing a role in the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.  
To the extent that the Type One appreciation is working to offset the underlying positive shock to the 
Canadian economy, there is less need for monetary policy to respond. But the Type Two appreciation 
is something that monetary policy would want to respond to in the form of a lower policy interest rate 
than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.  Our  assessment  is  that  most  of  the  exchange  rate  appreciation 
since 2003 reflects strong global demand and higher commodity prices. At the same time, part of the 
Canadian dollar appreciation has been related to the multilateral depreciation of the U.S. dollar, and 
we have had to factor this Type Two force into our monetary policy decision making. 
Weighing all factors, the Bank of Canada has raised the policy interest rate from 2 1/2 per cent to 4 1/4 
per  cent,  as  unused  capacity  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  absorbed  by  strong  foreign  and 
domestic demand for Canadian goods and services. Our objective with these rate moves has been to 
keep the Canadian economy operating at its potential and inflation close to the 2 per cent target over 
the medium term. Policy interest rates in the United States, by comparison, have increased from 1 per 
cent  to  5  per  cent.  As  a  result,  while  the  Canadian  and  the  U.S.  economies  both  appear  to  be 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 3
operating close to their full production capacity, interest rates in Canada are below those in the United 
States right across the yield curve. And, at longer maturities, the negative spreads with U.S. rates are 
historically large.  
As I said earlier, interpreting currency movements is difficult and requires judgment. The challenge is 
even more acute during periods of market volatility, such as we've seen in recent weeks. 
The challenges of a rapid currency appreciation  
At  this  point,  I'd  like  to  make  one  thing  very  clear:  for  many  individuals  and  firms,  adjusting  to 
exchange rate changes can be difficult—particularly when the currency moves as far and as quickly as 
it  has  in  the past  three  years. While  higher commodity  prices  benefit  some  firms,  others are  facing 
higher energy and non-energy input costs, and new competition from low-cost producers in China and 
elsewhere.  For  these  firms,  the  higher  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  is  an  added  pressure.  Some 
sectors,  particularly  manufacturing,  tourism,  the  fishery,  and  forestry,  are  facing  some  very  real 
challenges.  And  some  firms,  especially  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  are  struggling,  and  individuals 
have lost jobs. We are well aware of this, and recognize the stresses that come with such dislocation. 
It's important to point out that there's a good deal of diversity within each sector of the economy. Not 
all commodity producers are benefiting from high commodity prices—firms in the paper products and 
agriculture  sectors  face  difficulties.  And  some  manufacturers,  notably  in  machinery  and  equipment, 
and resource processing, are doing well. 
What we have been struck by, both in industry visits and in our analysis of the data, is how actively 
businesses have been responding to the challenges posed by a rapidly appreciating dollar. The Bank 
of Canada's most recent survey of Canadian businesses shows that about half of the firms surveyed 
have been adversely affected by the rising dollar, while about a quarter have been favourably affected. 
Those adversely affected have responded to the strengthening dollar by outsourcing labour-intensive 
production, specializing in higher value-added products, developing new products and entering new 
markets, and by improving productivity.  
Firms  in  Nova  Scotia  and  across  Canada  are  looking  for  ways  to  adapt  to,  and  thrive  in,  these 
challenging times. The fact that they are adjusting attests to the strength and resiliency of Canadian 
business, and to the skills and resourcefulness of our workers. For its part, the Bank of Canada will 
continue  to  support  the  adjustment  process  by  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  and  the  economy 
operating close to capacity. This contribution is critical to the adjustment process because it enables 
sectors  that  are  expanding  to  more  readily  absorb  resources  that  are  released  by  sectors  under 
pressure. And our focus on inflation control ensures that Canadians can continue to have confidence 
in the value of their money.  
Conclusion 
I'd like to conclude by emphasizing that the flexible exchange rate is an essential part of Canada's 
monetary  policy  framework.  A  floating  currency  absorbs  shocks,  passes  on  price  signals,  and—
against a backdrop of low and stable inflation—facilitates adjustment to economic developments.  
This  framework,  of  anchored  inflation  and  a  floating  exchange  rate,  helps  Canada  to  weather  the 
sometimes stormy seas of the global economy. Whatever the economic circumstances, the Bank of 
Canada will continue to do its part by keeping inflation under control and the economy expanding in a 
sustainable fashion.  
For  business,  a  floating  currency  brings  both  challenges  and  opportunities.  I'm  sure  that  Nova 
Scotians will continue to seize the opportunities, and, through investment, innovation, and marketing, 
rise to the challenges.  
I'd now be happy to respond to your comments and questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2006
