Irma Rosenberg: The objective of monetary policy  
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting arranged by 
Öhman Fondkommission, Stockholm, 14 February 2006.  
 A discussion has recently taken place in the media on the objective of monetary policy. Some have 
argued that we should have more objectives while others considered that we already work with too 
many  objectives  and  that  this  has  created  a  lack  of  clarity.  In  my  opinion  this  discussion  is  a  bit 
misleading. We have one objective: keeping inflation low and stable. However, in our efforts to achieve 
this  objective,  we  have,  like  many  other  central  banks,  opted  to  be  flexible  to  avoid  exposing  the 
economy to strain. 
Our statutory objective is to maintain price stability. It has been left to the Riksbank to decide on the 
detailed interpretation of this objective. We have defined it as meaning that inflation should be 2 per 
cent. However, monetary policy affects the economy with a time lag and is simply not precise enough 
to maintain inflation at a constant 2 per cent. The inflation target includes a tolerance interval of +/- 
one percentage point to underline that temporary deviations are permitted, provided that these are not 
too large. For further clarity, we apply the principle that in the event of any deviation, inflation should 
normally  be brought  back  to  the  target  within  a  two-year  period.  When we  set  the  interest  rate, we 
must  accordingly  base  our  decision  on  an  inflation  forecast.  In  most  cases,  this  two-year  horizon 
provides us with the scope to return gradually to the target without having to apply monetary policy 
with such force as to create unnecessary fluctuations in the real economy. Occasionally in the wake of 
a major disturbance, there may even be grounds to allow a period of more than two years to return to 
the target. In such cases, however, we should communicate this clearly. Like most central banks with 
inflation targets, we apply what is usually referred to as a flexible inflation target policy.  
When  we  decided  at  the  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  to  increase  the  repo  rate,  we  once 
again had to take into account the continuing rapid increase in house prices and household debt. This 
was not because we have a target for household debt or house prices. However, it is important for us 
to monitor the trend in the housing market, bearing in mind both financial stability and price stability. 
As far as financial stability is concerned, there are no indications that house prices or household debt 
constitute a threat to the banking system. We produce regular analyses and reports on such matters in 
our six-monthly stability reports.  
As far as the work with price stability is concerned, we must take into account the effect that house 
prices have on household saving and consumption decisions through their impact on wealth and thus 
the level of demand in the economy as a whole. For households with debts, the scope for consumption 
is also affected by interest rate adjustments if the share of income used for interest payment changes. 
Accordingly, we take this into consideration when we make our inflation assessment. There has been 
a  swift  increase  in  household  debt  and  house  prices  over  a  long  period.  One  potential  cause  of 
concern, which we cannot disregard, is that if this trend continues at the same rapid rate, a situation 
could  develop  where,  at  a  later  date,  there  is  a  risk  of  a  considerable  slowdown  in  growth  and 
employment as a result of households finding themselves compelled to increase savings owing to a 
heavy debt burden. The risks involved here are very difficult to quantify in forecasts or pinpoint in time, 
but could none the less be a threat to macroeconomic stability. Inflation could then also revert to a 
state that might prove difficult to deal with. However, it should be underlined that the likelihood of such 
a scenario arising is regarded as slight, in particular when we have identified it in good time. We have 
taken  these  factors  into  consideration  even  if  they  have  not  been  crucial  for  our  monetary  policy 
decisions.  
The Riksbank does not have a target for the krona exchange rate. However, since the exchange rate 
is one of many factors affecting growth and inflation, we must naturally take the path of the krona into 
consideration  in  the  inflation  assessment.  The  exchange  rate  affects  inflation  directly  and  generally 
relatively  quickly  through  prices  of  imported  goods  and  services.  The  exchange  rate  also  affects 
inflationary pressure indirectly and usually with a long time lag, by its impact on the level of activity. A 
weaker krona entails, everything else being equal, greater demand for Swedish goods and services, 
which in turn leads to an increase in resource utilisation. The exchange rate can also affect inflation 
expectations indirectly.  
BIS Review 11/2006 
 1
I  would  now  like  to  move  on  to  inflation  prospects  and  monetary  policy.  In  the  December  Inflation 
Report, we made the assessment that international growth would be good this year and in the next few 
years but would slow down somewhat. New information prior to our January meeting suggested that 
development would be stronger than expected. This applied primarily to the euro area and Asia while 
the latest US statistics indicated that the trend was more or less in line with the assessment made in 
December. Overall, the international prospects for growth and thus the growth of the Swedish export 
market seemed slightly stronger in January than in December. In my view, this assessment still holds 
good.  
The assessment in December for the Swedish economy was that growth would increase this year but 
subsequently slow down slightly in the next few years. In January, according to revised GDP statistics, 
growth in Sweden was considerably stronger from the final quarter of 2004 onwards than indicated by 
the information available at the beginning of December. Several indicators of economic activity also 
suggested a stronger development than expected. New information made available since our January 
meeting  appear  to  confirm  this.  According  to  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research's  most 
recent Business Tendency Survey, the level of economic activity continued to improve in the fourth 
quarter  of  2005  and  firms  were  very  optimistic  about  the  future.  Household  expectations  have  also 
become  more  optimistic  about  their  own  finances  and  the  Swedish  economy.  In  the  light  of  these 
developments, it seems reasonable to adjust the GDP forecasts for 2005 and 2006 upwards slightly 
compared with our expectations in December.  
The  situation  in  the  Swedish  labour  market  appeared  to  be  somewhat  brighter  in  January  and  the 
number of those employed increased slightly more than expected. However, the trend for the number 
of hours worked was surprisingly weak and productivity growth in the business sector was therefore 
stronger  than  expected.  There  is  no  apparent  reason  to  make  any  substantial  change  to  that 
assessment either. The labour market is improving although domestic cost pressures are expected to 
remain  subdued.  Overall,  this  means  that  inflation  is  expected  to  approach  the  target  during  the 
forecast  period,  more  or  less  as  we  said  in  December.  Given  the  strong  growth  in  demand,  we 
envisage a relatively moderate increase in inflation.  
However, it is important to bear in mind that the inflation assessment in December was based on the 
assumption  that  a  gradual  increase  of  the  repo  rate  would  be  initiated  at  the  beginning  of  2006.  In 
January,  we  also  decided  to  raise  the  key  rate.  In  view  of  the  favourable  economic  climate,  the 
Executive  Board  judged  that  a  further  increase  of  the  repo  rate  was  justified.  In  my  opinion,  the 
information that has subsequently become available does not warrant any change to this conclusion 
pending our next meeting.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2006
