Ranee Jayamaha: The significance of payment reforms in financial system 
stability 
Opening address by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
seminar  on  “Payment  systems  and  cheque  imaging”  organised  by  the  Royalist  Bankers’  Club, 
Colombo, 25 May 2006. 
 Let  me  thank  the  President  and  members  of  the  Royal  Bankers’  Club  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the 
opening  remarks  at  the seminar  on  ‘Payment  Systems  and  Cheque  Imaging’.  I  am  honoured  to  be 
speaking to this distinguished group and it is encouraging to note that the subject is of interest to a 
good cross section of the financial community. In my opening remarks, I will give an overview of the 
significance  and  rationale  of  payment  reforms  in  financial  stability  and  then  set  out  the  impact  of 
payment reforms on the financial system, institutional arrangements that are in place, and the need to 
change  payment  practices  of  banks  and  the  public.  It  may  also  be  important  to  note  that  the  term 
“Payment Systems” covers payments, clearing and settlement systems. 
As you are aware, the Central Bank’s role in the payment system stems from its primary function of 
providing  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  service.  Economic  policy  reforms,  the  ever  increasing 
complexities in the financial system and the changing role of central banks have resulted in central 
banks to be at the center of payment reforms which, from the Central banks’ point of view, is helpful in 
achieving the objective of financial system stability. 
The  national  payment  system  is  the  backbone  of  a  country’s  monetary  and  financial  system  and  it 
plays a critical role in a country’s economic development. It is through the payment system that money 
is  transferred  between  savers  and  lenders,  buyers  and  sellers  or  from  one  point  to  another. 
Developing  a  national  payment  system  is  an  ongoing  process.  By  reforming  and  developing  the 
national  payment  system,  it  is  possible  to  reduce  the  overall  transaction  costs  and  expand 
opportunities for commercial and financial transactions in an economy. In recent years, there has been 
a  rapid  acceleration  in  fundamental  reforms  to  national  payment  systems  worldwide,  although  the 
pace of implementation of reforms in different countries has been uneven. Planned outcomes have not 
always been achieved in terms of expected use, benefits or costs of payment system reform projects 
and many planned reforms have been unexpectedly slow to complete.  
In its modernization programme which commenced in 2001, the Central Bank refocused on its core 
objectives, i.e. the economic and price stability and the financial system stability. The financial system 
stability objective encompasses a wide range of subjects of which, the establishment of a safe and 
sound  payment  system  was  seen  crucial  for  the  development  of  the  financial  sector,  which  is  also 
complementary to the maintenance of price stability. In this context, the Central Bank examined the 
adequacy and the efficiency of the payment system to satisfy the needs of an evolving economy and 
decided to undertake comprehensive payment reforms. The broader objectives of the reforms were to 
reduce transaction costs, increase efficiency, ensure safety and reduce credit, liquidity and systemic 
risks.  
Payment modes are wide ranging. Cash is the common mode of payment, because it has a finality in 
settlement of a transaction and is readily and legally acceptable as a medium of exchange. However, 
the inconvenience of carrying cash and increased security threats have encouraged the move towards 
other  payment  media.  Non-cash  payment  modes  are  considered  to  be  more  secured  payment 
instruments, but paper-based instruments like cheques, drafts and travellers cheques are also not so 
convenient  instruments.  In  modern  times,  card  and  electronic  payments  are  treated  as  the  most 
convenient  and  safer  instruments,  although  they  too  are  subject  to  certain  risks,  card  frauds  in 
particular and technology related issues. 
There are two systemically important payment systems in Sri Lanka. They are the high value and time 
critical payment system used by banks, primary dealers, the Central Bank and the corporates and the 
cheque-based  retail  payment  system  which  is  used  by  all  segments  of  the  population.  Reforming 
these  two  systemically  important  payment  systems  were  necessary  to  mitigate  settlement  risks, 
increase  efficiency  and  enhance  accessibility.  The  reforms  were  also  in  line  with  the  public  policy 
objectives which require attention of the Government and regulatory authorities.  
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
The implementation of the Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) and the Scripless Securities 
Settlement  Systems  (SSSS)  with  a  SWIFT  link  was  the  most  significant  reform  effected  in  recent 
times. The RTGS was implemented in September 2003 and the system facilitates large value and time 
critical  fund  transfers  and  settlements  electronically  and  on  real  time.  In  February  2004,  the  SSSS 
module  was  integrated  to  the  RTGS  System.  To  facilitate  the  operations  of  these  systems, 
government securities are issued in scripless form and the system facilitates simultaneous transfer of 
government securities and settlement of funds through the RTGS on a Delivery versus Payment basis. 
The Central Bank continues to upgrade and enhance facilities to these two systems and in December 
2005,  the  internet  based  facility  called  LankaSecureNet  which  enables  the  account  holders  of  the 
Scripless Securities Depository System to obtain up to date details of their investments through the 
internet was introduced. While eliminating the systemic risks that was involved in the high value and 
time  critical  transactions,  the  Central  Bank  became  the  owner  and  operator  of  both  the  RTGS  and 
SSS systems.  
The service provider of the retail payment system is LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd which is owned jointly by the 
Central Bank and the commercial banks. Two weeks ago, LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd introduced the Cheque 
Imaging and Truncation System to ensure that cheques deposited in any part of the country is cleared 
and settled within two days except in uncleared areas. The cheque imaging system eliminates regional 
disparities in cheque clearing and establishes a common clearing schedule. In addition to these two 
systemically  important  payment  systems,  there  are  other  small  scale  payments  and  settlements 
arrangements. They include the SLIPS system which is also owned and operated by LankaClear and 
the  US$  clearing  system  operated  by  a  commercial  bank.  Mr  Anura  de  Silva,  General  Manager 
LankaClear will give you the technical details of the CIT System including some of the glitches that 
have surfaced in implementing the cheque imaging project.  
Let me now deal with the institutional and legal arrangements and the impact of payment reforms very 
briefly.  The  focus  will  be  on  (i)  the  market  arrangements  for  payment  services  (ii)  the  legal  and 
regulatory framework; (iii) the coordination of oversight of the payment system and regulation affecting 
the system; and (iv) mechanisms for consultation with stakeholders.  
The RTGS and SSS systems speedily transfer funds and make settlements of banks, primary dealers, 
financial institutions, investors, customers, the government and the public. These two systems bring 
about  financial  discipline  among  these  stakeholders  as  they  have  to  maintain  adequate  cash  and 
reserves in their accounts to meet payment obligations. This also improves the liquidity management 
by banks as treasurers and fund managers have to produce accurate estimates of their daily liquidity 
requirements. More importantly, the users of the RTGS and SSS systems can use Central Bank funds 
throughout  the  day  for  settlement  purposes  and  return  them  at  the  end  of  the  day.  Subject  to  the 
availability of acceptable collateral, the banks and primary dealers are provided with intra day liquidity 
by the Central Bank. 
To underpin the payment reforms undertaken by the Central Bank and enhance integrity and safety of 
such  systems,  a  comprehensive  legislation  to  govern  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  in 
general and to provide the Central Bank with oversight and regulatory powers over various payment 
systems and money transfer service providers has been enacted through the Payment and Settlement 
Systems  Act  of  2005.  The  Act  empowered  the  Central Bank  to  be  the  authority  responsible  for  the 
national  payment  system,  which  requires  oversight  and  continuous  surveillance  of  all  payment 
systems to ensure its efficiency and effectiveness. The systemically important payment systems will 
be reviewed periodically to ensure that the design and operation meet with international standards and 
best practice.  
Some  of  you  may  be  aware  that  a  couple  of  months  ago,  the  Central  Bank  established  a  National 
Payments Council which is the highest decision making body with regard to payment systems. This 
committee represented by all stakeholders provides a forum for constant dialogue on payment issues 
to  take  place  within  the  industry.  The  National  Payments  Council  is  responsible  for  developing  the 
payment  and  settlements  infrastructure  in  collaboration  with  all  the  relevant  authorities  and 
stakeholders. Currently, it is in the process of finalizing a road map for the development of the national 
payment system in the next five years, which will be in line with the vision of the financial sector. 
In implementing the road map, it is vital that all stakeholders in the payment system understands the 
significance of payment systems, their impact on financial stability and take ownership and leadership. 
Most  central  banks  at  some  point  or  other  have  been  owners,  operators,  catalysts,  overseers  and 
users  of  the  payment  system.  Over  the  years,  central  banks  have  given  up  their  ownership  and 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
operator’s role and, in some cases, even the catalyst role. Banks and financial institutions and even 
the corporates should play an important role in shaping the national payment system in Sri Lanka.  
Let me conclude now by giving an important message. Payment reforms help to adopt best practices 
by all stakeholders. With or without payment system reforms, banks and financial institutions should 
be able to meet their payment obligations. Some of the benefits enjoyed by banks and customers over 
the years will no longer be there under the CIT system. The public too has to make adjustments in 
their payment practices and ensure that there are funds in their accounts when cheques are issued. 
All stakeholders should change their past practices and fall in line with reforms which are aimed at 
improving facilities. 
Once  again,  I  thank  the  Royal  Bankers  Club  for  inviting  me  and  extend  my  good  wishes  for  all  its 
future activities.  
BIS Review 66/2006 
 3
