Y V Reddy: Foreign exchange reserves – new realities and options 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 2006 Program of Seminars 
on the theme "The World in Asia, Asia in the World", Singapore, 18 September 2006. 
 Distinguished Friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to participate in the 2006 Program of Seminars on the 
Theme  "The  World  in  Asia,  Asia  in  the  World".  The  theme  for  this  session  has  tantalising  words: 
problems, plenty, challenges, opportunities, accumulation, large, foreign, windfall and reserves. It may 
be a little hard to match the sense of these words in an address by central bankers. So, I intend taking 
a  slightly  broader  view  of  the  subject  and  focus  on  the  new  realities  and  innovative  ideas.  I  would 
argue  that  there  are  degrees  of  comfort  at  various  levels  of  reserves  at  any  given  time  and  in  a 
country-context and in general, higher the degree of comfort, more numerous are the options. 
I. 
New realities of forex reserves and management 
Large increase: most rapid in Asia  
(i)  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crises,  it  was  widely  perceived,  supported  by  academic  research  and 
commentators, that large reserves were needed by emerging market economies (EMEs) to withstand 
any crisis and, to some extent, it was a reflection of the lack of confidence in the international financial 
architecture. As a result, the recent episode of reserve accumulation has been on a much higher scale 
and more prolonged than was seen during the early 1990s. For instance, as reported by the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), the EMEs, during 2000 and 2005, accumulated reserves at an annual 
rate of US $ 250 billion (or 3.5 per cent of their annual combined GDP), which was almost five times 
higher than the level seen in the early 1990s. The bulk of the reserve accumulation was concentrated 
in  Asia  with  countries  like  China,  Korea,  India,  Malaysia  and  Taiwan  (China)  witnessing  large 
increases,  while  countries  in  Latin  America  and  Central  Europe  had  a  fairly  modest  increase  in 
reserves during this period. Lately, many oil-exporting countries have also seen a large increase in 
their reserves. 
It  may  be  useful  to  recognise  that  reserve  accumulation,  in  some  senses,  reflects  the  savings-
investment balances and is symptomatic of both domestic and global factors, including self-insurance, 
a concept difficult to define.  
Reserves increases: mostly driven by capital account surplus 
(ii) 
It  is  important  to  identify  the  sources  of  reserve  accretion  in  this  latest  episode.  There  are  some 
countries  like  Russia  where  the  reserves  are  built  out  of  current  account  surplus.  In  countries  like 
China,  Korea  and  Taiwan,  the  surplus,  in  both  current  and  capital  account,  led  to  accumulation  of 
reserves. On the other hand, there are countries like India, where the reserves accretion was driven 
more by capital account surplus and not due to current account surplus, broadly implying that capital 
inflow was more than what could be normally absorbed in the domestic economy. Net capital flows 
have remained much larger than the current account deficit in India as well as in most of Latin America 
and Central & Eastern Europe. In case the reserve accumulation is due to large capital flows, it may 
be useful to distinguish between debt and non-debt flows as also between foreign direct investment 
and generally less stable portfolio flows. In fact, the stock as well as flow in each category would be 
relevant for reserve management. While the marking-to- market of the assets and liabilities may be 
difficult, it might not be irrelevant.  
Thus, while the traditional indicators of adequacy of reserves are based on trade, debt and monetary 
indicators, or even the ‘Guidotti Rule’ or ‘Liquidity at Risk’ Rule suggested by Alan Greenspan may 
help explain the adequacy of reserves, they need to be supplemented with, what may be described 
as, multiple indicators to assess the adequacy of reserves of any country at a given juncture. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
Difficulties in computing quasi fiscal cost of reserves 
(iii) 
A  simple  method  of  calculating  net  cost  of  carrying  reserves  to  the  central  bank  is  the  difference 
between the interest rate on domestic securities and the rate of return earned on the foreign exchange 
reserves adjusted for any exchange rate change. The magnitude of the cost, which is often difficult to 
estimate,  varies  with  the  extent  of  sterilisation  and  the  yield  differentials.  These  are  termed  “quasi-
fiscal” costs in the literature since the costs to the central bank are passed on to the sovereign through 
a lower transfer of profits. In countries where local interest rates are well above international levels, 
such  carrying  costs  could  be  positive,  while  if  the  reverse  is  true  such  carrying  costs  could  be 
negative.  A  recent  study  by  the  BIS  has  shown  that  carrying  costs  are  negative  in  a  number  of 
countries at current interest rates. The study states that in China, for instance, the one year interest 
rate in June 2006 was less than half the comparable US Treasury bond rate. Hence the central bank is 
earning a positive carry. However, it can be argued that given the inherent cyclical nature of interest 
rates, such negative carrying cost could reverse over a period of time. Moreover, one has to keep in 
mind that these hypothetical cost calculations do not capture capital gains or losses. Dani Rodrik of 
Harvard University has proposed a measure of social cost of reserves, from the national stand point, 
that is equal to the spread between the private sector's cost of short-term borrowing abroad and the 
yield that the central bank earns on its liquid foreign assets. He estimates this cost roughly equivalent 
to  one  per  cent  of  GDP  of  the  developing  countries  in  2004.  Briefly  stated,  there  are  difficulties  in 
calculating precisely quasi-fiscal costs or other costs on this account.  
While assessing the fiscal cost of holding reserves, it would be worthwhile to set off the benefits that 
the country may have in holding reserves. In any country risk analysis by the rating agencies and other 
institutions, the level of reserves generally has high weights. Moreover, it is essential to keep in view 
some hidden benefits which could accrue to a country holding reserves, which may, inter alia, include: 
maintaining confidence in monetary and exchange rate policies; enhancing the capacity to intervene in 
foreign exchange markets; limiting external vulnerability so as to absorb shocks during times of crisis; 
providing confidence to the markets that external obligations can always be met; and reducing volatility 
in foreign exchange markets. It is true that beyond a point, when the credit rating reaches appropriate 
investment grade, addition to reserves may not lead to further improvement in the credit rating. It is 
necessary to recognise that, as in the case of costs, there are difficulties in computing the benefits too.  
Changing composition of reserves  
(iv)  
The available data on the composition of official reserves indicate that progress towards diversification 
of reserves has been cautious, which is not surprising given the very definition of reserves in terms of 
“external  assets  that  are  readily  available…..…”  as  defined  by  the  IMF.  An  important  objective  of 
holding  the  reserves  is  to  be  prepared  for  contingencies,  but  the  range  of  instruments  available  to 
satisfy this need is limited. Nevertheless, the management of reserves has been changing and there 
has  been  a  quest  for  higher  returns  within  these  traditional  objectives.  To  quote  Mr.  Philip  D. 
Wooldridge of the BIS, in his latest article on “The Changing Composition of Official Reserves” in the 
September 2006 issue of the BIS Quarterly Review: 
“Continuing a trend that began in the 1970s, when reserves were first reallocated 
from  US  Treasury  bills  to  bank  deposits,  reserve  managers  have  been gradually 
shifting into higher-yielding, higher-risk instruments. They seem most comfortable 
managing market risk but are beginning to take on more credit and liquidity risk too. 
The  currency  composition  of  their  portfolios,  while  volatile,  has  not  changed  as 
much as the instrument composition." 
It is essential to recognise that reserve managers are already shifting into higher-yielding instruments 
with  a  higher  risk-return  equation,  presumably  as  a  result  of  progressively  rising  level  of  reserves. 
Consequently,  the  financial  returns  on  the  free  reserves  at  the  margin could  be  far  higher  than  the 
average return. In my view, the marginal return appears to be a more relevant concept in the context 
of alternative forms of investment of reserves. 
Quasi reserves 
(v) 
With  the  positive  shock  emanating  from  large  capital  flows  resulting  in  significant  reserves 
accumulation  in  many  EMEs,  a  new  development  in  reserve  management  is  to  hold  a  part  of  the 
reserves which could be used by the public sector in a country in a manner different from the strictly 
defined pattern of holding of the external assets by the monetary authorities. Such foreign exchange 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
reserves  could  be  termed  as  quasi  reserves.  In  terms  of  its  holding,  such  quasi  reserves  could  be 
easily  retrievable  when  the  situation  demands.  In  Singapore,  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore 
(MAS)  and  the  Government  of  Singapore  Investment  Corporation  (GIC)  basically  manage  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  GIC  is  the  Government’s  principal  investment  agent,  handling  the  bulk  of  the 
nation’s investments while the MAS holds reserves to maintain the stability of the Singapore dollar. 
Similarly, Temasek Holdings invests in Singapore as well as manages diversified global portfolio with 
the aim of creating and maximising sustainable value for the shareholders and providing resources to 
finance pension and other benefits. 
On the pattern of the Singapore's GIC, South Korea has recently established the Korean Investment 
Corporation (KIC). Another interesting example is China, where foreign exchange reserves have been 
utilised to strengthen the banking system without foreign securities being sold. China has transferred 
funds from its international reserves, held with the Peoples’ Bank of China (PBC) to a new company, 
Central Huijin Investment Company (CHIC), set up in 2003 and jointly managed by the government, 
PBC and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange. In the PBC's balance sheet, the said amount 
of reserves was replaced by claims on the CHIC. The CHIC used the assets to purchase shares in 
banks which were to be recapitalised.  
Stabilisation funds 
(vi) 
Investment funds are sometimes created by the public sector out of "windfall revenue" accruing to a 
country due to rise in export price of, say, oil or other commodities. Such reserves arise due to positive 
external shocks which can cause a surge in government revenues and, at times, could be challenging 
as  some  Governments  may  have  to  deal  with  an  appreciating  exchange  rate,  undermining  export 
competitiveness  with symptoms of  "dutch  disease".  Many  countries such  as Chile,  Kuwait,  Norway, 
Russia and United Arab Emirates (UAE) have institutionalised the investment of the surplus arising 
from the positive shocks of commodity and oil prices by creating sophisticated investment agencies or 
commodity/oil stabilisation funds to manage reserves – since there is a broader range of investment 
opportunities  for  their  savings  today  than  in  the  1970s  or  1980s.  The  management  of  such  corpus 
may, in some cases, be entrusted to the central bank but with an appropriate mandate.  
Usually, these stabilisation funds are established with one or more of the following objectives: insulate 
the budget and the economy from excess volatility in revenues; help monetary authorities to sterilise 
unwanted liquidity; build up savings for future generations; or use the money for economic and social 
development. In regard to oil funds, the transparency and disclosures standards appear to be lower 
than those for the official reserves but with some accountability.  
An interesting question in this regard is the extent to which the windfall revenues can be equated with 
the  large  capital  flows.  While  there  could  be  a  deceleration  in  the  windfall  revenues,  the  reserve 
accumulation  due  to  large  capital  flows  should reckon  with  the  possibility  of  potential  reversals  and 
outflows in respect of the capital account. 
Innovative ideas 
II.  
It is useful to explore some of the innovative ideas that have been put forward in the recent period for 
using reserves. 
First,  in  March  2006,  Prof.  Lawrence  Summers  while  delivering  the  L.  K.  Jha  Memorial  Lecture  in 
Mumbai, argued that the level of reserves in many countries far exceeded the traditional measures of 
reserve levels required to guard against a foreign exchange crisis. While expressing concern about the 
risk composition of the assets in which these reserves are invested, Prof. Summers suggested that it 
was time for the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank to think about how they could 
contribute to deployment of the reserves held by some of the major emerging markets. Prof. Summers 
suggested  creation  of  an  international  facility  by  these  two  multilateral  institutions,  under  which  the 
countries  could  invest  their  excess  reserves  without  taking  domestic  political  responsibility  for  the 
process of investment decision and ultimate outcome. In turn, the modest fee charged by these two 
institutions could support the concessional and grant aspects of global development.  
The  proposal  provides  an  option  to  a  country  holding  reserves  to  place  a  part  of  them  with  the 
IMF/World  Bank  entities  to  operate,  de  facto,  as  external  asset  managers.  The  option  could  be 
exercised, presuming that it would be permissible, but not obligatory, to make placement of a part of 
the  reserves  if  the  envisaged  entity  could  assure  that  it  had  the  expertise  to  function  as  such  an 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 3
external  asset  manager  and  to  provide  a  higher  risk-weighted  return  than  the  domestic  reserve 
managers.  Further,  since  the  external  asset  managers  for  reserve  management  in  the  market  are 
usually guided by the parameters fixed by the official reserve management authorities, which may vary 
from country to country, the proposed entity may also have to have several windows to cater to the 
varied mixes of safety, liquidity and return preferred by various client countries. Thus, the critical issue 
would  be  the  professional  expertise  of  the  proposed  entity  in  terms  of  assuring  an  acceptable  risk-
reward equation. 
Second,  there  was  a  proposal  in  2005  by  Eswar  Prasad  and  Raghuram  Rajan  of  the  IMF  for  a 
controlled approach to capital account liberalisation for economies experiencing large capital inflows. 
The proposal essentially involves securitising a portion of capital inflows through closed-ended mutual 
funds that issue shares in the domestic currency, use the proceeds to purchase foreign exchange from 
the central bank and then invest the foreign exchange so acquired, abroad. It is argued that such an 
arrangement would eliminate the fiscal costs of sterilising these inflows, provide the domestic investors 
opportunities  for  international  portfolio  diversification  and  stimulate  the  development  of  domestic 
financial  markets; more  importantly,  it  would allow central banks  to control  both,  the  timing  and  the 
quantity of capital outflows. It is advocated that this proposal could be a part of a broader toolkit of 
measures to liberalise the capital account cautiously when external circumstances are favourable.  
The  merit  of  this  proposal  is  in  combining  three  elements  –  capital  account  management,  financial 
sector  development  and  use  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This  proposal,  for  setting  up  more  than 
closed-ended private-sector foreign- asset funds, to be licensed by the central bank, appears relevant 
under certain circumstances, mainly when there is a likelihood of a significant investor interest for such 
fund. This, however, does not seem realisable, if there is a negative carry that such funds could entail. 
Further, it is not certain whether a private intermediary licensed by a central bank specifically for this 
purpose  would  entirely  obviate  the  moral  hazard,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  explicit  or  implicit 
guarantee with regard to performance.  
In India, domestic mutual funds are permitted to invest in foreign securities, apart from ADR/GDR of 
Indian companies, up to an aggregate limit of USD two billion. In addition, a limited number of qualified 
mutual funds are also permitted to invest cumulatively up to USD one billion in overseas exchange 
traded funds (ETF). More generally, the pace and sequencing of several measures of liberalisation of 
capital account take into account the degree of comfort as one of the relevant factors. 
Third,  an  idea  which  received  some  attention  in  March  2002  during  the  gathering  on  ‘Finance  for 
Development’ in Monterrey, Mexico, is that instead of holding the reserves in the US dollars, a new 
form  of  global  money,  akin  to  IMF's  Special  Drawing  Rights,  namely,  ‘global  greenbacks’  could  be 
issued, which countries could hold in their reserves. The corpus would be created by countries setting 
aside a part of reserves every year as an insurance against contingencies. The amount of money held 
by  these  countries  in  ‘global  greenbacks’  could  be  given  to  developing  countries  for  financing  their 
development programmes as well as global public goods like environmental projects, health initiatives, 
humanitarian assistance, and so on. For countries that receive less than the amount that they need to 
put into reserves, the new ‘global money’ would go into reserves freeing dollars that these countries 
would  otherwise  set  aside.  Countries  that  receive  more  than  they  must  put  into  reserves,  could 
exchange the new money for conventional currencies. Eventually, all the new money will find its way 
into reserves, which in effect represent a commitment by the countries to help each other in times of 
trouble.  
It  has  been  argued  that  the  global  greenbacks  proposal  envisages  flow  of  funds  to  poor  countries 
according to their need while contributing to global economic growth, stability and equity. Opponents 
of  this  move  have  argued  that  some  countries  will  become  “greenback  addicts”,  and  when  the 
handouts end, the economic withdrawal symptoms will be severe.  
Fourth, in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis, two related developments took place. In the year 
2000, ASEAN+3 countries mutually agreed to form a network of bilateral swap agreements to provide 
mutual protection from financial emergencies, popularly known as the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI). The 
success  of  such  an  initiative  is  reflected  in  the  recent  proposal  of  the  Asian  Finance  Ministers  to 
double the size of the Asian Central Bank Swaps under the CMI.  
The Asian Bond Fund Initiative was also launched in 2003 reflecting the efforts to develop a regional 
bond market for catering to the medium- and long-term financing needs of the Asian economies. The 
Asian Bond Fund provided an arrangement for pooling of a portion of foreign exchange reserves of a 
few  East  Asia  and  Pacific  countries  and  the  Fund’s  portfolio  is  invested  in  the  liquid  US  dollar 
denominated bonds issued by the major Asian economies. The second ABF, launched in June 2005, 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2006
aims to promote local currency bond markets, by establishing a Pan-Asian Bond Index Fund (PAIF) 
and eight single-market funds (SMFs).  
Degree of comfort  
III. 
The  concept  of  adequacy  of  reserves  is  popular  but  it  is  also  possible,  from  a  practitioner's 
perspective,  to  view  reserves  in  terms  of  degree  of  comfort  they  provide  at  various  levels.  Such  a 
perspective is more dynamic and contextual. Certainly, at a very low level of reserves, which we in 
India had in the early 1990s, the degree of comfort was very low, and with rising level of reserves, the 
comfort also increases. The level of comfort and discomfort could be linked to the problem of plenty 
and the problem of paucity – with a continuum representing different levels of comfort at various levels 
of reserves. For a country, it could happen that initially the degree of comfort with the level of reserves 
may be too low for sometime but with rising level of reserves, the country might reach a 'comfort zone', 
and as the reserves level keeps on rising to reach a still higher level, then at some point, a portion of 
the reserves would cease to be strictly ‘foreign exchange reserves’ and could be characterised as a 
corpus of funds available for deployment in a higher risk-return portfolio. 
Several factors, apart from the exchange rate regime, influence the comfort level in regard to reserves. 
Illustratively,  they  would  include  vulnerability  to  the  real  sector  shocks,  strength  of  the  fiscal  and 
financial sectors, current account balance, the changing composition of capital flows, a medium-term 
view  of  growth  prospects  encompassing  business  cycles,  etc.  In  a  sense,  official  reserves  have  to 
reflect the balancing and comforting factors relative to external assets and liabilities in the context of a 
rational balance sheet approach. 
Options linked to comfort 
IV.  
Let me now link the availability of options with the degree of comfort. 
First, it may be useful, for practical purposes, to view the adequacy of reserves in terms of degree of 
comfort they offer at a given time.  
Second, while considering the level of reserves and comfort derived there from, it will be necessary to 
take into account the investment and the stabilisation funds, if applicable. Further, transferability from 
official  reserves  to  such  funds  and  vice  versa,  and  the  extent  of  liquidity  required,  also  need  to  be 
considered in assessing the comfort level. 
Third, relative emphasis on safety, liquidity and return keeps changing with the degree of comfort at a 
given level of reserves. 
Fourth,  it  must  be  noted  that  from  a  national  balance  sheet  point  of  view,  official  reserves  have  to 
reflect the potential market infirmities in the private sector. So, if there are high returns derived from 
high risks assumed due to larger risk appetite of the external asset managers, then deploying official 
reserves too in the high-risk assets would exacerbate the risks. Official reserves may be needed as a 
cushion when markets get suddenly risk averse and hence, safety and liquidity should normally have 
higher orders of priority in the management of reserves. 
Fifth, it is possible for a central bank to have tranches – each tranche reflecting a different combination 
of safety, liquidity and return. Each tranche can be managed by the central bank or an external asset 
manager, or both, in parallel, to benchmark their relative performance. 
Finally, and above all, the criticality of the accountability in the use of reserves must be recognised. It 
is  useful  to  note  that  the  reserve  management  policies  normally  involve  joint  responsibility  of  the 
Government and the central bank – irrespective of in whose balance sheet they appear. 
Concluding observations 
V.  
I would like to recall here what I had said in this regard In 2003, at the Annual Fund-Bank Meetings in 
Dubai:  
"The reserve accumulation could also be seen in the context of the availability of 
abundant  international  liquidity  following  the  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  in 
industrial  countries.  The  resultant  excess  liquidity  flowed  into  the  emerging 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 5
markets. In the event of hardening of interest rates in industrialised countries, this 
liquidity  may  as  quickly  dry  up;  in  that  situation,  emerging  markets  should  have 
sufficient cushion to withstand such reverse flows of capital." 
Now, with the global rise in the interest rates, there is always a lurking fear in the EMEs, that the level 
of capital flows may not be maintained. Thus, the comfort level of reserves should not be viewed with 
respect to the current situation alone but should also reckon the assessment of the emerging risks. 
Moreover,  at  this  moment,  the  global  economy  has  not  been  tested  on  the  eventuality  of  a  not-so-
orderly  correction  of  the  current  global  imbalances.  In  that  eventuality,  as  the  experts  caution, 
disruption in financial markets in the form of large cross-currency volatility and sharp rise in interest 
rates are not unlikely in the global economy. 
To sum up, several factors impinge on the comfort level of reserves and the relative weights assigned 
to safety, liquidity and return. When, how and through whom should the search for higher returns be 
pursued, depending upon the level of comfort, is a matter of convenience and context, and options, as 
appropriate, should always be kept open. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2006
