M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Upon acceptance of the award for Central Banker 
of the Year - Asia 2006 
Statement  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Banker 
Magazine Luncheon Seminar, Bangkok, 1 February 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Back in June 2001, when I landed at the job of Governor of the Bank of Thailand, I was fairly confident 
that I would be able to do well in the area of bank supervision, given the considerable exposure I’ve 
had as a commercial banker. I also had some ideas on how to move forward the resolution of NPL and 
return banks to profitability. 
But I was a banker and not an economist by profession. My expertise in business administration made 
me  a  bit  uneasy  on  matters  concerning  monetary  policy,  as  I  felt  that  I  did  not  have  enough 
macroeconomic background to master the monetary policy issues. However, I was really fortunate to 
have a highly competent Monetary Policy Committee as well as BOT staff to support me in this area. 
Indeed the depth of knowledge and the quality of analysis provided by BOT staff are materials which I 
can  always  rely  on.  All  I  have  to  do  during  the  past  4½  years  is  to  pay  close  attention  to  their 
presentation, data analysis and proposals. The analysis of BOT staff is intellectually rigorous yet very 
clear in their message, enabling me to fully grasp the issues, and the Monetary Policy Committee to 
make appropriate decisions.  
However, in a country where the functioning of financial market mechanism is not fully efficient, there 
is an important role for public communication to help enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Public  understanding  of  monetary  policy  would  lead  to  desirable  change  of  market  behaviour  and 
adjustment  process.  Effective  communication  would  also  enable  financial  market  participants  to 
anticipate  the  direction  of  monetary  policy,  thereby  enhancing  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy.  
It is in this area that I feel I could contribute. Series of efforts have been made to improve Bank of 
Thailand’s  public  communication  and  I  believe  nowadays  the  public  is  more  receptive  to  monetary 
policy,  while  financial  market  participants  could  correctly  anticipate  the  direction  of  monetary  policy 
and adjust their behaviour accordingly. 
Because this award is based on the work in the monetary policy area, I therefore humbly accept this 
award-not only for myself, but also on behalf of the Monetary Policy Committee as well as the staff of 
the Bank of Thailand. 
And as Mr. Caplen mentioned earlier on, the Thai banking sector also deserves congratulatory note for 
delivering  economic  growth  in  Thailand.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  would  therefore  like  to  thank  the 
banking  community  for  its  steadfast  adherence  to  the  reform  efforts,  for  its  cooperation  in 
strengthening  our  financial  sector  and  for  its  support  to  the  recovery  of  the  Thai  economy.  Even 
though I was a commercial banker for over 20 years of my career and fully share and understand the 
challenges  facing  this  profession,  I  would  not  be  able  to  witness the  recovery  and resilience  of  our 
banking system today if not for your remarkable efforts and hard work. 
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  the  management  of  the  “Banker”  magazine  for  honoring  me  with  this 
award  and  all  of  my  colleagues  at  the  BOT  for  their  untiring  support.  The  award  is  a  great 
encouragement for me to continue dedicating myself to the cause of my work. 
Finally, let me leave you with a quote that has always been close to my heart. These were the words 
of one of my mentor, Dr. Puey Ungphakorn, one of the finest Governors we’ve ever had, who once 
said that: “If one is not concern about holding on to one’s position, then one can always make the right 
decisions.” So you can rest assured that I will continue to do what is right and in the best interest of 
our country. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 1
