Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Standards, codes and rules – friend or foe of poor 
nations? 
Presentation by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the luncheon of 
the Commonwealth Finance Ministers’ Meeting, Colombo, 12 September 2006. 
 Your Excellencies, Honourable Ministers, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, it is my great pleasure to welcome all of you to Sri Lanka 
and to host this Luncheon today. I hope all of you had a pleasant journey and have been able to settle 
down well in our city so as to be ready to face the rigours of the tight programme that is ahead of you 
over the next few days. I am also delighted that I have the opportunity to speak to you this afternoon, 
knowing that it has provided me the platform to share some thoughts with a very diverse group that 
constitutes the Commonwealth. 
As we all know, the family of Commonwealth countries is a truly global, multi-ethnic, multi-religious, 
multi-cultural, multi-national collection of vastly differing economies, societies and political ideologies. 
It may also be not inappropriate to state that the Commonwealth is enriched greatly by this diversity. 
At the same time, we have to be mindful that the countries within this group are at various stages of 
economic development, ranging from poor developing nations with annual per capita incomes of about 
US  Dollars  160  to  very  wealthy  industrialized  nations  with  per  capita  incomes  of  about  US  Dollars 
36,000. Hence, although we may, in general, say that we derive our strength through diversity, we still 
have  to  take  serious  note  that  the  great  disparity  in  living  standards  is  an  issue  that  needs  to  be 
uppermost in our minds if we are to move forward in harmony and brotherhood. In that context, I think 
it is very appropriate that, this year, the Commonwealth Finance Ministers have decided to focus on 
several dimensions and options that impact on this issue, which is borne out of the fact that they have 
selected “Agenda for growth and livelihood”, as this year’s theme for the meeting. 
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,  
In order to critically examine the issue of wealth disparity in perspective, let us take our minds back to 
the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Singapore in the year 1971. At that meeting, the 
declaration  of  Commonwealth  Principles  was  adopted.  These  Principles  acknowledged  that  wide 
disparities in wealth existed between different sections of mankind. The Heads of Government also 
acknowledged  that  such  disparities  were  too  great  to  be  tolerated  and  that  such  disparities  would 
create  world  tension.  Accordingly,  the  Commonwealth  resolved  to  work  towards  the  progressive 
reduction of these disparities. The same declaration undertook to steer the group’s efforts to overcome 
poverty,  ignorance  and  disease,  as well  as  to  raise  standards  of  life  and  achieve  a  more equitable 
international society. 
20  years  later,  in  1991,  the  Harare  Declaration  was  issued.  This  declaration  conceded  that  many 
Commonwealth  countries  were  still  poor  and  that  they  faced  acute  problems,  including  excessive 
population growth, continuation of poverty, debt burdens and environmental degradation. At the same 
time, it was acknowledged that while disparities among members appeared to have worsened, some 
favourable results were also being achieved. For example, despite the widening economic gap, many 
nations  had  been  able  to  establish  better  democratic  processes,  good  administrative  frameworks, 
more independent judiciaries, keener respect for human, fundamental and labour rights, and several 
other social successes. Those were of course significant achievements, and we should all be proud 
that we have been able to create such conditions in our countries. 
Notwithstanding  those  gains  as  noted  in  1991,  and  the  many  subsequent  successes,  we  may  still 
have to admit that our collective efforts to address one of the fundamental Principles of the Singapore 
Declaration,  namely,  that  of  addressing  the  issue  of  income  disparity,  has  been,  by  and  large, 
unsuccessful.  Today,  35  years  after  the  Singapore  Declaration,  it  is  actually  becoming  even  more 
acute, and consequently, we need to respond to that widening gap appropriately, urgently. 
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests,  
As we all know, countries that are affluent today were not affluent at some point in time in their history. 
However,  they  have  reached  an  affluent  status  today  through  their  various  actions  and  initiatives. 
Obviously  therefore,  as  in  the  case  of  any  successful  outcome,  we  could  learn  from  those  case 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 1
studies. In fact, we in Sri Lanka felt that we should do so professionally and objectively. We began by 
examining the economic and political environments in which many of the highly successful countries 
operated.  We  studied  the  external  and  internal  conditions  that  prevailed  during  the  early  days  of 
growth of those countries. We also attempted to analyze the factors which enabled those countries to 
break the shackles and reach a stable platform from where they launched themselves to the next level 
of development.  
In that exercise, one of our key findings was that, in the journey to reach developed and industrialized 
country status, many of those countries had immense space and flexibility to grow in an uninhibited 
environment. Further, when the present day rich countries were growing, (from per capita income of 
US dollars 1,000 to US dollars 10,000), they faced very few obstacles in the movement of capital and 
labour.  They did  not  have to  be overly concerned  about  human or  labour rights.  They  were  free  to 
impose  trade  quotas  and  grant  very  visible  and  obvious  subsidies  to  their  local  entrepreneurs  and 
farmers.  They  were  not  subjected  to  stringent  global  standards  for  copyrights.  They  were  not 
desperately  worried  about  safeguarding  the  ozone  layer  or  the  environment.  They  did  not  have  to 
make too much of a fuss about money laundering. They did not spend expensive professional time 
and money on compliance tests. They did not have to deal with 24 x 7 media reports. The list goes on. 
Some even had ready access to the natural and human resources of other countries, which they ruled.   
But  today,  many  low-income  countries,  despite  their  potential  to  grow  are  functioning  in  an 
“international  environment”  that  is  “controlling”  almost  all  economic  activities.  Accordingly,  they  are 
seriously constrained by these stringent benchmarks, however wonderful they may be, which from a 
rapid  development  point  of  view,  poses  serious  and  continuous  challenges.  For  example,  at  a  time 
when these countries are desperately attempting to break free from the poverty trap, the allocation of 
resources to them by way of aid inflows by wealthy nations have been reducing. In fact, the net official 
resource inflows to developing countries were negative in 2005 and projected to remain negative in 
the next few years as well. In the meantime, although the Commonwealth group supported the Doha 
Declaration of WTO and were moving towards the direction of freest possible flow of multilateral trade 
on  terms  fair  and  equitable  to  all,  while  taking  account  of  the  special  requirements  of  developing 
countries,  the  current  multilateral  trade  negotiations  have  not  been  moving  in  the  right  direction. 
Hence,  it  is  clear  that  not  only  are  the  present  day  poor  nations  struggling  in  the  emerging,  highly 
complex and controlled economic environment, they are also facing reduced resource transfers, and 
not being accorded special treatment they should be afforded in order to propel them out of poverty. 
Some may however argue that the tremendous benefits of globalization has levelled the playing field 
and that advantages are available to any and all who care to access, and it is just unfortunate if some 
persons are unable to take advantage of these conditions.  
Nevertheless, I believe we are all aware that weaker communities have lesser chances of access and 
that  situation  leads  to  widening  even  further,  the  ever-widening  gap.  Therefore,  it  is  timely  and 
appropriate that this forum addresses the need to impress upon the more wealthy nations to increase 
aid flows, open out greater trading opportunities, and move towards higher investment and resource 
build-up in the lower income countries. 
Lest I be misunderstood, let me add that, not for a moment am I suggesting that the progressive steps 
the world and the international community have taken over the past few decades in developing new 
standards  and  norms  are  in  any  way,  inappropriate  or  unwelcome.  Those  initiatives  were  certainly 
necessary and have been beneficial for the overall advancement of society. But, we must, at the same 
time, collectively address the ever growing constraints arising out of the inflexibilities and restrictions 
imposed in the transfer of capital, wealth, skills, knowledge and the imposition of new standards, which 
may consciously or unconsciously act as subtle barriers to poverty alleviation. 
Your Excellencies, Honorable Ministers, Distinguished Guests,  
In order for all of us to appreciate the fact that what I am saying is not something new, let me now 
quote a Principle as set out in the Singapore Declaration, and affirmed in Harare.  
“Our aim is to achieve the freest possible flow of international trade on terms fair and equitable to all, 
taking into account the special requirements of the developing countries, and to encourage the flow of 
adequate  resources,  including  governmental  and  private  resources,  to  the  developing  countries, 
bearing in mind the importance of doing this in true spirit of partnership, and of establishing for this 
purpose  in  the  developing  countries,  conditions  which  are  conducive  to  sustained  investment  and 
growth”. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2006
While this Principle enunciates a very laudable and noble philosophy the unfortunate reality may be 
that the plethora of what we may call “worthy restrictions”, (albeit they may be for the greater good of 
mankind), may be actually but unwittingly assisting to keep the same developing countries in a tighter 
trap  of  poverty.  The  powerful  message  that  emerges  from  this  situation  is  clear.  The  present  low-
income  countries,  when  they  have  to  struggle  in  this  unsympathetic  environment,  need  more 
understanding; greater allocations for funding and investment; increased direct aid flows; and tangible 
support and direct concessions to recognize satisfactory “compliance”.  
At this stage, I would like to acknowledge a step in the right direction that has been followed by some 
advanced  countries  through  certain  targeted  schemes,  such  as  the  GSP+  scheme,  which  provides 
some  welcome  relief  to  low-income  countries.  Unfortunately  however,  even  such  concessions  are 
often coupled with stringent criteria such as Rules of Origin which again adds to the ever growing list 
of “do’s and don’ts”, which list must be quite a nightmare for those who have to keep track of these! Of 
course all this has served to create a new breed of corporate executives titled, “Compliance Officers” 
(CO’s), who may at this rate, soon end up becoming even more important than CEO’s!! 
Your Excellencies, Honorable Ministers, Distinguished Guests,  
The  Principle  in  relation  to  addressing  income  and  wealth  disparity  among  nations  is  equally 
applicable  to  societies within  nations  as  well.  Towards  that  end,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  to  this 
distinguished  audience  that  Sri  Lanka  has  already  developed  a  comprehensive  policy  framework 
“Mahinda Chintana”, based on the election manifesto submitted by President Mahinda Rajapaksa at 
the  last  Presidential  Elections  which  addresses  this  issue  comprehensively.  This  policy  framework 
provides a sustainable development strategy designed to address growth and livelihood issues, while 
covering the income – disparity issue that prevails in our own country. As per the “Mahinda Chintana” 
development strategy, every endeavour is to be made to tap domestic resources for investment. At the 
same time, the Government clearly realizes that it is imperative to encourage large scale investment 
flows into the country to make a significant impact in the acceleration of the growth process. It is now 
an  accepted  norm  that  large  infrastructure  projects  such  as  highways,  railways,  airports,  ports  and 
power projects not only add to the stock of investment in a country, but are also considered a better 
recipe for poverty alleviation rather than income support and subsidies. 
A large number of such investment opportunities now exists in Sri Lanka and no doubt in many other 
Commonwealth countries as well. In that context, we need to use the opportunities provided by events 
such as today’s meeting to establish bi-lateral relationships leading to the promotion of investments. 
While Governments  attempt  to  achieve  consensus  for  multi-lateral  facilities and  agreements,  it  may 
also be time for individuals to seriously consider B2B investment opportunities.  
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, I am confident that the delegates present at this Forum will 
actively, seriously and diligently explore possible ways and means of promoting interactive growth that 
would  generate  livelihoods  and  reduce  poverty  in  our  respective  countries.  If  we  all  do  that 
successfully,  we  could  look  back  and  proclaim  that  we  did  our  bit  to  fulfill  the  lofty  outcomes  as 
envisaged in the 1971 Singapore Declaration. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 3
