Goh Chok Tong: Opportunities in a New Asia – China, India and ASEAN  
in-between 
Speech Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Institute of International Finance (IIF) Opening Dinner, Singapore, 16 September 2006. 
 Let me bid you a warm welcome to Singapore. I hope that your stay here will not only be intellectually 
stimulating and professionally beneficial but also enjoyable and memorable. 
The IMF and World Bank meetings were last held in Asia in September 1997. A few months before the 
meetings in Hong Kong, the Asian Financial Crisis had started to erupt. The crisis swept across the 
region, causing immeasurable damage. Pundits declared the end of the East Asian growth miracle. 
But Asia has bounced back. 
Looking at East Asia through post-Crisis lens, a 2001 World Bank report "Rethinking the East Asian 
Miracle" noted that Asia was still: 
"...the  most  exciting  development  experience  available  to  us...the  Crisis  has 
tarnished that record only slightly and, if anything, together with the strong recovery 
in  several  of  the  countries,  may  have  reinforced  the  conclusion  that  there  is 
something very special about these countries." 
Indeed, there is something special about Asia. Asia had problems, and will face big challenges ahead. 
But never in human history has the world seen such large-scale reduction in poverty and the rise in 
living standards for billions in so short a time. 
I am therefore confident about Asia's prospects. Over the next 20 years, Asia will continue to surge, 
led by the re-emergence of India and China, and a revitalised ASEAN. 
Japan, will remain an important player in Asia. However, as a mature economy, Japan is not expected 
to grow as fast as India and China. 
This evening, I will focus on India, China and ASEAN in-between. 
India on the march 
First, India. 
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said on India's Independence Day this year that India is "certainly on 
the march". The Prime Minister is a modest man who is not given to exaggeration. 
Today, India is attracting attention from foreign investors and world leaders alike. 
Over the past 12 years, India grew by an average of 6.5% per year. Growth was even higher, at 8% 
per annum, over the last three years. I believe that India will continue to grow at a fast pace for two 
main reasons. 
First, in India, old mindsets are being tossed aside in favour of pragmatic policies supporting reform 
and  liberalisation,  and  integration  with  the  global  economy.  India's  market  reforms  have  stayed  the 
course  despite  several  changes  of  governments  and  Prime  Ministers.  Business  leaders,  too,  are 
prepared to compete against foreign companies and foreign investors in India. 
Early  this  year,  I  met  with  the  Chief  Minister of  West  Bengal  in  Kolkata.  The  state  has been  under 
communist rule for 30 years. The Chief Minister, one of the politburo members of the Communist Party 
of India (Marxist), was keen on foreign investments. He told me candidly he did not look at "the colour 
of investment - be it yellow, red or white". This reminded me of Deng Xiaoping's famous dictum: that 
the  colour  of  a  cat  matters  less  than  its  ability  to  catch  mice.  The  Indian  communists  had  drawn 
lessons from the fate of other communist regimes - the fall of the Soviet Union and the rise of China. 
They know they have to perform or perish. 
I believe that reform in India is irreversible, even though the pace may fluctuate. No matter which party 
comes  to  power,  the  government  of  the  day  will have  to  perform  or  perish. The  Indian  voters  have 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 1
seen how China, which was once just as poor, has raised the standard of living of its people. And they 
want their government to do the same for them. 
Second, India has many strengths, not least of which is a large pool of talent, including well-educated 
English-speaking  professionals  and  workers.  India  has  300  universities  and  1,500  research 
institutions.  It  produces  over  200,000  engineers  and  9,000  PhDs  each  year.  It  also  has  a  young 
population. 
What will drive India forward is sheer hunger - not the hunger that comes from poverty but the hunger 
for  knowledge  and  success.  The  drive  and  desire  of  young  Indians  to  succeed  is  palpable  -  in  top 
institutions like the Indian Institute of Management (IIM) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), or the 
Infosys campus in Bangalore. Young Members of Parliament whom I met were upbeat about India's 
future. 
Of  course,  India's  growth  trajectory  will  not  be  a  straight  line.  Development  across  states  will  be 
uneven. Unlike China, power does not rest with one political party. The intricacies of coalition politics 
mean  that  time,  patience,  skill  and  political  bargaining  will  be needed  to  balance different interests, 
and  forge  a  national  consensus  on  reforms.  Investors  have  cited  inadequate  infrastructure,  rigid 
regulations  and  bureaucracy  as  some  of  the  impediments  to  India's  rapid  growth.  In  addition,  India 
cannot  grow  into  a  major  economy  on  services  alone.  It  will  have  to  find  ways  to  expand  its 
manufacturing sector to create jobs for the large numbers of young people entering the labour market 
each year.  
India  has  decided  to  use  Special  Economic  Zones  (SEZs)  to  spearhead  the  growth  of  its 
manufacturing and export sectors. SEZs will create pockets of growth and prosperity. They will have a 
powerful demonstration effect on the rest of the economy. Foreign investors will find it easier and more 
attractive to locate their factories in an SEZ. Singapore and India have agreed to set up an SEZ in 
India and both sides are now working to implement it. 
China on the rise 
Let me now turn to China. 
I  first  visited  China  in  1971  to  do  business  with  them.  It  was  during  the  height  of  the  Cultural 
Revolution. I saw young Red Guards holding their study sessions in the open. I visited a commune 
and  listened  to  an  old  woman  singing  praises  of  Chairman  Mao  and  the  Liberation.  I  have  visited 
China  regularly  since  then.  I  have  seen  China's  transformation  through  the  decades  -  not  just  the 
physical  transformation  but  also  the  change  in  mindset  and  values  of  the  people.  Pop  songs  have 
replaced revolutionary songs. Gucci, Armani and other luxury brands are worn instead of Mao jackets. 
The  communes  have  given  way  to  industrial  parks,  like  the  Suzhou  Industrial  Park,  an  integrated 
township which Singapore helped build. And golf has become popular in China. 
Most analysts project China to continue to grow by 8% per year over the next 10 years. I share this 
optimism. 
However, we should not underestimate the immense challenges before China. The Chinese leaders 
certainly  do  not.  Premier  Wen  Jiabao  once  explained  to  me  the  magnitude  of  China's  problems 
through the concept of "division and multiplication". He said that China's resources become very small 
when divided by 1.3 billion people, while a small problem becomes huge when multiplied by 1.3 billion. 
Despite the tremendous changes, China is still underdeveloped and suffers from great imbalances in 
its development. 
Beijing's  top  priority  now  is  to  spread  the  fruits  of  development  more  widely.  The  government 
recognises  the  risks  for  the  country  if  growth  in  the  coastal  provinces  is  not  spread  to  the  inland 
provinces. 
I  believe  that  Chinese  leaders  have  the  capability  and  the  will  to  do  what  is  necessary  to  sustain 
China's growth and ensure political and social stability. Chinese leaders and officials, both in Beijing 
and the provinces, are pragmatic and in touch with the people. They understand the problems. They 
are prepared to learn from others, and they learn fast. One of Singapore's former Chief Planners, now 
working in the private sector, told me this. He had imparted Singapore's experience on town planning 
to some Chinese officials, while doing a planning project for the Chengdu government. Chengdu is the 
capital of Sichuan province, which has a population bigger than Germany's. Recently, these officials 
invited him back to do a critique of their strategic plan for an area many times bigger than Singapore. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2006
He was astonished by the quality of their work - the depth of their research and the strength of their 
reasoning power. Those who have been to Shanghai or Beijing in the 80's and today will understand 
the point I am making. The speed with which the Chinese are learning and catching up is awesome. 
China  will  also  face  the  trickier  problem  of  managing  the  demand  for  political  change  and  greater 
political  participation  as  it  becomes  a  middle  income  country.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  the 
cohesiveness of Chinese society and the social contract between the government and people would 
remain in the foreseeable future. Communism may have failed worldwide but in China, the Communist 
Party of China (CPC) has succeeded in providing the people with security, stability and prospects for a 
better life. What the Chinese people fear most is chaos and a slide back to poverty. 
A revitalised ASEAN 
Third, ASEAN. Southeast Asia is strategically positioned between India and China. 
ASEAN does not regard the re-emergence of India and China as a threat. Instead, it is responding in a 
positive and strategic manner. ASEAN is positioning itself to borrow the strengths of these two giants 
to boost its growth. Some of you may have watched martial arts movies starring Jackie Chan or Jet Li. 
 ). 
There is a movement in Tai Chi called to 'use four taels to deflect a thousand pounds' ( 
Using  this  movement,  a  smaller-built  Tai  Chi  Master  borrows  the  strength  of  his  bigger  sparring 
partners to achieve victory. 
ASEAN's total trade with China and India has grown significantly over the past decade, and in 2005 
amounted  to  US$130  billion  and  US$22  billion  respectively.  ASEAN  is  working  hard  to  ensure  that 
Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with China and India are completed by 2010 and 2011 respectively. 
At  the  same  time,  ASEAN  is  also  enhancing  its  links  with  other  economic  centres.  ASEAN  is 
negotiating  FTAs  with  Japan,  South  Korea,  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  To  strengthen  their 
longstanding  economic  ties,  ASEAN  and  the  US  signed  a  Trade  and  Investment  Framework 
Agreement (TIFA) in August. 
ASEAN is moving ahead with closer political, economic and security integration. ASEAN has set itself 
the goal of establishing an ASEAN Economic Community that will form a single production zone, with 
free flow of goods, services and investment. The original target date of 2020 was advanced to 2015 
this year.  
Obviously, there are practical difficulties of integration given the diversity in the region and the different 
levels of development. ASEAN leaders have tasked an Eminent Persons Group to come up with an 
ASEAN Charter to guide ASEAN's future development. This will mark a new phase of deeper ASEAN 
integration. 
Geo-strategic shifts 
The  re-emergence  of  India  and  China,  and  the  revitalisation  of  ASEAN  are  taking  place  within  a 
broader geo-strategic context. Let me now examine some of the larger trends. 
At  one  level,  Asia  is  slowly  but  surely  coalescing.  The  entire  region  is  being  sewn  together  by 
changing  patterns  of  trade,  investment  and  production  chains.  Increasing  economic  integration  is 
reflected by the rapid expansion of intra-Asia trade. From 34% in 1980, intra-Asian trade as a share of 
the region's total trade has grown to more than 50% in 2005. 
The  transformations  taking  place  in  Asia  are  of  a  depth  and  scope  historically  unprecedented.  The 
combined population of Northeast Asia, Southeast Asia and India is well over 3 billion, about half the 
world's population. Changes of the scale that are currently underway could be profoundly unsettling to 
international  order.  Strong  growth  will  give  Beijing  and  New  Delhi  the  resources  to  pursue  wider 
strategic interests across Asia and beyond. Strategic stability is not to be taken for granted, particularly 
in  Asia  where  there  are  many  territorial  and  other  unresolved  issues  left  over  from  historically 
complicated  relationships.  Great  power  competition  and  rivalry  are  facts  of  life.  However,  Asia  has 
learnt from Europe that competition need not lead to conflict, and that conflict will destroy its dreams of 
a rising, prosperous region. The main challenge is to integrate all the key players within the evolving 
regional architecture. 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 3
The  US,  with  its  economic  and  strategic  preponderance,  will  continue  to  provide  the  overarching 
stability and balance in Asia. Most countries in Asia, including China and India, welcome a continued 
US presence. 
The  key  relationships  that  underpin  the  region's  stability  are  fundamentally  sound.  In  the  post-Cold 
War era, US-China-Japan ties underpin the East Asian landscape. Today, while this strategic triangle 
remains valid, India's re-emergence has added a new dimension. 
Relations between the US and China are the most important, and basically sound. So long as there is 
no miscalculation over Taiwan, occasional tensions over trade, democracy and human rights can be 
managed. 
US  and  Japan  are  steady  allies.  The  US'  Security  Alliance  with  Japan  will  continue  to  anchor  its 
presence in East Asia and the Pacific. 
Relations between Beijing and Tokyo have been historically uneasy. There has never been a period in 
history  when  both  China  and  Japan  were  simultaneously  strong  powers.  As  geographically  close 
neighbours, they will have to learn to accommodate each other. 
US-India relations are nascent but on an upswing. Japan has also started to actively woo India. 
Relations  between  China  and  India  have  continued  to  improve.  Many  current  discussions  of  Sino-
Indian  relations  are  based  on  a  presumption  of  geopolitical  rivalry.  This  premise  is  false.  There  is 
certainly an element of rivalry between China and India but India is not going to allow itself to be used 
to check and contain China. Both Chinese and Indian leaders want their two countries to have good 
relations. They believe that the world is large enough to accommodate the aspirations of both, plus of 
course, the US, Europe, ASEAN and other countries. 
ASEAN with more than 500 million people is large but it is not a country. It is an organisation of 10 
countries. It does not threaten the interests of the major powers. That is why ASEAN has been able to 
provide a neutral venue to bring larger powers together. 
Placing  ASEAN  at  the  centre  of  the  Asian  construct  helps  to  reconcile  and  assuage  the  tensions 
between major players and their competing interests. It is also the reason why ASEAN must remain in 
the driver's seat and the political underpinning for the multitude of dialogues and fora that ASEAN has 
spawned  such  as  the  ASEAN  +3,  ASEAN  Regional  Forum  and  the  East  Asia  Summit  (EAS).  The 
inaugural 16-member EAS was held last December. Major powers outside the grouping need not be 
worried that the EAS would work against their interests. It is in ASEAN's interest that the EAS remains 
open and inclusive. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
A rising new Asia will usher in a new era of opportunities for the world. It is therefore appropriate for 
the Institute of International Finance (IIF) to hold this meeting in Singapore, a gateway to access Asia. 
I hope that the next few days will provide all of you with fresh insights into Asia and Singapore. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2006
