Krzysztof Rybinski: Globalisation - opportunities, threats and implications for 
the economic policy 
Speech by Mr Krzysztof Rybinski, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, at a meeting with 
entrepreneurs who have participated in the economic climate survey carried out by the National Bank 
of Poland, Rzeszow, 10 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to the meeting in the regional branch of the National Bank of Poland in Rzeszow. First of all, 
I  would  like  to  thank  very  much  the  management  of  the  branch  for  their  efforts  to  organise  this 
meeting.  Since  1998  the  National  Bank  of  Poland  has  carried  out  quarterly  and  annual  economic 
climate  surveys  of  enterprises.  Results  of  this  survey  allow  a  better  assessment  of  the  state  of  the 
economy and the outlook for inflation. They also constitute a vital element of the economic analyses 
carried  out  by  the  NBP.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  you  for  your  contribution  to  the 
accumulation of knowledge at the NBP about the current processes in the Polish economy. 
Such  knowledge,  gained  from  people  who  create  jobs,  make  investments  and  face  domestic  and 
foreign  competition  on  a  daily  basis,  is  particularly  important  in  the  environment  of  the  changing 
structure of the economy. Structural changes may bias results derived from econometric models used 
by  central  banks.  Still  as  a  student  at  the  Faculty  of  Mathematics  and  Computer  Sciences  at  the 
Warsaw University, back in the late 1980s, I assisted in the works on a model of the Polish economy 
carried  out  at  the  Faculty  of  Economic  Sciences.  Soon  afterwards,  as  a  result  of  the  fundamental 
changes in the structure of the Polish economy, consisting in liberalisation of prices and opening to 
foreign  trade,  the  model  became  useless  as  a  tool  of  macroeconomic  analysis.  Nowadays,  the 
changes  observed  in  the  Polish  economy  are  neither  so  rapid  nor  radical  any  more.  However, 
intensification of changes in the global economy, reported in the recent years, must have brought in 
many economic relations other than those known so far. There have been many structural changes 
whose force, permanence and significance cannot be assessed on an ongoing basis with the use of 
econometric models. In principle, such an assessment is feasible only after a few years, which - from 
the point of view of pursuing an effective monetary policy - is too long a period1. This is why in such 
periods the so-called soft data and information, obtained directly from entrepreneurs, gain particular 
significance. 
There are numerous examples of such changes taking place in many countries. In spite of the fact that 
the interest rates of many central banks have been reduced to their historical lows in the recent years 
(they have been brought down to zero in Japan and were at the level of 1% in the USA for some time), 
and  in  spite  of  a  high  growth  in  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities,  inflation  in  the  largest  world 
economies still remains low. The Federal Reserve Bank increased its interest rate from 1% to 4.5% 
over the past two years and the markets expect further rises, to the level of about 5.0%, whereas the 
interest rate on 10-year US Treasury bonds has been fluctuating at around 4.5% for a few years now. 
This phenomenon has even received an official name of “the Greenspan’s puzzle”. The yield curve in 
the US is inverted, which means that the interest rate on 2-year bonds is higher than that on 10-year 
bonds; in the light of the present knowledge, this should indicate an oncoming recession. Meanwhile, 
according to the present forecasts, the economic growth rate in the USA will slow down only slightly in 
2006 and will remain close to the potential GDP. In 2005, the current account deficit in relation to the 
GDP  in  the  USA  exceeded  6%,  and  many  forecasting  institutions  expect  its  further  deterioration. 
Meanwhile, contrary to what the theory of economics says, the dollar exchange rate, instead of falling, 
appreciated against the euro by 13% in 2005. Although the US foreign liabilities exceed the assets by 
over USD 2.5 trillion, the current account income balance of the US in 2005 was positive. This has led 
                                                      
1   As presented by A. Blinder and R. Reis in „Understanding the Greenspan Standard”, presented at the Fed conference in 
Kansas  City  in  August  2005.  (Economic  Performance  in  the  Greenspan  Era:  The  Evolution  of  Events  and  Ideas).  An 
example of such delays in the possibility of recognising a certain phenomenon is the rapid acceleration of the growth trend 
in labour productivity in the USA in mid-90s. The former Federal Reserve President Alan Greenspan formulated a thesis that 
such an acceleration took place in 1995, whereas econometric models where capable to show it only after five years from its 
occurrence. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 1
to  creation  of  a  new  hypothesis,  according  to  which  the  USA  exports  “dark  matter”2.  It  claims  that, 
since the US revenues on foreign assets are higher than the costs of servicing of foreign liabilities, 
some  “other  assets”  must  exist  which,  being  measured  incorrectly  in  the  statistics,  affect  the  “real” 
international investment position of the USA, which is not negative. In such a case, the US current 
account  deficits  observed  in  the  recent  years  would  be  a  statistical  illusion.  The  aforementioned 
concept  has  stirred  a  very  lively  debate  and  has  been  forcefully  criticised  by  many  economists, 
including Willem Buiter3, a former EBRD chief economist. 
Another  puzzle,  described  by  the  Federal  Reserve  economist  Kevin  Lansing4,  is  the  fact  that  the 
growing share of the US society is aging and will leave the period of their highest income level behind. 
In such a situation, the Americans should be paying off their housing loans and accumulate savings. 
However, they do exactly the opposite thing. If this behaviour pattern does not change soon, many 
Americans may find themselves in a situation where retirement shall mean a radical decrease in their 
standard of living. 
Of course, it is difficult to point out a single factor that leads to all those changes. Yet, there is no doubt 
that  one  of  the  most  important  factors  changing  the  structure  of  the  global  economy  is  the  rapid 
globalisation  of  financial  markets,  trade,  manufacturing  and  -  in  recent  years  -  of  services  and 
knowledge. Globalisation has many dimensions but today I would like to focus on just two aspects that 
are  actually  interrelated,  i.e.  global  imbalances  and  globalisation  of  manufacturing,  services  and 
knowledge,  which  takes  on  the  form  of  offshoring.  At  the  same  time,  I  shall  omit  many  other 
globalisation-related themes, such as globalisation of financial markets or migration. 
As  I  have  mentioned  before,  one  of  the  manifestations  of  globalisation  in  recent  years  are  global 
imbalances. In 2005, the US current account deficit exceeded 5% of the GDP, and many forecasts of 
investment banks point to its further increase in 2006 and 20075. The USA has had a negative current 
account balance for two decades now. However, the growing rate of the deficit has accelerated in the 
recent years, which has brought the negative net investment position of the largest economy in the 
world down to the vicinity of 30% of the GDP in 2005 and - according to all available forecasts - will 
continue to deteriorate it rapidly. 
The large US current account deficit is related to a negative balance of household savings and a sharp 
increase in real property prices, observed not only in the USA but in all Anglo-Saxon countries6 in the 
recent years. Moreover, the US current account deficit is financed to a large extent from purchases of 
American  debt  securities  by  Asian  central  banks  and  -  in  the  years  2004  and  2005  -  to  a  growing 
increasing extent by public institutions managing foreign exchange reserves in oil-exporting countries. 
Foreign exchange reserves have increased substantially over the recent years. In China, for example, 
reserves of the People’s Bank of China increased from USD 166 billion in December 2000 to USD 819 
billion  in  December  2005,  and  it  is  broadly  expected  that  -  in  terms  of  size  of  its  foreign  exchange 
reserves  -  China  will  outdistance  the  to-date  leader  Japan,  whose  FX  reserves  reached  USD  847 
billion in December 2005, and that Chinese reserves will exceed USD 1 trillion in 20067. 
As yet, there is still no definition of global imbalances that would be commonly accepted by most of 
economists. In the economic literature of recent years most of the references to the problem of global 
imbalances concern the phenomena described above. Therefore, for the purposes of this speech, I 
shall assume that whenever global imbalances are mentioned, the term will mean a joint occurrence of 
the following factors: 
                                                      
2   Ricardo Husmann, Federico Sturzenegger “Global imbalances or bad accounting? The missing dark matter in the wealth of 
nations”, Harvard University working paper, January 2006. 
3   W. Buiter “Dark Matter or Cold Fusion”, Goldman Sachs Global Economics Paper, January 2006. 
4   K.Lansing “Spendthrift Nation”, Federal Reserve Bank San Francisco Economic Letter, November 2005. 
5   According to World Economic Outlook published by the IMF in September 2005, the forecasted US current account deficit 
will amount to USD 759 billion in 2005 and will increase to USD 805 billion in 2006. Both values correspond to 6.1% of the 
forecasted GDP. Some forecasts by investments banks, however, indicate an increase in the forecasted current account 
deficit to 6.5% of the GDP in 2005 and to 7-8% of the GDP in 2006 and 2007. 
6   An extensive discussion of the real property market can be found in A. Ahearne et al. „House Prices and Monetary Policy: A 
Cross Country Study”, Fed Board of Governors, International Finance Discussion Papers, September 2005. 
If  one  considers  the  fact  that  China  has  already  used  USD  60  billion  from  their  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  order  to 
recapitalise two commercial banks, the People’s Bank of China has now the largest foreign exchange reserves in the world. 
BIS Review 19/2006
7  
2 
 •  The high current account deficit in the USA. 
•  The negative household savings in the Anglo-Saxon countries, particularly in the USA. 
•  Sharp  increases  in  real  estate  prices  in  Anglo-Saxon  countries,  which  in  some  cases  have 
characteristics of speculative bubbles. 
•  Strong  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  by  public  sector  institutions  in  the  Asian 
and oil-exporting countries. 
A combination of the above-mentioned factors, which is an unprecedented phenomenon in the history 
of the world economy, has triggered a lively economic debate concerning two issues. Firstly, attempts 
are  being  made  to  explain  how  these  imbalances  came  into  being.  Secondly,  both  academic 
economists and strategists at investment banks are trying to assess the possible scenarios of further 
developments.  Are  global  imbalances  a  normal  phenomenon  in  the  global  economy  and  can  they 
increase  further  without  any  harm  to  the  outlook  for  a  long-term  global  growth?  Can  a  radical 
adjustment of these imbalances occur - and if yes, what will be the mechanism of such an adjustment 
and what will its consequences for the global growth be? 
Let  us  begin  with  a  presentation  of  the  main  hypotheses  that  explain  the  phenomenon  of  global 
imbalances. In 2003, three economists presented a hypothesis that an informal Bretton Woods regime 
had been reactivated8. The original Bretton Woods system was created after WWII and consisted in a 
formal obligation of its participant countries to maintain foreign exchange rates, determined against a 
gold  parity,  on  a  specific  level,  with  acceptable  deviations  not  exceeding  1  percent.  The  system 
ceased  to  exist  in  1971  after  president  Nixon  had  taken  a  decision  that  the  USA  would  no  longer 
exchange  dollars  for  gold  according  to  the  parity  determined.  The  nature  of  the  reactivated  Bretton 
Woods,  often  called  Bretton  Woods  2,  is  well  conveyed  in  the  motto  used  by  the  authors  of  this 
concept: 
“(…) if I made an agreement with my tailor that whatever money I pay them, it returns to me on the 
very same day as a loan, I would have no objection at all to ordering more suits from him”  
(Jacques Rueff, 1965, after Dooley et al. (2003)) 
The  hypothesis  of  the  existence  of  an  informal  Breton  Woods  2  says  that  a  system  has  been 
established in which it is profitable for the Asian countries to finance the US current account deficit, 
because  it  allows  them  to  increase  their  exports  to  this  market.  Thus,  it  supports  the  economic 
development of the Asian countries and allows them to create new jobs, which is particularly important 
in China, where - according to various estimates - each year between 10 and 20 million of jobs should 
be created, due to migration from rural areas to cities. In order to maintain the competitiveness of their 
exports,  the  Asian  countries  intervene  on  the  FX  market,  thus  preventing  appreciation  of  their 
currencies.  They  invest  the  purchased  dollars  in  American  bonds,  thus  financing  the  US  current 
account deficit. 
Another  hypothesis  that  explains  the  mechanism  of  the  occurrence  of  global  imbalances  has  been 
formed by the present Federal Reserve Chairman, Ben Bernanke9. His major concept is that the large 
US current account deficit cannot be explained solely by internal factors. In the opinion of the present 
Fed chairman, external factors, which he has defined as a global savings glut, have played the key 
role.  The  hypothesis  says  that  a  substantial  surplus  of  savings  over  investments  in  the  Asian 
countries, together with the structurally high savings in Germany and Japan, have resulted in a global 
savings  glut  that  has  caused  a  boom  on  the  US  stock  exchanges  and  an  increase  in  the  property 
prices, which has in turn resulted in a drop in household savings in the USA. 
The Bretton Woods 2 and the global savings glut hypotheses are challenged by the IMF, which claims 
that  the  source  of  the  current  account  surpluses  is  the  excessively  low  level  of  investments  in  the 
Asian  countries  -  except  for  China.  Thus,  according  to  the  IMF,  we  deal  with  a  global  investment 
drought10, considering the fact that during the five years following the Asian crisis of 1997-1998, the 
                                                      
8   A series of articles on the topic was commenced with the work of M.Dooley, D.Folkerts-Landau and P.Garber „An Essay on 
the Revived Bretton Woods System“, NBER Working Paper 9971, September 2003. 
9   A  hypothesis  of  a  global  savings  glut  was  formed  for  the  first  time  by  Ben  Bernanke  in  March  2005  in  his  speech  at  a 
meeting of Virginia economists’ association. 
10   For  example  in  speeches  by  the  IMF  Managing  Director  Rodrigo  Rato  and  the  IMF  Research  Department  Director 
Raghuram Rajan in January and February of 2006. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 3
level  of  investments  was  about  7  percentage  points  lower  than  during  five  years  before  the  crisis. 
Therefore,  an  appropriate  recommendation  for  these  countries  is  not  limiting  their  savings  rate  but 
enhancing their investment climate. 
According  to  other  hypotheses,  the  major  factor  behind  the  global  imbalances  is  the  low  level  of 
savings in the US household and public sectors11, i.e. the fact that Americans spend more than they 
earn  and  that  the  budget  deficit,  from  a  substantial  surplus  in  the  year  2000,  turned  into  a  level 
estimated  at  4.7%  of  the  GDP  in  2004.  Another  factor  that  is  often  indicated  is  the  change  in  the 
economic policy of the Asian countries after the crisis of 1997-1998, when a decision was taken in 
many countries to establish huge foreign exchange reserves for the purpose of hedging against similar 
changes  in  the  sentiment  of  financial  markets  in  the  future12.  Other  hypotheses  indicate  higher 
investment attractiveness of the USA in comparison to other regions, measured - inter alia - with the 
higher potential economic growth rate13. There exists another hypothesis, according to which such a 
high current account deficit is optimal14, in the face of the expected higher future growth rate of the 
American economy in comparison to that of other developed economies. This hypothesis is based on 
the assumption that Americans increase their present consumption financed from loans, anticipating 
high future earnings that will allow them to pay off the loans, which is perfectly correct. Finally, there 
are papers which try to prove that ... there is no deficit. The above-mentioned article by Hausmann 
and Sturzenegger15 arguing for the existence of “dark matter” is an example of this approach. 
In spite of many attempts to prove that the US current account deficit is in fact lower than it is believed 
to be and that it is even desirable, a vast majority of academic economists and many central bankers 
are seriously alarmed by the scale of global imbalances. Many papers have been written recently that 
show what may be the consequences of the scenario in which the financial markets - in view of no 
adequate  measures  undertaken  by  economic  decision-makers  -  initiate  adjustment  processes  by 
themselves16. If the financial markets start pricing in higher risk premium for American debt securities, 
the outflow of capital from this market - or even decreased capital inflows - may lead to a fall in bond 
prices,  i.e.  to  a  sharp  increase  in  long-term  interest  rates,  a  slowdown  on  the  property  market, 
depreciation of the dollar and, consequently, stagnation or even recession, which may be observed 
globally. 
In  order  to  mitigate  the  probability  of  such  a  scenario,  structural  reforms  should  be  implemented  in 
many  countries.  The  USA  should  substantially  reduce  its  budget  deficit  and  -  via  a  reform  of  the 
pension  system  -  increase  the  household  savings  rate.  In  the  EU  and  Japan  a  series  of  structural 
reforms should be accelerated to raise the flexibility and competitiveness of the labour and product 
markets . In the Asian countries, and first of all in China, the exchange rate regime needs to be made 
more flexible, which should be preceded by reforms that would strengthen the financial system, also 
via a greater openness to foreign capital inflows. At present, it is difficult to assess the likelihood of the 
scenario  involving  a  serious  slowdown  in  the  global  growth;  nevertheless,  implementation  of 
necessary reforms is proceeding slowly. 
Before I move on to the other aspect of globalisation, let me repeat that I understand globalisation as a 
progressive  process  of  international  integration  of  national  markets  of  goods,  services,  capital  and 
knowledge.  In  practice,  this  means  higher  levels  of  trade  and  higher  inflows  of  foreign  investment, 
                                                      
11   For example M. Chinn “Getting Serious about Twin Deficits”, working paper, The Bernard and Irene Schwartz Series on the 
Future of American Competitiveness, CSR No. 10, September 2005. 
12   This  hypothesis  has  been  proved  in:  J.Aizenman,  J.Lee  “International  Reserves:  Precautionary  vs.  Mercantilist  Views, 
Theory and Evidence”, IMF Working Paper WP/05/198, October 2005; and M-A Gosselin, N Parent “An Empirical Analysis 
of Foreign Exchange Reserves in Emerging Asia”, Bank of Canada working paper 2005-38, December 2005. 
13   See R.Caballero et al. “An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates”, MIT mimeo, September 2005. 
14   C.Engel,  J.Rogers  “The  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit  and  the  Expected  Share  of  World  Output”,  NBER  working  paper 
11921, January 2006. 
15   See footnote no. 2. 
16   Examples of such estimations can be found in: S.Edwards “Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And if not, How 
Costly  Is  Adjustment  Likely  to  Be?”,  NBER  working  paper  11541,  August  2005;  N.  Roubini  “Global  Current  Account 
Imbalances:  Orderly  or  Disorderly  Rebalancing?”,  New  York  University  Working  Paper;  M.  Obstfeld  M,  K.  Rogoff  “The 
Unsustainable  US  Current  Account  Deficit  Position  Revisited”,  prepared  for  12-13  July  2004  NBER  conference  on  G-7 
Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and  Adjustment; H.  Faruqee et al. “Smooth Landing or  Crash? Model Based 
Scenarios  of  Global  Current  Account  Rebalancing”,  NBER  Working  Paper  11583;  O.  Blanchard  et  al.  „The  U.S.  Current 
Account and the Dollar”, NBER Working Paper 11137 and many others. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2006
thanks to the intensified scale of those phenomena and thanks to including an increasing number of 
countries  into  the  international  economic  processes.  Taking  into  consideration  the  labour  market,  it 
may be observed that the inclusion of the CEE countries as well as the former Soviet Union countries, 
India, China, and other developing countries resulted in an increase in the global labour supply of 2 
billion workers. Thus, we are witnesses to the establishment of the global labour market. Actions of 
international  corporations  undertaken  to  relocate  manufacturing  or  orders  to  countries  with  lower 
manufacturing  costs  simply  make  use  of  the  existing  comparative  advantages.  The  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) inflow between 1990 and 2004 increased more than threefold, amounting to ca. USD 
648 billion in 2004. In the same period, the FDI inflow to developing countries was six times higher and 
in 2004 it amounted to USD 233 billion17. 
A significant factor contributing to intensification of the above phenomena is trade liberalisation, which 
involves reduction or elimination of customs tariff rates and all other non-tariff barriers that increase 
the  costs  of  trade.  Studies  undertaken  so  far18  point  to  a  significant  role  of  preferential  trade 
agreements,  which  in  the  years  1993-1997  involved  about  70%  of  all  trade  exchange  of  West 
European  countries.  Apart  from  preferential  trade  agreements,  a  factor  of  vital  importance  to  the 
liberalisation  of  global  flows  of  goods  are  multilateral  agreements  within  the  WTO/GATT  forum. 
Thanks to GATT agreements, there has been a sharp reduction in customs tariff rates from ca. 40% 
after WWII to 6% in the early 1990s and to 4% at the turn of the century19. A gradual reduction of 
barriers  to  trade  is  a slow  process;  however,  it  brings permanent  benefits  to  each  of  the interested 
parties,  as  it  leads  to  specialisation  in  production,  which  brings  notable  benefits  in  the  form  of 
maintaining a competitive position on the global market. 
Proofs of growing links among economies can be found e.g. in the world trade statistics, according to 
which exports of goods and services have increased fivefold since 198020. In 2005, the value of global 
exports corresponded to 29% of the global GDP, compared to 20% in 1980. This also indicates that 
trade develops at a much higher rate than the global domestic manufacturing. In the new EU Member 
States the export-to-GDP ratio has increased by 15 percentage points only over the past 10 years21. 
Changes  in  the  growth  rate  have  been  accompanied  by  changes  in  the  structure  of  exports,  which 
have been significantly influenced by the foreign direct investment. Specialisation of production, as a 
prerequisite for competitiveness, leads companies to seek adequate locations allowing them to gain a 
competitive  edge  over  rival  companies.  An  increase  in  capital  flows  in  the  form  of  foreign  direct 
investments  (and  especially  the  establishment  of  branches  of  multinational  corporations)  and 
international  trade  liberalisation  favour  fragmentation  of  the  production  process,  consisting  in  its 
division  into  parts  located  in  different  countries.  Fragmentation  of  production  is  also  enabled  by 
enhanced  transport  and  information  transfer  as  well  as  their  lower  costs  (i.e.  the  decrease  in 
transaction costs). 
The fragmentation of production is grounded in international differences in the endowments of factors 
of  production  and  -  as  a  result  -  in  prices  of  these  factors.  Multinational  corporations  divide  their 
production among many different countries in order to minimise costs and make use of advantages of 
local markets, such as inexpensive labour force or a favourable location. Research and development, 
on the other hand, and the part of the production process that requires the use of the most advanced 
technologies and with the highest value added, are often located in the home country, also due to poor 
protection  of  the  proprietary  rights  in  developing  countries.  Such  a  conduct  allows  the  company  to 
benefit from comparative advantages related to different production locations. Moreover, it enables the 
use of international differences in exchange rates, interest rates, and government subsidies supporting 
selected types of economic activity, as well as of different structures of customs tariff rates and varying 
features of internal markets in particular countries, for the purpose of maximising profits. Research22 
                                                      
17   Based on the data of UNCTAD. 
18   J.-M.  Grether,  M.  Olarreaga,  “Preferential  and  non-preferential  trade  flows  in  World  Trade”,  WTO  Staff  Working  Paper, 
September 1998. 
19   M. Bacchetta and M. Jansen, “Adjusting to Trade Liberalization – the Role of Policy, Institutions” and WTO Disciplines, WTO 
Special studies No 7, April 2003. 
20   Based on the data of the IMF, Word Economic Outlook Database 2005. 
21   Based on the data from national accounts, source: ONZ. 
22   E.g. B. O. Sascha et al., “Location choice and employment decisions: a comparison of German and Swedish multinationals”, 
CESifo Working Paper No. 1374. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 5
indicates that differences in remuneration constitute a significant factor that leads to relocation of jobs 
in manufacturing to the countries in our region. 
Hence,  the  result  of  production  fragmentation  is  the  optimal  use  of  the  advantage  of  location  of 
particular  production  stages  and  the  reduction  of  the  average  cost.  However,  its  side  effect  are 
additional costs related to linking of the particular stages into one via activities that have the nature of 
services (e.g. transportation, co-ordination and management). 
The  phenomena  inseparable  from  all  those  mentioned  above  are  offshoring  and  outsourcing. 
Offshoring consists in relocation of jobs and production or orders from the country where the company 
is based abroad – usually to countries with lower employment costs23. Offshoring does not have to 
necessarily take place within a single enterprise. Outsourcing, on the other hand, consists in relocation 
of a part of services outside the company. OECD calculations have shown that ca. 19% of jobs in EU-
15 have been threatened by offshoring24. It should be noted, however, that for the developed countries 
this process does not mean losses of jobs. Mankiw and Swagel25 cite research results, according to 
which relocation of jobs abroad may be positively linked to an increase in employment in the home 
country of the relocating company. It stems from the fact that foreign branches do not compete but 
rather  complement  the  hitherto  activity  of  companies,  and  thus  help  to  improve  effectiveness  and 
quality, and lower costs, which may lead to an increased market for products or services of the given 
company, what may in turn result in an increase in employment in the home country. It is first of all the 
countries capable of manufacturing products and rendering services at a competitive price that gain a 
major  advantage  in  acquiring  new  investments  and  creating  new  jobs.  It  is  worth  adding  that  the 
growing significance of offshoring has an impact on the distribution of remuneration in the countries, 
whose participation in the globalisation process is increasing. The wages of unqualified workers from 
the developed countries are falling, while workers with higher qualifications from countries with lower 
labour costs are being better rewarded. 
Labour costs remain an important, although not a sole, factor of investment attractiveness of a given 
country. In A.T. Kearney’s research26 countries from our region, i.e. the Czech Republic, Poland and 
Hungary,  are  in  the  top  eleven  offshoring  locations.  The  assessments  emphasised  the  cultural 
similarity  of  the  countries  in  our  region  to  the  west  European  countries,  relatively  low  barriers  to 
business activity for West European companies as well as high qualifications of our employees. While 
comparing  the  abovementioned  countries  it  has  been  indicated  that  the  grade  for  Poland is  slightly 
lower than for the Czech Republic as regards the infrastructure and respect for intellectual property 
rights. 
Offshoring  in  its  broader  scope  constitutes  a  new  idea  of  innovation  in  enterprise  management27. 
While as a result of production relocation the company may lower its costs substantially, a much more 
important advantage of offshoring is that it may become an incentive to change production processes. 
In extreme cases this may lead to a situation where a company divests itself of all processes that have 
no direct connection with production or services rendered. 
                                                      
23   However, relocation of manufacturing to countries with lower labour costs need not to be a rule. Research by Aubert and 
Sillar (2005) indicated that between 1995 and 2001 in France less than a half of all relocated jobs (on the offshore basis) in 
manufacturing were moved to countries with low production costs. According to the authors, such results rather to a motive 
of enterprise restructuring, whereas the phenomenon of offshoring is limited primarily to large enterprises employing over 
500  persons.  See  P.  Aubert  and  P  .  Sillar  ,  „Offshoring  and  Job  Losses  in  French  Industry”,  April  2005,  OECD  working 
paper. 
24   OECD,  “Growth  in  Services.  Fostering  Employment,  Productivity  and  Innovation”,  Meeting  of  the  OECD  Council  at 
Ministerial Level, 2005, pp. 7. 
25   N. G. Mankiw, P. Swagel, “The Politics and Economics of Offshore Outsourcing”, American Enterprise Institute for Public 
Policy Research Working Paper, November 2005. 
26   A. T. Kearney’s 2004, „Offshore Location Attractiveness Index, Making Offshore Decisions”, Three categories of indicators 
were assessed: the financial structure with the weight of 40% (labour costs, infrastructure costs, tax and regulatory costs), 
employee  skills  and  access  to  labour  force  —  weight  of  30%  (accumulate  business  experience,  easiness  of  employing 
workers, knowledge of foreign languages and education, social indicators, e.g. unemployment rate), business environment 
— weight of 30% (business conditions in the country, infrastructure, cultural adaptability, intellectual property protection). 
27   “The Future of Outsourcing, How it’s transforming whole industries and changing the way we work,” BusinessWeek, January 
30, 2006. 
6 
 BIS Review 19/2006
Alan Blinder28 goes even further and openly speaks about the third industrial revolution. He presents a 
vision  of  medical  services  which  may  performed  on  a  remote  basis  (an  example  of  radiological 
examinations  in  India)  as  well  as  rendering  many  educational  services  via  electronic  ways  of 
communication. Formerly, the natural resources of an economy were of prior importance; nowadays, 
the  perspectives  of  an  economy  depend  to  a  greater  degree  on  the  human  factor.  This  factor  is 
decisive,  especially  in  new  branches  of  the  economy,  related  to  the  services  sector.  Thanks  to  the 
development of new information and communication technologies, there has been an increase in trade 
in services, which - until recently - have been considered nontradable. The importance of the services 
sector in the economy should be stressed, as this sector constitutes a 70-percent share of the GDP in 
the  developed  economies.  The  whole  accounting  departments  or  customer  support  call  centres 
outsourced are only some of the services that take advantage of new technologies. Some of those 
innovations have already become a permanent element of our reality: the possibility to purchase an 
airline  ticket  via  the  Internet,  creation  of  inventory  control  systems  in  IT  companies,  a  possibility  to 
gather  and  process  information  on  consumer  behaviour.  The  aforementioned  solutions  embody  the 
new  forms  of  labour  organisation  and  the  development  of  new  products  and  services,  which  are 
becoming increasingly common.  
Research by van Ark29 indicates that the results of a comparison of the growth in labour productivity in 
the  services  sector  in  the  USA  and  the  EU-15  in  the  past  10  years  are  in  favour  of  the  USA.  The 
advantage of the USA has resulted primarily from a higher labour productivity in retail and wholesale 
trade and in the financial services. Among the causes for the lower increase in labour productivity in 
the EU countries one should mention lower innovative capabilities of the European companies and a 
lack  of  reforms  that  could  have  forced  the  sector  to  take  advantage  of  its  potential.  There  are  still 
regulation  barriers  to  business  activity  in  Europe,  which  make  it  impossible  to  move  freely  across 
country borders30. New information transfer technologies create a possibility of central processing of 
information, which is why limiting of the capability to take advantage of this process results in lower 
economies  of  scale.  Moreover,  the  development  of  road  transport  still  faces  regulatory  barriers. 
Finally, cultural differences, which are a natural barrier in business activity, should be mentioned. 
While indicating the vital role of services in building a competitive edge of the American economy, we 
should  also  relate  to  EU  solutions  in  the  form  of  the  so-called  Services  Directive,  which  has  been 
recently  adopted  by  the  European  Parliament.  The  basic  objective  of  the  directive,  in  its  version 
proposed by the European Commission, is to create a single market for services covering the whole of 
the  European  Union  and  to  abolish  all  the  barriers  that  prevent  or  significantly  hinder  rendering 
services  by  entrepreneurs  of  a  given  country  in  other  EU  countries.  However,  the  amendments 
introduced by the Parliament, which deleted the so-called “country of origin” clause, in principle allow 
maintaining  the  existing  barriers,  which  will  result  in  a  more  difficult  and  hampered  process  of 
increasing the effectiveness of the European companies, including their capability of taking advantage 
of offshoring. 
This  is  why,  in  the  era  of  globalisation,  all  initiatives  that  increase  the  region’s  investment 
attractiveness play a vital role. The project of the City Council of Rzeszow, under which 60% of the 
city’s area will have a free access to the Internet, may serve as an example here. A parallel creation of 
a  radio  telephone  network,  allowing  free  calls  between  public  institutions  and  the  city  inhabitants, 
make a step forward in the right direction.  
On  the other  hand,  the  EU  Commissioner  for Regional  Policy  Ms.  Danuta Hübner  has  emphasised 
how structural funds support development and innovation31: 
“Let  me  present  an  example  of  a  project  whose  implementation  was  made  possible  thanks  to  the 
Structural Funds. Here in Poland, the administration uses the European Regional Development Fund 
in order to create a research lab for the aviation industry in the vicinity of Rzeszow. The goal of the 
project  is  to  create  a  modern  centre  equipped  with  the  state-of-the-art  research  infrastructure  and 
                                                      
28   A. Blinder, “Fear of Offshoring”, CEPS Working Paper No. 119, December 2005. 
29   B. van Ark, “Europe’s Productivity Gap: Catching Up or Getting Stuck?”, an article prepared for the International Symposium 
on Productivity, Competitiveness and Globalisation, Banque de France, Paris, 4 November 2005. 
30   R.  H.  McGuckin,  III,  M.  Spiegelman,  B.  van  Ark,  “The  Retail  Revolution  -  Can  Europe  Match  U.S.  Productivity 
Performance?”, The Conference Board, March 2005. 
31   Speeches by the Regional Policy Commissioner Ms. Danuta Hübner at the conference RESEARCH AND INNOVATIONS – 
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR CONVERGENCE REGIONS, Warsaw, 13 February, 2006. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 7
specialised  equipment  for  testing  of  materials.  Public  and  private  partners  are  involved  in  this 
undertaking — they formed a consortium composed of the Rzeszow University of Technology, other 
technical  universities,  a  group  of  aviation  industry  enterprises  called  “The  Aviation  Valley”  and  the 
Polish Aviation Institute”. 
Globalisation influences the perspectives of the world’s major economies. In the USA, the discussion 
on relocation of jobs to the Asian countries became a lively element of political debate during the last 
presidential elections. Similarly, in Europe a debate is underway concerning the future of the single 
services market. There is no doubt, however, that any solutions of regulatory or protectionist nature 
may hinder all these changes only temporarily, as they are inevitable. The countries, whose politicians 
will  understand  the  mechanisms  of  the  global  economy  and  will  implement  necessary  reforms  to 
improve the investment climate, will benefit the most from the globalisation processes. Entrepreneurs 
should  also  keep  a  sharp  lookout  on  the  globalisation  processes  currently  underway,  in  order  to 
respond to the emerging threats in a timely manner, but - first of all - in order to benefit from the great 
opportunities that they create.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 19/2006
