Ardian Fullani: Albania’s long-term sustainable economic growth 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the meeting with Prime Minister of 
the Republic of Albania and Albanian Bankers Association, Tirana, 20 March 2006. 
 Monetary policy, standing neutral for most of the year, has ensured a constant money supply 
to the economy, in accordance with the needs for the country’s economic development;  
Inflationary  pressures  remained  under  control,  under  the  conditions  of  a  more  steady 
exchange rate stability; 
At  year  end,  monetary  conditions  reflected  extension  of  the  economy  financing  by  lending, 
while Bank of Albania foreign reserves were further increased;  
Banking  system  increased  considerably  its  financial  support  to  the  economy  in  the  form  of 
banking loans. Credit portfolio was increased by 74 percent or ALL 52 billion in absolute value. 
At end of the year, outstanding credit recorded 14,6 percent of GDP, from 8.4 percent in 2004. 
Also  the  short-term  program  for  the  country’s  economic  development  over  2006  has 
forecasted a further growth of the outstanding credit to 50 percent, implying further incentives 
for the country’s economic activity. This has made domestic business have more guarantees to 
invest  in  the  economy,  simultaneously  inviting  foreign  investors  for  more  foreign  direct 
investments in Albania. 
Honoured Mr. Prime Minister,  
Honoured bankers, 
I believe the purpose of today’s meeting has to do with a major problem, that of long-term sustainable 
economic  growth  of  the  country.  All  actors  present  in  this  meeting  play  a  key  role  in  this  direction; 
therefore I think that such meetings are useful, with significant contributions to the country’s economic 
activity.  
First of all, I would like to underline that during 2005 the Albanian economy had positive developments 
in the following directions:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  I  must  share  with  you  a  natural  concern  that  is  generally 
related to credit portfolio quality, particularly when we are faced with such a rapid expansion of the 
volume of lending. Even though the outstanding credit to the economy is still low, about 15 percent of 
the GDP, its expansion over 2006 similar to that of the previous year, would increase the potential of 
banks’ s exposure to credit portfolio quality risks.  
Therefore, the banking system should undertake all the measures to improve monitoring, analysing, 
and controlling capacities, aiming at preventing any possible credit portfolio deterioration. On the other 
hand, we will enhance our supervising capacities, particularly the on-site examinations, by working out 
plans of measures to prudentially control each member bank of the system. Special attention will be 
paid  to  control  on  specific  lending  procedures  and  review  of  re-rating  made  and  of  provisioning 
performance for non-performing loans. Furthermore, the Bank of Albania has included in its priorities 
of 2006 the project on creating the credit register, a facility that will help the process of controlling and 
verifying loan borrowers.  
I would like to clarify that the banking system stability is of special priority for us, therefore we remain 
committed  to  carry  out  precisely  all  the  recommendations  given  by  the  IMF’  s  report  of  Financial 
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) over 2005.  
I think that the concept of bank is inevitably related with the concept of confidence. For me confidence 
is transparency, transparency and only transparency. I deem that enhancement of transparency is a 
primary  condition  that  leads  to  increased  access  of  the  population  to  your  business.  This  increase 
implies  deposits 
financial 
intermediation. Above all, enhancement of transparency means more opportunities and lower costs to 
your clients.  
Think for a moment that the quantity of money circulating and “sleeping” outside banking channels is 
still  high.  Turning  back  to  my  discussion  in  the  last  meeting  organised  by  the  World  Bank  and  the 
increase,  credit  extension,  more  competition  and  more  effective 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
Puglia Region, I would like to emphasize that more than half of remittances enter the country through 
unofficial channels. According to Balance of Payments statistics of 2005, it speaks about a potential 
close to Eur 700 - 800 million. I believe this fact does not need any comment. Out of our surveys the 
causes are different. However, high fees applied by the banks are often brought up as a motive why 
individuals do not prefer banking service. 
On the other hand the increased circulation of money through banking channels requires enhanced 
prudence  for  preventing  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing.  The  combat  against  money 
laundering is an ongoing challenge that relates to the major problems our country is facing with, such 
as: cash economy, fiscal evasion, and economy informality. Therefore, at the beginning of the year we 
undertook a partial examination on 7 banks. It resulted out of the examination that in general banks 
have the proper structures and policies on fighting against money laundering and terrorism financing. 
However, we also observed some deficiencies having to do with staff training and better knowledge of 
legal framework.  
Taking into account what I said earlier, I believe that you understand the massage I want to transmit to 
you  today,  that  is  not  only  banking  business  extension,  but  also  significant  contribution  to  reducing 
cash and informality in the economy.  
Recently we have made some concrete steps in this direction. Therefore, the banking system is more 
extended  geographically  and  richer  in  products.  Increase  of  assets,  rise  in  the  number  of  clients, 
modern  infrastructure  and  other  developments  have  made  our  contribution  to  cash  reduction  in  the 
economy  be  significant.  I  believe  that  the  above  accomplishments,  combined  with  determined 
administrative measures, will contribute to the closure of informality gates one by one in the economy. 
However, I observe unexploited space particularly in terms of:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I personally think that it is just the time to enhance popularity for imposing the creation of a banking 
culture and education. The obligation of each individual for opening a bank account in addition to an 
important massive service the state does to the population, is more than necessary. More concretely, 
I propose that new cards be associated with a bank account number.  
In conclusion, it is understandable that for being successful in the long run, more focus is needed on 
all  the  problems  I  briefly  treated  above.  More  loans,  more  prudence  in  the  supervision,  more 
qualified services, more free prices, less cash in the economy, more banking business, will all 
lead to more access of the population into your business.  
I  deem  that  this  is  an  essential  prerogative  that  ensures  sustainable  long-term  development  of  the 
Albanian economy.  
increasing opportunities for more electronic payments; The last year overturned the ratio in 
the  favour  of  electronic  payments,  when  their  level  reached  the  figure  of  320  thousand  as 
compared  to  the  number  of  300  thousand  of  payments  effected  at  the  windows.  This  is  an 
encouraging sign, urging us to better focus on this direction.  
channelling  periodic  settlements  for  utility  services  through  bank  accounts;  more 
concretely  AEC,  Alb  telecom  and  Water  supplying  should  be  related  to  the  banking  system 
so that their services are settled electronically.  
compulsory  transfer  of  salaries  of  private  sector’s  employees  through  the  banking 
system;  The  so-far  experience  with  the  private  sector  resulted  successful,  while  even  some 
big private operators are applying this method efficiently. I think that the obligation to transfer 
salaries  through  the  banking  system  will  significantly  decrease  the  evasion  existing  on 
income tax and social insurance contributions.  
2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
