Y V Reddy: Financial sector competition and monetary policy – comments 
Observations by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, as a panellist at the Annual 
General Meeting panel of the Bank for International Settlements, Berne, Switzerland, 25 June 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman, Professor Mario Monti, Co-panellists and fellow Governors, 
I am honoured by the invitation to participate in the Annual General Meeting Panel in this historic and 
beautiful location. When I got the enquiry on my willingness to be a panelist on “The Relevance of 
Competition and Monetary Policy for Financial Stability” for the Per Jacobsson Foundation lecture this 
year, I initially felt that the topic of the lecture was rather unconventional. But on deeper reflection, the 
significance struck  me  immensely.  It  is  a  fascinating  subject  as we  realised  today  after  hearing  the 
Foundation Lecture. I am grateful to Professor Mario, the “anti-trust tsar”, also known as ‘Super Mario’, 
who is said to be “politically tone-deaf”, but tried hard to establish an international network of national 
competition authorities.  
My brief comments will be on:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
The link between competition and monetary policy; 
Recent developments that reinforce the link, particularly for the developing countries; 
Some issues relating to competition in the financial sector and monetary policy, especially 
from the perspective of the developing countries; 
Indian policies to enhance competition in the financial sector; and 
The implications for India’s monetary policy. 
d) 
e) 
There  is  a  two-way  linkage  between  competition  and  inflation;  the  latter  is  the  major  objective  of 
monetary policy. Professor Monti explained the link and similarities as well as dissimilarities in detail 
and so I will refer to one aspect only.  
Inflation reduces uncertainties and enhances competition. Competition leads to more efficient pricing, 
which in turn, contributes to low inflation. There is, thus, in some ways, a convergence between the 
ultimate objectives of both competition and monetary policy. 
There are three recent developments that reinforce the linkages especially for emerging markets. First, 
central bankers are increasingly using indirect instruments of monetary policy and are thus, in a way, 
competitive players in the market, to achieve their objective. Second, fiscal rules, which are closely 
related to monetary policy, operationally require that governments use markets to raise their borrowing 
requirements.  Third,  increasing  liberalisation  and  global  integration  of  financial  systems  enhances 
competitive pressures, amongst major players and instruments, which central bankers cannot afford to 
ignore. 
There are some issues relating to competition in the financial sector and monetary policy, which are 
worth flagging.  
First, both efficient markets and successful use of market-based policy instruments, require a strong 
legal framework and effective implementation. 
Second, competition in the financial sector appears to be a little more complicated than in the non-
financial  sector.  For  instance,  consensus  is  still  lacking  on  the  separation  of  commercial  and 
investment banking. Further, there are differences on issues of commercial affiliations of otherwise ‘fit 
and proper’ owners of banks. This issue was raised in the discussion today and Professor Monti also 
felt  that  it  calls  for  deeper  reflection.  Major  issue  here  is  the  potential  for  conflict  of  interest,  in 
particular, the possible perception of such a conflict of interest in the realm of public opinion in respect 
of banks, which are highly leveraged with acceptance of uncollaterallised deposits. Moreover, banks 
continue to be viewed as enjoying a special status in the financial sector, especially in the developing 
economies – which could be construed as unfair competition between banks and non-banks. It is also 
possible  that  banks  have  regulatory  burdens  disproportionate  to  their  special  nature  and  relative  to 
non-banking intermediaries.  
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
Third,  financial  sector  competition  has  two  dimensions,  namely,  amongst  the  intermediaries  and  in 
terms of price discovery in financial markets. Here I am deliberately not referring to the fundamental 
issue  raised  in  the  discussions  on  the  Address  by  Prof.  Jacob  Frenkel  on  central  banks’  monopoly 
over domestic money supply, and supply of foreign currency, in some ways. That has been responded 
to by Professor Monti and Chairman Roth has also touched on this aspect in his remarks.  
Fourth,  by  its  very  nature  or  as  a  matter  of  current  practice  in  regard  to  most  of  the  goods  and 
services, the degree of financial sector competition varies across countries. In other words, variability 
in the degree of competition in the financial sector across economies is perhaps more than those in 
the non-financial sector. 
Fifth, the increased competition in the financial sector will enhance efficiency and stability, if there is an 
acceptable minimal degree of competitive efficiency in the product markets and, to some extent, factor 
markets,  supported  by  some  comfort  of  sound  institutions  and  practices.  The  markets  are  mutually 
reinforcing, but, ideally, the competitive conditions in all the markets need to be broadly in sync and 
avoid serious mis-alignments with each other.  
Sixth, some of the multi-national banks have assets exceeding the Gross Domestic Product of many 
large emerging economies and hence their proper functioning in such emerging markets is critical for 
genuine competition in financial sector in such economies.  
Seventh, in the context of consolidation of commercial banking, there may be considerable merit in 
recognising  the  usefulness  of  several  categories  of  local  banks  particularly  in  larger  economies.  A 
classic example of co-existence of large banks with locally active banks is the USA, where regulatory 
regime enables such possibilities without, perhaps, diluting underlying competitive pressure. 
Now, a few words on the policies to enhance financial sector competition in India:  
a) 
We had, till reforms of early 90’s, an over-regulated, virtually administered financial sector. 
So, the process of deregulation implied gradual removal of restrictions on the operation of 
the  pricing  mechanisms,  especially  interest  rates  and  statutory  liquidity  and  reserve 
requirements – a process which is still underway. 
Markets  have  to  be  created,  nurtured  and  developed,  in  the  case  of  financial  assets  – 
especially  money,  forex  and  government  securities.  In  emerging  economies,  there  are 
complexities in parallel implementation of measures for both development and integration of 
domestic as well as external markets in the financial sector, in contrast to being sequenced 
and  spread  over  a  period  as  it  happened  in  major  financial  centres.  A  nurturing  policy  is 
necessary for a simple reason. In developed financial centres, each centre evolved over a 
period in an organic fashion. For developing countries, there are external compulsions which 
affect  the  pace  and  nature  of  development  of  markets.  This  involved,  in  the  Indian  case, 
putting  in  place  appropriate  policies,  institutions,  practices,  etc.,  including  efficient  market 
infrastructure and robust payment and settlement system. 
Enhanced competition in both banking and non-banking financial sectors has been gradually 
introduced – through a dynamic mix of public and private as well as domestic and foreign 
ownership – along with deregulation or adaptive regulations. 
Simultaneously,  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks,  financial  markets  and  infrastructure 
were improved to increasingly align them with international standards and best practices. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
To conclude, let me mention four of the implications of enhanced competition in financial sector for our 
monetary policy.  
First  is  the  positive  impact  on  both  growth  and  price  stability  –  especially  due  to  the  competitive 
pressures  in  the  banking  sector.  Bank-finance  still  dominates  the  financing  of  the  corporate  sector, 
through loans and advances, subscription to corporate bonds as also assisting in overseas operations 
in several ways, both in trade and investment.  
Second,  in  view  of  the  enhanced  competition,  there  is  a  clear  evidence  of  improved  monetary 
transmission mechanism – both through interest rate and credit channels.  
Third, we, as the monetary authority, feel that increasingly competitive financial markets are playing 
enhanced feedback role in the financial system. They help us not only in terms of information content 
on yield curves, but also in gauging market expectations and designing better communications.  
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
Fourth,  while  competition  in  the  domestic  markets  is  in  many  ways,  enhancing  effectiveness  of  the 
monetary  policy,  the  increasing  integration  of  our  financial  sector  with  global  markets  is,  arguably, 
making  the  monetary  policy  transmission  somewhat  more  complex  than  before.  My  co-panellist 
Governor Axel Weber made a mention of this aspect in his intervention. 
Finally, let me also respond to Professor Jacob Frenkel who raised the general issue of focussing on 
the core-inflation in policy and not the headline inflation in spite of persistence of high oil prices for a 
long period. In India, we could not consider core-inflation for several reasons, especially because the 
two major sources of supply shock, food and fuel, account for a large share of the index. In our case, 
pass  through  of  higher  oil  prices  has  been  halting  and  not  full.  Thus,  the  headline  inflation  in  our 
country in a way understates the problem. So, in our monetary policy communications we emphasised 
the fact that there is clear evidence of a permanent component in the oil price increase, and hence the 
headline inflation may be understated till that component is fully passed through. While the permanent 
component is judgmental, broad magnitudes could be perceived and articulated. Such an explanatory 
approach to headline and underlying inflation pressure in monetary policy has added credibility to the 
policy and influenced and guided the inflation expectations in India. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 3
