Jens Thomsen: Some risks to the Danish economy 
Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, 
at the meeting of the Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 1 June 2006.  
 This is an interesting report that pinpoints the problems which the Danish economy could be facing if 
the pace does not slow down.  
The  Council  has  more  zest  than  the  Ministry  of  Finance:  "Economic  Survey,  May  2006",  which  is 
reflected in a pronounced deterioration of the balance of payments. It is, however, evident that if the 
assumptions – which are described as optimistic – are not met, in terms of productivity and the labour 
force, the risk of overheating is more imminent. 
The  calculations  of  structural  unemployment  in  Box  I.10  show  that  the  central  estimate  is  just  over 
150,000, a substantially higher figure than the current one. It is noted that the estimate is subject to 
considerable uncertainty. 
Unemployment  in  2006  is  estimated  at  129,000,  indicating  a  fall  by  approximately  1,000  a  month 
throughout the rest of the year. From February to March 2006 the figure fell by 4,300. 
As usual, the forecast is self-stabilising. The above tendency is positive. It is, nevertheless, difficult to 
model overheating, as pages 112-113 show. However, the Council should not be criticised for having 
published this calculation. It is hard not to share the report's conclusion that there is a substantial risk 
of overheating. 
The  tight  labour  market  can  to  some  extent  be  eased  by  importing  labour,  and  consequently 
unnecessary barriers should be avoided. In Iceland, 80 per cent of those aged 60-64 are in work, in 
Denmark  only  40  per  cent.  That  provides  food  for  thought.  Moreover,  the  number  of  Danes  on  the 
early retirement scheme (142,000 in 2006) now exceeds the number of unemployed in Denmark. 
It is also evident that expansionary fiscal policy contributes to strong demand. In the current situation it 
is therefore extremely important to keep a tight rein on government expenditure. 
It will be interesting to see when growth in public spending once again falls below 1.0 per cent. Since 
the millennium this has only been the case in 2003. Does the Council believe it will be in 2007, when 
growth of 0.7 per cent is anticipated? 
The development in house prices also illustrates our forecast problems. Increases of 15 per cent are 
now expected in 2006. Six months ago, the forecast was 7.0 per cent. A continued rise in prices could 
have a negative impact so it is important that the government does not encourage this. 
The Dutch situation is mentioned. I refer to the June version of Danmarks Nationalbank's Monetary 
Review, which includes an article on the Netherlands. 
The  issue  of  establishment  of  a  petroleum  fund  would  require  further  consideration;  after  all,  the 
lessons learned from the Social Pension Fund are not exactly uplifting. 
In respect of business support, it would be useful to have statistics to underpin decision-making. 
The  traffic  section  includes  interesting  points  of  view,  as  well  as  a  somewhat  discouraging  outlook. 
Traffic  is  getting  worse,  the  number  of  cars  is  rising,  transport  of  goods  is  also  increasing,  the 
possibilities  of  switching  to  rail  transport  are  extremely  limited,  and  a  road-pricing  system  is  not 
currently  in  the  pipeline.  At  the  same  time,  taxation  does  not  necessarily  ensure  appropriate 
behaviour. Signs point to more congestion on the roads. 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 1
