Y V Reddy: Banks and service to the common person 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion of the release of 
the Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 1 July 2006. 
 Chairperson of the Board Smt. Udeshi, Chairman of the IBA Shri Shetty, Deputy Governor Smt. Usha 
Thorat, distinguished bankers and friends, 
It gives me immense pleasure and satisfaction to be here to release the "Code of Bank’s Commitment 
to Customers". The Code signifies the first formal collaborative effort by the Reserve Bank of India, the 
banks  and  the  newly  set  up  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI)  to  provide  a 
framework for a minimum standard of banking services, which individual customers can legitimately 
expect.  The  IBA  and  members  of  the  BCSBI  are  to  be  commended  for  successfully  evolving  this 
Code, which is not only a commitment of banks to their customers but also in a sense a Charter of 
Rights for the common person. By setting the minimum standards of customer service with reliability, 
transparency and accountability, it outlines how each bank expects to deal with the customers' day-to-
day requirements, and accordingly, what each customer should reasonably expect from his bank. The 
Board,  in  a  way,  helps  the  banks  in  terms  of  providing  independent  review  and  feedback  on  their 
adherence, in practice, to the self-prescribed standards. We, in the RBI, attach great importance to the 
work and assessments of the BCSBI, which, in a way places onerous responsibility on the BCSBI in 
this relatively unexplored area.  
The background 
In our context, the issue of services rendered by banks to the common person dates back to the R.K. 
Talwar  Committee  (1975)  and  the  Goiporia  Committee  (1990).  The  Report  of  the  first  Narasimham 
Committee (1991) ushered in the financial sector reforms, which were expected to spur competition in 
the banking sector through deregulation and entry of new private sector banks, which, in turn, was to 
provide high-quality customer service to meet the long pending aspirations of the bank customers. But 
there is an increasing realisation, both in India and several other countries, that the competitive forces 
alone do not ensure fair treatment or adequate quality in service to the customers at a justifiable price, 
in a transparent manner. 
There has been an on-going debate on the choice between statutory regulation and self-regulation for 
oversight  of  customer  service.  Statutory  regulatory  instructions  are  set  out  in  letter  but  sometimes, 
may not be carried out in spirit. Self-regulation may often be more effective in dealing with deficiencies 
in service but it has been found that in many cases, it has, by itself, not been a fully effective tool for 
raising  standards  of  customer  service.  To  build  on  the  positive  features  of  both  the  systems,  the 
Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (CPPAPS, 2004) felt that there 
was a need to benchmark the extant level of public services in the banking sector. The Committee 
recommended that a Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) be set up to evaluate and 
oversee the observance of a voluntary code of conduct by the banks. Consequently, the RBI and the 
banks decided to set up, as a collaborative effort, an autonomous body, which combines the best of 
self-regulation  and  statutory  regulation.  As  a  part  of  collaborative  arrangements  for  an  independent 
body, the RBI will fully meet the budgetary requirements for the first five years while the banks would, 
during this period, contribute to building the corpus of the BCSBI to enable it to eventually become a 
self-sustaining organisation. I am happy to know that the majority of banks in India are registered with 
the BCSBI, indicating their willingness to adopt the voluntary Code. Those Banks, which adhere to the 
BCSBI Code, would provide the RBI necessary supervisory comfort; and I have no doubt that all the 
banks will join the main stream. 
Standards of service in banks: select country experiences 
It may be useful to note recent developments in several countries in regard to services rendered by 
banks. In the U.K., the Banking Code of the British Bankers’ Association (BBA) sets standards of good 
banking practices for financial institutions to follow when they are dealing with personal or business 
customers  in  the  UK.  As  a  voluntary  code,  it  allows  competition  and  market  forces  to  work  to 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
encourage higher standards of service for the benefit of the customers. The code applies to savings 
deposits  and  current  accounts,  card  products  and  services,  loans  and  overdrafts  and  payment 
services including foreign exchange. The BCSBI is, in a way, modeled after the Banking Code and 
Standards  Board  of  the  United  Kingdom  –  which  has  been  promoted  by  the  British  bankers’ 
Association,  Building  Societies’  Association  and  the  Association  for  the  Payments  and  Clearing 
Services.  In  addition,  the  Office  of  Fair  Trading  (OFT),  established  by  the  Enterprise  Act  2002, 
enforces both consumer protection and competition law, acting as the UK's economic regulator. 
In Canada, the issue of bank service charges was the subject of a 1988 investigation conducted by 
the House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance. The Committee report set out a number of 
recommendations,  which  have  subsequently  been  reflected  in  market  practice.  The  Committee’s 
recommendations resulted in improved disclosure of service charges and the designation of Office of 
the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  (OSFI)  for  handling  and  reporting  on  service  charge 
complaints. 
In  the  US,  organisations  such  as  Consumers’  Union  are  fighting  to  create  legislation  that  will  help 
protect vulnerable consumers from price gouging on checking accounts. They are demanding lifeline 
banking  legislation  that  will  give  consumers  access  to  basic  banking  services.  Several  American 
States have implemented legislation for minimum no-frills banking services. 
Bank Negara Malaysia initiated a nation-wide survey in 2003 to assess the requirements, expectations 
and the satisfaction level of consumers on the quality of products and services offered by the banking 
institutions.  The  quality  of  interface  with  bank  staff  and  the  efficiency  of  delivery  channels  were 
identified  as  the  key  factors  that  customers  look  for  in  their  banking  relationship.  Secondary 
requirements represented potential leverage factors such as product innovativeness with value-added 
features, which can be used to substantially improve overall customer relationship.  
The  central  bank  of  Philippines  initiated  significant  measures  geared  towards  protecting  both  the 
industry and the public. In 2002, regulations were issued which tightened the rules on credit card and 
other lending operations by requiring the banks and their subsidiary credit card companies to ascertain 
that the cardholders were capable of fulfilling their commitments and setting credit limits based on their 
net take-home pay. A Consumer Education Committee was subsequently constituted to help improve 
basic financial literacy.  
Credit card issues: recent measures 
Credit card related payments and charges have been one of the most contentious issues in the recent 
past. Late payment charges levied by the banks on credit cards have attracted attention worldwide. 
Recently, the Office of Fair Trade (OFT) in the U.K. undertook a review of prevailing conditions in the 
UK.  The  OFT  study  revealed  that  the  credit  card  issuers  charged  consumers  excessively  for  late 
payment. The OFT came to the conclusion that the default charge should not exceed reasonable pre-
estimated administrative cost. In their opinion, such cost should include the cost of postage, stationery, 
proportionate  additional  staff,  maintenance  of  premises,  etc.  On  this  basis,  OFT  arrived  at  the 
conclusion that any charge exceeding the monetary threshold of £12 may not be fair and tenable. It is 
estimated that the consumers had paid £300 million more than what was reasonable last year. The 
industry estimates indicate that with credit card default fees ceiling at £ 15, gross profits of the banks 
in the UK would be reduced by £ 800 million. 
International research has shown that inter-change fee (fee for using ATM of a bank other than that of 
the  account  holder)  is  generally  stable  or  declining  in  most  of  the  countries.  In  many  of  these 
countries, the decline has been possible because of recent regulatory action or threat of regulatory 
action. The most common public authority to take such action is normally the Competition Authority. 
The  central  banks  of  Australia,  Mexico, Spain,  the  Netherlands,  the  United  Kingdom and European 
Union (E.U.) appear to be taking more hands-on regulatory stance on these issues. The Reserve Bank 
of Australia has instituted a regulation that requires card net works to set inter-change fees at or below 
the cost-based standards. As a result of this, the inter-change fees have fallen in Australia. The U.K. 
has also mandated cost-based inter-change fees (inter debit card network). Last year, despite one of 
the lowest fee structure in Europe, the Dutch Competition Authority fined Interpay and its owner bank 
for  charging  excessive  fees  as  compared  to  cost.  Bank  de  Mexico  has  used  regulatory  threat  to 
implement some reforms and has issued regulations requiring the banks to disclose fees.  
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
Credit counselling: further work in India 
A relatively unexplored area in India is credit counseling and we may have to seriously work further on 
this keeping in view the international experience and our domestic conditions. In this regard, a recent 
initiative of Bank Negara Malaysia is worth mentioning. The Bank Negara Malaysia has established a 
Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  (CCDM)  Agency  to  provide  credit  counselling  and  loan 
restructuring advice  to  individuals.  The arrangement is  aimed at  assisting  individual customers who 
are  encountering  difficulties  in  meeting  their  financial  commitments.  In  fact,  this  measure  has  been 
introduced  to  provide  a  channel  for  resolving  potential  credit  issues  that  may  be  faced  by  the 
households.  The  Agency  would  provide  individuals  assistance  in  restructuring  debts  relating  to 
household loans, hire purchase, credit card and personal loans from institutions functioning under the 
purview of the Bank Negara. The arrangement is expected to be a prompt and cost-effective means of 
debt settlement based on the repayment plan between creditors and the debtor without intervention of 
courts.  The  agency  will  also  provide  credit  counselling  and  advice  on  financial  management  to 
individual consumers.  
In the USA, recent initiatives reportedly imply that, since October last year, debt-trapped consumers 
seeking bankruptcy protection have been forced to undergo credit counseling and financial training.  
In the U.K., in addition to Consumer Credit Counselling Service, Citizens Advice Bureaux and other 
debt counselling organisations, there is also a National Debt Line through which a bank customer can 
get  free  financial  advice.  In  fact,  in  the  U.K.,  the  Banking  Code  provides  that  member  banks  shall 
discuss financial problems with customers and together evolve a plan for resolving these problems. In 
general, banks in the U.K. have to be prepared to accept an offer of repayment, which is based on the 
principle  of  equitable  distribution  of  available  income  of  the  customer,  in  line  with  the  amount 
outstanding to each creditor.  
Financial education: need for study 
It  has  been  said,  particularly  in  the  context  of  developed  economies  that  the  young  do  not  save 
enough  and  do  not  fully  understand  the  need  for  investments  for  future.  The  middle-aged  tend  to 
regret that they did not save when they could afford to. Many of the elderly tend to feel the pinch of 
poverty. In this background, priority is accorded to financial education. For example, in the U.K, the 
Financial Services Authority is reported to have launched the biggest campaign ever to improve the 
financial  skills  of  the  population.  According  to  a  recent  report  in  the  U.S,  the  Congress  formed  a 
bipartisan Financial and Economic Literacy Caucus last year that has, among other things, passed a 
bill to designate April as the financial literacy month. Singapore, Hong Kong and Hungary also have 
schemes to boost financial training levels, as does Finland, where a theatre group puts on plays in 
high schools about financial education issues. In New Zealand there is an official financial-information 
website  with  an  online  game  "money  island"  –  while  the  Australian  Securities  and  Investments 
Commission organises money expos to help investors avoid scams and improve investment choices.  
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  literacy  programmes  has  been  questioned,  partly 
attributed to the manner in which literacy campaigns are conducted by the regulators. However, the 
subject needs to be explored further in our country since there is a spurt of new financial products and 
financial intermediaries, and often, the savers are bewildered by them. The skills for assessing risks 
and  rewards  have  to  be  acquired  anew  as  administered  interest  rate  regime  and  public  sector 
guarantees are diminishing. It may be desirable to encourage research and study on financial literacy 
in India, which would help customers use transparent information provided by banks in a monitorable 
manner.  
Business Banking Code: for SMEs 
An area, which needs special attention in India, is related to lending to Small & Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs)  and  here,  there  may  be  a  pointer  for  further  attention.  In  the  U.K.,  the  Banking  Code 
Standards Board has evolved a separate Business Banking Code which covers traders, partnerships, 
companies with a turnover of under £ 1 million and clubs, charities and associations with income of 
less  than  £  1  million.  Small  business  customers  are,  therefore,  covered  by  this  Business  Banking 
Code.  The  SME  Sector  in  India  needs  to  be  nurtured  and  I  would  urge  the  BCSBI  to  consider 
encouraging a Code for the SMEs somewhat on the lines of the U.K. Business Banking Code.  
BIS Review 66/2006 
 3
Fine print and undue enrichment 
In India it is said that people are reluctant to change their doctor, lawyer and banker. In some cases, 
the consumer adherence to particular service provider can be attributed to lack of information. Many a 
times,  even  with  alternate  services  available,  clearly  at  lower  price,  including  the  switching  cost, 
customers tend to stay with the same service provider. Therefore, customer staying with any specific 
service  provider  should  not  be  construed  by  the  service  provider  as  a  certificate  of  good  customer 
service. Consumer choice to a great extent depends on the availability of complete information about 
the  product  or  service  being  sold.  The  main  issue  is  whether  the  bank  is  genuinely  providing 
information or merely satisfying the requirement of doing so by getting a plethora of signatures over a 
volume of documents with fine print. Often, the customers trust a banker, especially with a standard 
printed  form,  assuming  rightly  that  there  are  no  choices  to  be  made  and  also  presuming, 
unrealistically, that fair treatment is assured. I trust that fairness and ethical conduct to ensure genuine 
transparency will be ensured by all concerned. 
Banks all over the world have been very active to provide a multitude of products and services by way 
of value addition. This is no doubt necessary in a competitive market. But earning fee-based income 
through  exorbitant  charge,  which  are  not  revealed  upfront,  points  to,  in  some  ways,  what  may  be 
described as ‘undue enrichment’. 
Dilution of reputation risk 
Generally, it is assumed that a penalty imposed by regulators would be a source of major reputation 
risk for the bank concerned, due to adverse public perception of such penalty and would thus be a 
deterrent. However, it is noticed in recent years that the regulatory penalties do not appear to be a 
material cause for reputation risk for the penalised bank. Perhaps, as far as banks are concerned, a 
penalty  is  now  being  viewed  more  from  the  perspective  of  affordability  of  its  monetary  value  rather 
than the cause for its imposition. This warrants that supplementary efforts are made on several fronts 
to  ensure  the  quality  of  service  while  the  sense  of  regulatory  comfort  is  kept  in  view  for  according 
various regulatory approvals in respect of each bank.  
Unequal parties: validity of contracts 
Banking  is  a  trust-based  relationship  and  the  banking  licence  from  the  regulator  provides  an 
assurance of trust to the public at large. To the banks, the banking licence provides the privilege of 
accepting  uncollateralised  deposits  from  the  public.  However,  the  acts  of  stealth  banking,  negative 
option marketing, misleading advertisements, information gathering from customers for cross selling of 
products  and  services,  and  tie-up  arrangements  are  inconsistent  with  the  concept  of  a  trust-based 
relationship.  The  lack  of  transparency,  coupled  with  the  difficulty  of  consumers  in  identifying  key 
information from the large volume of material and communication in fine print, leads to an information 
asymmetry, which renders the banker-customer relationship one of unequals. In this context, banks 
would  do  well  to  keep  in  mind  a  Supreme  Court’s  judgement  regarding  the  non-enforceability  of  a 
contract entered into between two unequal parties.  
In the case of LIC of India vs. Consumer Education & Research Centre (AIR 1995 SC-1811), while 
considering the validity of LIC policy under table 58 restricted only to salaried persons in government / 
semi-government or reputed commercial firms, the Supreme Court observed:  
“It  is  well  settled  law  that  if  a  contract  or  a  clause  in  a  contract  is  found 
unreasonable or unfair or irrational, one must look to the relative bargaining power 
of the contracting parties.” 
Symmetrical compensation: case for 
In  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  have  been  trying  to  enhance  quality  of  our  customer  service  and  in  the 
process, it was noticed that interest was not being paid to customers if there had been delay on our 
part. For example, in the case of Savings Bond Scheme, the RBI commits that in case of any delay in 
payment of interest warrants or redemption, the holder is compensated at savings bank rate. Such a 
commitment is also binding upon its agency banks. More important, I feel, that we need to accept that 
compensation  has  to  be  necessarily  symmetrical  and  banks  have  to  put  in  place  procedures  that 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2006
ensure it. Instances have been reported where the interest rate or penalty charged by the banks is 
higher than what banks pay for any delay or default on their part. I hope that this Code will provide an 
unequivocal  commitment  to  customers  on  the  principle  of  symmetry  in  compensations  in  regard  to 
delay or default in payment between the bank and its customers. 
Status in India: regulatory initiatives 
The Reserve Bank has taken several regulatory initiatives including issuance of guidelines to banks on 
various  customer-related  issues,  such  as  matters  relating  to  opening  &  maintenance  of  the  deposit 
accounts  and  other banking  services  including credit  cards.  The banks are  required  to  form  Board-
level committees to focus on customer service and to constitute a Standing Committee of Executives. 
Besides, they are also required to appoint and notify nodal / specific officers for redressal of customer 
complaints  at  their  controlling  offices  and  critical  branches.  Enlarging  the  scope  of  the  Banking 
Ombudsmen  Scheme  to  also  look  into  deficiencies  in  customer  service  and  credit  card-related 
complaints is an initiative that has been welcomed by consumer groups. A recent initiative has been 
the setting up of a Working Group to look into the reasonableness of bank charges and fees. At the 
level  of  commercial  banks,  they  have  been  advised  to  display  and  update,  on  their  websites,  in  a 
format  prescribed  by  the  RBI,  the  details  of  service  charges  apart  from  displaying  the  prescribed 
minimum information on such charges in all their branches. This wide spectrum of measures, together 
with the efforts of the BCSBI and the IBA in evolving the Code of Bank's Commitment to Customers 
will hopefully bring about improvement in the quality  of customer service. An exclusive department, 
namely, the Customer Service Department is being set up in the RBI to attend to the matters relating 
to customer service and grievance redressal for the customers of the banks and the RBI. 
Linking the content with the title 
Let  me  conclude  by  explaining  the  title  of  my  speech,  namely,  Banks  and  Service  to  the  Common 
Person. Though the Code is for customers as a whole, our major concern is with the common person. 
As  the  Nobel  Laureate  Professsor  Amartya  Sen  has  been  articulating  recently,  there  are  different 
identities to each person; whether to attach greater importance to one over another depends on us. I 
feel  that  for  the  limited  purpose  of  customer  service,  banks’  customers  may  be  divided  into  two 
categories  –  privileged  clients  like  other  financial  intermediaries  or  corporates,  and  the  common 
person. We, in the RBI, whenever considering customer service, tend to focus on the common person, 
particularly in the context of our country.  
When I joined the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) in 1964, a Professor at the Academy imparting 
training to us said this: “You are among the best and the brightest of the youth in the country. You 
have chosen to join IAS and your basic duty is to serve the public. Please remember that public are 
those who are not in the IAS”. That is one of the lessons worth remembering. 
Appreciation 
I want to place on record my deep appreciation of the enormous cooperation extended by all banks 
and in particular, Indian Banks’ Association in bringing to fruition this important institutional venture, 
under the overall guidance of my colleague Shri V. Leeladhar. 
I am grateful to our Finance Minister, Shri P. Chidambaram who supported and encouraged us in the 
RBI for pursuing this work in conjunction with revisions in the Ombudsman Scheme.  
Finally, I am thankful to Smt. Udeshi for agreeing to chair the Board and build the institution. I am also 
grateful  to  Sarvashi  MG  Bhide,  MM  Chitale,  S  Divakara  and  Krishna  Kumar  for  graciously  allowing 
themselves to be persuaded by me to work for the Board, as a matter of public service, inspite of their 
otherwise busy schedule. In house, but spared to work on this worthy cause, are Sarvashri Kolarkar 
and Baijal who will serve the common person through this forum.  
I  have  great pleasure  in  releasing  the Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to Customers  and assuring  the 
Board and the banks of continued support and understanding from the RBI in all their endeavours to 
discharge their mandate. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 5
