Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The state of the Philippine economy and policy 
directions of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the monthly 
meeting of the Association of International Business Executives of the Philippines, Inc, Manila Polo 
Club, 17 May 2006.  
 President  Julian  Lim  of  the  Association  of  International  Business  Executives  of  the  Philippines, 
distinguished officers and members of the AIBEP board, special guests, ladies and gentlemen, good 
evening. 
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  tonight  to  address  your  regular  monthly  meeting.  We  appreciate  your 
continued support of… and interest in… the Philippine economy.  
As  international  stakeholders  in  business  in  the  Philippines,  I  know  all  of  you  closely  monitor  the 
outlook  on  the  Philippine  economy  as  it  affects  your  individual  businesses  and  industries.  In 
consideration of your varied interests, I would like to spend the next few minutes painting you a picture 
of the recent developments in the country’s economy as well as its monetary, external and financial 
sectors.  I  would  also  like  to  share  with  you  our  vision  of  the  future  and  the  challenges  that  we 
anticipate along the way. 
Recent economic developments  
The Philippine economy continues to show resilience in the face of continued challenges. 
In 2005, real gross domestic product (GDP) expanded over 5 percent on the strength of the services 
sector  on  the  production  side  and  sustained  consumer  expenditures  on  the  demand  side.  This 
moderate growth of the economy helped create more jobs that lowered unemployment rate. 
Please  note  that  the  expansion  of  the  economy  is  being  sustained  without  fueling  further  inflation, 
even as oil prices continue to climb to record high levels.  
For instance, headline inflation fell from 8.5% in May 2005 to 6.7% in December. This year, after the 
implementation of the VAT rate increase initially pushed prices higher, we note a softening of prices 
….with inflation easing from 7.6% in march to 7.1 percent in April.   
The  government’s  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  are  also  showing  positive  results.  The  National 
Government  (NG)  deficit  for  the  first  quarter  of  2006  was  significantly  lower  than  the  programmed 
ceiling due to strong revenue performance. The fiscal deficit reached P67.6 billion as of March….lower 
and better than the programmed ceiling of P71.8 billion. 
Meanwhile, the banking system continues to show positive trends as well. Loan quality continues to 
improve, while the capital adequacy ratio of the Philippine banking system continues to remain well 
above the international benchmark: as of September 2005, it stood at 17.6 percent, way above the 
international benchmark of 8.0 percent.  
This  is  indicative  of  an  increasingly  sound  banking  sector  that  is  better  able  to  finance  the  funding 
requirements of a growing economy.  
On the external front, the country’s overall balance of payments position yielded a surplus of US$2.4 
billion in 2005, as foreign exchange inflows benefited from heavy remittances from overseas Filipino 
workers  and  inflows  from  foreign  portfolio  and  direct  investments.    In  turn,  these  foreign  exchange 
inflows  helped  raise  the  country’s  gross  international  reserves  (GIR)  to  a  record  year-end  level  of 
$18.5 billion; this rose further to a new record high of nearly $21 billion as of end April 2006, which 
provides ample cover for over 4 months of imports of goods and payments of services and income.  
Such  strong  inflows  and  the  confidence  generated  by  increasing  international  reserves  and  tax 
reforms helped support the peso. The peso began to appreciate against the dollar in the last quarter of 
2005,  eventually  ending  the  year  at  P53.61,  from  P56.18  in  December  2004.  This  year,  the  peso 
continues its appreciation. The strong peso has helped moderate inflation in the midst of record high 
oil prices. 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 1
Monetary and external sector outlook and policy directions 
As the government institution mandated to keep prices stable, the BSP has to contend with the effects 
of the continued rise in oil prices, the surge in liquidity growth from foreign exchange inflows, and the 
effects of whatever negative market sentiments on the exchange rate.  
To address these risks to inflation and keep inflation expectations from spiraling away from our target, 
calibrated  increases  in  BSP’s  benchmark  interest  rates  were  carried  out  in  April,  September  and 
October 2005. These rate increases were made in tandem with a hike in reserve requirements in July 
to keep excess liquidity in check and prevent it from creating additional inflationary pressure. 
In the second half of 2006, we expect inflation to follow a decelerating trend as the short-lived impact 
of the RVAT on prices of goods and services continues to taper off. 
Nevertheless, average inflation is expected to tip past the government’s target of 4.0–5.0 percent in 
2006 due principally to high oil prices.  
Given these risks and outlook for inflation, the BSP will exert all efforts to achieve the inflation target in 
the medium-term. The BSP will keep a close eye on incipient inflationary pressures, especially those 
coming from the demand side, and will stand ready to undertake the necessary monetary action. As a 
complement to monetary action, direct action to address supply-side risks would remain a key policy 
priority. To this end, the BSP will intensify further representation with relevant government agencies in 
support of supply-side intervention measures, particularly in keeping basic food supplies stable. 
On the other hand, the BSP’s exchange rate policy will continue to be anchored on our main mandate 
of price stability. Consistent with our inflation-targeting framework for the conduct of monetary policy, 
the BSP will continue to leave the determination of the value of the peso to market forces.  
Of  course,  there  is  some  scope  for  occasional  BSP  action  to  dampen  sharp  fluctuations  in  the 
exchange  rate,  principally  to  maintain  order  and  stability  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  This  is 
intended to mitigate possible adverse effects of significant exchange rate fluctuations on inflation and 
inflation expectations.  
External sector policy and outlook 
On the external sector, we expect that the balance of payments (BOP) will remain strong.  Current 
projections show that our BOP will yield a surplus of US$1.6 billion on the back of continued dollar 
inflows from OFW remittances and foreign investments. Improving investor sentiment will continue to 
positively impact capital and financial accounts. On the other hand, remittances of OFWs are expected 
to  grow  by  10  percent  in  2006,  as  the  deployment  of  more  workers  escalates  and  as  more  high-
salaried workers get jobs overseas. 
We are often asked whether the strength of the OFW remittances is sustainable.  We believe so. In 
particular,  local  commercial  banks  have  broadened  their  reach  through  establishment  of  more 
remittance centers abroad, tie-ups with foreign financial institutions and introduction of innovative and 
faster means of remittance transfers to channel remittances through banks. Parallel to these, the BSP 
is  undertaking  specific  action  plans  to  reduce  remittance  costs  in  the  Philippines  and  in  host 
economies to encourage and facilitate remittances through formal channels.  
The  BSP  has  also  initiated  a  nationwide  information  campaign  for  OFWs  and  members  of  their 
families on the opportunities for investing their foreign exchange savings in microenterprise activities 
and  other  alternative  financial  instruments.  What  we  want  to  see  is  the  transformation  of  our  OFW 
families from being consumers to regular savers, investors and even entrepreneurs.  
Banking sector outlook and policy 
The  BSP  will  continue  to  intensify  its  efforts  to  strengthen  the  country’s  financial  system.  For  this 
purpose, the BSP’s reform strategy is focused on two pillars: a healthy banking system as well as a 
deep  and  efficient  capital  market  that,  together,  will  effectively  mobilize  savings  to  fund  economic 
development. 
BSP’s  banking  reform  strategy  is  focused  on  the  further  clean  up  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets, 
aligning prudential regulatory framework with international standards, the further strengthening of risk 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2006
management, adherence to good corporate governance practices, stronger capital base of banks, and 
continuing enhancements in our payments and settlements system. 
The extension of the Special Purpose Vehicle Act should provide banks the opportunity to continue to 
reduce their holdings of non-performing assets (NPAs). Apart from the SPV-related dispositions, the 
BSP now allows banks to enter into Joint Venture Agreements (JVAs) with real estate developers as a 
means to convert idle real estate and other acquired properties into income generating assets. This 
new regulation should create a favorable impact on the real estate market. 
An expedient consolidation of the banking industry is also being encouraged through the combination 
of more stringent regulatory regime and international benchmarking of financial standards. In addition, 
the BSP’s moratorium on the establishment of new commercial banks continues to be enforced. We 
also continue to enforce our policies of allowing entry of foreign banks only through the acquisition of 
existing domestic banks.  
Efforts are now firmly underway for the adoption by local banks of International Accounting Standards 
and the implementation of the Basel II Accord, the new international capital standards reflective of the 
risks banks are exposed to. Our efforts in this regard include training programs for our personnel and 
BSP-supervised entities. 
The BSP likewise continues to enhance its supervisory and regulatory authority by pursuing the full 
implementation  of  the  consolidated  and  risk-based  supervision  framework  and  strengthening  its 
enforcement of prompt corrective actions on banks and other financial institutions under its jurisdiction.  
The BSP also continues its reform initiatives to speed up the development of the country’s domestic 
capital  market.  Efforts  to  develop  the  needed  infrastructure  for  this  purpose  were  supported  by 
regulatory changes. Among others, guidelines on investing in various investment products were issued 
to widen the array of available financial products in the capital market.  
As  a  further  incentive  to….  and  protection  for  investors….the  BSP  also  worked  on  the  full 
implementation  of  the  third-party  custodian  system  that  ensures  proper  delivery,  accounting  and 
monitoring of all securities sold.  
The BSP also continues to cooperate with congress on the creation of a centralized credit information 
bureau system to improve the quality of financial information available to investors, enhance private 
sector access to credit, and minimize exposure to risks of financial intermediaries. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have just given you an update on the financial health of the country as well as 
an overview of the direction of the BSP monetary, external and banking sector polices.  
We are hopeful that the reform agenda we have embarked upon will help us sustain our growth track.  
However,  you  and  I  know  that  appropriate  policy  reforms  of  government  do  not  by  themselves 
translate into desired growth in output and incomes. The success of policymakers’ efforts to sustain 
economic growth depends on the support and cooperation of the private sector.  
The  government  cannot  do  everything  on  its  own.  To  this  end,  I  would  like  to  see  the  partnership 
between industry groups like the AIBEP and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas… develop and prosper.   
With your support and cooperation, we can achieve broad-based growth in the years ahead, with the 
fruits of development shared equitably among our people.  
On this positive note, I wish to thank all of you for inviting me here tonight. Mabuhay po kayong lahat! 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 3
