Wu Xiaoling: Creating a favorable social environment for the development of 
micro-credit business 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Asia Pacific Micro-
Credit Forum, Beijing, 22 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
Let me first express my warm congratulations on the opening of the Asia Pacific Micro-credit Forum. In 
the  past  century,  human  beings  created  tremendous  wealth  and  improved  evidently  the  living  and 
welfare standards. However, we face many problems at the same time as economic aggregates grew 
rapidly, such as environment pollution, resources constraint and polarization between rich and poor 
etc.  The  common  issues  many  countries  face  in  the  21st  century  will  be  how  to  make  the  earth  on 
which mankind relies for existence much cleaner and how to give everyone an equitable development 
chance in the process of economic growth.   
Since  the  last  century,  China  has  achieved  remarkable  accomplishments  in  social  and  economic 
development.  But  in  terms  of  distribution,  the  income  gaps  between  urban  and  rural  areas  and 
between  different  regions  have  widened  gradually  and  drawn  more  and  more  attention.  Some 
researchers pointed out that, development chances usually belong to people with certain capitals in 
the  period  when  financial  intermediaries  were  underdeveloped  or  in  countries  where  financial 
intermediaries were less developed, while people lack of capitals are excluded from economic growth 
and  could  not  share  the  benefits  of  economic  growth.  However,  with  the  innovation  of  financial 
institutions  and  financial  instruments,  in  a  comparatively  developed  financial  system,  people  lack  of 
capital  but  possess  some  production  skills  or  entrepreneurships  will  obtain  development  chances 
thanks to the available and suitable financial instruments. In recent years, micro-credit, as an available 
and suitable financial innovation, has drawn many attentions from the public, international institutions 
and international donors and even some explicit supports from governments in developing countries 
because it can help people from low-income country who have willingness and development potential 
to grasp the opportunity to increase income and shake off poverty. When the income gaps between 
urban and rural areas and between different regions widen continuously, large low-income population 
in rural areas and mid-western regions of China as well as numerous private producers and micro-
enterprises demand urgently for the suitable financial services including equity financing and micro-
credit financing.  
Since 2005, Chinese government has paid increased attention to micro-credit. First, reform of the rural 
credit  cooperatives  has  been  underway  smoothly  and  the  number  of  rural  households  that  have 
access  to  micro-credits  and  joint  guaranteed  micro-credits  from  rural  credit  cooperatives  (RCCs) 
nationwide reached 71.34 million as of the end-September, 2005, accounting for 32.31 percent of the 
total 220 million rural households. Given that around 120 million rural households of the 220 million 
rural households had real borrowing needs, the micro-credit provided by the rural credit cooperatives 
met  60  percent  of  their  needs.  Second,  the  CBRC  issued  the  Guideline  on  the  Credit  Business  of 
Commercial Banks to Small Enterprises in July 2005, with a view to promoting financial services to 
small enterprises through guiding banking sector to establish “six mechanisms”, including interest risk 
pricing,  effective  discipline  and  default  information  disclosure  mechanisms.  Many  banks  established 
successively  special  units  to  manage  small  enterprises’  loans.  For  example,  the  Industrial  and 
Commercial Bank of China and the Agricultural Bank of China established special units for credit to 
small  enterprises  in  pilot  regions,  Shanghai  Pudong  Development  Bank,  China  Minsheng  Banking 
Corp. and China Everbright Bank established small & medium-sized customers department or small & 
medium-sized  enterprises  servicing  center,  and  some  other  city  commercial  banks  and  rural 
commercial banks established special units or teams as well. Furthermore, China Development Bank 
also joined in a special way, by signing a strategic cooperation agreement with Taizhou Commercial 
Bank to conduct pilot credit business to micro-enterprises. As of end 2005, the outstanding balance of 
micro-enterprises  loans  of  the  main  banking  institutions  in  China  amounted  to  2.68  trillion  yuan, 
increasing by 205.736 billion yuan from the beginning of the year. Third, apart from about 300 micro-
credit  projects  led  by  non-government  organizations  in  China,  5  provinces  are  undergoing  the  pilot 
commercialized micro-credit organization program. At end-2005, two private micro-credit institutions in 
BIS Review 27/2006 
 1
Pingyao, Shanxi province were established with approval to extend loans, and more similar institutions 
will be established on a pilot basis in other regions. 
But  currently  the  development  of  micro-credit  business  has  not  fully  met  the  social  and  economic 
development needs. To advance economic growth in mid-western regions and vast countryside and 
include low-income population in such regions into the general economic development track so that 
they can enjoy the benefits of economic growth, micro-credit should play a more important role in this 
regard.  We  have  to  cope  with  various  challenges,  such  as  the  credit  market  in  China  is  not  fully 
diversified, institution setup does not fit in with risk control requirements and credit culture and legal 
environment need to improve etc. Therefore, we should create a better social environment with a view 
to promoting the healthy development of micro-credit. 
I.  
 
Developing  micro-credit  that  provides  services  for  private  producers  and  micro-
enterprises should center on developing regional financial institutions. 
Private  producers  and  micro-enterprises  are  characterized  by  weak  production  stability,  unsound 
financial  situations  and  hard  to  standardize  relevant  credit  registration,  therefore  the  direct  contact 
between lenders and clients becomes crucial, and accordingly micro-credit is a labor-intensive work. 
The successful micro-credit activities in China rooted in the diligence of credit issuers and the good 
customer relationships they have established. One credit issuer of Agricultural bank in Siyang county, 
Su Qian of Jiangsu province has issued more than 60 million yuan of rural household’s loans in 16 
years,  involving  thousands  of  loans  without  any  bad  ones,  thanks  to  his  visit  to  every  household. 
Taizhou Commercial bank has high quality loans because the client managers paid tremendous visits 
to  farmers  to  obtain many  “soft  information”.  They  said,  “Once  an  old client  comes  to  us, we could 
basically  tell  why  he  comes  to  the  bank  today;  if  one  client  asks  for  credit,  we  can  reply  promptly 
whether  we  will  extend  loans  and  how  much  we  can.  Sometimes  our  clients  joked  that  the  client 
managers in Taizhou Commercial Bank are able to read faces.” 
If a national big bank directly conducts retail business in micro-credit field, it will face high costs of risk 
control  and  transaction.  On  one  hand,  big  banks  will  find  out  that  they  don’t  understand  the  risk 
profiles of those micro and seemingly irregular clients, at the same time, such clients may not be able 
to provide enough qualified mortgages or pledges so as to put big banks in such a plight when they 
encounter problems as pre-loan “adverse selection” and “moral hazards” after loan issuance. On the 
other hand, negotiating individually with numerous micro-clients is likely to incur high transaction costs 
while the financial services requirements of those clients are not complicate enough to bring benefits 
of  economic  scale  for  big  banks.  Accordingly,  there  are  no  technical  advantages  for  big  banks  to 
directly conduct micro-credits. 
Economic development in China is not balanced judged from many aspects. Multi-layered economic 
development  level  and  complicated  economic  structure  require  multi-level  financial  institutions  to 
provide  relevant  services.  Accordingly,  various  financial  institutions  should  divide  the  credit  market 
according  to  “cost-efficiency”  principle  and  comparative  advantages  to  precisely  choose  their  target 
markets and development strategy. Contrast to national big banks, regional financial institutions have 
comparative  advantages  in  regards  of  micro-credit  fields  that  target  private  producers  and  micro-
enterprises.  Apart  from  having  more  natural  advantages,  regional  financial  institutions  could  also 
resort  to  some  flexible  measures  that  regular  financial  institutions  lack  of  to  deal  with  information 
exchange  and  transaction  costs.  Regional  financial  institutions  are  located  in  communities,  so  their 
client  managers  understand  more  about  the  risk  characters  of  potential  micro-credit  clients  in  the 
community  as  well  as  control  credit  risks  through  some  “social  assets”  of  their  clients  except  their 
economic assets or in virtue of some informal guarantee and mortgage that is hard for big banks to 
take. As a result, developing micro-credit business that provides services for private producers and 
micro-enterprises  should  focus  on  the  development  of  regional  financial  institutions  and  community 
financial institutions.  
II.  
 
Create a moderately competitive financial environment to improve financial services 
and reduce service fees.  
In order to enhance the quality of county-level economy and rural financial services, we should strive 
to create a moderately competitive financial environment. While big commercial banks including the 
ICBC, BOC and CCB gradually cut down their branches in county-level economies due to cost and 
risk  control  factors,  Agricultural  Bank  of  China  and  Agricultural  Development  Bank  of  China  should 
persist in the direction of serving for agricultural development and establish organizational structures 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2006
and  function  mechanism  suitable  to  the  development  of  agriculture  through  reform.  We  should 
encourage big commercial banks to restructure their outlets in counties and encourage private capital 
to participate in such restructuring of financial institutions in order to reduce shocks from restructuring 
and strengthen their services for county-level economies. We should also create much eased policy 
environment for the newly established financial institutions with independent legal status in a county.  
Credit cooperatives have become an important financial service provider in counties and wide rural 
areas of China. We must deepen the reform of rural credit cooperatives by persisting in the direction of 
serving for agriculture and farmers. We should pay proper attention to the external constraint of rural 
credit  cooperatives’  operation,  such  as  market  competition  and  possible  M  &A  activities  apart  from 
focusing on reestablishing effective internal control system, namely, reasonable corporate governance 
structure. We propose to reform the traditional “one RCC in one township” arrangement by liberalizing 
cross-region operation and competition of the RCCs and removing the restriction that only one RCC is 
allowed to establish in one township to encourage establishing new institutions and stimulate RCCs to 
provide service for the rural economy.  
We  should,  through  tax  policy,  guide  the  financial  institutions  to  provide  financial  services  for  rural 
areas and transfer funds to countryside so as to promote the modernization of the agricultural industry 
and urbanization of countryside. 
III.  Create a good social environment for the development of formal financial institutions 
 through guiding rational development of the informal financial services 
Informal  financing  exists  since  long  time  ago.  If  private  funds  participate  in  lending  activities  in 
accordance  with  relevant  rules  on  interest  rate,  informal  financing  is  unlikely  to  damage  social 
economic order rather it could be a beneficial supplement to formal financing and even a barometer of 
social financial demands. Judged from past experiences, problems in informal financing stemmed from 
illegal  public  financing  activities  without  permission.  I  believe,  a  good  policy  to  prevent  social  and 
financial  disorder  should  focus  on  establishing  a  governing  mechanism  that  guide  its  healthy 
development while imposing harsh punishment on irregularities. 
Regular informal financing is usually based on kin relationship or community relationship, so it features 
in high efficiency but low financing amount due to the low credit registration cost and hash punishment 
on  credit  slippage.  Informal  financing  should  be  a  normal  phenomenon  in  terms  of  laws  and 
regulations given that we should respect the rights of a citizen to treat his or her own wealth and the 
freedom  of  signing  agreement  with  other  citizens.  But  sometimes  informal  financing  may  be  taken 
advantage by some bad men, so it is necessary for the government to guide and regulate informal 
financing activities to protect public interests. For example, although the Usury Act in South Africa has 
clauses to punish usury activities, registered micro-credit activities are not subject to the restrictions in 
the Usury Act.  
A practical choice to guide the development of informal financing will be to allow individuals or special 
companies to provide micro-credit under regulations stipulated by local governments and restrictions 
of the Contract Law and the individual credit registration system when credit environment in China is 
not much healthy. Facilitating citizens’ financing activities and cutting down the threshold of conducting 
legal  financing  activities  will  reduce  the  probability  of  illegal  financing  actions  in  essence,  and 
effectively crack down criminal activities as well.  
The No.1 document of the central government in 2004 called to “continue the effort to expand micro-
credits and the joint-guaranteed loans to the farmers. Efforts should be made, through attracting social 
and  foreign  funds,  in  setting  up  financial  institutions  with  diversified  ownerships  to  directly  provide 
services for the rural economy. The No.1 document of the central government in 2005 already clarified 
that regions in good conditions could explore to establish micro-credit organizations close to the needs 
of  farmers  and  villages  and  launched  by  natural  persons  and  enterprises.  Furthermore,  the  No.1 
document  of  the  central  government  in  2006  pointed  out  that,  establishing  community  financial 
organizations in counties with diversified ownerships were encouraged, and private as well as foreign 
capitals  are  allowed  to  invest  in  such  entities.  Efforts  should  be  made  in  fostering  micro-credit 
organizations  launched  by  natural  person,  enterprises  and  associations  with  legal  person  status. 
Farmers will be guided to develop credit unions. Informal financing should be regulated.” In fact, the 
No.1  documents  of  the  central  government  in  following  3  consecutive  years  all  put  emphases  on 
encouraging institutional innovation in rural financial system, while in recent two years it clarified that 
micro-credit should be developed greatly as an appropriate financial innovation.  Obviously, a micro-
BIS Review 27/2006 
 3
credit organization is unlikely to become an important component of the rural financing system, but it is 
indeed  a  catalyst  to  activate  rural  financing.  One  of  the  responsibilities  of  the  government  is  to 
maintain the social and economic order and make citizens responsible for the consequence of their 
own behaviors while respecting citizens’ economic freedom. Once a citizen hands his money to a third 
person for collective usage, the government should point out the potential risks and conduct prudential 
supervision over the fund receivers, which is the function of financial supervision authorities. We will 
not allow the proposed micro-credit company to absorb public deposits but only use its equity from 
several  limited  shareholders  and  wholesale  financing  from  other  institutions  to  conduct  relevant 
business. The shareholders of the micro-credit company and the institutions that provide funds should 
bear  relevant  risks  from  funds  operation.  Once  the  micro-credit  company  failed,  it  would  not  bring 
external  damages  to  our  society.  On  the  contrary,  a  well-functioned  micro-credit  company  will  win 
trusts  of  the  society  and  therefore  has  more  diversified  financing  channels  or  create  conditions  to 
establish  a  new  form  of  financial  institution.  To  regulate  the  lending  activities  of  the  micro-credit 
companies, the central government or local government should stipulate the Rules on Management of 
Creditors, in which the industrial and commercial administrative authorities should be responsible for 
registration management; the individual credit registration system should require lending information to 
be  registered  and  provide  basic  financial  knowledge  training  program  for  both  the  borrowers  and 
lenders, and the court should be able to adjudicate borrowing contract disputes.  
Regulated informal borrowing and lending activities could change the society into a financial university. 
In  this  university,  public  risk  awareness  and  credit  profile  will  be  improved  and  people  who  are 
interested in financial business will have a chance to practise. We are expecting our society to reach 
consensus in this issue. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2006
