Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Detection and prosecution of securities market 
abuses 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Bahrain Monetary Agency, 
at the Detection and Prosecution of Securities Market Abuses Seminar, held at the Bahrain Institute of 
Banking and Finance, Manama, 26 June 2006.  
 Distinguished Guests, Speakers, Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  all  here  this  morning  to  the  opening  ceremony  of  the 
Seminar on Detection and Prosecution of Securities Market Abuses and I would like to thank everyone 
who has been involved in organizing this event. 
Following  on  from  last  year’s  successful  Broker-Dealer  Regulation  and  Enforcement  Program,  our 
special thanks go once again to our partners in this project, namely the United States Securities and 
Exchange  Commission  and  the  Financial  Services  Volunteer  Corps  who  under  the  auspices  of  the 
U.S. Middle East Partnership Initiative are once again sponsoring this program, and of course to our 
hosts, the Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance.  
Global  and  regional  financial  markets  are  increasingly  becoming  integrated,  and  it  is  important  for 
individual  markets  to  remain  fair,  efficient  and  liquid,  and  to  be  able  to  offer  superior  value  to  their 
investors, issuers and market intermediaries. If investors do not have the confidence in the fairness, 
efficiency and transparency of the market, they will feel that they are not being adequately protected 
and  will  move  out  of  the  market  in  pursuit  of  better  opportunities  elsewhere.  Indeed,  investor 
confidence  in  the  risk  management  systems  and  integrity  of  the  capital  market  is  essential  and  will 
enhance its liquidity and efficiency.  
Therefore, it is essential that regulators, stock exchanges and market intermediaries should play an 
active role in enhancing the fairness, efficiency and transparency of the markets and maintain market 
integrity, by ensuring that the price of securities is determined efficiently by the market forces of supply 
and demand. 
In order to accomplish this, investing in the education of the capital markets sector’s human resources 
is a fundamental way of achieving this goal. Enhancing the knowledge of the industry’s key players will 
allow for greater insight into better ways of early detection of market abuse, and the prevention of such 
abuse from occurring.  
This seminar has therefore been carefully thought-out to touch on all subjects and to allow participants 
to widen their knowledge and derive the greatest benefit and insight into the various surveillance and 
investigation systems and techniques for the detection and prevention of market abuses.  
I would like to finish by thanking once again our collaborators in this event and to wish the seminar 
participants every success, and trust that everyone will take away with them invaluable knowledge and 
experience. Thank you for participating in this event. 
BIS Review 78/2006 
 1
