Christian Noyer: Recent developments and policy challenges affecting large-value 
and retail payment systems in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  high-level  international 
conference  on  “Central  Banks  in  the  21st  Century”,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Spain,  Madrid, 
8-9 June 2006.  
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Madrid  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  about  recent 
developments and policy challenges affecting payment systems in Europe.  
Indeed structural changes are underway in Europe that should have a significant and positive bearing 
on the efficiency and safety of the payment infrastructures, notably in the wake of the implementation 
of the TARGET2 and the SEPA projects. Both projects are part of the overall process of the Lisbon 
agenda  which  aims  at  making  the  European  Union  “the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-
driven economy by 2010”. 
However, for Europe to reach that objective in the field of payment systems, a number of collective 
challenges  have  to  be  addressed,  both  by  private  actors  and  public  authorities.  Those  challenges 
range from the redefinition by private actors of the boundaries between cooperation and competition, 
to  the  adjustment  by  public  authorities  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment  in  which  payment 
systems operate. 
In that context, the Eurosystem’s central banks have a key role to play, given their statutory task of 
promoting the smooth functioning of payment systems in euro. 
I will first review the key issues we are facing in Europe in the field of payment infrastructures. Then, I 
will discuss the current and possible future roles that the Eurosystem’s central banks can play in that 
field. 
Key issues in the field of payment infrastructures today 
1. 
The three main issues I see as regards payment infrastructures today in Europe could be summarised 
as follows : (1) which role for payment infrastructures to support the European financial integration? (2) 
Which  place  to  give  to  technological  progress  in  the  field  of  payment  systems?  (3)  How  to  ensure 
business continuity of payment systems? 
Supporting the European financial integration 
1.1.  
The  share  of  payment  systems  in  money  transfers  between  financial  intermediaries  is  nearly  80%, 
versus  20%  for  the  traditional  correspondent  banking  arrangements.  So,  payment  systems  are 
essential for the financial sector as a whole and, therefore, can be considered as a key enabler in the 
process of the European financial integration. 
Such contribution of payment systems to the financial integration is embodied in the TARGET2 and 
SEPA projects. Both projects aim at the harmonisation and consolidation of the European “network” of 
payment  infrastructures.  While  large-value  payment  systems  have  already  attained  a  high  level  of 
integration and will further progress with the launch of TARGET2, retail payment systems are still very 
fragmented. 
In the segment of large-value payment systems, the degree of integration has increased very quickly. 
The rationale for setting up the two European-wide payment systems that currently exist, i.e. TARGET 
and EURO 1, was clearly to face the challenge of the EMU. TARGET2, which is due to go live at the 
end of 2007, will further improve the degree of integration of wholesale payment infrastructures and 
will represent a major step forward in their consolidation. It will provide to its users fully harmonised 
settlement services and prices across Europe, supported by a single shared platform. 
An  important  issue  which  is  now  under  consideration  is  how  TARGET2,  as  “backbone”  of  the  euro 
market  infrastructure  of  the  euro,  can  best  contribute  to  the  integration  and  consolidation  of  the 
securities settlement systems with which it is going to interact. Should TARGET2, as announced by 
the Eurosystem and implemented in the system’s specifications, support a wide range of interaction 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
modes in order to foster competition between systems and let market forces select the most efficient 
one (i.e.  the so-called no prohibition  no  compulsion principle)  ? Or should  TARGET2  influence  that 
selection  process  by  limiting  the  interaction  modes  to  only  one  in  a  long-term  perspective?  It  goes 
without  saying  that  in  the  latter  case  the  Eurosystem,  given  its  statutory  responsibilities,  can  only 
select the most efficient interaction model, namely a model of settlement of cash and securities, which 
is in real time as it is the case in the US for instance, and which is integrated in a single platform. 
In the segment of retail payment systems, the situation is quite different. Retail infrastructures are still 
separated  by  national  borders  and  characterized  by  a  high  degree  of  diversity.  A  number  of  local 
payment systems concentrate the clearing and settlement of all retail national transactions. In addition, 
the  execution  of  cross-border  payments  go  through  several  dedicated  arrangements  such  as 
international card schemes, banking “clubs” or the EBA’s STEP 2 system. 
The SEPA project aims to put an end to such fragmentation by introducing, as from 2008, European 
payment instruments which are going to replace national ones by end-2010. The vision is that by end-
2010 all retail payments in euro are carried out as easily, efficiently and safely across Europe as within 
national borders. For this vision to become a reality, a key enabler is that retail payment infrastructures 
become interoperable and consolidate. 
The  outcome  of  theses  changes  on  retail  payment  systems  is  uncertain.  It  may  lead  to  various 
structures,  ranging  from  a  natural  monopoly  exercised  by  one  infrastructure  that  would  encompass 
most national and cross-border payment flows, to the competition between several systems. However, 
whatever  the  structure,  the  challenge  will  be  to  find  the  right  balance  between  two  objectives:  (1) 
reaping  economies  of  scale  and  scope  and  (2)  fostering  competitive  market  conditions  and 
behaviours. 
Keeping pace with technological progress 
1.2. 
The second issue for payment infrastructures consists in keeping pace with technological progress. 
Payment  systems  are  made  up  of  IT  networks,  hardware  and  software.  As  a  consequence, 
technological progress is a key driver for enhancing the way payment systems are designed, operated 
and used. I will highlight a few significant examples of recent technological developments. 
The first half of the nineties experienced a major transformation in the design of large-value payment 
systems with the widespread introduction of real-time gross settlement (RTGS) systems. In a second 
step, further advances in information technologies have made possible new designs like the so called 
“hybrid systems”, i.e. systems that settle in real-time but, at the same time, minimise liquidity needs 
thanks to highly sophisticated optimisation mechanisms. 
In  short,  advances  in  information  technology  allowed  large-value  payment  systems  to  settle  faster, 
with a lower amount of liquidity and at a lower cost. 
On  the  retail  payments  side,  technological  progress  should  also  allow  safety  and  efficiency  gains 
beyond those which have resulted, for instance, from the implementation of cheque truncation or those 
that  are  expected  from  introduction  of  the  EMV  (Europay  Mastercard  Visa)  technology  for  card 
payments. Innovation has definitely an important role to play in order to keep the SEPA project future-
oriented and promote the use of new delivery channels for retail payments like the internet and mobile 
devices, or new types of services like electronic invoicing. 
However, this flow of innovations come together with the entry in the payments market of new actors 
which  do  not  always  offer  the  same  level  of  security  as  the  traditional  suppliers  of  those  services, 
namely  credit  institutions.  There  is  obviously  a  trade-off  between,  on  the  one  hand,  encouraging 
innovation by facilitating access to the payments market and, on the other hand, ensuring the safety of 
payments provided by setting prudential requirements on their suppliers. This challenge is at the heart 
of the current discussions on the “proposal for a directive on payment services in the internal market”. 
Ensuring business continuity 
1.3. 
The third key issue I see is related to business continuity. Business continuity can be defined as a set 
of  measures  aimed  at  ensuring  the  continuity  of  service  in  various  incident  scenarios  such  as  the 
failure of an infrastructure component, or the unavailability of the staff in charge of operating systems. 
Business  continuity  has  progressively  emerged  as  a  key  issue  to  be  considered  for  the  design  of 
payment  infrastructures.  In  addition,  several  factors  have  recently  led  to  overhaul  our  approach  of 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
operational  risk:  the  spreading  of  real-time  processing  within  payment  systems,  the  growing 
complexity  of  technologies,  the  increasing  interdependence  between  payment  systems  and  the 
materialisation of risks such as terrorism or power breakdowns. All stakeholders - public authorities in 
charge  of  regulation  and  oversight,  operators  and  users  of  infrastructures  –  have  identified 
weaknesses as regards current practices. For example, incident scenarios impacting wide geographic 
areas have been overlooked. 
In Europe, there is a broad consensus on the need to strengthen business continuity requirements. 
The ultimate objective is clear: business continuity should contribute to enhance the soundness of the 
financial system as a whole. But it is not obvious to renew business continuity procedures. Among the 
challenges to be taken up, I see two major ones: (1) how far to go without putting at stake the cost 
efficiency of the systems? (2) How to ensure the necessary coherence of the efforts undertaken by 
stakeholders of different importance, submitted to different types of regulations, across the different 
financial centres that compose the financial system of the euro? 
What roles for the Eurosystem 
2. 
The Eurosystem has been quite active in the field of payment systems and is likely to develop further 
its  involvement  under  its  three  roles  of:  (1)  service  provider,  (2)  facilitator  of  market  and  regulatory 
evolution, and (3) overseer. 
Providing payment services 
2.1. 
As a service provider, the Eurosystem has put priority on enhancing the efficiency and safety of its 
TARGET system, with the launch of the TARGET2 project. 
TARGET2 will provide harmonised services and prices, efficient liquidity management and settlement 
mechanisms,  while  setting  a  new  benchmark  in  terms  of  business  continuity.  The  Eurosystems 
objective  is  to  promote  the  use  of  real-time  settlement  services  in  central  bank  money,  given  their 
expected social benefits in terms of risk reduction in the payment process. 
In the field of retail payments, the degree of the Eurosystem’s central banks’ operational involvement 
varies  across  countries.  Most  central  banks  provide  payment  services  to  public  institutions.  Some 
central  banks  also  offer  processing  facilities  to  commercial  banks  by  participating  in  private  retail 
payment systems and/or operating an own retail payment system. The completion of the SEPA project 
calls  for  a  specific  effort  of  those  central  banks  that  are  significantly  involved  in  retail  payment 
operations.  They  should  lead  by  example,  notably  by  supplying  the  new  European  payment 
instruments to their clients and by ensuring that the retail payment system they operate complies with 
the interoperability principle enshrined in the SEPA project. 
Acting as a facilitator of market and regulatory evolutions 
2.2.  
Turning to the involvement of the Eurosystem in payment systems issues as a facilitator of market and 
regulatory evolutions, it is fair to say that this mode of action has been mainly used in the field of retail 
payments to support the SEPA project. 
The SEPA project was launched in 2002 by the European banking community under the aegis of the 
Eurosystem and the European Commission. The banking industry has taken on the responsibility of 
delivering the SEPA products, in particular the specifications of the new European instruments. The 
European Commission, which grants a great importance to the SEPA project in so far as the latter 
contributes to the achievement of the common market and the completion of the Lisbon agenda, has 
elaborated  a  legal  framework  for  payment  services  in  the  European  Union.  It  made  public,  in 
December  2005,  a  directive  proposal  that  should  be  adopted  at  the  European  level  before  being 
transposed in national laws by 2008. 
Since 1999, the Eurosystem’s central banks have been actively promoting, at European and national 
levels, the establishment of a SEPA. They proposed a vision which is now shared by all stakeholders, 
contributed to a constructive review of the banking community’s deliverables and cooperated with the 
European Commission to address legal and regulatory impediments. 
While the design phase of the SEPA project is almost completed, the next challenge is to ensure that 
migration  towards  the  SEPA  is  well-organised  and  delivered.  Because  the  starting  point  in  each 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
country is different, migration plans to the SEPA will primarily have to be organised locally. This should 
naturally lead to a further involvement of the Eurosystem’s central banks at national level, at least to 
help co-ordinating the efforts of the wide range of stakeholders. 
For  example,  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  French  banking  federation  have  created  a  national 
committee dedicated to the implementation of the SEPA. This committee gathers representatives of 
banks, different categories of users – public administration, corporates, retail business and citizens – 
as  well  as  members  of  the  French  Parliament.  It  is  in  charge  of  coordinating  works  relating  to  the 
migration  towards  the  SEPA.  Having  held  its  first  meeting  in  April  2006,  the  committee  foresees  to 
adopt the French migration plan by October. 
Overseeing payment systems 
2.3.  
As overseers, the central banks of the Eurosystem have also contributed to the objectives of European 
financial integration, technological progress and higher resilience of the financial system. 
So  far,  this  contribution  has  consisted  in  developing  and  applying  an  oversight  framework  for  retail 
payment  systems,  which  contributes  to  establish  safety  and  efficiency  guidelines  for  the  expected 
integration and consolidation of retail payment systems in the context of the SEPA project. 
The  need  that  the  payment  systems’  regulatory  framework  keeps  pace  with  the  structural  changes 
underway  in  Europe  is  likely  to  lead  the  Eurosystem’s  central  banks  to  develop  further  their 
involvement as overseers, at least in two directions. 
The first direction is the updating of the existing oversight requirements to new market realities. Work 
has already started  in  that  respect.  For  instance,  the  Eurosystem  is currently  revising  the  oversight 
standard  for  systemically  important  payment  systems  relating  to  operational  risk.  This  is  because 
discussions and initiatives in order to strengthen business continuity management have taken place 
mostly at national level and have not systematically considered that the financial system of the euro 
operates as a euro area-wide network of interrelated markets, market infrastructures and participants. 
Therefore, the Eurosystem is preparing a revised version of its business continuity expectations for 
systemically  important  payment  systems  that  should  be  integrated  soon  into  its  oversight  policy 
framework. 
The transformation of the payment infrastructures landscape in Europe should also logically lead to an 
updating of the oversight framework for retail payment systems. In particular, retail payment systems 
are  about  to  become  interoperable  and  face  a  consolidation  process,  which  is  likely  to  lead  to  the 
establishment of links between systems. Such links may potentially imply a spill over of risks from one 
system  to  another.  Central  banks  will  have  to  make  their  oversight  function  evolve  accordingly. 
Oversight standards will certainly have to include the links between systems, as it is already the case 
for securities settlement systems. 
The second direction for an evolution of the oversight activities of the Eurosystem is the extension of 
the scope of its oversight framework to the European payment instruments currently in the making and 
their associated clearing and settlement systems. Investigations are currently underway to elaborate 
an oversight framework for card payments. 
Concluding remarks 
Payment systems, which are significant contributors to the broader effectiveness and stability of the 
financial system, are currently exposed in Europe to specific structural changes notably as a result of 
pressures and progress towards financial integration in the euro area. 
Integration and consolidation of payment systems have made progress, while remaining in line with 
expectations in  terms  of  safety.  However,  further  progress  need  to  be  made,  notably  in  the  field  of 
retail  payment  services  and  infrastructures.  In  that  perspective,  the  Eurosystem’s  central  banks  will 
continue to significantly contribute to these evolutions, but I believe that market forces should be and 
are likely to be the primary engine for such progress.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2006
