Panayotis Thomopoulos: The Greek economy and its outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Covered 
Bonds Conference, organised by Barclays International, Athens, 1 September 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  address  this  meeting  devoted  to  an  issue  of  growing  importance  to  the  financial 
community. Experts will speak on the subject of this conference as for me I shall try to introduce the 
subject of Greece.  
It is two years since the successful conclusion of the Athens Olympics and I am glad to observe that 
the Greek economic performance since then has vindicated those of us who have remained optimists 
all through the last decade. While two years ago many feared that the Greek economy would slide into 
a protracted period of slow growth or even recession when the spending for the Olympics ended, and 
cited Spain as a precedent, we now see that the Greek economy remains one of the strongest in the 
EU. This performance, achieved in the context of a very significant domestic fiscal adjustment and the 
Eurozone’ s slow growth until recently, indicates that Greece has a dynamism that reflects important 
changes on the supply side. In the rest of my speech I will highlight the main strengths of the Greek 
economy,  the  risks  facing  us  and  the  necessary  policy  measures  needed  to  avoid  those  risks  and 
maximize the benefits from our strengths.  
As  I  alluded  to  before,  many  feared  that  the  demand-led  expansion  in  the  run-up  to  the  Olympics 
would be followed by a significant slowdown and some even predicted that Greece risked falling back 
into  a  vicious  circle  of  stagflation.  Indeed,  between  1980  and  1994,  economic  performance  was 
abysmal: GDP grew only at 0.7% annually and inflation averaged 16% combined with a rising fiscal 
deficit, culminating at 13% of GDP in 1993.  
Considering  the significant  initial  disequilibria  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  the 1990s  few  believed  that 
Greece would satisfy the strict criteria for Euro area membership, and even after joining the Euro area 
in 2001 many doubted that it would be able to sustain for long the high rate of GDP growth of 4% p.a. 
experienced in the 9 years to 2004, compared with only 1.9% for the Euro area as a whole. Indeed, 
the  fears  increased  as  the  deterioration  of  the  fiscal  situation,  associated  with  the  Olympic  Games’ 
overruns partly due to sizeable additional expenditure for security as well as the budgetary relaxation 
called for a substantial fiscal adjustment, with inevitable dampening effects on growth. Similarly, it was 
pointed out that the turn-around from a rising trend in net EU transfers in relation to GDP to a falling 
trend  would  also  impact  negatively  on  growth.  Indeed,  net  transfers  fell,  from  4.7%  of  GDP  in 
1995-1997, to 2.1% of GDP in 2005, but growth continued unabated. In addition, since 2004 Greece, 
which is heavily dependent on oil imports, suffered from the rapid rise in energy prices as well as from 
the appreciation of the Euro, which affected especially Greece’s main manufactured export products –
textiles, garments, shoes – which after the lifting of the quotas had to confront strong competition from 
the emerging markets in Asia and the countries in transition in South-East Europe.  
The fact that Greece avoided the problems faced by other countries, such as Portugal, after a period 
of  excessive  demand  growth  is  a  sign  of  underlying  improvements  on  the  supply  side.  However, 
equally important is the restoration of the historical links between Greece and the countries in South-
East  Europe,  around  the  Black  Sea  as  well  as  with  Egypt.  For  more  than  2000  years  large  Greek 
communities, in some cases numbering hundreds of thousands, had settled and prospered in these 
countries. The communist regimes, revolutions and nationalism caused the amicable relations with our 
wider neighbours to be suspended, and many of these communities disappeared towards the end of 
the 1940s and in the 1950s: for example, in the 1950s more than 250000 Greeks had to leave Egypt. 
After 1990, the historical forces of gravity have been re-established; nationalism, as is the case in all 
EU countries, is now taught only in history books. As a result, friendly relations with our neighbouring 
countries  have  been  restored.  Greece  has  been  a  key  supporter  of  Bulgaria’s  and  Romania’s  EU 
membership, and eventually Turkey’s, as well as of the other South-Eastern European countries. A 
little story of the weight of history is the immigration to Greece in the last ten years of thousands of 
Greeks,  whose  ancestors  had  settled  in  Russia  between  the  1st  and  3rd  century  B.C.  and  who,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  they  were  cut  off  from  Greece  for  almost  800  years,  spoke  some  Greek  and 
preserved many Greek traditions.  
BIS Review 81/2006 
 1
Until  almost  the  end  of  the  1990s,  Greece  had  a  big  handicap:  it  was  located  at  the  periphery  of 
Europe without direct land connections to the main EU members and was surrounded by countries 
whose economic development had stalled for about 50 years. Nowadays, its geographical location has 
become an advantage, almost all of its neighbours are growing fast, much faster than the EU as a 
whole, and very soon two of them will become EU members.  
Greece is offering these countries entrepreneurship, expertise and capital as well as a market for their 
products and surplus labour. Indeed, the Greek private sector has responded quickly and positively to 
the opening of the region. Greek firms and individuals who spoke the language and knew the culture 
are  establishing  themselves  in  large  numbers.  Some  5000  Greek  firms  have  set  up  businesses  in 
these countries in diverse activities, ranging from small bakeries, restaurants, hotel chains, to super-
markets, food processing plants, mines, cement factories, metallurgical and aluminium factories, I.T. 
companies,  including  telecommunications,  trading,  shipping  and  other  service  companies.  Likewise, 
attracted by the low labour costs and tax rates, many Greek firms relocated their plants, mainly textile, 
garment,  shoe  making  plants  as  well  as  other  light  industries,  from  Northern  Greece  to  Bulgaria, 
FYROM, Albania, i.e. they moved some 30 to 80 kilometres over the other side of the border. This 
opening and the establishment of a network of Greek firms in all our neighbouring countries, which are 
moreover growing rapidly, has given a new impetus to the Greek economy - the size of the market is 
no longer the 11 million Greeks but about 60 to 80 million consumers and many more if we include 
parts of Turkey which are close to Greece.  
The economic interdependence between Greece and its neighbours is now reflected in the sizeable 
Greek direct investment to South-Eastern European countries. Greeks are among the first two or three 
foreign  investors  in  these  countries.  The  enlarged  market  gave  the  opportunity  to  Greek  firms  to 
increase their size and to establish different processing plants in different countries, according to their 
cost  advantage,  with  the  result  that  their  international  competitiveness  has  been  greatly  enhanced. 
This development has been particularly noticeable in the banking sector, as I shall refer below.  
Contrary to the direction that capital was taking, labour migrated to Greece: the number of immigrants 
who  have  settled  in  the  last  13  years  is  estimated  at  about  1  million  (mainly  from  the  wider 
neighbourhood) raising the population to 11 million and causing the labour force to increase by up to 
20%.  For  developed  countries,  this  probably  represents  the  largest  foreign  worker  inflow  in  such  a 
short space of time. In total, the whole region of South-East Europe is becoming a unified economic 
space as it used to be for centuries, first in antiquity, then under the Byzantine and, later, the Ottoman 
Empire.  
It is true that Greece is located in, and oriented towards a region of relatively high growth, including the 
rapidly growing Middle-Eastern countries, whose governments and their nationals have a long tradition 
of friendship with Greece. The outlook for all these countries remains favourable and indeed, since the 
start of this decade import demand from our trading partners has systematically exceeded the growth 
of world trade. While this is significant, it is more significant to note that in 2005 Greece increased its 
market  share  in  its  export  markets  for  the  first  time  after  more  than  a  decade  of  retrenchment, 
associated  with  the  decline  of  textile  production,  and  we  are  on  track  to  repeat  this  good  export 
performance  this  year,  as  exports  of  goods  increased  by  13½  percent  in  the  first  half  of  this  year, 
excluding idiosyncratic items such as refined petroleum and ships. A number of indicators suggest that 
this  development  is  not  a  statistical  artefact  but  may  indicate  a  more  permanent  improvement  in 
economic performance. The good export performance is not restricted to a few countries of destination 
or  sectors,  but  is  quite  widespread.  The  opening  of  the  economic  space  of  South-East  Europe 
coincided  with  a  sustained  effort  to  improve  domestic  economic  performance  and  this  has  been 
underpinned by three factors.  
• 
First  fixed  investment  has  grown  robustly:  7.3%  annually  since  1995,  and  10%  for  private 
non-residential investment; this compares with 3.3% for the Euro area as a whole. Moreover, 
the investment boom affected all sectors: in the second half of the 1990s industry benefited 
mostly,  with  fixed  investment  rising  at  over  15%  annually,  whereas  in  the  first  half  of  this 
decade investment in the service sector, including tourism as well as the construction sector, 
recorded very high rates of growth.  
Second, extensive privatisations and liberalisations unleashed entrepreneurial spirits and led 
to the creation of competent new managerial class, which is progressively taking up the reins 
of the business sector, which, until recently, was almost exclusively run by family members 
of the owners. This development owes much to the growing interest of foreign companies to 
buy or take a strategic position in Greek companies following Greece’s decision to join the 
BIS Review 81/2006
 2 
 Euro area. Foreign firms recruit Greek senior staff to run their businesses. Out of the 200 
biggest  Greek  companies  a  very  large  proportion  is  fully  or  partly  owned  by  foreign 
companies  who  prefer  to  buy  existing  Greek  firms,  so  as  to  avoid  the  heavy  and  lengthy 
bureaucratic procedures in setting new companies in Greece. The new managerial class has 
promoted  the  restructuring  of  firms  and  focused  on  efficiency,  with  the  result  that  labour 
productivity grew by 3% annually in the ten years to 2005 compared with 0.8% for the Euro 
area and 2.2% for the US, the country which mostly benefited from the I.T. boom.  
Third, although the Government sector is still a drag on the economy, the progress towards 
fiscal  consolidation  and  the  tentative  efforts  to  reduce  state  intervention  and  to  simplify 
bureaucracy have started bearing some fruits.  
 The fact that industrial production has started growing again after a protracted period of retrenchment 
is  another  signal  in  the  same  direction  and  indicative  of  a  newfound  dynamism.  Greece  has 
traditionally  been  a  service  economy,  with  a  relatively  small  manufacturing  sector.  Although  Greek 
manufacturing  firms,  with  the  exception  of  the  declining  sectors  such  as  textiles,  show  healthy 
profitability – with profit rates above most other European counterparts– and we see new firms being 
set up in dynamic sectors, the contribution of manufacturing to GDP will continue to be much smaller 
than in the rest of the EU. The service sector is the engine of growth in Greece and here we see an 
encouraging performance not only with respect to our main export product, that is tourism, but also 
with many other export-oriented services in higher value-added sectors which are showing buoyancy. 
Again, over the last two years the number of tourists arriving in Greece has grown faster than world 
tourism,  indicating  that  the  positive  image  generated  by  the  Olympics  is  now  producing  tangible 
results.  Shipping,  a  sector  of  traditionally  strong  Greek  presence  has  been  doing  well  recently  and 
contributing significantly to Greece’s export earnings (about $15 billion). In effect, over 15% of world 
shipping and more than 20% of world tankers are owned and run by Greeks all over the world. More 
importantly,  Greek  ship-owners  are  using  the  current  propitious  circumstances  to  renew  their  fleet, 
thus ensuring a significant future presence in a sector, where Greeks have thrived for over 3000 years.  
The success of the Olympic Games is one reason behind the favourable turn of events. It has helped 
not only tourism, where benefits were expected all along, but even more merchandise exports, as well 
as other service sectors as it has reinforced the image of Greece as a stable and reliable partner. That 
was  a  positive  side-effect  that  was  not  much  foreseen,  as  the  focus  was  on  promoting  tourism. 
Nowadays, many foreign firms use Greece as a gateway to South-Eastern European countries or in 
partnership with Greek firms penetrate these markets. Thessaloniki, the second biggest Greek port is 
expected  to  play  a  pivotal  role  in  the  economic  integration  of  the  Southern-Eastern  European 
countries. The border of Bulgaria, and of landlocked Fyrom are about 80 kms from Thessaloniki and 
for their respective capitals, Sofia and Skopje, Thessaloniki is the natural outlet to the Mediterranean 
Sea.  Likewise,  the  southern  provinces  of  Serbia  and  parts  of  Romania  can  equally  be  served 
efficiently by the port of Thessaloniki, which, in addition has an interesting cultural life and a pleasant 
life  style.  The  advantageous  location  of  Thessaloniki  will  become  even  more  evident  after  the 
completion of the planned and partly financed by the EU of the North-South EU road and railway axes.  
The renewed optimism about the Greek economy is now reflected in many areas. I wish to refer to the 
example of construction and housing. There was a widespread belief that construction would be the 
main victim of a slowdown in the post-Olympics period. There was talk of a housing bubble and of a 
supply  glut.  Indeed  there was  a construction slowdown  in  the  immediate aftermath of  the  Olympics 
and a levelling off of housing prices, but since last year we are seeing a renewed dynamism in this 
sector,  unexpected  in  its  degree.  In  addition  to  Greeks,  many  more  foreigners  than  in  the  past  are 
building secondary residences in the Greek islands and in the mainland.  
Total credit growth at around 20% annually and 30% for credit to households since 2001 has been 
one factor underpinning strong private demand in recent years and has been fuelled by the low Euro 
area interest rates. I fully accept that we should monitor developments in this area but we are far from 
becoming alarmed. Greece is a country with a still relatively low household debt-to-GDP ratio – 38% 
compared with  56%  for  the  Euro  area.  The  rapid  credit  expansion  in  this  area  reflects  fundamental 
changes  in  the  Greek  economy  and  has  underpinned  the  transformation  of  a  fragmented  stagnant 
inward-looking  banking  sector  into  a  dynamic  modern  banking  sector  with  strong  international 
competitive  presence.  The  lifting  of  foreign  exchange  controls  in  the  mid-1990s  and  of  household 
credit restrictions in 2001 as well as privatisations and the mergers between a large number of smaller 
banks  since 1997  has created  Greek  champions  (up  to  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  almost  2/3  of 
Greek banks were controlled by the State and were moreover, badly run, compared with about 15% 
presently, which are managed by professionals).  
BIS Review 81/2006 
 3
The biggest 5 banks with a 78% market share have been very active is modernising their business not 
only  in  Greece  but  also  in  acquiring  or  setting  up  new  banks  in  all  the  South-Eastern  European 
countries, where the market share of Greek banks is more than 20% on average, with a high of over 
33% in FYROM and a low of somewhat less than 20% in Romania. In this region Greek banks employ 
around 16.000 employees in their subsidiaries or branches, and few thousand more in EU countries, 
US,  Australia,  Canada  etc.  The  recent  acquisition  of  Finansbank,  the  fifth  largest  private  bank  in 
Turkey by the NBG and of a smaller Turkish bank by Eurobank, as well the purchase of an Egyptian 
bank  by  the  Bank  of  Piraeus,  is  transforming  the  scenery  of  the  Greek  banking  sector,  which  is 
becoming more international.  
The size of Greek banks is increasing so that the disadvantage of their small size is gradually being 
removed and banks are now in a position to extend their activities into more profitable lines of banking, 
e.g. private banking, consultancy for M&A, investment banking, asset management etc. Greek banks 
can  now  start  enjoying  economies  of  scale  and  scope.  These  factors  are  all  reflected  in  their  high 
profitability: This year the return on equity is expected to exceed 20%. At the same time, Greek banks 
are reinforcing their role as a vehicle facilitating trade in goods and services, investment and capital 
flows  as  well  as  migration  between  the  countries  in  the  wider  region.  This  has  led  to  intensive 
competition between the Greek banks both in the home market and abroad, with the result that the 
high  Greek  interest  rate  spreads  over  most  Euro  area  countries’  bank  loans  has  considerably 
diminished to the benefit of the consumer.  
Indeed, competition and financial liberalization allows households to better manage their portfolios of 
assets and liabilities and in a fast growing economy most households would find it preferable to bring 
forward the benefits of their expected higher incomes in the future. There is also a stock adjustment 
issue; starting from a very low level of indebtedness and realizing that Greece has entered a period 
where  interest  rates  are  much  lower  and  risks  have  diminished,  as  well  as  because  of  their  rising 
wealth,  households  find  it  acceptable  to  carry  a  larger  stock  of  debt.  The  flow  of  borrowing  as 
households adjust to their higher level of desired debt may be very high for a protracted period.  
Undoubtedly, as regulators of the banking system we are concerned and we know that many things 
have  to  be  improved.  There  is  a  need  for  better  consumer  protection  and  better  education  of 
borrowers about the risks of bad financial choices. We should not forget that the experience of Greeks 
over  the  last 15-20  years has been  one  of  falling  interest rates  first  as  they converged  to  the  Euro 
area’s average and then as the ECB relaxed its monetary policy. Now that the ECB is undergoing a 
phase of monetary policy tightening, the experience of rising interest rates may come as a shock to 
many households in Greece. In spite of this, between 2002 and 2005, we saw a reduction in the ratio 
of non-performing loans, a reduction that was particularly steep in the case of mortgage loans where 
the ratio dropped from 6.9 percent to 3.6 percent over the period.  
As far as the Bank of Greece is concerned, our supervisory role obliges us to ask banks to increase 
provisions, to tighten credit standards and in general to introduce efficient credit control mechanisms, 
including  state-of-the-art  risk  management  units  so  that  even  if  non-performing-loans  increase  their 
CAR will still remain well above 10%: today it is almost 14%. At the same time in collaboration with the 
host  supervisors  in  the  South  Eastern  European  countries,  the  Bank  of  Greece  monitors  closely 
developments at home and abroad.  
An area that we should look into is whether immigrants to Greece can become a valuable bridge and 
help trade between Greece and their home countries. There is some anecdotal evidence that this is 
already happening. I should like to note that Greece has always been a country of immigration and 
has successfully absorbed all the successive waves of immigration throughout the centuries. Greek 
society has always been open to foreigners: in antiquity, the orator Isocrates (in 380 BC) defined as 
Hellenes all those who shared our culture, and by definition spoke Greek, and not those who shared a 
common blood, i.e. of Greek ancestors. Even in the Oath of Alexander the Great (324 BC), it is stated 
that: ”Unlike the narrow minded, I make no distinction between Greeks and Barbarians. The origin of 
citizens, or the race into which they were born, is of no concern to me. I have only one criterion by 
which to distinguish them. Virtue. For me, any good foreigner is a Greek and any bad Greek is worse 
than a Barbarian”. The word Barbarian had a different meaning that to-day and was then referred to 
people speaking a language that Greeks could not understand, as it sounded “bar-bar”.  
I believe that Greece is now seeing also the fruits of the significant infrastructure investments that took 
place  over  the  last  decade,  partly  financed  by  the  EU,  and  of  the  more  tentative  structural  reforms 
enacted over this period. There is also a deepening understanding among the population at large, and 
the business community in particular, that Greece should embrace globalization at last if it is to further 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2006
improve  the  living  standards.  Indeed,  it  is  striking  to  note  that  globalization  until  recently  passed 
Greece by. We were a much more closed economy than most other economies of similar size and 
level of development. Apart from our location at the periphery of Western Europe, this was the result of 
an  undue  reliance  on  the  state  to  provide  the  stimulus  to  growth  and  job  creation  and  the 
corresponding  over-regulation  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  the  lack  of  intra-industry  trade  as  our 
production was basically oriented to cater for home needs. I believe this was an aberration in Greek 
history. Greeks embraced globalization long before it became a fad. Notice our strong shipping and 
merchant  traditions,  the  prospering  Greek  communities  established  all  over  the  world,  the  Greek 
scientists and researchers that thrive in foreign universities and research centres.  
Continuing the adjustment to the new international economic order is a one-way road for Greece. We 
must  start  by  admitting  that  Greece  cannot  compete  in  labour-intensive,  low-wage  sectors.  Rather 
than  trying  to  sustain  such  industries,  we  should  look  to  what  activities  we  should  develop  for  the 
future.  We  should  also  realize  that  the  public  sector,  already  burdened  by  debt  and  facing  the 
pressures of an ageing society cannot continue acting as the engine of employment creation. But let’s 
note  the  positive  facts:  Greece  possesses  an  enormous  stock  of  highly  qualified  scientists  and 
researchers, both here and abroad. Greek students studying in foreign universities represent a very 
high  percentage  of  these  universities’  foreign  student  body  but  unfortunately  many  remain  abroad 
enticed by higher earnings and the better research facilities than Greece. But in recent years reflecting 
the  rapidly  growing  living  standards  and  the  significant  improvements  in  urban  amenities  there  is  a 
growing number of Greeks returning to Greece. Greece has also moved further than most countries to 
becoming a service economy.  We  are  thus at  a  good  starting point  to  thrive in  a  knowledge-based 
world economy. Membership of the eurozone provides a stable macroeconomic framework with low 
interest rates and inflation as well as legal certainty that should allow private business to plan for their 
long-term growth.  
A change that is now bearing fruits was the gradual emergence of Greece as a source, instead of as 
destination, of foreign direct investment, particularly toward neighbouring countries. While at the time 
there were fears of an exodus of jobs, we now see that those investments abroad conferred multiple 
advantages  to  Greek  firms.  First  of  all,  they  entered  new  markets,  learning  a  lot  about  what  is 
demanded there. While much of the demand is filled locally, high-value added exports from Greece 
play a significant role. Also, the move of the labour-intensive parts of the production process abroad 
allows  the  parent  firm  to  survive  and  prosper,  safeguarding  the  high-end,  mainly  managerial  and 
research,  jobs  located  in  Greece.  It  is  noteworthy  that  most  of  the  outward  investment,  which  on 
average has amounted to about half the inward flows, is concentrated in sectors where Greece has 
enjoyed  a  comparative  advantage,  such  as  food  and  beverages,  finance,  trading  companies 
construction,  cement,  even  textiles.  They  form  thus  part  of  Greek  firms’  strategies  to  maintain  and 
enhance their competitive position. Contrary to popular beliefs, outward Greek investment flows are 
not  directed  exclusively  to  low-cost  countries.  The  UK  and  the  US  figure  prominently  among  the 
recipients  of  Greek  FDI,  where  the  four  largest  foreign  subsidiaries  of  Greek  firms  in  2005  were 
located. This indicates that such flows are used mainly to enter foreign markets or acquire necessary 
know-how and technological expertise.  
I  find  it  extremely  encouraging  that  this  year  we  are  seeing  significant  gross  flows  of  foreign  direct 
investment,  even  if  the  final  net  amount  may  turn  out  to  be  small.  Indeed,  outward  FDI  flows  have 
been  about  half  the  level  of  inward  flows  in  recent  years;  as  a  result,  Greece  now  has  a  stock  of 
investments abroad exceeding 16 billion dollars, and this may well underestimate the true amount if 
we take into account the complex statistical problems that surround the collection of this data and the 
fact  that  many  Greek  firms  retain  (without  declaring)  in  the  South-Eastern  European  countries  their 
exports earnings in order to finance their investment there instead of borrowing at a higher interest 
rate  from  the  local  bank.  It  is  becoming  clear  that  Greece  should  now  actively  support  efforts  to 
enhance  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system  and  provide  guarantees  to  cross-border 
investments.  
The inward investment flows not only show that Greece is becoming an advantageous place in which 
to invest, they also bring with them important benefits, such as know-how. Outward flows should be 
seen  as  our  entry  ticket  to  foreign  markets  and  as  a  way  for  Greek  firms  to  regain  their  cost 
advantage.  
While much in Greece bodes well for future development, we must not shy away from confronting and 
solving existing problems. There is a need for government activism, if only to redress the mistakes of 
the  past.  In  addition,  the  new  environment  brings  with  it  new  challenges  and  the  need  for  action. 
Bureaucracy,  despite  some  progress  in  the  last  10  years,  is  still  stifling  entrepreneurial  initiative; 
BIS Review 81/2006 
 5
simplified procedures, personnel which are better acquainted with international practises, especially at 
higher echelons, and less duplication of work are necessary both in order to boost private activities but 
also in order to reduce the operational cost of the state.  
Much  has  been  said  about  the  fiscal  imbalances  and  I  would  be  the  last  to  downplay  the  need  for 
fiscal  consolidation.  The  accumulated  public  debt  is  a  burden  we  should  get  rid  off  as  soon  as 
possible.  Not  only  does  it  consume  a  large  part  of  tax  revenues,  it  is  also  a  source  of  uncertainty. 
Small changes in interest rates impose a heavy toll on public finances, as is the case with changes in 
investors’  sentiment  and  risk  preferences.  A  similar  argument  can  be  made  about  addressing  the 
lingering  problem  of  our  social  security  systems.  Both  the  explicit  public  debt  and  the  contingent 
pension  obligations  form  a  source  of  uncertainty  for  the  private  sector,  which  may  reasonably  fear 
revenue-enhancing tax measures in the future. Putting the public finances in order, as planned by the 
government,  by  achieving  at  least  a  balanced  budget  should  reassure  investors  and  help  promote 
investment in the country.  
While the aim should be the elimination of the fiscal deficit, this macroeconomic objective should be 
reconciled  with  the  microeconomic  objective  of  reducing  the  tax  burden  on  the  economy,  and, 
especially,  continuing  to  alleviate  the  taxes  on  entrepreneurship.  This  aim  has  become  even  more 
pressing as we are facing increased tax competition, especially from neighboring countries and new 
members of the EU. You may have noticed regular advertisements trumpeting some country’s low tax 
rates.  Combating  tax  evasion  can  provide  significant  revenues,  even  in  the  short-run,  while  at  the 
same time improving efficiency by leveling the playing field. The long-run solution is to have a more 
efficient and focused public sector that will absorb fewer resources to deliver its necessary services.  
I  now  turn  to  two  particular  areas  of  concern,  perhaps  interrelated  ones,  the  high  level  of 
unemployment, and inflation persistence.  
A  black  spot  in  the  otherwise  bright  picture  of  the  Greek  economy  is  the  stubborn  persistence  of 
unemployment.  After  almost  ten  years  of  continuous  robust  growth,  unemployment  remains 
unacceptably high. Unprecedentedly low and falling interest rates, both real and nominal, have played 
a role by encouraging capital deepening and substitution away from labor. There was also significant 
labor  hoarding  at  the  start  of  the  period  for  various  reasons.  Likewise,  agricultural  employment  still 
represents  8%  of  the  labour  force,  4  times  as  high  as  the  EU  average  and,  to  the  extent  that  it 
diminishes,  the  outflow  of  rural  labour  will  continue  to  inflate  total  unemployment.  Still,  no  one  can 
deny  that  there  has  been  insufficient  employment  creation  and  so  it  is  worth  taking  some  time  to 
analyze the reasons for that.  
First, let’s dispose of some erroneous arguments. Trade and globalization cannot be blamed for this 
situation. Greece was an unusually closed economy and still has one of the highest unemployment 
rates  in  Europe.  Indeed,  unemployment  has  fallen,  albeit  slowly,  in  the  last  couple  of  years  just  as 
Greece  started  opening  up  to  international  competition.  By  the  same  token  we  should  not  look  to 
immigrants as the scapegoats. They are performing jobs that the locals would not undertake. In some 
cases,  by  providing  low-cost  input  they  help  keep  production  in  Greece,  thus  helping  better-
remunerated Greek workers. This is much more evident in the case of agriculture where production of 
several crops would have become uneconomic save for the abundant labor supplied by immigrants.  
Instead of looking to put the blame on outsiders for our unemployment problem, it is better to admit 
that domestic policies are the main reasons for this unacceptable situation. First, there is obviously a 
mismatch  between  demand  for  specialized  labour  and  supply,  which  calls  for  a  better  professional 
orientation  of  the  tertiary  educational  level.  Likewise  the  regulatory  regime,  supposedly  created  to 
safeguard jobs, is now discouraging job creation and leads firms to try and minimize the labor input. 
We should adapt to an economic system that is changing fast and where overly-rigid labour relations 
together with laws encouraging oligopolistic practices in the business sector, have a detrimental effect 
on employment itself. There is also a need to reduce the wedge between wage costs to firms and the 
wages received by employees. This wedge is one of the highest in Europe and is due to the very high 
social security contributions. It is necessary to reduce this difference in a non-distortionary way.  
Another  issue  for  concern  is  the  lack  of  competition  and  the  rigidities  that  pervade  many  product 
markets in Greece. As I travel quite often abroad I am very often struck by how much dearer some 
goods  and,  especially,  services  are  in  Greece  than  in  other  European  countries  with  higher  wage 
levels. Opening up to foreign entrants and international trade as well as lifting entry barriers to various 
professional jobs should help induce greater competition and reduce the power of local oligopolies. A 
strengthened  Competition  Authority  is  also  a  useful  tool,  and  its  increased  activity  is  certainly 
welcome.  
6 
 BIS Review 81/2006
To sum up Greece, as the other EU countries, is facing its domestic problems but also the challenges 
arising  from  the  unprecedented  rapid  globalization.  Developments  so  far  shows  that  Greece  is 
responding successfully by recording the second highest growth rate, over 4% on average since 1996, 
in the Euroarea and more than twice as high as the Euroarea average. However, the continuation of 
this  successful  record  requires  sustained  efforts  towards  budget  consolidation  and  simplifying 
bureaucracy. Indeed, provided policies remain focused on promoting the necessary structural reforms 
and  that  there  are  no  disorderly  upheavals  on  the  international  front,  the  Greek  economy  should 
continue to perform well.  
BIS Review 81/2006 
 7
