Lars Nyberg: Financial reforms and financial crises - Swedish experiences  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri 
Lanka, Colombo, 28 March 2006. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come hear and speak today. It is a great honour to 
be asked to give a speech within the framework of this prestigious lecture series.  
On many occasions I – and several of my colleagues at the Riksbank – have described the financial 
crisis in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s, both here in Colombo and in other contexts. That is 
because this crisis made a considerable impression on the Swedish economy, resulting in low – and 
during  a  number  of  years  negative  –  growth  and  high  unemployment.  However  it  also  made  an 
impression  in  terms  of  making  us  consider  what  basic  conditions  were  necessary  to  ensure  that  a 
financial system functions smoothly.  
There were many interacting factors behind the crisis experienced in Sweden. Mistakes made by bank 
management,  by  the  supervisory  authority  and  by  politicians  made  the  situation  worse  for  the  real 
economy.  These  mistakes  were  probably  due  to  some  extent  to  the  financial  markets  having  been 
regulated  for  almost  half  a  century  and  so  this  affected  the  financial  agents'  way  of  thinking  and 
perception of reality.  
I  intend  today  to  describe  in  broad  terms  the  design  of,  the  background  to  and  the  effects  of  the 
Swedish regulations and then go on to discuss the deregulation process. After this I shall point out 
which  factors  led  to  the  crisis  and  what  it  entailed  for  Sweden.  This  is  because  I  believe  that  our 
experiences in Sweden are in many respects relevant to other countries. Although conditions tend to 
differ  somewhat  between  countries,  financial  crises  usually  have  similar  causes  and  similar  results. 
For example, comparisons have been made between the crises in South East Asia at the end of the 
1990s and the crisis in Sweden. It appears that at least three quarters of the crisis causes were the 
same, including the excessively rapid credit boom, insufficient credit assessment and overheating in 
the  economy.  The  sequence  of  events  for  the  actual  crisis  was  also  similar;  with  large  currency 
outflows,  rapidly  increasing  loan  losses  and  insolvent  banks.  I  therefore  hope  you  will  have  the 
patience to listen to my account of the Swedish experiences. I believe you will be surprised at how 
many similarities there are! 
The Swedish regulations  
During the period between the Second World War and up to the 1980s, the Swedish financial system 
was subject to a number of regulations. I shall mention some of the most important ones.  
Credit regulation was one of these. Around half of the Swedish banks' lending must be directed to the 
Government  and  provided  at  a  low  interest  rate  and  with  a  long  duration.  This  was  to  enable  the 
Government to finance ambitious housing construction programmes and budget deficits that arose as 
a result of investment and social welfare measures.  
The banks themselves could decide who received the other half of their lending. However, the rate at 
which the lending could increase was determined by the Riksbank through “credit ceilings”. The idea 
was  to  keep  credit  expansion  in  line  with  economic  developments  and  thus  prevent  inflation  from 
accelerating. Moreover, the banks were encouraged to give priority to corporate lending so that the 
investment rate would not be threatened. Most of the loans to the private sector were made to large, 
international Swedish corporations.  
However, it was not only the banks’ credit volumes that were regulated; the price of the credit was also 
regulated. The Riksbank determined both the deposit and lending rates. The charges for various bank 
services  were  also  regulated.  This  was  intended  to  prevent  unhealthy  competition  and  protect 
account-holders and borrowers.  
The banks had to obtain permission to open branches in other towns in Sweden. This was to avoid too 
many banks establishing in one area so that competition became too stiff and profitability poor.  
In  addition  to  the  domestic  regulations,  there  were  also  a  number  of  regulations  regarding  cross-
border capital flows. These were more or less entirely regulated. Companies and individuals were only 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 1
permitted  to  invest  if  they  could  prove  the  financial  necessity  of  the  investment.  Foreigners  were 
allowed  to  invest  in  Sweden  without  a  permit,  but  these  investments  might  not  be  financed  in  the 
Swedish market. Portfolio investment abroad was regarded as more transient than direct investment 
and  it  was  therefore  more  difficult  for  a  Swedish  company  to  obtain  permission  for  this  in  another 
country.  
Companies that earned money abroad were obliged to bring it home to Sweden as soon as possible 
and convert it to Swedish krona.  
Swedish banks required permits to establish subsidiaries abroad and were on the whole not allowed to 
open branches abroad. This was because it was easier to control capital movements between parent 
and  subsidiary  than  between  branches,  as  the  latter  were  not  different  legal  entities.  Prior  to  1986, 
foreign  banks  were  not  allowed  to  establish  in  Sweden.  After  this,  subsidiaries  were  permitted  and 
later on also branches.  
Swedes were in general not permitted to purchase shares in companies outside of Sweden. Those 
who were already in possession of foreign shares were allowed to exchange them for others or to sell 
their right to own shares to someone else if they sold their holdings.  
Private persons were not allowed to take unlimited currency out of the country. Amounts above the 
regulated limit – which was low – required permission from the Riksbank. It was necessary to show 
evidence that the money would be used for personal aims and not for investment or other financial 
purposes.  Private  persons  were  not  allowed  to  hold  accounts  abroad.  Of  course,  considerable 
resources were required to administer all of these regulations.  
My  description  here  shows  clearly  how  thoroughly  regulated  the  Swedish  financial  system  was. 
Furthermore, the regulations applied over a long time. They were for a good purpose. The aim was to 
create stable markets for credit and foreign currency, secure and sound banks and also to achieve 
redistribution of wealth effects through prioritising economic policy measures. However, the result was 
the removal of necessary incentives for the banks to develop their operations in a professional manner 
and  it  also  reduced  the  opportunities  to  compete,  which  prevented  new  banks  from  entering  the 
market. Thus, short-term stability was attained at the cost of the build-up of long-term tensions, which 
would gradually result in a crisis.  
The emergence of a market economy…  
The idea behind the regulations was good, but they led to the central government having too much 
control over the banks’ operations. This put the banks’ functions out of operation.  
The  banks’  most  important  task  is  to  borrow  money  from  the  general  public  and  then  lend  it  to 
companies  who  wish  to  invest.  They  must  therefore  be  able  to  assess  the creditworthiness  of  their 
borrowers. However, the regulations that had prevailed for almost forty years meant that the banks 
had  not  needed  to  develop  thorough  credit  assessment  competence.  The  central  government  had 
controlled  their  risk-taking.  The  limits  to  lending  growth  also  meant  that  they  could  choose  to  only 
provide  credit  to  the  customers  with  the  highest  credit  ratings.  Loan  losses  were  thus  small.  In 
addition, there was little competition and little incentive to develop new services. The Swedish banks 
had  too  many  employees  and  lived  in  an  environment  that  must  with  hindsight  be  regarded  as 
sheltered. After enduring the crisis, the number of employees had been reduced by one third, but at 
the same time turnover had increased.  
However,  during  the  1980s  the  regulation  structure  was  slowly  eroded.  The  banks’  balance  sheets 
were full of government bonds that they had been forced to buy at non-market prices, and the credit 
flows began to move increasingly towards the unregulated sector outside of the banks. Developments 
in the international financial markets made the currency regulation increasingly difficult – and pointless 
–  to  maintain.  It  was  not  so  much  that  there  was  a  wish  for  deregulation;  more  that  developments 
made it necessary. No one realised that this would entail a rapid and well-needed improvement in the 
efficiency  of  the  banking  system.  Nor  that  the  method  by  which  it  occurred  would  lead  to  a  major 
financial crisis.  
During  this period  a  Swedish  money market  began  to  emerge.  As  the  banks could  not  and  did  not 
want to buy more treasury papers the central government was forced to consider alternative methods 
of financing the central government debt. They began to issue first short-term and then longer term 
bonds  through  regular  auctions  and  these  were  purchased  by  pension  funds  and  insurance 
companies. The banks became mediators in the market – primary dealers – rather than final investors.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2006
…and a financial crisis  
How did the banks react to the new deregulated environment? Now they could set their own prices 
and grant loans as they wished. One might say that the bank management saw the opportunities more 
clearly than the risks. They wanted to obtain market shares and increase their income. The general 
public’s  pent-up  demand  for  credit  was  substantial  when  the  credit  regulations  were  abolished  and 
high inflation made it more profitable to borrow than to save. The 1980s were also a period of strong 
economic growth, which contributed to the credit demand enduring even after the earlier pent-up need 
had been satisfied.  
There  was  thus  a  rapid  credit  boom  over  a  number  of  years.  Between  1985  and  1990  the  general 
public’s loans from banks increased from 75% to 115% of GDP. A substantial part of the borrowed 
money  was  used  to  buy  property,  which  led  to  property  prices  being  pushed  up  beyond  what  was 
essentially justified.  
In  this  situation  it  is  of  course  important  to  use  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  to  tighten  the 
economy.  However,  at  that  time  Sweden  had  a  fixed  exchange  rate  pegged  to  a  basked  of 
international currencies, primarily the US dollar. Monetary policy – the interest rate – had to balance 
the short-term capital flows and could not be used to influence domestic demand. Nor was fiscal policy 
tightened to cool down the overheated economy.  
High inflation and rapidly rising wages meant that Swedish competitiveness was at a low level when 
international economic activity began to weaken in the early 1990s. At the same time, the Government 
made  it  clear  that  the  fixed  exchange  rate  should  be  defended  at  any  cost.  It  was  an  untenable 
situation.  Gradually,  confidence  in  the  Swedish  krona  deteriorated  and  this  forced  the  Riksbank  to 
raise interest rates to counteract the capital outflows. As inflation at the same time fell substantially – 
from 10% to 2% within the course of two years – real interest rates also rose substantially, from 1.5% 
to 8% between 1991 and 1992. The Swedish economy experienced a real interest rate shock.  
This led to the property bubble bursting, which was a serious problem for the banks, as a large part of 
their lending had property as collateral. In some areas property prices fell by up to 60 per cent over an 
18-month period.  
During autumn 1992 confidence in the Swedish krona declined further. Despite the Riksbank setting 
the interest rate at 500 per cent over a weekend, it proved impossible to stop the speculative capital 
flows and on 19 November 1992 Sweden was forced to abandon the fixed exchange rate regime. This 
was a further blow to the banks. Many of the borrowers who had borrowed in foreign currency had 
their income or assets in Swedish krona and when the krona fell they experienced problems in paying 
their loans.  
Confidence  in  the  Swedish  banks  declined  dramatically  and  they  had  problems  in  continuing  to 
finance their short-term loans on the international interbank market. The bank crisis was upon us. To 
prevent  the  system  from  collapsing,  the  central  government  was  forced  to  rapidly  intervene  with  a 
general, overall blanket guarantee that promised that all of the Swedish banks would meet all of their 
obligations, existing and future, towards all types of lender.  
All in all, the bad loans for the seven largest banks, when they were finally mapped out, amounted to 
12 per cent of GDP. Six of these banks risked falling below the minimum limit for their capital buffers 
and  therefore  needed  more  capital  from  their owners or  from  the  central government.  An important 
principle in managing this crisis was that banks that were not viable would be closed down and their 
owners  would  lose  capital.  One  bank  was  closed  down  and  its  assets  were  transferred  to  another 
bank, while the original bank was declared bankrupt.  
The effects of the crisis  
The  effects  of  the  crisis  were  considerable,  not  only  for  the  banks  but  also  for  society  as  a  whole. 
Growth fell drastically and was negative for three years in a row. Unemployment rose from just under 2 
per cent to over 8 per cent between 1990 and 1993. However, the effects were also substantial with 
regard to the financial system itself.  
As I see it, there are two reasons why the financial crisis in Sweden developed as it did and was so 
damaging. Firstly, there was a lack of the necessary competence for managing credit in a responsible 
manner,  both  in  the  banks  and  in  the  supervision  of  the  banks  –  largely  due  to  the  long  period  of 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 3
regulation. Secondly, monetary policy and fiscal policy were conducted in a way that reinforced, rather 
than moderated, developments.  
I  shall  begin  with  the  banks.  Insight  into  the  risks  entailed  in  the  new  competitive  situation  was 
insufficient. The banks lacked the systems and processes needed to identify and measure credit risks, 
as  well  as  to  manage  and  prevent  them.  As  you  know,  there  have  been  rapid  developments 
internationally with regard to awareness of these issues and knowledge of instruments to measure and 
manage risk. Even smaller banks now have comprehensive systems for assessing borrowers and can 
thereby avoid taking greater risks than they can afford.  
If the banks analysed credit risks at all then, they only looked at the risks from an individual company. 
They did not analyse risks in entire sectors or those related to macroeconomic developments. To a 
great extent, the banks’ credit assessment was also focussed on the value of the collateral rather than 
the borrowers’ ability to pay. With hindsight we can observe that not even collateral was analysed in a 
satisfactory  manner.  Sound  international  banking  practice  today  says  that  credit  should  only  be 
granted on the basis of the borrower’s ability to pay and the financial strength of the project. Collateral 
should be required, but good collateral can never outweigh a borrower with a poor credit rating or an 
uncertain  project.  The  bank  must  also  make  a  realistic  assessment  of  the  value  of  collateral.  For 
example,  it  is  common  to  provide  the  borrower’s  own  premises  as  collateral.  However,  when  a 
borrower  goes  bankrupt  the  value  of  the  premises  often  declines  substantially,  as  it  is  difficult  and 
costly to adapt them to another user.  
The banks accepted high concentrations, not merely in lending to individual borrowers, but also credit 
granting to individual sectors and geographical areas. For example, the banks’ loans to the property 
sector, or with property as collateral, accounted for more than 60 per cent of all loan losses. This is a 
concentration risk that contravenes all sound risk management and is currently prohibited.  
However, it is easy to say all this with the benefit of hindsight. At the end of the 1980s, the banks had 
substantial profitability and low loan losses. Economic activity was strong. I believe that all of us active 
in the financial system then would have found it hard to believe that a crisis was impending.  
Nevertheless, the Swedish banks had one important piece of the puzzle already in place prior to the 
crisis. They were well capitalised and had built up capital reserves that corresponded to, or exceeded, 
the statutory level of 8 per cent. This created some resilience and to a great extent reduced society’s 
direct costs when the crisis occurred, as the bank owners’ money was lost first. In some countries that 
have  experienced  bank crises,  the  central  government  has  intervened  and  saved  the  bank  owners’ 
capital contributions. In my opinion, this is both unfortunate and inappropriate and creates the wrong 
incentives for the future.  
Like the banks, the supervisory authorities and legislators lacked insight into what risks were actually 
associated  with  banking  activities  in  a  competitive  environment.  This  meant  that  the  supervision 
remained  largely  as  it  had  been  before,  with  unchanged  resources,  despite  a  drastic  change  in 
conditions. There was neither the competence nor the instruments needed to assess what risks were 
arising  within  the  banks.  The  main  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  banks  reporting  their  positions 
correctly rather than on analysing the underlying risks. There were few economists within the Swedish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  but  a  lot  of  legal  advisers.  What  was  really  needed  was  a  suitable 
mixture of the two; and also other specialists in various forms of banking activities.  
Our experiences of the crisis mean that I cannot emphasise strongly enough the importance of having 
carefully-drawn  up  legislation  in  place  that  can  provide  effective  support  for  the  supervision  to  be 
conducted.  As  well  as  support  for  potential  crisis  management.  The  legislation  should  provide  the 
supervisory authority with obligations and powers of authority to intervene at an early stage against 
institutions  that  do  not  meet  the  requirements  set,  to  avoid  problems  in  one  institution  becoming 
magnified  and  spreading  to  others.  The  intervention  by  the  authorities  must  be  predictable  and 
objective, so that the banks are not forced to operate in uncertainty. The legal rights of the parties in 
the financial market are important, at the same time as the authorities must be able to operate without 
the  threat  of  legal  countermeasures  by  the  banks  in  the  event  of  an  intervention.  The  supervisory 
authority  therefore  needs  to  have  adequate  resources,  the  right  competence  and  operational 
independence.  
There  need  to  be  clear  rules  as  to  how  the  authority  responsible  can  take  over  and  close  a  credit 
institution.  This  was  not  the  case  in  Sweden  at  the  time  of  the  crisis,  which  of  course  delayed  the 
rescue  work.  Creating  confidence  in  the  banking  system  –  which  does  not  become  unconditional 
confidence if the central government acts as final guarantor – also requires a deposit insurance that 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2006
clearly indicates how much of the customers' deposits the government is prepared to guarantee. The 
legislation must also cover more than just the banks – other institutions that receive deposits from the 
general public must also be under supervision.  
As I said, deregulation was necessary – it was rather the incapacity of the banks and the supervisory 
authorities  to  manage  a  competitive  situation  that  contributed  to  the  crisis.  However,  the  economic 
policy  conducted  also  contributed.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  were  not  used  to  slow  down 
developments at the end of the 1980s, which laid the foundations not only for increased borrowing, but 
also for the currency crisis. The combination of a fixed exchange rate and large budget deficit was 
devastating. Incentives for increased saving were not actually introduced until the crisis was actually 
upon us and then they only helped reinforce the decline.  
It may seem something of a paradox that international organisations, such as the Basel Committee, 
are now implementing a number of new regulations – such as Basel II – despite the fact that the old 
regulations  had  negative  effects  and  were  therefore  abolished.  However,  these  are  a  completely 
different  type  of  regulation.  The  old  regulations  were  aimed  at  prohibition  and  other  strict  controls, 
while modern regulations give the banks plenty of flexibility to offer their services as long as they meet 
certain fundamental conditions. For  instance, Basel II allows the banks to determine their own risk-
taking to a great extent, as long as they have adequate risk management and capital reserves.  
The experiences of regulation and the crisis also show clearly how important it is that the central bank 
can make independent decisions regarding the interest rate according to objectives set by parliament, 
for instance, to maintain inflation or the exchange rate at a stable level. If there are no guidelines for 
the interest rate, or if the parties that determine the interest rate have differing interests, it will often be 
set too low for the purpose of benefiting borrowers, investment and central government consumption. 
This was the case in Sweden during the years of regulation. Apart from leading to higher inflation and 
pressure on the exchange rate, exaggeratedly low interest rates also have a negative effect on the 
financial sector. If the real interest rate is low, even bad investments appear to be profitable and the 
banks'  credit  assessment  process  will  not  function  properly.  A  large  number  of  borrowers  will  then 
experience unsatisfactory profitability, particularly if the interest rate then increases slightly, and will be 
unable to pay their loans.  
The bad experiences from the time before and during the crisis led to the Riksbank later being given a 
very  independent  role  to  determine  the  key  interest  rate  within  the  framework  for  monetary  policy. 
Parliament set the objective for what should be achieved, namely price stability. The Riksbank then 
specified this as an inflation target, whereby the inflation rate would normally be within an interval of 1 
to 3 per cent a year. Interest rate decisions are made by the Executive Board of the Riksbank, which is 
intended to ensure that there can be no external influence. The predictable and independent interest 
rate  policy  means  that  the  banks  and  other  financial  agents  have  been  given  a  firm  foundation  on 
which to base their risk assessments, which reduces their risks of suffering unexpected losses.  
Avoiding being wise after the event  
It  is  dangerous  to  use  regulations  to  limit  competition  in  the  banking  sector.  Almost  forty  years  of 
regulations  had  led  our  banks  to  almost  entirely  lose  one  field  of  competence  they  must  have  to 
accomplish their task to society – to assess credit risks and allocate credit where it can have the most 
positive effect on economic developments.  
When we were in the midst of the build-up phase of the crisis, there were few – if any – who had the 
capacity to see the consequences of the problems we were facing. That the banks had lost their ability 
to assess credit risks and were thus not functioning as they should. That those who supervised the 
banks  did  not  have  this competence  either,  nor  the ability  to  see  beyond  the tables  and  the  formal 
reporting.  That  the  stabilisation  policy  could  not  manage  to  bring  the  economy  back  to  a  long-term 
sustainable economic development, as monetary policy was tied to the fixed exchange rate and fiscal 
policy was overly expansionary. Quite simply, that risks had been built up in several areas. At that time 
there was no authority that had responsibility for overseeing whether financial stability was in danger. I 
certainly do not wish you a bank crisis; this is a story that is much better read than experienced. But 
there are some elements in the financial system and the financial developments here in Sri Lanka that 
give cause for consideration. This applies in particular to the macroeconomic picture. I hope that my 
presentation will give you reason to reflect on these problems, so that they do not grow and become 
unmanageable. We have already made all the mistakes in Sweden. It would be quite unnecessary to 
make them again.  
Thank you!  
BIS Review 24/2006 
 5
