Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy in Sweden 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedbank, 
Stockholm, 18 September 2006. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak.  The  topic  of  the  conference  is  economic 
prospects and I will of course provide my views on these. However, I will speak in fairly general terms 
– a more detailed analysis will be presented in the Riksbank’s Inflation Report, which is published at 
the end of October.  
Before I move onto economic developments, however, I would like to take this opportunity to say a few 
words about how monetary policy is conducted in Sweden in general, or the monetary policy strategy, 
as it is usually called. More specifically, I intend to  take up some questions that have arisen in the 
discussions in the media and elsewhere as there still seems to be some confusion.  
This  applies  in  particular  to  the  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Do  we  attach  less  importance  to  the 
inflation target now, or have we even introduced other objectives in addition to the inflation target? Let 
me emphasise right now that no such changes have been made. Our focus is on the inflation target 
and the central aim is to anchor inflation expectations in the economy around this target. However, 
when we formulate our monetary policy we also give consideration to the way the rest of the economy 
is developing. It is our reasoning on this that I intend to begin with.  
The inflation target and consideration of the real economy 
The  Riksbank  has  the  statutory  objective  of  maintaining  a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate,  or  of 
“maintaining price stability” as it is expressed in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. We have specified this 
task as ensuring that CPI inflation is around 2 per cent a year, with a tolerated deviation interval of +/- 
1 one percentage point. As long as confidence in the inflation target is not threatened – or, as it is 
usually expressed, as long as the nominal anchor for setting prices and wages is not at risk – we also 
have  the  opportunity  to  take  into  consideration  how  the  real  economy,  such  as  production  and 
employment, develops.  
Although the latter has not been written into the Act, it was stated in the preliminary work to the new 
Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  that  came  into  force  in  1999  that  it  was  natural  that  the  Riksbank  should 
support the economic policy objectives of sustainable growth and high employment without neglecting 
the  long-term  price  stability  objective.  This  was  considered  a  natural  consequence  of  the  Riksbank 
being  an  authority  under  the  Riksdag  (the  Swedish  parliament).  It  was  therefore  considered 
unnecessary to specify any further objective than price stability in the law text. There were probably 
also some fears that statutory objectives for the real economy could give the wrong impression – that 
monetary policy could also govern long-term developments in growth and employment, for example. It 
is now widely accepted that these are determined by factors that are not directly affected by monetary 
policy, such as the rate of technological advances and the efficient functioning of various markets. 
In general terms, one can say that the policy conducted by the Riksbank is aimed partly at limiting the 
inevitable deviations from the inflation target and partly at ensuring that the real economy does not 
fluctuate  excessively.  The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  price  stability,  but  the  Riksbank  also 
considers  real  economy  considerations  to  be  important.  This  is  characteristic  of  what  is  known  as 
flexible inflation targeting, which as far as I know, is conducted by all central banks that have inflation 
targets. 
Monetary policy affects the economy with a certain time lag. Monetary policy decisions must therefore 
be based on forecasts of future inflation. Normally, monetary policy is aimed at achieving the inflation 
target within two years to avoid the deviations from target from being too large and too protracted. This 
two-year horizon can be regarded as a restriction that the Riksbank has placed upon itself as a means 
of upholding confidence in the inflation target. At the same time, it provides an opportunity to show 
consideration  for  the  real  economy.  If,  for  instance,  there  is  a  shock  that  leads  to  inflation  being 
pushed upwards despite weak demand, a very rapid return to the inflation target would entail large 
negative effects for the real economy – an even greater slowdown in the already weak demand – than 
if the recovery was allowed to occur at a slower pace. If inflation is instead held back despite good 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
growth in demand, attempts to quickly return it to target through very expansionary monetary policy 
could lead to the economy overheating. Over time a policy that quickly subdues inflationary impulses 
would  perhaps result  in  more  stable  inflation,  but  there  would  be  substantial  fluctuations  in  the real 
economy. 
We have chosen a two-year horizon for monetary policy because this is considered to give sufficient 
scope in most cases to ensure acceptable developments in the real economy. However, the rate at 
which  it  is  desirable  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  depends  on  what  shocks  the  economy  has 
suffered and how substantial they are. Sometimes deviations from the target may be so substantial 
that there is reason to allow inflation to return to target beyond the normal two-year horizon and in this 
case  we  explain  the  reasons  when  we  announce  our  decision.  However,  the  ambition  remains  the 
same; that is, a desire to ensure that inflation is low and stable a few years ahead, while giving some 
consideration to the stability of the real economy. 
What significance do house prices and household indebtedness have? 
How  do  developments  in  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  come  into  the  picture?  House 
prices  must  be  given  consideration  in  the  forecasts  as  they  affect,  through  the  wealth  effects, 
households’ decisions regarding consumption and saving. The size of household debts is important to 
the way in which interest rate changes affect consumption.  
However, one problem is that it can be difficult in the normal forecasting and analysis work to capture 
the risks that ensue from large fluctuations in house prices and other asset prices. One reason for this 
is that the models usually used to make forecasts do not have such sophisticated descriptions of the 
financial  sector  and  its  interplay  with  the  real  economy.  The  problems  are  particularly  great  when 
house prices and credit growth have over a long period developed in a manner that is not sustainable 
in the long term. It is simply not possible, with the analysis and forecasting tools currently available, to 
forecast  with  sufficient  accuracy  whether,  for  instance,  there  will  be  a  sudden  correction  in  house 
prices, or whether there will be a calmer, more protracted adjustment.  
At the same time, the Riksbank must take into account the risks when conducting its monetary policy. 
If the rate of increase in house prices and household debts remains at a high level over a long period 
of time, the risk increases that imbalances will build up and will force an adjustment later on, which 
could in the worst case have significant consequences for the real economy and inflation. The way in 
which  the  Riksbank  can  manage  this  type  of  risk  when  making  monetary  policy  decisions  is,  in 
principle, to make changes in the interest rate sooner or later than would otherwise be assessed as 
the most appropriate timing, given the “normal” forecasts for inflation and the real economy. It is hoped 
that such a policy will contribute to a smoother adjustment process for house prices and help to avoid 
a more abrupt correction.  
One example of when this type of reasoning has been applied is at the monetary policy meeting in 
February. We then chose to raise the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, which was also in line 
with market expectations, despite the fact that the forecasted inflation path showed the rate as being 
at the lower edge of the target margin two years ahead, and low for the majority of the forecast period. 
The inflation forecast as such could therefore have warranted delaying a few months before raising the 
rate.  
It is important to realise that this type of decision with preventive interest rate changes does not mean 
the inflation target has been “downgraded” or that we now have a special target for house prices. The 
reason is that we believe it is the best way to safeguard that we have been set to safeguard – stable 
prices while avoiding large fluctuations in the real economy.  
I  do  have  some  understanding  for  those  who  consider  this  type  of  consideration  to  mean  that 
monetary policy becomes “discretionary”. This is of course true to some extent. However, at the same 
time I find it difficult to see that we should act in a different way when we are now, as far as I know for 
the  first  time  since  introducing  the  inflation  target,  experiencing  a  period  when  house  prices  and 
household indebtedness have developed in a way that raises concerns that monetary policy has been 
too expansionary. The important thing is that the Riksbank in these situations reports the motives for 
the decisions made as clearly as possible. However, the considerations are very difficult to make and 
it is not always possible to provide simple, precise explanations.  
One might say, somewhat provocatively perhaps, that it appears as though many have interpreted our 
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability,  or  more  generally,  safeguarding  confidence  in  the  inflation 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
target as meaning that the Riksbank should conduct a policy where the inflation forecast always shows 
inflation as being on target two years ahead. However, this is an overly narrow interpretation and I am 
convinced that if we were to follow this principle in all situations the final result, seen over a long period 
of  time,  would  be  worse  than  with  a  policy  that  also  gives  consideration  to  other  prevailing 
circumstances. In this context it can also be observed that, despite the debate that monetary policy 
has become less clear and that there is a risk that confidence in the inflation target will weaken, none 
of this is reflected in inflation expectations. These remain firmly anchored around 2 per cent.  
Much  of  my  reasoning  here  on  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  described  in  a  booklet 
entitled “Monetary policy in Sweden”, which we published a few months ago1. The most important aim 
of this booklet is to explain how the Riksbank, when setting its interest rate, has scope to take into 
consideration developments in both inflation and in the real economy. 
One step in this direction was taken already back in 1999 when the clarification of monetary policy was 
published by the Executive Board for the purpose of explaining that the Riksbank conducted flexible 
inflation targeting2.  In the period since 1999 we have learned even more about how flexible inflation 
targeting is conducted. There has also been considerable progress in the academic research on this 
subject. New insights led to a decision to issue a new document on monetary policy strategy. This is 
essentially a question of developments and changes in the method of describing and communicating 
inflation targeting policy rather than in the basic strategy itself. 
Inflation in focus, not the interest rate 
Let me conclude this section of my speech with a few words on a concept that has been used in the 
discussions on monetary policy recently, namely that the Riksbank has begun a “normalisation” of the 
repo rate. The way the term ”normalise” is used in this context usually means that the policy rate is 
being increased after having been very low for a period, that is, it is simply a way of pointing out the 
natural direction for the policy rate in future.  
At the same time, there is an implication in the term “normalise” that there is a level for the policy rate 
where  it  normally  should  be.  Some  analysts  appear  to  have  interpreted  this  to  mean  that  the 
Riksbank’s  increases  in  the  repo  rate  point  reflect  that  there  is  an  end  in  itself  to  achieving  such a 
"normal" level now that the economic upturn is well established and most curves are pointing upwards, 
quite regardless of how inflation may develop. However, this is not the way we reason.  
The fact that the interest rate is below the "normal" level is not in itself a reason to increase the rate, 
even if real economic developments are favourable. It is not an argument that can stand for itself. The 
decisive factor for future interest rates is the result of our forecasts and assessments of inflation and 
economic  developments  as  a  whole.  It  may  be  the  case,  for  instance,  that  different  factors  are 
expected to hold back inflation over a relatively long period of time and that there may thus be reason, 
even in an economic boom, to allow interest rates to “normalise” – if we are to use this term – at a 
slower rate than would otherwise be justified. In recent years weak growth in import prices and rapid 
productivity growth have been such factors. On the other hand, it may also be the case, if inflation is 
high  and  held  up  by  special  factors  for  a  fairly  long  period  of  time,  that  interest  rates  must  be 
maintained at a high level even when economic activity is not so strong.  
This means that it is also very difficult in practice to determine what is a "normal” level for the policy 
rate.  It  is  possible  to  use  different  methods  to  calculate  an  approximate  interval  for  what  can  be 
regarded as a normal repo rate. However, this type of interval will of necessity be fairly broad – in a 
box in the June Inflation Report it was estimated at 3.5-5 per cent. Experiences also show that the 
repo rate can fall outside of this rather broad range for fairly long periods of time.  
Given this, it can be observed that estimates of the normal level for the repo rate have a fairly limited 
value when assessing interest rate developments in the near future and that interest rate decisions 
cannot  be  justified  merely  because  the  repo  rate  is  deviating  from  a  level  regarded  as  normal. 
                                                      
1   See  Monetary  policy  in  Sweden”,  Sveriges  Riksbank,  2006  (can  be  downloaded  as  a  file  from  the  Riksbank's  website, 
www.riksbank.com, or ordered in booklet form). 
2   Memorandum “Riksbankens inflationsmål – förtydligande och utvärdering”,  4 February 1999, registration no. 1999-00351 
DIR, or Heikensten, L., “The Riksbank’s inflation target – clarifications and evaluation” Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 
No. 1, 1999. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 3
Ultimately, it is the inflation forecast in relation to the target that decides monetary policy. How quickly 
the target should be attained is also decided by developments in the rest of the economy.  
largely  because  of  strong 
The economic situation 
Let me go on to say something about the monetary policy situation and the prospects for inflation and 
economic activity. It is the inflation assessment on which we based the decision to raise the repo rate 
by 0.25 percentage points at our most recent monetary policy meeting on 29 August that I intend to 
discuss.  An  account  of  the  discussion  held  at  the  meeting  is  contained  in  the  separate  minutes 
published last week. 
We  observed  in  the  Inflation  Report  published  in  June  that  economic  activity  in  Sweden  had 
strengthened, 
international  developments,  high  productivity  and 
expansionary  monetary  policy.  Our  assessment  was  that  these  factors  would  also  continue  to 
stimulate the economy. GDP growth this year was therefore expected to be high, which was supported 
by  both  the  national  accounts  figures  for  the  first  quarter  and  the  economic  indicators  for 
developments  during  the  second  quarter.  There  were  also  signals  from  the  labour  market  that 
economic activity was continuing to improve, with an increasing demand for labour.  
We  could  also  note  that  inflation  had  begun  to  increase,  after  having  been  strikingly  low.  The  high 
inflation rate was partly explained by rising energy prices, but prices of certain other goods had also 
been raised more quickly than before. Our assessment was that inflation would not change very much 
over the coming year and would then gradually increase as economic activity improved and there was 
a rise in the rate of wage increase. Our forecast was that inflation would be on target a couple of years 
ahead,  on  the  assumption  that  monetary  policy  gradually  became  less  expansionary  in  line  with 
market expectations in June.  
International  statistics  received  over  the  summer  indicate  that  economic  prospects  look  more 
favourable  now  than  we  had  assumed  in  June.  The  signals  regarding  the  US  economy  are  mixed, 
however, and some indicate that growth will be weaker than expected next year. However, the picture 
for the euro area and other parts of the world is that developments have been slightly stronger than 
assumed in our earlier forecasts.  
With regard to the Swedish economy, the national accounts for the second quarter have confirmed our 
assessment in June that growth would remain strong. The statistics show that GDP growth during the 
second  quarter  was  actually  higher  than  our  forecast.  However,  the  development  in  the  number  of 
hours worked and the number of persons employed was weaker than expected, which reflected the 
fact that productivity growth had been much higher than anticipated. The new indicators received point 
to continued stable economic activity and to an improvement in the labour market in future. All in all, 
this indicates that growth will be higher than we had assumed in June, even taking into account the 
fact that expectations of repo rate increases have been adjusted upwards over the summer. 
The upward revision in growth prospects has not led to any major revision in our inflation assessment. 
Although  the  high  GDP  growth  in  itself  indicates  that  inflation  may  rise  more  rapidly  in  future,  the 
strong productivity growth is at the same time expected to contribute to cost pressures being lower this 
year than was assumed in June. Cost developments in the somewhat longer term are very difficult to 
assess.  If  productivity  continues  to  develop  strongly,  companies  may  postpone  recruiting  new  staff, 
which would mean a delay in the labour market upturn and continued low cost pressures. However, 
there  are  a  number  of  indications  that  the  labour  market  is  now  strengthening  and  a  more  rapid 
increase in employment will probably contribute to rising cost pressures in future.  
During the summer inflation has been slightly higher than expected, which was mainly due to rising 
energy  prices.  The  inflationary  impulse  this  entails  is  to  some  extent  counteracted  by  the  low  unit 
labour costs, but inflation this year will probably be slightly higher than we had assumed in our June 
forecast. Our assessment is that the effects of the energy prices will subside at the beginning of 2007. 
However,  as  with  productivity  growth,  there  is  a  risk  that  we  are  underestimating  the  effects  –  this 
could mean that energy prices may continue to rise and that there could be contagion effects pushing 
up inflation further ahead. During 2007 rising unit labour costs will provide an increasing contribution to 
inflation and a couple of years ahead underlying inflation is expected to be in line with the target, given 
a gradual increase in the repo rate.  
Prospects for economic activity and inflation thus indicate that less expansionary monetary policy is 
called for in future. This will ensure that inflation is close to the target and that developments in the real 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2006
economy are balanced. Given this, we chose, in line with the repo rate path expected by the market, to 
raise  the  repo  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  August.  The 
assessment of the prospects for economic activity and inflation over the coming years that we made 
then showed it would be reasonable to also assume that the gradual repo rate increases will need to 
continue. I see no reason to change this assessment today. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 5
