Shyamala Gopinath: Approach to Basel II 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
IBA briefing session on "Emerging Paradigms in Risk Management", Bangalore, 12 May 2006.  
The assistance of Shri K Damodaran in preparing this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be here at this program on emerging paradigms in risk 
management. As expected of me, in my address today, I intend to share with you the broad contours 
of the regulatory approach, process and thinking in regard to some of the issues arising in context of 
Basel II. 
Basel II aims to encourage the use of modern risk management techniques; and to encourage banks 
to ensure that their risk management capabilities are commensurate with the risks of their business. 
Previously,  regulators'  main  focus  was  on  credit  risk  and  market  risk.  Basel  II  takes  a  more 
sophisticated  approach  to  credit  risk,  in  that  it  allows  banks  to  make  use  of  internal  ratings  based 
Approach - or "IRB Approach" as they have become known - to calculate their capital requirement for 
credit risk. It also introduces, in addition to the market risk capital charge, an explicit capital charge for 
operational risk. Together, these three risks - credit, market, and operational risk - are the so-called 
"Pillar 1" risks. 
Banks' risk management functions need to look at a much wider range of risks than this - interest rate 
risk  in  the  banking  book,  foreign  exchange  risk,  liquidity  risk,  business  cycle  risk,  reputation  risk, 
strategic risk. The risk management role of helping identify, evaluate, monitor, manage and control or 
mitigate  these  risks  has  become  a  crucial  role  in  modern-day  banking.  Indeed,  it  is  probably  not 
exaggerating the importance of this to say that the quality of a bank's risk management has become 
one of the key determinants of a success of a bank. 
The policy approach to Basel II in India is to conform to best international standards and in the process 
emphasis is on harmonization with the international best practices. Commercial banks in India will start 
implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007 though, as indicated by Governor, a marginal 
stretching  beyond  this  date  cannot  be  ruled  out  in  view  of  latest  indications  of  the  state  of 
preparedness.  Though  the  Basel  II  framework  provides  various  options  for  implementation,  special 
attention  was  given  to  the  differences  in  degrees  of  sophistication  and  development  of  the  banking 
system while considering these options and it was decided that banks in India will initially adopt the 
Standardised Approach (SA) for credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach (BIA) for operational risk. 
The prime considerations while deciding on the likely approach included the cost of implementation 
and the cost of compliance.  
Before coming to specifics I may like to mention that overall capital is what makes financial systems 
stable. In general, expected losses are to be covered by earnings and provision and hence the need 
to price risk appropriately. Unexpected losses or losses beyond the normal range of expectations need 
have to be met by capital.  
Let me briefly review the steps taken for implementation of Basel II and the emerging issues.  
• 
The  RBI  had  announced  in  its  annual  policy  statement  in  May  2004  that  banks  in  India 
should examine in depth the options available under Basel II and draw a road-map by end-
December 2004 for migration to Basel II and review the progress made at quarterly intervals.  
The Reserve Bank organized a two-day seminar in July 2004 mainly to sensitise the Chief 
Executive Officers of banks to the opportunities and challenges emerging from the Basel II 
norms.  
Soon thereafter all banks were advised in August 2004 to undertake a self-assessment of 
the  various  risk  management  systems  in  place,  with  specific  reference  to  the  three  major 
risks  covered  under  the  Basel  II  and  initiate  necessary  remedial  measures  to  update  the 
systems to match up to the minimum standards prescribed under the New Framework.  
Banks were also advised to formulate and operationalise the Capital Adequacy Assessment 
Process (CAAP) as required under Pillar II of the New Framework. 
   BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
    Reserve Bank issued a Guidance Note on operational risk management in November 2005, 
which serves as a benchmark for banks to establish a scientific operational risk management 
framework. 
We have tried to ensure that the banks have suitable risk management framework oriented 
towards their requirements dictated by the size and complexity of business, risk philosophy, 
market perceptions and the expected level of capital.  
Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks has been introduced on a pilot basis. 
As per normal practice, and with a view to ensuring migration to Basel II in a non-disruptive 
manner, a consultative and participative approach had been adopted for both designing and 
implementing  Basel  II.  A  Steering  Committee  comprising  senior  officials  from  14  banks 
(public,  private  and  foreign)  had  been  constituted  wherein  representation  from  the  Indian 
Banks’  Association  and  the  RBI  was  ensured.  The  Steering  Committee  had  formed  sub-
groups  to  address  specific  issues.  On  the  basis  of  recommendations  of  the  Steering 
Committee, draft guidelines to the banks on implementation of the New Capital Adequacy 
Framework have been issued.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  constituted  a  sub  group  of  the  Steering  Committee  for  making 
recommendations on the guidelines that may be required to be issued to banks with regard 
to the Pillar 2 aspects. The guidelines with regard to Pillar 2 aspects proposed to be issued 
would cover the bank level initiatives that may be required under Pillar 2. 
The underlying philosophy while prescribing the Basel II principles for the Indian banking sector was 
that  this  must  not  result  in  further  segmentation  of  the  sector.  Accordingly,  it  was  decided  that  all 
scheduled commercial banks in India, both big and small, shall implement the standardised approach 
for credit risk and the basic indicator approach for operational risk with effect from March 31, 2007. 
However, the existing three-tier structure in respect of SCBs, the cooperative banks and RRBs may 
continue. Currently, the commercial banks are required to maintain capital for both credit and market 
risks as per Basel I framework; the cooperative banks, on the second track, are required to maintain 
capital for credit risk as per Basel I framework and through surrogates for market risk; the Regional 
Rural Banks, on the third track, have a minimum capital requirement which is, however, not on par 
with the Basel I framework. 
By opting to migrate to Basel II at the basic level, the Reserve Bank has considerably reduced the 
Basel  II  compliance  costs  for  the  system.  In  a  way,  the  elementary  approaches  which  have  been 
identified for the Indian banking system are very similar to the Basel I methodology. For instance,  
a) 
there is no change in the methodology for computing capital charge for market risks between 
Basel I and Basel II;  
the computation of capital charge for operational risk under the BIA is very simple and will 
not involve any compliance cost; 
the computation of capital charge for credit risk will involve compilation of information in a 
marginally more granular level, which is expected to be achieved with a slight re-orientation 
of the existing MIS. 
b) 
c) 
In the above circumstances, it might not be an entirely correct assessment that implementation of the 
elementary levels of Basel II significantly increases the cost of regulatory compliance. No doubt some 
additional capital would be required, but the cushion available in the system, which at present has a 
Capital to Risk Assets Ratio (CRAR) of over 12 per cent, provides for some comfort. The banks have 
also started exploring various avenues for meeting the capital requirements. The Reserve Bank has, 
for  its  part,  issued  policy  guidelines  enabling  issuance  of  several  instruments  by  the  banks  viz., 
innovative  perpetual  debt  instruments,  perpetual  non-cumulative  preference  shares,  redeemable 
cumulative  preference  shares  and  hybrid  debt  instruments  so  as  to  enhance  their  capital  raising 
options.  
With  a  view  to  have  an  objective  assessment  of  the  true  cost  of  implementation  of  Basel  II,  banks 
would be well advised to institute an internal study to make a true assessment of the costs involved – 
exclusively for the elementary approaches. The informal feedback that we have from banks reflects 
that they do not see Basel II implementation as a ‘costly’ proposition. 
However, banks need to ensure that expenditure incurred by them to improve their risk management 
systems, IT infrastructure, core banking solutions, risk models etc. should not be included as Basel II 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
compliance costs, since these are expenses which a bank would incur even in the normal course of 
business to improve their efficiencies. 
Operational risk 
Operational risk was one area which was expected to increase capital requirement for the banks. The 
Reserve  Bank  had  announced  in  July  2004  that  banks  in  India  will  be  adopting  the  Basic  Indicator 
Approach for operational risk. This was followed up with the draft guidelines for the Basel II framework 
in  February  2005  where  the  methodology  for  computing  the  capital  requirement  under  the  Basic 
Indicator Approach was explained to banks. Even at the system level, we find that the CRAR of banks 
is at present well over 12 per cent. This reflects adequate cushion in the system to meet the capital 
requirement for operational risks, without breaching the minimum CRAR.  
There  is  also  a  perception  that  the  capital  requirement  for  operational  risk  will  be  lower  under  the 
advanced approaches rather than under the Basic Indicator Approach. I feel that, in the absence of 
details of the quality of operational risk management systems in banks and their operational risk loss 
experience, it may not be correct for the banks to assume that adoption of the advanced approaches 
would result in lesser capital than under the BIA. 
Having  addressed  the  specific  issues  on  which  I  was  supposed  to  'brief',  let  me  now  turn  to  some 
other important issues.  
Rating agencies 
In  terms  of  Basel  II  requirements,  national  supervisors  are  responsible  in  determining  whether  the 
rating  agencies  meet  the  eligibility  criteria.  The  criteria  specified  are  objectivity  in  assessment 
methodology, independence from pressures, transparency, adequate disclosures, sufficient resources 
for high quality credit assessments and credibility. 
India has four rating agencies of which three are owned partly/wholly by international rating agencies. 
Compared  to  developing  countries,  the  extent  of  rating  penetration  has  been  increasing  every  year 
and a large number of capital issues of companies has been rated. However, since rating is of issues 
and not of issuers, it is likely to result, in effect, in application of only Basel I standards for credit risks 
in respect of non-retail exposures. While Basel II provides some scope to extend the rating of issues to 
issuers,  this  would  only  be  an  approximation  and  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  system  to  move  to 
rating of issuers. Encouraging rating of issuers would be essential in this regard.  
An  internal  working  group  is  examining  the  process  for  identification  of  the  domestic  credit  rating 
agencies which would be meeting the eligibility criteria prescribed under Basel II. It is expected that by 
this process would be over soon and banks would be informed the details of the rating agencies which 
qualify. Thereafter, the borrowers are expected to approach the rating agencies for getting themselves 
rated, failing which banks would be constrained to assign 100% risk weight at the minimum for unrated 
borrowers. 
The  Reserve  Bank  had  invited  all  the  four  rating  agencies  to  make  a  presentation  on  the  eligibility 
criteria and a self assessment with regard to these criteria. The rating agencies have since made their 
presentations and these are under examination vis-à-vis the eligibility criteria for recognising the rating 
agencies, whose ratings can be used by banks for risk weighting purposes.  
Migration to advanced approaches 
After adequate skills are developed, both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks may 
be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach. The obvious corollary is that only a 
few banks are expected to migrate to the advanced approaches – though after some time, and not 
immediately. Hence, the small banks would be well advised to focus their resources on understanding 
the mechanics of the functioning of the elementary approaches and identify the minimum requirements 
that these approaches demand. It would be in their interests to take the necessary initiatives which 
make the implementation of the elementary approaches effective and meaningful. 
As  a  well  established  risk  management  system  is  a  pre-requisite  for  implementation  of  advanced 
approaches under the New Capital Adequacy Framework, banks were required to examine the various 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 3
options  available  under  the  Framework  and  lay  a  road-map  for migration  to  Basel  II.  The  feedback 
received  from  banks  suggests  that  a  few  banks  may  be  keen  on  implementing  the  advanced 
approaches but all are not fully equipped to do so straightaway and are, therefore, looking forward to 
migrate to the advanced approaches at a later date. Basel II provides that banks should be allowed to 
adopt  /  migrate  to  advanced  approaches  only  with  the  specific  approval  of  the  supervisor,  after 
ensuring that they meet / satisfy the minimum requirements specified in the Framework, not only at the 
time  of  adoption  /  migration,  but  on  a  continuing  basis.  [The  minimum  requirements  to  be  met  by 
banks  relate  to  (a)  internal  rating  system  design,  (b)  risk  rating  system  operations,  (c)  corporate 
governance and oversight, (d) use of internal ratings,  (e) risk quantification, (f) validation of internal 
estimates,  (g)  requirements  for  recognition  of  leasing,  (h)  calculation  of  capital  charges  for  equity 
exposures and (i) disclosure requirements.] Hence, it is necessary that banks desirous of adopting the 
advanced approaches do a stringent assessment of their compliance with the minimum requirements 
before  they  shift  gears  to  migrate  to  these  approaches.  In  this  context,  current  non-availability  of 
acceptable and qualitative historical data relevant to ratings, along with the related costs involved in 
building  up  and  maintaining  the  requisite  database,  does  influence  the  pace  of  migration  to  the 
advanced approaches available under Basel II. 
Banks  which  are  internationally  active  should  look  to  significantly  improve  their  risk  management 
systems  and  migrate  to  the  advanced  approaches  under  Basel  II  since  they  will  be  required  to 
compete  with  the  international  banks  which  are  adopting  the  advanced  approaches.  This  strategy 
would also be relevant to other banks which are looking at adoption of the advanced approaches. As 
you are aware adoption of the advanced approaches might help these banks to maintain lower capital. 
However,  it  would  be  relevant  to  refer  here  to  the  inverse  relationship  between  the  capital 
requirements  and  information  needs.  Adoption  of  the  advanced approaches will  require  adoption  of 
superior  technology  and  information  systems  which  aid  the  banks  in  better  data  collection,  support 
high  quality  data  and  provide  scope  for  detailed  technical  analysis  -  which  are  essential  for  the 
advanced approaches. Hence, banks aiming at maintaining lower capital by adopting the advanced 
approaches would also have to be prepared to meet the higher information needs. 
While  migration  to  the  advanced  approaches  will  basically  be  a  business  decision,  I  would  like  to 
mention a few things which may perhaps influence those decisions:  
• 
Implementation  of  advanced  approaches  under  Basel  II  will  not  be  mandatory  for  small 
banks  which  are  undertaking  traditional  banking  business  and  have  a  regional  or  limited 
presence.  
Implementation  of  advanced  approaches  under  Basel  II  should  not  be  considered  as 
fashionable  and  implementation  of  elementary  approaches  should  not  be  considered  as 
inferior. 
Any decision to migrate to the advanced approaches should be a well deliberated, conscious 
decision of the bank’s Board, after taking into account, not only their capacity to compute the 
capital requirement under those approaches but also their capacities to sustain the bank’s 
risk  profile  and  the  consequent  capital  levels  under  various  scenarios,  especially  stress 
scenarios.  
The  preconditions  for  migration  to  the  advanced  approaches  would  include  (a)  well 
established,  efficient  and  independent  risk  management  framework;  (b)  supported  by  well 
established,  efficient  IT  and  MIS  infrastructure;  (c)  cost  benefit  analysis  of  adoption  of 
advanced  approaches;  (d)  availability  of  appropriate  skills  and  capacity  to  retain  /  attract 
such skills at all points in time; and (e) a well established, effective and independent internal 
control mechanism for supplementing the risk management systems. 
   I hope the subsequent sessions would discuss in greater detail some of these issues. It is important 
for the sector as a whole to appreciate and internalize the basic philosophy of the Basel II, with all 
attendant costs and benefits.  
Undoubtedly the discipline of risk management has significantly altered the ethos of the banking as an 
economic  activity.  But  one  point  I  would  like  to  stress  in  conclusion  is  that  banks  should  view  the 
opportunities opened up by these complex financial instruments in the perspective of larger systemic 
interest.  Today  internationally,  when  market  discipline  is  being  considered  an  integral  part  of  the 
regulatory  framework,  it  is  imperative  for  banks  to  realize  that  they  are  equal  partners  in  ensuring 
financial stability; and this involves helping build up a risk management culture across all stakeholders. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2006
Any distortions brought about by misalignment of risk needs and the product being offered to address 
the risk can only harm and arrest the development of a healthy market. 
BIS Review 54/2006 
 5
