Y V Reddy: Role of accountants in fostering economic growth 
Inaugural  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  International 
Conference  on  Role  of  Accountancy  Profession  in  Anchoring  Economic  Growth,  organised  by  the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Mumbai, 19 January 2006.  
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  thankful  to  Shri  Kamlesh  Vikamsey  for  inviting  me  to  this  august  gathering.  This 
 
Conference is of relevance to all of us, not only because of the eminence of the speakers who are 
addressing  this  gathering,  but  also  because  it  represents  an  important  step  by  the  Institute  of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) to distill from the experiences of other countries in its quest for 
global benchmarking of our accounting standards. The agenda for the Conference is comprehensive 
while  focusing  on  critical  but  contemporary  issues.  I  congratulate  the  organisers  for  ensuring  a 
professionally  stimulating  feast.    In  my  address  today,  I  will  confine  myself  to  a  few  general 
observations. 
 
Broadly  speaking,  from  the  micro-economic  point  of  view,  accounting  standards  encompass 
mechanisms for providing information about the financial condition and performance and importantly, 
the risk profile of firms to all potential users. It therefore, constitutes one of the core elements of the 
financial  infrastructure.    From  the  macro-economic  point  of  view,  the  information  supplied  serves  a 
dual function. First, by facilitating the identification of most productive use of economic resources, it 
constitutes the basis for assessment of prospective rewards and risks. Second, it acts as an enabling 
mechanism for control over the effective utilisation of resources. Taken together, this forms the basis 
of income allocation among various constituents and the exercise of financial discipline.  
 
It is not appropriate to believe that the ‘invisible hand’ of the market would generate the requisite 
information,  irrespective  of  the  accounting  standards  in  place.  This  argument  of  the  presumed 
omniscience  of  markets  tends  to  disregard  the  fact  that  producing  information  can  be  costly.  More 
importantly, the costs of generating information are private, while the benefits are dispersed across all 
potential users, resulting in a tendency to under-supply. This under provision of information, as you 
would all know, was a key factor behind the build-up of financial imbalances and contributed to the 
enormity of the Asian crisis.  In fact it is the Asian crisis that brought into clear focus the close links 
between micro and macro aspects of economic growth as well as institutional aspects as distinct from 
policy aspects of economic management. 
 
Effective  market  mechanisms  must,  therefore,  be  instituted  to  ensure  efficient  capital 
mobilisation and its prudent allocation in securing long-term economic growth with assured stability. 
Needless to say, the development of efficient markets needs to be supported by high-quality market 
participants.  Intermediaries,  issuers,  investors,  regulators  and  professionals  play  important  roles  in 
generating this  growth  dynamism  in  our  financial  markets.  Within  the  context  of  both  domestic  and 
international challenges, the accounting profession therefore plays an important complementary role 
towards  building  a  credible,  reputable  and  internationally  competitive  economy,  irrespective  of  the 
capacities  in  which  they  perform.  This  includes  not  only  in  your  capacity  as  auditors,  but  also  as 
advisors, consultants, directors or even as members of the corporate sector. 
 
In auditing financial statements, accountants have the most intricate knowledge of the financials 
of companies. They are able to ascertain the drivers of performance and are equipped to provide an 
independent and objective evaluation on the opportunities and risk profiles of firms. Thus, for instance, 
in the absence of accurate financial reporting, it would become difficult for banks to make informed 
decisions about credit allocation unless they have confidence in the information provided by financial 
reporting. It is the quality, reliability and objectivity of this information which stakeholders rely upon to 
make informed judgment and allocate resources efficiently. 
Transparency is imperative to imbue confidence amongst investors in our markets. The quality 
 
of information and the integrity of the market place act as strong modes for brand differentiation. While 
the  quality  of  information  has  immediate  and  far-reaching  implications  for  a  particular  enterprise,  it 
eventually permeates to the market and the economy as a whole. It is, therefore, not surprising to find 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
that  the  accounting  profession  is  being  constantly  challenged  to  meet  the  demands  for  quality 
information.  As  key  providers  and  verifiers  of  information,  the  bottom-line  is  simple:  the  higher  the 
quality and integrity maintained by the profession, the stronger and more resilient will our markets be. 
 
The  investing  public  in  India  is  at  present  broader  and  much  more  discerning  than  earlier.  A 
crisis  behind closed doors in past decades often becomes a matter of the broadest public concern at 
present.  The  globally  noticed  accounting  irregularities  at  leading  corporate  entities  in  recent  years 
have  provided  graphic  evidence  as  to  how  much  the  absence  of  accurate,  timely  and  comparable 
financial  information  can  impede  the  effective  working  of  markets.  More  generally,  the  debilitating 
effects of deficiencies in financial reporting have been amply demonstrated by the spate of financial 
crises  and  scandals  in  recent  years.    Thus,  the  importance  of  integrity  of  auditing  functions  for 
maintaining financial stability is now well-recognised.  Professions such as yours could possibly take 
the  lead  in  self-policing.  The  mix  between  self-regulation  and  regulatory  discipline  need  not  be 
watertight, but instead be flexible to inspire high levels of professionalism and integrity so as to ensure 
increased  transparency  and  greater  accountability.    By  providing  the  foundation  for  compilation  of 
credible  financial  statements,  the  accounting  profession  facilitates  market  discipline,  engenders 
confidence among various stakeholders and reduces the possibility of misleading information that can 
disrupt stability of financial systems.  
 
In  respect  of  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  shares  a  synergistic  relationship  with 
accounting  profession.  The  RBI  conducts  both  on-site  inspections  of  banks  as  well  as  technology-
driven off-site surveillance of banks to ensure compliance with the prescribed guidelines. In addition, 
the  RBI  relies  on  accountants  to  ensure  compliance  with  financial  reporting  requirements.  In  the 
course  of  monitoring  compliance  with  the  prudential  regulations,  the  RBI  identifies  and  requires 
corrections  for  departures  from  established  accounting  standards.  It  also  pursues  the  auditors’ 
qualified  opinion  with  the  banks  and  their  auditors.  This  serves  to  provide  the  RBI  with  valuable 
insights  on  the  inhibitors  of  performance,  which  can  be  utilised  to  advise  banks  on  corrective 
measures.  
 
Some  time  ago,  a  Working  Group  was  constituted  by  the  RBI,  chaired  by  Shri  N.D.Gupta,  a 
former  President  of  the  ICAI,  to  identify  banks’  compliance  with  Indian  Accounting  Standards  and 
recommended steps to eliminate or reduce any deviations from them. Based on the recommendations 
of the Group, guidelines were issued in March 2003 on certain accounting standards. Subsequently, 
detailed  guidelines  were  issued  to  ensure  banks’  compliance  with  these  standards  in  April  2004. 
These improvements will further align our accounting practices with those prevailing internationally. I 
would like to highlight in this context the emerging importance of the accounting profession in view of 
the impending implementation of Basel-II framework for capital adequacy.  
 
With  the  opening  up  of  the  Indian  economy,  firms  are  sourcing  finance  from  abroad  through 
both the debt and equity routes, as also acquiring stakes abroad. The issue of adopting best practices 
in accounting, tailored to country-specific requirements, has acquired added importance and priority in 
this context. This demand for greater transparency and more effective financial reporting has placed 
renewed  pressures  on  those  preparing  and  attesting  financial  reports  to  comply  with  the  accepted 
accounting standards, and also ensure that these standards are properly applied.  Since some of the 
software companies and a few manufacturing corporates from India are now rated globally best, RBI 
intends to be similarly the best.  Needless to say we expect Indian accounting profession to be among 
the world's best, if it is not already so in any specific aspect. 
 
Many of you would be aware that RBI has been making pro-active efforts to facilitate positioning 
of international financial standards and codes in relevant areas of the financial system in India. As part 
of this process and to guide the overall process of implementation of appropriate changes in respect to 
various  segments  of  the  financial  system,  the  RBI  had,  in  consultation  with  Government  of  India, 
constituted a Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes in December 1999. 
The Standing Committee, in turn, constituted Advisory Groups in ten core subject areas pertaining to 
the financial system, broadly encompassing the key areas prescribed by Financial Stability Forum. Out 
of these, the Advisory Group on Accounting and Auditing (Chairman: Shri Y.H.Malegam) compared 
the Indian standards and relevant statutes with international standards and made recommendations 
for reducing the gap.  
 
In this regard, it is heartening to observe that the accounting and auditing standards in India are 
being increasingly benchmarked against international standards. I am also happy to note that the ICAI 
is  making  sustained  efforts  to  align  the  Indian  accounting  standards  with  the  international  ones.  A 
Review  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Advisory  Group  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  December  2004 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
shows that the gap between International Accounting Standards and Indian Accounting Standards has 
been gradually narrowing, reflecting the foresight of the profession in recognising the importance of 
international comparability. 
 
As my remarks would testify, the relationship between the RBI and the  ICAI has been mutually 
reinforcing, where both can draw on each other’s strengths and contribute to an efficient and stable 
financial system. I am happy to state that we have decided to constitute a small group comprising the 
representatives of the RBI and the ICAI who can meet at regular intervals and sort out pending issues 
relating to standardisation of audit formats, concurrent audit of banks and empanelment of auditors as 
well as implementation issue on certain accounting standards.  
 
Before concluding, let me say a few words on the role of auditors in economic reforms.  While 
the  reform  process  had  largely  emphasised  the  need  for  improving  the  balance  sheets,  it  is  very 
critical that these measures really get reflected in the financial statements and present a true and fair 
view of the financial position of all entities.  The reform process would be evidently incomplete if the 
balance sheet integrity is not ensured.  
 
Though it is generally thought that the primary responsibility of the auditor fraternity is towards 
the shareholders of the entity, I believe that in the financial sector in a liberalised environment, their 
role is much wider. For example, they owe perhaps greater responsibility to all the varied stakeholders 
of  banks,  viz.,  depositors,  regulators,  banking  community  within  the  country  as  also  the  banking 
community outside the domestic market who have to undertake banking/ correspondent relationships 
with the domestic banking system,; that is, in effect the entire system - domestic and global.  As you 
are well aware, the audit of a banking entity is special relative to the audit of a corporate since banks 
are  universally  considered  to  be  special.    In  the  case  of  a  corporate  audit,  the  stakeholders  are 
primarily the shareholders and in case of a crisis, the fall-out would be by and large localised to the 
corporate entity concerned.  In the case of a banking entity, the systemic impact of any crisis may not 
remain localised to the banking entity but could under certain circumstances translate into a systemic 
issue with far greater consequences.  It would be appropriate to conclude that perhaps a critical link in 
the successful implementation of the financial reform process lies with the auditors of banks when they 
ensure that the financial statements of banks reflect the highest level of integrity. 
 
be fruitfully explored to the benefit of all concerned. 
I am sure that the deliberations over the next few days will provide useful insights which could 
We too look forward to benefiting from your deliberations.  
I wish the Conference all success. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
