Niklaus Blattner: System stability and monetary policy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the University of Berne, Berne, 31 January 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 For a number of years the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has been devoting considerable attention to the 
interaction between system stability and monetary policy. The aim is to arrive at an assessment of the 
current situation. The results obtained so far have been very useful, but there is still work to be done in 
implementing them and developing them further.  
Our point of departure is an analysis comparable to that presented in the 2005 Annual Report of the 
Bank for International Settlements (BIS). From basic research papers published by the BIS we can 
conclude that, where financial systems are liberalised, a monetary policy that responds exclusively to 
short-term  risks  to  price  stability  will  promote  the  elasticity  of  economic  systems.  Only  if  monetary 
policy  also  responds  to  cumulative  disequilibria  in  financial  markets  can  this  elasticity  be  limited.  A 
monetary policy response of this kind can be achieved through coordination with macroprudential and 
microprudential instruments.  
With this in mind, we turn to the activities of the SNB. The primary objective of the National Bank’s 
monetary policy and its contribution to the stability of the financial system is to supply the economy 
with liquidity. These two elements are interlocked, thereby taking account of the insights reached in 
international discussion in this area. The SNB supplies the economy with liquidity first and foremost 
through  money  market  operations,  but  also,  under  certain  circumstances,  through  its  function  as 
lender of last resort. Emergency liquidity assistance is only provided if the stability of the system is 
severely jeopardised. The SNB guards against this situation by helping to ensure a well-functioning 
liquidity supply. It facilitates and secures the operation of cashless payment systems, regulates and 
monitors  both  the  payment  and  the  securities  settlement  systems  and  works  to  ensure  that  these 
systems  are  crisis-proof.  In  addition,  it  continually  oversees  and  analyses  developments  in  the 
financial  system  and  collaborates  closely  with  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking  Commission  (SFBC),  the 
banking supervisory body.  
Currently,  there  are  three  questions  that  direct  the  SNB’s  use  of  information  on  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system  when  it  makes  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  first  question  is  whether  monetary 
policy – as an instrument for ensuring price stability – can be improved by including information on 
banking  system  stability?  The  second  question  works  the  other  way  round:  Can  monetary  policy 
influence the stability of the banking industry? And – if the answer to this second question is yes – the 
third  (normative)  question  is  whether  monetary  policy  should  be  used  to  increase  stability  in  the 
banking industry.  
While the answers to the first two questions are in the affirmative, the response to the third is negative. 
Apart from monetary policy, the SNB has other ways of contributing to system stability. The law clearly 
specifies that the instrument of monetary policy is directed at ensuring price stability. In other words, 
using monetary policy to promote the stability of the banking system while accepting the possibility that 
the objective of price stability might not be fulfilled, would be inadmissible. What is more, any gain in 
the stability of the banking system at the cost of price stability would be temporary, at best. Experience 
has  shown  that,  in  the  long  term,  the  absence  of  inflation  is  a  necessary  pre-condition  for  stable 
banking systems.  
Finally,  the  paper  points  out  that  the  SNB  is  already  including  system  stability  considerations  in  its 
monetary  policy  decision-making  process,  and  is  examining  the  possibility  of  utilising  synergies 
between system stability and monetary policy more extensively.  
Naturally, there are many more challenges with respect to the relationships between system stability 
and  monetary  policy.  One  of  these  challenges  is  liquidity  management  at  commercial  banks.  It  is 
apparent that liquidity standards that are desirable in terms of the public interest may be more exacting 
than  those  pursued  by  banks  in  their  own  private  interests.  Like  other  central  banks,  the  SNB  is 
currently  looking  more  closely  at  the  examination  of  existing  liquidity  standards.  In  this  area,  it  is 
working  with  the  SFBC  and  engaging  with  the  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  of  other 
important international financial centres in information-exchange and opinion-building activities. 
BIS Review 7/2006 
 1
