David Dodge: Views on the Canadian economy and monetary policy 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Standing  Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 3 May 2006.  
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  Committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Senators and all Canadians informed about the Bank's views on the economy, 
and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When Paul and I appeared before this Committee last October, we said that the global and Canadian 
economies were continuing to grow at a solid pace, that our economy appeared to be operating at full 
production capacity, and that it would remain at capacity in 2006 and 2007. Total and core inflation 
were projected to average close to 2 per cent, beginning in the second half of this year. This projection 
assumed oil prices at roughly US$64 per barrel, a level then indicated by futures prices. Our projection 
also assumed stable commodity prices, government spending that was growing roughly in line with 
revenues, and a Canadian dollar continuing to trade in a range of 85 to 87 cents U.S. 
In our April Monetary Policy Report (MPR), we say that the global economy has shown a little more 
momentum  than  had  been  anticipated:  oil  prices  have  been  roughly  US$10  per  barrel  higher  than 
assumed; metals prices have risen significantly; and the Canadian dollar had been trading in a range 
of 85 1/2 to 88 ½ cents U.S. 
In our Report, the Bank projects economic growth of 3.1 per cent in 2006, 3.0 per cent in 2007, and 
2.9 per cent in 2008. Total CPI inflation will continue to be volatile and affected by developments in the 
markets for crude oil and natural gas, and will average close to 2 per cent in 2007 and 2008 (excluding 
the effect of any changes in the GST). Core inflation is projected to rise to 2 per cent in the second half 
of this year and remain there through to the end of 2008.  
This  projection  is  based  on  three  key  assumptions:  first,  that  energy  prices  will  remain  roughly  as 
indicated by futures prices; second, that Canadian governments will continue to run budgets that are 
roughly  in  balance;  and  third,  that  the  orderly  resolution  of  global  imbalances  will  involve  a  gradual 
depreciation  of  the  U.S.  real  effective  exchange  rate.  A  small  fraction  of  this  depreciation  will  be 
against the Canadian dollar and will occur late in the projection period. 
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's projection for growth and inflation. The Bank 
judges that these risks are roughly balanced, with a small tilt to the downside later in the projection 
period,  related  to  a  possible  disorderly  correction  of  global  imbalances.  We  consider  this  risk  to  be 
slightly  smaller  than  previously  judged,  given  the  tentative  signs  of  policy  adjustments  in  some 
countries and of rotation in global demand.  
In line with the Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy and its current assessment of risks, some 
modest  further  increase  in  the  policy  interest  rate  may  be  required  to  keep  aggregate  supply  and 
demand  in  balance  and  inflation  on  target  over  the  medium  term.  We  will  closely  monitor  evolving 
economic  developments  in  the  Canadian  economy  in  light  of  the  cumulative  increase  in  the  policy 
interest rate since last September.  
Mr.  Chairman,  I  want  to emphasize  that  what we  have  laid out  in  our  April  MPR  is  a  projection  for 
growth and inflation based on the assumptions that I have noted above. We publish our projection so 
that Canadians and financial markets know the basis against which the Bank judges all new economic 
developments.  When  we  set  our  policy  interest  rate  eight  times  a  year,  we  assess  all  available 
information on the global and Canadian economies relative to our base-case projection and then make 
our monetary policy decisions.  
BIS Review 35/2006 
 1
