Savenaca Narube: Improving our lives and those of our families 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Fiji 
Development Bank 2006 Small Business Awards, Suva, 23 November 2006. 
 Mr. Tukana Bovoro, Chief Executive Officer, Fiji Development Bank; 
Fellow Sponsors; 
Small Business Owners; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure for me to participate in today’s Awards. I have a dual role to play this evening. The first 
is  as  a  sponsor  and  this  is  perhaps  the  role  that  I  would  prefer  to  have.  The  other  is  as  the  guest 
speaker and here I will be brief. 
Introductory comments 
At  the  outset,  let  me  commend  the  Fiji  Development  Bank  for  this  excellent  initiative,  which 
acknowledges  the  outstanding  achievements  of  small  business  owners  in  Fiji.  This  is  a  good 
opportunity to recognise your efforts and your contributions to the economy. 
I  understand  that  FDB  has  run  the  small  Business  Awards  competition  for  3  years  now.  I  like  this 
year’s theme: “Bisinisi lailai – paisa accha”, “Small business – good money.” 
It may be useful to recall the objectives of the Awards which are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These are  laudable  objectives.  But  good  sounding  objectives  aside,  to  me,  I  would  like  to  translate 
them into a simpler interpretation: “Improving our lives and those of our families” and I would like 
to make this the theme of my address this evening. 
To promote small and micro enterprise development; 
To recognize successful, innovative and creative entrepreneurs for national development; 
To encourage self-employment; 
To encourage supply chain linkages to bigger manufacturing businesses; and 
To encourage the use and value adding of local resources. 
The Fiji economy and challenges 
Let me firstly put this theme in the context of the economy. 
This  year,  Fiji  is  expected  to  record  its  sixth  successive  year  of  economic  growth.  Investment  is 
growing. Inflation is low. Foreign reserves are adequate. Our financial system is sound. Our debt is 
moderate by international standards. 
But we face several challenges. Let me mention three now: 
• 
The  biggest  challenge  is  that  our  growth  rate  has  been  too  low.  Our  growth  rate  has 
averaged 2.4 percent over the past 5 years and is expected to be around the same level in 
the next 3 years. This growth rate is not enough to absorb many of our school leavers. At 
this rate of growth, we will double our economy in 50 years and that is a half of a century. 
This is too long. If we lift our growth rate to say 5 percent per year we will double the size of 
our economy in 20 years and that is a huge 30 year difference. If we can even grow by 8 
percent per year, we can do the same in only 12 years. So the difference can be a lifetime. 
The second challenge is that we need to raise our investment to over 25 percent of GDP. 
That ratio currently stands at 18 percent of GDP. Attracting foreign investment is not easy for 
small  nations  like  Fiji.  Other  countries  some  of  which  are  big  and  richer  are  competing 
fiercely for the same investment dollar. So our task is cut out for us. We can however be 
more successful if we also try to incite our local people to invest more in Fiji. 
 BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
 The third challenge is that we need to narrow the widening gap between our exports and our 
imports. We can do this in two ways. We can increase our exports which are not doing too 
well. We can also decrease imports which are rising fuelled by the increase in oil prices. 
To  raise  exports Government  is  implementing  a  new  national export strategy.  But  this will 
take time. In the meantime, we must try to slow down the growth of imports. The Reserve 
Bank  has  therefore  raised  interest  rates.  The  National  Budget  has  also  introduced  new 
revenue measures that will help reduce the rate of import growth. 
Potential for small businesses and micro enterprises 
The good news is that small and micro businesses can help address all the three challenges that I 
have mentioned. 
They  can  help  the  country  raise  its  growth  rate.  In  developing  countries  in  Asia,  small  and  micro 
businesses make up the bulk of their economies, some as high as 60 percent of GDP. For those of us 
that have visited some of these countries in Asia, we can attest to the roadsides crowded with hawkers 
selling all kinds of wares. In Fiji we are beginning to see small businesses springing up all over the 
place. This is very encouraging. But it is not enough and well below our true potential. 
In Fiji we will be struggling for small businesses to make up 10 percent of the economy. The potential 
in these small businesses for us is therefore huge. This sector is the answer to our jobs that the formal 
sector  cannot  provide  enough  of.  Rough  estimates  put  close  to  60  percent  of  Fiji’s  labour  force  as 
being involved in various forms of business that fall under the heading of small and micro enterprises. 
Small businesses do not always stay small. They can grow into medium and big businesses. Many of 
our  large  companies  like  Tappoos  and  Motibhais  started  from  very  humble  beginnings.  This  brings 
hope to everyone. The key is hard work, perseverance and prudence. When these small businesses 
grow they can look at the export market and also add to investment. 
Small businesses can directly help in import substitution. We can use more of our natural resources to 
fulfil our basic needs. They are not only cheap they are healthy. 
Constraints 
Let me pose this question: What are the constraints to starting and operating small businesses? Some 
of  the  more  common  answers  are  difficult  access  to  finance,  lack  of  skills  and  lack  of  access  to 
markets. 
On  finance,  I  am  glad  that  the  Fiji  Development  Bank  is  putting  its  money  where  its  mouth  is.  The 
National Centre for Small and Micro Enterprise Development is also a financing option. The Reserve 
Bank is currently examining ways that can facilitate access to financing for small businesses. 
Still  on  this  issue  of  finance,  we  have  been  amazed  at  the  increase  in  personal  remittances  from 
abroad which have provided us with much needed foreign exchange. One of the issues that we are 
encouraging is for us to spend these remittances in a more useful manner. One of the best ways of 
doing this is to use these remittances to start small businesses. The benefits will last for a long time. 
The Reserve Bank is also looking at ways in which we can help facilitate this. 
We are also talking with commercial banks on how we can work together to help small businesses. 
One of the issues that I am hopeful that we can collaborate on is the provision of training on how to 
plan and successfully run small businesses. 
Debt 
The National Budget was voted on in the House yesterday. Let me say a few things on this topical 
issue. 
Another  of  our  major  challenges  is  to  reduce  our  rising  debt  level.  I  am  encouraged  that  the 
Government has addressed this challenge in the 2007 Budget. It has made the commitment to lower 
the fiscal deficit to 2 percent of GDP in 2007 and to maintain this level over the next five years. This is 
expected to bring government debt back down to 45 percent of GDP by 2011. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
The  other  aspect  of  the  Budget  that  was  encouraging  is  the  implementation  of  the  Government’s 
Policy Support Program. It will be important that this Program is heavy on reforms in the key areas of 
the civil service, public enterprise and public financial management. 
Budget strategy supports monetary policy 
It  was  also  important  to  see  that  fiscal  policy  is  complementing  monetary  policy.  Government’s 
reduction in deficit, as well as the higher fiscal and excise duties on certain commodities are expected 
to  dampen  import  demand.  As  the  largest  component  of  our  imports  is  that  of  mineral  fuels,  the 
consideration of alternative sources of energy is also an important step. These measures will assist in 
bringing about improvements in the balance of payments. 
VAT & the poor 
Finally, on the Budget, a brief comment on VAT. As we all know, public debate on the Budget has 
been centered on the increase in VAT. This measure was put in place to help reduce the debt and at 
the same time help fund government development plan and social obligations. 
The way the debate raged, one can be forgiven in believing that VAT was the target and not poverty 
reduction. The arguments seem to suggest that lowering VAT will solve the problems of poverty. We 
all  know  that  this  is  not  true.  Poverty  is  a  wide  ranging  issue  and  solutions  are  complex  and 
comprehensive. VAT is of course paid by everybody including the poor. While the mitigating factors 
that the Government has introduced will alleviate the burden on the poor, the more relevant question 
to me is: “What is the most effective way to reduce poverty in Fiji?” And there are bound to be more 
than one solution. It would have to be a package. 
One  of  the  most  effective  components  of  this  package  should  be  to  provide  income  earnings 
opportunity to the unemployed and the poor. In this manner, they can walk out from poverty for good 
and more importantly they will do so with dignity and pride. This is where small businesses have their 
greatest impact. Starting a small business will provide basic needs such as education, food, shelter 
and  clothing.  Government  can  then  use  the  revenue  from  VAT  to  provide  access  to  clean  water, 
power, sanitation and roads. This is a most effective partnership to reduce poverty. 
At the same time, we can do a lot to avoid paying VAT. We can encourage our people to better use 
the resources around us like land and the sea to provide food for our families. I know from my own 
experience, that leisure appears to be more important than work in many of our villages. As the small 
business owners have shown, hard work can provide lasting answers to addressing poverty and this 
should be stressed as well. 
The importance of the SME sector 
Tonight, I am of course talking to the converted, either to those who already are in business or to us 
supporters. For small business owners that are here today, you have created your own income stream 
on your own initiative and carved out a livelihood for you and your families. You are also providing for 
the livelihood of many others by giving them jobs. 
Right environment is critical 
As I said at the beginning, my key message today is that small business is the answer to raising our 
living standards and reducing poverty. However, it is important that we build the right environment to 
allow  this  sector  to  grow.  This  environment  must  be  created  with  sound  policies  and  appropriate 
infrastructure and support services. It must be stable - politically, economically and socially. 
Any threat to this stable environment will scare away visitors and investors from coming to Fiji. We 
have all heard the phrase: “The World is a Global Village”. We should take this as a warning that, if 
we  don’t  have  the  right  environment  in  place,  there  are  many  countries  that  tourists  can  go  to  and 
investors can start their businesses in, instead of Fiji. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 3
In  this  regard,  the  current  political  uncertainty  is  already  having  negative  repercussions  on  tourism 
which has been our only star performer in the last six years. It threatens the hard work that we have 
put in to raise growth and investment. 
Standard & Poors 
The  political  situation  has  had  disastrous  consequences  on  the  international  perception  of  Fiji. 
Standard & Poors has already downgraded Fiji’s credit rating. 
I can understand the concern S&P had regarding the political stand-off. However, I was disappointed 
on  the  error  they  made  on  Fiji’s  reserves  position  which  they  said  in  their  press  release  was  400 
million Fiji dollars when it was nearly twice that level. Realising their mistake, S&P silently changed the 
Fiji dollar sign to US dollars on their website, without the fanfare that accompanied the earlier release. 
At the same time, they said that foreign reserves had further weakened while in fact it has remained 
the  same  or  perhaps  increased  since  they  first  rated  Fiji  in  September.  This  is  extremely 
unprofessional for a reputable rating agency like S&P. 
This error appears to have added fuel to many of our local soothsayers, who the press loves to solicit 
views from. I welcome the views of these theorists. But from reading our daily newspapers, they seem 
to be problem driven, talking about the obvious and shooting from the hip. I envy their position where 
they can simply shoot off their opinions but are not accountable for any policy implementation. These 
theorists seldom propose solutions except to speculate on the currency. 
Let me therefore clarify my position on devaluation. I believe that devaluation is not the answer given 
the nature of our problems on the export front. In my view, devaluation will only raise prices and is 
unlikely  to  help  our  balance  of  payments  or  raise  economic  growth.  There  is  therefore  no  need  for 
devaluation.  Fiji’s  external  reserves  remain  at  comfortable  levels.  In  fact,  at  the  end  of  September, 
Fiji’s reserves stood at $817 million, rising at the end of October to $840 million, which is equivalent to 
3.4 months of imports. 
The way forward 
I cannot conclude without saying something on the future economic scenario that we can look forward 
to. Economic growth will continue in the next three years but at the same level as we have seen in the 
last  five  years.  I  therefore  very  much  hope  that  the  program  of  reform  that  the  Government  has 
announced will be smartly implemented. I also hope that the national export strategy becomes a reality 
sooner rather than later. If we lift exports at least to their potential and accelerate reforms, we can look 
forward to a higher rate of growth in the next five years. 
Let me add though that we cannot just keep on talking about these issues, or writing reports analysing 
the same problems that I have talked about today. We do not need new reports to tell us the same 
things that we already know. I have only three words on what we need to do now: Implementation, 
Implementation, Implementation. 
However, right now the political uncertainty looms menacingly over everything else that we do. It is 
already damaging the only industry that has carried the nation so far. The ramifications of this political 
climate continuing are too dire. We pray for a speedy resolution. 
Concluding remarks 
I conclude by saying: 
To my fellow sponsors: 
I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  your  support  and  look  forward  to  your  continuing  assistance  to  small 
businesses. 
To the small business owners: 
Very soon we will know the decisions of the judges for the various award categories. In my book you 
are all winners. You should all be proud both of your efforts and of your contribution to Fiji’s economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2006
I  wish  you  the  very  best  tonight  and  every  success  with  your  business  plans  and  ambitions  in  the 
future. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 5
