Erkki Liikanen: Finland and EU  
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  College  of  Europe, Warsaw, 
8 December 2006. 
 On the evening of 9 May, 56 years ago, French and foreign newspapermen assembled at the Quai 
d'Orsay  for  the  foreign  minister's  weekly  press  conference.  Instead  of  the  routine  event  which  the 
journalists were expecting, the foreign minister, Robert Schuman read out in a "dull, hesitant" voice a 
two-page declaration that hit them like a bomb.  
"It  is  no  longer  a  time  for  vain  words,  but  a  bold,  constructive  act.  France  has  acted,  and  the 
consequences of her action may be immense… She has acted essentially in the cause of peace. For 
peace  to  have  a  real  chance,  there  first  must  be  a  Europe.  Virtually  five  years  to  the  day  since 
Germany  surrendered  unconditionally,  France  has  made  the  first  decisive  step  towards  building 
Europe hand-in-hand with Germany". This was how Schuman started his speech, which culminated in 
the proposal to set up the Coal and Steed Community.  
Schuman wanted to bring the raw materials of war under the umbrella of a Coal and Steel Community. 
This  Community  was  to  be  the  first  step  towards  creating  a  European  federation,  which  was 
indispensable  for  safeguarding  peace.  And  Schuman  made  this  point  explicitly:  "The  solidarity  in 
production thus established will make it plain that any war between France and Germany becomes not 
merely unthinkable, but materially impossible".  
France's initiative received considerable attention in various parts of Europe. The Finnish embassy in 
Paris did not notify Helsinki of the May initiative until September, by which time the negotiations on 
setting up the Coal and Steel Community were well advanced.  
The Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community was finally signed in April 1951. And 
six years later it was on much the same basis that the European Economic Community or EEC was 
built.  
Robert Schuman became prime minister of France in 1947, by which time J.K. Paasikivi had taken up 
office as President. Schuman's government lasted only a year, after which he was minister of foreign 
affairs in eight successive governments.  
Paasikivi and Schuman steered their respective countries' foreign policies in the late 1940s and early 
1950s, although Paasikivi did so longer and from a stronger position.  
Finland and France's political agendas differed dramatically from each other. Paasikivi's concern was 
how to develop a relationship of trust with the Soviet Union while safeguarding his country's position 
as a democratic market economy. Schuman's big problem, on the other hand, was Germany: how to 
operate so that war between Germany and France would be permanently ruled out. On the domestic 
political scene both men were anxious to prevent the Communists from gaining too strong a position.  
The  author  of  Schuman's  initiative  was  Jean  Monnet,  a  cosmopolitan  Frenchman,  who  headed  his 
country's Planning Commissariat.  
Finnish autonomy in the debate over Alsace-Lorraine  
There are, however, similarities between Schuman's and Paasikivi's respective careers and outlooks. 
Schuman was a native of Alsace-Lorraine, which was part of Germany up to the time of the First World 
War. He attended school in Metz and studied law in Munich and Berlin. Naturally Schuman was well 
acquainted with Germany and even served as a clerk in the German army during the war.  
Paasikivi  was  an  influential  figure  in  Finland  when  it  was  an  autonomous  Grand  Duchy  within  the 
Russian  Empire.  He  was  renowned  as  an  expert  on  Russia.  He  began  his  studies  specializing  in 
Russian language and literature and even spent half a year in Novgorod. Later on he too was to end 
up as a lawyer.  
In  the  1910s  there  was  serious  controversy  in  Alsace-Lorraine  over  the  relationship  with  Germany. 
Political opinion was sharply divided. One group wanted the region to be a fully-fledged German state, 
whereas the other group aspired to a return to the French sphere. They wanted to see an autonomous 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
Alsace-Lorraine with its own constitution and government independent of the Bundesrat. Interestingly 
enough, the example of Finnish autonomy within the Russian Empire was occasionally brought up in 
the debate as a sort of yardstick.  
Cognac entrepreneur Monnet  
Jean  Monnet's  origin  was  in  the  region  of  Cognac.  It  was  in  fact  Jean  Monnet's  father  who  made 
Monnet a brand name in 1901. The cases of cognac were dispatched from the Monnet business to 
Berlin, New York, St. Petersburg and London.  
The thought of the world awaiting these packages fired the young Monnet's imagination. The restless 
schoolboy eventually left school at the age of 16 and set off into the wide world. He first spent two 
years in London, from where he made for Canada and then continued on to the United States. By the 
age of 20 he had already seen a fair amount of the world.  
Monnet  returned  home  to  Cognac  just  before  the  First  World  War  and  began  working  in  the  family 
business. He was exempted from military service on account of a lung condition.  
However, Monnet's mind was constantly on the bigger issues of war and peace. He was perturbed 
that  the  Allied  purchasing  and  supply  organization  was  so  badly  run,  having  observed  the  lack  of 
cooperation between France and England in this area.  
Monnet managed to get to speak to the French prime minister and put his ideas to him. This unknown 
26-year-old  son  of  a  Cognac  dealer  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  prime  minister.  He  sent 
Monnet to talk with the minister for war and before long Monnet was in London putting together the 
Allied combined supply organization.  
Monnet came to occupy a key position in Anglo-French cooperation arrangements. With this as his 
background, in 1919 - when he was still only 31 - he became Deputy Secretary-General of the League 
of Nations. But just a few years later bad news from Cognac began to filter through. The market had 
collapsed and Monnet's sister made a special visit to Geneva to beg her brother to return and look 
after the family business.  
Monnet did not hesitate for a moment and much to his colleagues' astonishment he went back at the 
age  of  36  to  head  the  family  cognac  business.  By  this  time,  in  1924,  Paasikivi  had  already  been 
chairman of the private bank, Kansallis-Osake Pankki, for ten years and he was to remain there for a 
further ten. Meanwhile in 1919 Schuman had become a member of parliament in the French National 
Assembly, where he was to remain in that capacity without a break until 1940.  
Once he had put the cognac business back in order, Monnet did not stay for long. He also got involved 
in  the  world  of  banking.  He  began  working  for  an  American  investment  bank  in  Paris.  In  1927  he 
headed  the  zloty  stabilization  negotiations  in  Warsaw.  In  1929  he  moved  to  the  United  States  and 
pursued a banking career in San Francisco.  
Monnet later summed up his time in San Francisco, which ended in 1932, in the following words: "In 
San Francisco, I made and then lost a great deal of money; experience was all I added to my capital." 
At the same time the family received some good news. J.G. Monnet had a new client, for in that same 
year the Finnish State alcohol monopoly, ALKO, began buying cognac from the Monnets.  
Monnet  switched  continents  to  become  an  investment  banker  in  Shanghai,  China,  where  he  was 
involved in devising a way of financing the enormous railway network.  
Although of limited professional interest, Monnet's Moscow contacts were altogether more rewarding 
from a personal point of view. In 1929 he had fallen in love with an Italian lady at a dinner party in 
Paris.  But  the  lady  also  had  a  husband  on  the  scene  and  it  was  not  possible  for  Catholics  to  get 
divorced. Eventually after some rather intricate manoeuvring Monnet traveled with his beloved Silvia to 
Moscow,  where  Catholic  marriages  were  not  recognized.  They  got  married  there  in  1934  with  the 
assistance of the Russian authorities.  
At the same time J. K. Paasikivi retired from the post of chairman of the Kansallis-Osake Pankki. It 
was not until six years later that he was sent to Moscow to become ambassador together with his wife 
Alli. In contrast Robert Schuman remained unmarried for his whole life.  
2 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Outsiders on the inside  
In 1936 Monnet returned to Washington, where his family lived until the end of the war. He developed 
an  extensive  network  of  contacts  in  the  city.  He  was  a  friend  of  leading  newspaperman  Walter 
Lippman,  and  John  Foster  Dulles  was  the  lawyer  who  worked  on  many  of  Monnet's  banking 
operations.  
Monnet  was  an  influential  figure  in  President  Roosevelt's  close  circle.  It  would  only  be  a  slight 
exaggeration to say of him what Max Jakobson said of Paasikivi's position during the war: that he was 
a sort of "outsider on the inside". In any case, it was an exceptional position for a Frenchman to be in.  
When war broke out, member of parliament, Robert Schuman was involved in the evacuation of his 
constituency  of  Thionville.  In  1940  he  was  appointed  France's  under-secretary  of  state  for  refugee 
affairs.  He  was  the  high-ranking  government  official  first  to  be  notified  of  the  massive  German 
offensive  in May  1940.  The  French  government  was  transferred  to  Vichy  and  Schuman  with  it.  But 
when  all  constitutional  powers  were  conferred  on  Marshal  Petain  by  decision  of  the  National 
Assembly, Schuman realized that he had been caught in a trap.  
Schuman  left  Vichy  and  returned  to  his  constituency  in  August  1940.  There  he  was  soon  to  be 
arrested by the Germans and was dispatched to Germany. He managed to escape two years later and 
lived out the war in the Underground movement in France.  
Paasikivi was ambassador in Moscow from April 1940 until the end of June 1941, although in fact he 
was already back in Finland by March. He did not live in "internal exile", as was sometimes claimed, 
but kept up extensive contacts with the political and economic leadership of Finland during the war.  
Monnet, on the other hand, was involved in a variety of international operations during the war, with 
the  confident  backing  of  President  Roosevelt.  I  shall  relate  just  one  historic  episode  from  Monnet's 
wartime activities.  
In July 1940 the French government was wavering between continuing the war and ceasing hostilities. 
Monnet was in London at the time, doing his utmost to encourage the French government to continue 
the war. De Gaulle too had already settled in London. Monnet proposed that the British government 
should  do  something  dramatic  to  galvanize  the  French  government.  The  proposal  was  to  create  a 
close union between England and France. The union would have a common currency, it would form a 
customs union and its nationals would have common citizenship rights.  
Winston Churchill hesitated, but nonetheless forwarded the proposal for his government to discuss. To 
his surprise, the government received the proposal enthusiastically and approved it on 14 July 1940.  
Charles  de  Gaulle  did  likewise  and  became  a  historic  figure  the  very  next  day  with  the  speech  he 
made on the BBC. De Gaulle did not like the federal tone of Monnet's text, but being a pragmatist he 
understood that needs must steer where the devil drives.  
The  reaction  in  France  was  one  of  astonishment.  It  was  quite  simply  not  possible  to  put  up  a  roof 
before the walls of the house were built. It was, however, hoped that this would give the French prime 
minister  some  extra  time.  But  it  was  not  to  be.  Petain  came  to  power  and  began  to  negotiate  an 
armistice with Germany. France was lost.  
National sovereignty and raison d'etat as problems  
Monnet discussed the need for European integration on several occasions during the war. He was not 
an idealistic federalist, but above all a practical man.  
At the League of Nations Monnet had been disappointed in the organization's failure to act in practice. 
He  was  convinced  that  mutual  dependence  between  nations  was  a  fact  of  life  and  that  rampant 
nationalism was the main cause of war. Monnet was convinced that political stability and economic 
prosperity in Europe called for the creation of a common free trade area. But it was not enough just to 
do  away  with  Customs  duties,  since  union  was  necessary  in  other  areas  too.  His  list  included 
currency, prices, industrial and agricultural production and communications.  
Monnet stressed that there could be no peace in Europe, if states continued to be structured around 
the sort of national sovereignty that leads to the politics of privilege and economic protectionism. If the 
states of Europe again cut themselves off from each other, it would again be necessary to amass huge 
armies. And before long we would be back at war.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
Coincidentally, in the summer of 1944 Paasikivi was discussing the fate of small countries. His reading 
of history had made him a pessimist: "States act for raison d'etat, i.e. in the interests of the State. It is 
frightful, blood-red". He went on: "To date no system has been devised that would constrain raison 
d'etat and protect other countries from them."  
Where  Monnet  spoke  of  nationalism  and  national  sovereignty,  Paasikivi  wrote  about  raison  d'etat. 
Ultimately, they were both talking about the same thing. Paasikivi saw the key issue as how to limit 
raison d'etat, whereas Monnet saw the basic problem as how to limit national sovereignty. Paasikivi's 
starting  point  was  the  lot  of  the  small  country,  but  his  thinking  went  further  than  this:  "Solving  the 
problem  of  limiting  raison  d'etat  and  its  relationship  to  morality  is  an  issue  that,  although  primarily 
affecting the future of small countries, will ultimately also determine the future of larger countries and 
the whole of mankind."  
History  had  made  Paasikivi  not  only  pessimistic,  but  also  cautious.  When  Monnet  was  accused  of 
being  over-optimistic  in  connection  with  his  numerous  initiatives,  he  always  replied:  "I  am  not  an 
optimist, I am determined".  
For his part, Schuman summarized his own thinking in his unpublished memoirs: "The harsh lessons 
of history have taught me, as a man from a border area, that I should be wary of hasty improvisation 
and over-ambitious projects, but they have also taught me that when an objective judgment, founded 
in mature reflection and based on actual facts and the overriding interests of mankind, leads us into 
new or even revolutionary endeavors, we should remain steadfast and persevere with them."  
The birth of a great idea  
The paths of the cautious foreign minister from Alsace-Lorraine, Robert Schuman, and the bold man of 
action, Jean Monnet, crossed in the post-war years. In February 1950 Monnet went on a two-week 
cross-country skiing trip in the Alps. Although having a guide to mark out the ski route, Monnet was on 
his own in blazing the conceptual trail that led to the pioneering thoughts he put down on paper each 
evening.  
By the time he returned his proposal was ready: France should take the initiative on setting up a coal 
and steel union. This would resolve the difficult dispute over the management of coal and steel and 
normalize relations between France and Germany.  
Another statesman also had his best ideas while out skiing and jogging, our president after Paasikivi, 
namely Urho Kekkonen.1  
In March 1950, Monnet began indirectly conveying his ideas to Schuman and eventually at the end of 
April he presented his complete plan. On May Day Schuman sent a message to Monnet: "I've read the 
proposal. I'll make it my own".  
The  core  of  Schuman's  initiative  was  that  the  member  States  would  agree  to  pool  their  national 
sovereignty in the area of coal and steel under the umbrella of a community. The community was to be 
run by a High Authority (the forerunner of the European Commission) that would be independent of 
the member countries' governments. The Community would be set up on the basis of a Treaty to be 
ratified by the parliaments of the member countries. Schuman thought it important that the make-up of 
the High Authority should ensure balance between the smaller and larger countries.  
Schuman's initiative was enthusiastically welcomed by the public. The reaction in the political world 
was  more  mixed.  It  cleared  up  many  issues  for  Germany  and  Adenauer.  The  Christian  Democrats 
supported  the  plan  unreservedly.  The  opposition  Social  Democrat  party  conference  was  against  it. 
Only one young little-known Member of Parliament spoke out strongly in support of the plan. His name 
was Willy Brandt.  
It  was  not  an  easy  ride  in  France.  The  centre,  which  Schuman  represented,  and  the  Socialists 
supported the plan. The Communists were against it, as were the Gaullists, since they did not approve 
of transferring national sovereignty to a High Authority. The reaction in Italy was immediately positive. 
In the Benelux countries it took somewhat longer for the idea to become established. Britain's negative 
stance hardly came as a surprise.  
                                                      
1  President of Finland 1956–82. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2006
Schuman entrusted Monnet with the task of leading the negotiations on establishing the Community, 
which was also given an Assembly and a Court. The Assembly was to monitor the High Authority and 
the Court of Justice was to supervise the implementation of the Treaty.  
However, as so often happens, at the political level and for the then foreign minister, Schuman, there 
was still some tricky negotiating to be done: decisions had to be reached on where the Community's 
headquarters were to be based, the official language and the composition of the High Authority.  
The compromise that was negotiated by Schuman is now standard Community practice: instead of just 
French,  as  had  been  proposed,  the  languages  of  all  the  member  countries  were  made  official 
languages  and  the  headquarters were split  in  two. The  Assembly  went  to  Strasbourg  and  the  High 
Authority and Court of Justice to Luxembourg. The Treaty finally came into force in July 1952 and the 
High Authority opened for business in Luxembourg a month later with Jean Monnet as its President.  
At  the  same  time  Schuman's  position  as  France's  foreign  minister  was  under  threat.  He  was 
particularly  targeted  by  the  Gaullists  and  the  Radicals  because  of  his  policy  on  Europe.  Pinay's 
government eventually fell in December 1952. The formal reason was budget controversy, but behind 
this there were also disagreements over European policy.  
Schuman stepped down as foreign minister in January 1953. He offered to give up his post so that he 
could  support  Rene  Meyer,  who  represented  the  same  policy  on  Europe,  as  the  choice  for  prime 
minister. That was the last time Schuman was to serve in a French government.  
"An intelligent and charming guest in Finland"  
Several weeks later the Finnish Foreign Trade Association was trying to find a speaker to its meeting. 
Heikki Brotherus, the press counselor to the embassy in Paris, knew Schuman, since he had met him 
at Quaker functions. And now that Schuman had left the government, Brotherus thought that he would 
be an ideal candidate.  
The  leadership  of  the  Foreign  Trade  Association  were  delighted.  But  then  the  difficulties  began. 
Brotherus received a letter from Mr Tarjanne, permanent secretary of Foreign Ministry, accusing him 
of  arbitrary  conduct.  Brotherus  responded  to  the  charge  in  writing.  Everyone  knew  about  the  affair, 
except the ambassador, Johan Helo. But that was how many things were dealt with at the embassy in 
Paris at the time. Helo had been appointed ambassador in the new wave after the war as one of the 
so-called Six.2 Helo's relations with the foreign minister were difficult, but Paasikivi protected Helo right 
until the end of his period of office.  
According  to  Brotherus,  the  foreign  minister  even  went  as  far  as  asking  the  French  ambassador  in 
Helsinki  to  cancel  Schuman's  planned  visit  to  Finland.  Paasikivi  does  state  in  his  diaries  that  the 
foreign  minister,  Törngren,  said  on  24  March,  in  connection  with  his  weekly  visit,  that  the  Foreign 
Trade Association wanted to make a big event out of Schuman's visit, but that the government was not 
interested in organizing any dinner reception or in devoting any other particular attention to Schuman. 
Despite  the  awkwardness  of  the  arrangements,  Schuman  came  to  Finland  on  a  visit  in  April,  three 
months after he had left the government. Schuman's visit was given enormous coverage in the press.  
In his presentation Schuman stressed that all wars had had their beginnings in precisely six states. 
"By defusing this hotbed of war, we have done something really fundamental for peace in Europe," he 
stated.  
The  government  did  not  in  fact  organize  a  dinner  or  devote  any  particular  attention  to  Schuman, 
unless  one  counts  the  supper  invitation  by  social  affairs  minister,  Vaino  Leskinen,  at  the  Helsinki 
community hall, where Schuman was to meet some trade union people.  
President Paasikivi was, however, present at Schuman's presentation and also had an audience with 
him.  Paasikivi  wrote  in  his  diaries  about  the  pleasant  impression  Schuman  had  made  on  him. 
Schuman believed that the antagonism between France and Germany would gradually be removed 
and that the Coal and Steel Community would be a step towards this. Paasikivi went on: "I explained 
                                                      
2   The Six is the name given to an opposition group of Social Democrats who left the party and allied themselves with the 
Communists in the elections after the war. 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 5
my own view and the position of Finland. He understood it well. Schuman is indeed an intelligent and 
charming man".  
It  was  typical  of  the  period  that  Pravda  reported  on  the  visit  a  week  later.  According  to  Pravda, 
Schuman's visit was undeniably connected with the discussions, which the right-wing socialists had 
launched,  against  stepping  up  trade  between  Finland  and  the  Soviet  Union.  So  Leskinen  did  not 
escape criticism. The article had been put together by Stefan Smirnov, a great expert on Finland.  
Jean Monnet never met Paasikivi. However, in October 1962 in connection with President Kekkonen's 
visit  to  France  the  newspaper  Helsingin  Sanomat  wrote  a  one-column  news-in-brief  item  on 
Kekkonen's meeting with the "father of Europe". The item said that the President had visited Carré's 
house outside Paris.  
Louis  Carré  was  a  distinguished  Parisian  gallery-owner  and  prominent  admirer  of  Alvar  Aalto,  the 
Finnish architect. Aalto had, in fact designed Carré's home. Carré was a neighbour of Monnet's, which 
is why Monnet was also invited to meet the important guest.  
According to the newspaper, despite being 74, "Mr Europe" came across as being extremely alert and 
sprightly.  Monnet  and  Kekkonen  had  a  long  talk  in  English,  although  the  newspaper  did  not  report 
about its content.  
President  Kekkonen  was  visiting  France,  at  that  time,  upon  the  invitation  of  President  Charles  de 
Gaulle.  This  was  a  time  when  de  Gaulle  and  Monnet  were  in  deep  disagreement  over  European 
issues. President de Gaulle considered national sovereignty untouchable while Monnet considered its 
limitation  to  be  the  key  to  European  integration.  Monnet  believed  that  independent  European 
institutions were the corner-stone of Europe, de Gaulle was, on the other hand, a strong opponent of 
their independence.  
So  President  Kekkonen  had  an  opportunity  to  hear  both  views.  Unfortunately,  we  have  no  records 
about his discussions with Jean Monnet.  
Finland's long road  
Europe managed to fit in a lot between Paasikivi's meeting with Schuman and Kekkonen's meeting 
with  Monnet.  France's  plan  for  a  European  Defence  Community  (the  EDC)  had  collapsed  under 
opposition from the French National Assembly. However, at the instigation of the Benelux countries 
negotiations were launched on setting up a European Economic Community (the EEC).  
The negotiations culminated in the conclusion of the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Under the terms of this 
Treaty the member states pooled their national sovereignties together in certain clearly defined areas, 
namely customs policy, trade policy, competition policy and agricultural policy. The bottom line for the 
states that founded the EEC was that together the countries of Europe would be greater and stronger 
than alone. With Community backing the member states would derive economic and political 'value 
added' which they could not achieve individually.  
Finland was far away from all of this. The Soviet Union saw the EEC as a western alliance and not as 
a partner. Finland had little room for manoeuvre and every move was closely scrutinized and watched. 
In Finland European integration was little known – if at all.  
 Finland had a long road to go until, in 1992, our country applied membership in the European Union.  
A turning point came in 1991, which altered the basic issue of how to reconcile Finnish foreign policy 
with  EU  membership.  At  that  time  the  whole  context,  in  which  our  foreign  policy  operated,  turned 
upside down. The "putsch" in Moscow did not succeed. The Baltic States became independent. A new 
agreement was negotiated redefining Finland's relations with its neighbour Russia. The EU went from 
being a threat to Russia to becoming a partner.  
Today, Finland has been 12 years a member of the EU. Finland is having the EU presidency for the 
second time.  
This week the Finnish Parliament has ratified the constitutional treaty. The constitutional treaty does 
not give new powers to the Union, but sets out to improve its efficiency and openness. Streamlining 
decision-making procedures is the best way of protecting the EU institutions' effectiveness.  
6 
 BIS Review 120/2006
It  the  EU,  the  guiding  principle  is  law  –  not  force.  Legitimacy  and  the  rule  of  law  govern  relations 
between the member states. The task of the Commission as the guardian of the treaty is to monitor 
the  legality  of  all  activities  and  compliance  with  the  treaties  on  which  the  EU  is  based.  The 
Independent European Court of Justice solves the disputes which concern legality of the actions.  
EU  is  non-hegemonic  and  it  must  be  efficient  in  decision-making.  There  have  been  efforts  to  unite 
Europe  under  one  hegemony.  They  have  created  huge  sacrifices  and  destruction.  To  be  non-
hegemonic, you need a majority decision-making. No one country can rule or dominate and no one 
country can prevent the majority from making a decision, not a big, not a small, not an old, not a new. 
Only a qualified majority as the dominant decision making procedure guarantees this.  
We must safeguard the European Union's capacity to act in the spirit of the founding fathers.  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 7
