Philipp Hildebrand: Risk management 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 14 December 2006. 
 As  I  have  reported  at  a  number  of  recent  media  conferences,  the  SNB  has  updated  its  investment 
policies for foreign exchange reserves over the past few years. I would like to take this opportunity to 
look back, once again, at our motives for these adjustments and to outline the context of conflicting 
objectives within which the investment policy of a central bank operates. I would like to devote special 
attention to risk management, which performs a key function in investment policy at the SNB. 
Looking at the current structure of our foreign exchange reserves, it is evident that we have moved a 
certain distance from the traditional structure of central bank portfolios. Traditional portfolios consisted 
almost  exclusively  of  short-term  government  bonds  in  USD  as  well  as,  possibly,  EUR  or  JPY.  By 
contrast, we at the SNB have gradually diversified our currency risks over the past few years, have 
lengthened the maturities of our investments and invested in additional bond categories and in shares.  
As a result of these adjustments, we are probably one of the most innovative central banks in the area 
of  investments  nowadays.  However,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  fact  that  we  have  never  pursued 
innovation for its own sake. The adjustments are our response to a challenge that all central banks 
with a significant level of currency reserves will probably have to face, sooner or later. The challenge is 
to  safeguard  the  protective  function  of  currency  reserves  while  simultaneously  making  use  of  their 
earnings  potential.  In  simple  terms,  what  is  needed  is  first,  to  structure  the  reserves  in  a  way  that 
ensures their availability when overcoming any kind of monetary crisis, and second, to invest them in a 
way that ensures they will generate the highest possible returns. Returns must be generated, if only 
for the simple reason that earnings are needed to finance the necessary growth in currency reserves. 
Furthermore, we owe it to the public to manage our currency reserves in a professional manner.  
The  protective  function  of  our  currency  reserves  is  fundamental.  It  is  a  direct  corollary  of  the  SNB 
mandate,  in  which  monetary  policy  takes  precedence  over  investment  policy  at  all  times.  However, 
without  questioning  the  primacy  of  monetary  policy,  there  was  still  some  leeway  for  greater 
management efficiency, particularly in the area of foreign exchange reserves. We have now exhausted 
a large portion of this room for manoeuvre. The first development that allowed us to take these steps 
was the 1997 revision of the National Bank Act. When the new Act came into force in 2004 the final 
statutory barriers with regard to permissible investment instruments were entirely removed.  
However,  in  investment,  as  in  all  walks  of  life,  the  old  adage  applies:  "There  is  no  free  lunch". 
Generally  speaking,  the  better  the  earnings  prospects,  the  higher  the  risk  of  losses.  Certainly,  the 
improved  currency  diversification  was  an  extremely  low-cost  lunch  for  the  SNB.  Nevertheless,  the 
introduction of additional investment classes and instruments, together with more active management 
of  investments,  brought  new  risks  as  well.  Consequently,  we  have  extended  and  enlarged  our  risk 
management activities in recent years, alongside the changes in our investment policies.  
We now run a comprehensive risk management operation which is based on best-practice methods in 
the finance industry while also taking account of the special requirements of a central bank. We attach 
great 
identification, 
measurement, evaluation, limitation and monitoring of risks as well as timely, comprehensive reporting 
allowing for regular risk assessment and control. A key aspect is the fact that our risk management 
reports  independently  to  the  Governing  Board  and  the  Bank  Council  Risk  Committee.  This  is  also 
important because all operational functions in the area of investment policy are concentrated in one 
department for reasons of efficiency.  
One of the special risks for a central bank is the fact that investment policies must not conflict with 
monetary policies. The liquidity requirements of monetary policy as well as the ability of investments to 
withstand crises are key parameters for investment strategy. Also, since we are unable to predict the 
timing  of  interventions  or  the  volume  of  currency  reserves  that  will  be  needed,  we  cannot  resort  to 
asset-liability  approaches  in  our  strategy  definition  process.  Technically  speaking,  this  means  we 
cannot determine an optimal commitment period for our investments. In point of fact, our investment 
horizon is usually relatively long-term, although it can be abruptly shortened in the event of a crisis. 
Finally, we also pay special attention to reputation risks when engaging in specific investments. One of 
to  nurturing  an  appropriate  risk  culture, 
including  ongoing 
importance 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 1
the  SNB's  most  important  assets  is  its  good  reputation  and  its  credibility.  Damage  to  its  reputation 
could  also  have  a  negative  impact  on  monetary  policy.  Consequently,  in  cases  of  doubt,  we  avoid 
investment  classes  and  instruments  that  may  be  expected  to  have  a  damaging  impact  on  our 
reputation.  We  are  also  very  risk-conscious  when  it  comes  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest.  For 
instance,  all  staff  engaged  in  practical  investment  activities  are  shielded  from  confidential  monetary 
policy information.  
Effective  risk  management  requires  that  all  relevant  risks  be  identified  and assessed regularly,  in  a 
manner that is as unbiased as possible. Experience has shown that technical failure is seldom at the 
root of serious losses. The greatest losses result from a lack of risk consciousness, from a total failure 
even to recognise significant sources of risk. This danger exists when risk assessment is restricted 
exclusively  to  easily  measurable  quantitative  risk  variables,  excluding  areas  such  as  processes  or 
legal  risks,  which  are  referred  to  as  'operational  risks'.  For  this reason,  we  also  include  operational 
risks in our assessment.  
However,  while  pursuing  this  broader  route,  we  certainly  do  not  neglect  the  regular  quantitative 
measures  for  assessing  financial  investment  risks.  No  single  key  figure,  taken  alone,  is  capable  of 
providing a comprehensive picture of the risks involved. Therefore, our risk assessment is based on a 
range  of  key  figures  developed  to  measure  risk,  each  of  which  has  its  own  justification  along  with 
certain limitations.  
In  order  to  evaluate  the  overall  risk  of  our  investments,  we  use  the  value  at  risk  method  (VaR). 
Additional  risk  analyses  are  also  necessary  because  of  the  method-related  limitations  of  VaR  (it 
provides no information about possible extreme losses; moreover it tends to underestimate the risk of 
large  losses,  particularly  in  times  of  low  volatilities).  We  therefore  conduct  a  number  of  additional 
stress and scenario analyses. For all of these risk calculations we take account of the SNB's tendency 
towards a long-term investment horizon. The methods used to assess and limit the risks linked to our 
active  management  of  investments  include  the  'tracking  error'  method.  This  shows  us  the  extent  to 
which our actual investments deviate from the given benchmarks.  
Our Risk Management unit has a complete and up-to-date picture of all investment positions. This is 
based on a dedicated IT solution which aggregates all positions from different supplier systems on a 
daily basis and evaluates them according to different criteria. This permits any critical developments to 
be identified in good time.  
Within the bounds set by monetary policy, we work to achieve the greatest possible diversification of 
financial  risks  and  to  attain  adequate  compensation  for  the  risks  we  enter  into.  In  other  words,  we 
always  assess  the  risks  in  conjunction  with  the  expected  benefit.  One  example  of  a  poorly 
compensated risk, from the point of view of a Swiss franc investor, is the USD currency risk on bonds. 
Our  experience  has  been  that  expected  earnings  on  bonds  in  other  currencies,  such  as  euros  or 
sterling, are comparable, while currency risks are significantly lower. Consequently, and also because 
another  important  reserve  currency  was  available  in  the  form  of  the  euro,  we  have  substantially 
reduced our share of USD investments over the past few years. Along with the expansion in the range 
of permissible bond classes and the addition of shares, the risk/return profile of our foreign exchange 
reserves  has  improved  substantially.  This  has  helped  to  ensure  that  results  on  foreign  exchange 
reserves  have  remained  positive  for  the  past  ten  years.  Naturally,  part  of  the  background  to  this 
development  has  been  the  favourable  interest  rate  environment  that  has  prevailed  since  the  mid-
1990s. 
Our analysis of the overall risk for all investments shows that the traditional risk factors such as the 
gold  price  and  the  dollar  exchange  rate  continue  to  dominate.  Gold  poses  the  most  substantial 
contribution to risk. By way of illustration: The gold price in terms of Swiss francs has fluctuated by 
over 10% in about half of the years that have elapsed since 1980. In terms of the SNB's annual result, 
this  means  that  gold  can  be  expected  to  contribute  more  than  +/-  CHF  3  billion  to  the  result  every 
second  year.  By  comparison,  the  fluctuations  in  the  value  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  more 
moderate.  
The  National  Bank  holds  1,290  tonnes  of  gold  reserves.  This  means  that,  as  the  price  of  gold 
changes, the composition of the currency reserves changes in value terms – as does the risk profile of 
the  currency  reserves.  In  other  words,  a  sizeable  advance  in  the  price  of  gold  led  to  a  substantial 
increase in the share of gold and thus also a significant rise in the risk that earnings would fluctuate. At 
the same time, our gold reserves represent a very special asset which, from a historical point of view, 
is likely to provide a crucial protective function in periods of extreme crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2006
What conclusions can we draw from these considerations? The 2004 revision of the National Bank Act 
gave  the  SNB  more  leeway  in  its  investment  policy.  Since  then,  we  have  made  use  of  this  leeway 
within  the  bounds  set  by  monetary  policy,  at  least  with  respect  to  foreign  exchange  reserves.  An 
essential prerequisite was – and remains – a risk management operation which is committed to best-
practice methods and takes full account of the special features of a central bank in its considerations. 
The requirements of monetary policy will continue to have a strong impact on SNB investment policy in 
the  future.  The  room  for  further  improvements  in  the  risk/return  ratio  is  limited.  As  a  result  of  their 
function,  the  currency  reserves  encompass  large  financial  risks,  while  the  comparable  returns  are 
relatively low. Compensation for the gold price risk and the dollar exchange rate risk, in particular, is 
relatively poor. It is therefore inevitable that tighter bounds will be set on SNB profit distribution, once 
the existing distribution reserve has been exhausted.  
BIS Review 123/2006 
 3
