Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Great  Hall,  Winchester, 
10 October 2006. 
 My Lord-Lieutenant, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thirty years ago, inflation reached 27% – the highest that any G-7 country has experienced in the past 
fifty years. A few months later, Southampton won the FA Cup for the first, and only, time. You will be 
pleased to know that I see no causal relationship. Later in 1976, Jim Callaghan, as Prime Minister, 
delivered a famous speech to the Labour Party Conference in which he said “We used to think that 
you could spend your way out of recession … I tell you in all candour that option no longer exists, and 
in so far as it ever did exist, it only worked on each occasion since the war by injecting a bigger dose 
of inflation into the economy, followed by a higher level of unemployment as the next step”. One of the 
economists who  developed  that  insight  –  an  American,  Professor  Edmund  Phelps  –  was yesterday 
awarded the Nobel Prize. Low and stable inflation – 2.5% at present – is now the cornerstone of our 
economic policy. 
In that 1976 Cup Final every one of the players came from the British Isles. Today, it is hard to find 
British  players  among  the  top  Premiership  teams  –  globalisation  is  everywhere.  We  are  all 
eyewitnesses to the tremendous economic impact of the integration of hundreds of millions of people 
in China, India, and the former Soviet Union into the world trading system. 
Globalisation has magnified world supplies of manufactured goods and capital as well as the labour 
force. Prices of all three have changed, and we have not been immune to those changes. Between 
1995 and 2005 the prices of consumer goods imported into Britain fell by around one-third relative to 
the average price of other goods and services. But the greater supply of manufactured goods from 
newly-industrialised countries has come at the cost of a greater demand by those same countries for 
energy and raw materials of all kinds. The prices of oil, steel, copper, lead and nickel have all more 
than doubled. 
And in a buoyant British labour market it is not just foreign-born footballers who have been in demand. 
Over  the  past  two  years,  around  half  a  million  migrant  workers  (or  possibly  considerably  more,  we 
simply  do  not  know)  have  arrived  from  the  new  member  countries  of  the  European  Union  and 
elsewhere  in  the  world.  It  is  unlikely  that  migration  on  that  scale  has  had  no  effect  on  wages,  or, 
indeed, on rents and house prices. 
Some of you may be tempted to think that because the growth of the Chinese economy has affected 
key prices in our own economy, inflation in Britain is now largely determined overseas. Low inflation in 
industrialised countries, it is argued, is made in China. As with the Arthurian legends, epitomised by 
King Arthur’s Round Table above us, that too is a myth. Despite large changes in relative prices, the 
average  change  in  prices  –  inflation  –  has  been  remarkably  stable.  Indeed,  it  is  striking  that  in  a 
decade in which prices moved so much, overall inflation was more stable than in any decade for a 
hundred  years.  It  was  a  decade  that  in  my  first  speech  as  Governor,  I  described  as  NICE  –  a 
non-inflationary consistent expansion.1
How  can  inflation  be  stable  when  individual  prices  move  around  so  much?  The  explanation  is  that 
inflation  is  the  result,  in  the  old  adage,  of  too  much  money  chasing  too  few  goods.  Inflation  arises 
when the total amount of money spending (or nominal demand) in the economy is greater than the 
value today of the available goods and services. When the Bank of England changes Bank Rate to 
keep consumer price inflation close to the target of 2%, we influence – albeit imprecisely and with a 
time lag – the amount of money spent in the economy and so the inflation rate. 
In short, inflation is made at home. 
Nevertheless,  we  cannot  and  do  not  control  the  price  of  every  item  in  your  shopping  basket.  That 
distinction  between  changes  in  individual  prices  and  changes  in  the  average  level  of  prices  is 
                                                      
1   Speech at an East Midlands Development Agency/Bank of England Dinner in Leicester, October 2003. 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 1
fundamental to an understanding of recent movements in inflation and the response to them of the 
Monetary Policy Committee. 
Let’s  take  a  closer  look  at  the  NICE  decade.  Two  factors  were  particularly  important  in  delivering 
stability. First, companies and employees responded flexibly to sharp movements – both up and down 
–  in  input  costs.  That  new-found  flexibility,  unlike  in  the  1970s,  meant  that  firms  absorbed  cost 
pressures  partly  in  profit  margins,  partly  through  efficiency  improvements,  and  partly  by  resisting 
increases  in  the  prices  of  other  inputs.  With  a  clear  commitment  by  the  Bank  to  meet  the  inflation 
target, raising prices (so losing market share) was a less attractive strategy for meeting the challenge 
of higher input costs than searching for ways of reducing other costs. And employees recognised that 
the consequences of higher world prices, such as for energy, on living standards could not be avoided 
by higher money wages. So wages rose more slowly when employers faced higher National Insurance 
contributions and energy prices than when the costs of imported inputs were falling. 
Second,  monetary  policy  supported  a  broadly  steady  path  for  total  money  spending  –  during  the 
decade 1995-2004, the growth rate of nominal domestic demand fell within a narrow range of between 
5¼% and 6¼% in all but one year – so that the new flexibility meant that price rises in some parts of 
the economy were balanced by price falls elsewhere, leaving inflation overall close to the target. When 
the prices of some goods fell, such as imports in the late 1990s, people had more disposable income 
to  spend  on  other  goods  and  services.  That  pushed  up  demand  in  those  sectors  and  encouraged 
companies to raise prices. Conversely, when some prices rose, as with energy prices over the past 
two years, the resulting squeeze on income available to spend on other goods and services helped to 
bear down on inflation in those sectors. With steady growth of money spending, a change in relative 
prices can be consistent with stable inflation overall. 
Monetary policy – a credible commitment to the inflation target and a broadly stable growth of total 
money spending – was then, and is always, the key to low and stable inflation. That point was made 
forcefully in a speech in February by the late David Walton, whose untimely death in June was a great 
loss to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Over the past couple of years our economic performance has not been quite as “nice” as in the NICE 
decade, but it was “not so bad”.2 In 2005, output growth slowed to 1.9% and inflation rose to 2.5%. 
Back  in  1976,  to  describe  this  as  “not so  bad”  would  have  been  the  understatement  of  the  year.  It 
followed a period of rather strong nominal domestic demand growth which, by placing pressure on the 
supply capacity of the economy, accounted for some of the subsequent pickup in inflation. At the same 
time,  sharp  rises  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities  reduced  the  income  households  had 
available  to  spend  on  more  discretionary  items  and  put  downward  pressure  on  those  prices.  Not 
surprisingly,  that  loss  of  spending  power  was  one  of  the  contributory  factors  to  the  standstill  in 
consumer spending in the second quarter of last year. But since then consumer spending and output 
growth in the economy have picked up, and in the first half of this year were growing at around their 
long-run average rates. 
After a prolonged period during which consumer price inflation was below its 2% target, inflation has 
been  above  target  for  nine  out  of  the  past  thirteen  months.  So  what  are  the  challenges  facing  the 
Monetary Policy Committee as it tries to bring inflation back to the 2% target? 
Since their peak in early August, oil prices have fallen by around a quarter. In due course, that will 
ease the pressure on petrol prices and fuel bills, including gas and electricity. The direct impact was 
seen in the producer price data published yesterday, and will be seen in CPI inflation over the coming 
months – making it less likely that I will have to write an explanatory letter to the Chancellor than was 
the case two months ago – although the anticipated fall in inflation for September may not persist for 
long. 
Over the past year, profit margins, especially in manufacturing, have been squeezed and outside the 
oil sector the share of profits in GDP has fallen. The recent fall in oil prices will ease the pressure on 
firms’  input  costs  allowing  them  to  restore  profit  margins  without  an  increase  in  output  prices. 
Nevertheless, according to surveys, businesses are more likely to raise prices than during the NICE 
decade. And in their own survey, the Bank’s Agents found that half of those (largely manufacturing) 
firms which had experienced some erosion of margins were now intending to raise prices.  
                                                      
2  
Not so bad: not of the same order but also desirable. Speech at the Eden Project, Cornwall, October 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2006
A change in oil prices does not in itself tell us where overall inflation is headed in the medium term. For 
that, we need to look at the balance between money spending and potential supply. 
The  growth  of  total  money  spending  in  the  economy  has  picked  up  in  recent  quarters  –  nominal 
domestic demand rose by 6% in the year to Q2. And the growth rate of broad money and credit in the 
economy is now higher than at any point since 1990. 
There  is,  however,  great  uncertainty  about  potential  supply.  The  possibility  of  continuing  migration 
from  the  new  member  countries  of  the  European  Union  and  elsewhere  is  likely  to  increase  the 
potential labour force available to UK employers. And it appears that more people of pensionable age 
are choosing to continue to work. The difficult judgment facing the Monetary Policy Committee is to 
what extent that increase in labour supply, and hence potential output, will allow a faster expansion of 
total money demand without upward pressure on inflation. 
Given the uncertainties about the supply potential of the economy, we will need to keep our eye on the 
ball and monitor closely the evolution of wage and cost pressures. But it is no easier for the Monetary 
Policy Committee to read those than for most English batsmen to read Shane Warne’s deliveries, and 
it is just as difficult for someone who, in terms of MPC meetings is 114 not out as it is for those still 
playing themselves in. The new factor is that, although wage pressures have so far been subdued, it is 
still not clear that earnings have been sufficiently restrained to accommodate the past rises in energy 
prices  and  the  fall  over  the  past  year  in  the  prices  of  our  exports  relative  to  our  imports  without  a 
squeeze on profits. Ultimately, both developments must result in lower real incomes. 
At this point, let me save the economic commentators a degree of anguish. Nothing in this speech is 
meant as a hint about our decision in November, which will be based on an assessment of the outlook 
for  inflation  two  years  or  so  ahead.  That  decision  will  be  taken  only  in  November,  and  much  can 
change between now and then. Rather, I have tried to explain the challenges facing the MPC when it 
decides on interest rates. 
Although we can control our own inflation rate in the medium term, temporary fluctuations in output 
and inflation will occur. We saw that in 2005. Moreover, we cannot insulate ourselves from the real 
economic consequences of the extraordinary changes taking place thousands of miles away from our 
own island. They will affect what we produce, what we buy and, most important, our standard of living. 
But  to  say  that  we  are  exposed  to  changes  in  the  rest  of  the  world  is  a  far  cry  from  saying  that 
monetary policy is impotent to control inflation. 
It is highly appropriate that I have been talking this evening about the recent decisions of the Monetary 
Policy Committee in the shadow of King Arthur’s Round Table. For the Round Table symbolised the 
equality of the knights. To quote one authority, “there is no head of the table at a round table, and so 
no  one  person  is  at  a  privileged  position.”  Equally,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  comprises  nine 
members, each with one vote, and the decision is determined by a majority of those votes rather than 
by consensus. No individual has a monopoly of wisdom and the pursuit of a consensus may hinder the 
discovery of the truth. Of course, I would not claim that the Bank of England is the long-lost site of 
Camelot, nor that meetings of the MPC are characterised by jousting and feasting. But I hope you can 
see  that  in  its  deliberations,  the  MPC  has  adopted  the  spirit,  if  not  the  literal  shape,  of  the  Round 
Table. 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 3
