European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Paris, 
5 October 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  press 
conference here in Paris. I would particularly like to thank Governor Noyer for his kind hospitality and 
express our special gratitude to the staff of the Banque de France for the excellent organisation of the 
meeting of the Governing Council. 
Let me now report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by the President of the 
Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
At  today’s  meeting,  we  decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This 
decision  reflects  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  that  we  have  identified 
through both our economic and monetary analyses. Today’s decision will contribute to ensuring that 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing 
contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Also 
after today’s increase, the key ECB interest rates remain at low levels, money and credit growth are 
strong, and liquidity in the euro area is ample by all plausible measures. Our monetary policy therefore 
continues to be accommodative. If our assumptions and baseline scenario are confirmed, it will remain 
warranted  to  further  withdraw  monetary  accommodation.  The  Governing  Council  will  therefore 
continue to monitor very closely all developments so as to ensure price stability over the medium and 
longer term. 
Turning  first  to  the economic analysis,  the  quarter-on-quarter growth rate  of real  GDP  in  the  euro 
area for the second quarter of 2006 was confirmed at 0.9%. Moreover, since our previous meeting on 
31  August,  Eurostat  has  revised  upwards  the  growth  data  for  the  two  preceding  quarters,  thereby 
confirming  that  a  significant  acceleration  in  economic  expansion has  taken  place  over  the  past  few 
quarters. On the basis of the revised data, economic activity has been growing at a quarterly rate of 
0.7%  on  average  over  the  last  four  quarters,  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  on  a  falling  trend, 
employment growth has recovered and employment expectations overall have remained favourable. 
All in all, the economic recovery now appears somewhat stronger than on the basis of earlier data. It 
has  become  more  broadly  based  and  is  mainly  supported  by  domestic  demand.  The  available 
information  on  activity  in  the  third  quarter  –  coming  from  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-
based estimates – continues to support the assessment that economic activity will grow robustly while 
possibly moderating somewhat. 
Looking ahead to the remainder of 2006 and 2007, the conditions remain in place for the euro area 
economy to grow at solid rates around potential, with some volatility in the quarterly growth rates likely 
to emerge around the turn of the year. Global economic activity has become more balanced across 
regions  and  is  still  robust,  thereby  providing  ongoing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  is 
expected to remain strong, benefiting from an extended period of very favourable financing conditions, 
balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business 
efficiency. Consumption growth in the euro area should also strengthen further over time, in line with 
developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions continue to improve.  
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  are  broadly  balanced  over  the  shorter  term,  although  the 
recent fall in oil prices – if it were to prove lasting – has the potential to lead to somewhat stronger 
demand and output growth than embodied in our baseline scenario for activity in the coming quarters. 
Over  the  longer  term,  risks  to  growth  lie  on  balance  on  the  downside,  and  relate  mainly  to  the 
possibility of a renewed increase in oil prices, fears of a rise in protectionist pressures, especially after 
the suspension of the Doha round of trade talks, and possible disorderly developments owing to global 
imbalances.  
As  regards  price developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP  inflation  fell  to 
1.8% in September 2006, from 2.3% in August. Although no detailed breakdown is available as yet, 
this  relatively  sharp  decline  seems  to  be  the  combined  result  of  favourable  base  effects,  given  in 
particular the strong rise in oil prices a year ago, and the recent significant fall in oil prices. While the 
outlook for energy prices is uncertain, on the basis of current energy prices and the higher quotations 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 1
on futures markets, overall inflation rates are likely to increase again towards the end of the year and 
in  early  2007.  As  a  consequence,  we  expect  a  considerable  degree  of  short-term  volatility  in  the 
annual HICP inflation rate, while the overall inflation rate will remain elevated at levels above 2% on 
average in 2006 and is likely to remain so in 2007.  
In addition, risks to the outlook for price developments remain clearly on the upside. They continue to 
include a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into consumer prices than currently anticipated 
and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus far. 
Furthermore,  renewed  increases  in  oil  prices  cannot  be  excluded.  More  fundamentally,  given  the 
favourable momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters and the positive signs 
from labour markets, stronger than currently expected wage developments pose substantial upward 
risks to price stability. Against this background, it is crucial that the social partners continue to meet 
their responsibilities, in particular in the context of a more favourable environment for economic activity 
and employment. 
The  monetary  analysis  continues  to  point  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons. Annual M3 growth rose again to 8.2% in August and, more generally, the rate of monetary 
and credit expansion remains rapid, reflecting the still low level of interest rates in the euro area. In 
particular,  loans  to  the  private  sector  continue  to  grow  at  double-digit  rates  on  an  annual  basis, 
remaining  broadly  based  across  the  household  and  corporate  sectors.  Taking  the  appropriate 
medium-term perspective, these developments remain consistent with the persistent upward trend in 
the underlying rate of monetary expansion, identified by the ECB’s monetary analysis since mid-2004. 
Moreover, following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation in the euro area is 
ample by all plausible measures. Continued strong monetary and credit growth in an environment of 
still ample liquidity, as a result of the persistently high rate of monetary expansion over the past few 
years, point to upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. Monetary developments 
therefore  require  careful  monitoring,  particularly  against  the  background  of  improved  economic 
conditions and strong property market developments in many parts of the euro area.  
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks to this 
outlook remaining clearly on the upside. Given the ongoing dynamism of monetary and credit growth 
in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over  the  medium  term.  It  is  essential  that  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. If our assumptions and baseline scenario are confirmed, it will remain 
warranted  to  further  withdraw  monetary  accommodation.  The  Governing  Council  will  therefore 
continue to monitor very closely all developments so as to ensure price stability over the medium and 
longer term. 
As regards fiscal policy, euro area countries are now in the process of finalising their 2007 budgets 
and  preparing  their  next  stability  programme  updates.  In  the  current  favourable  economic 
environment, it is essential that adequate headway be made towards sound public finances, implying 
that  budget  targets  for  2007  should  generally  be  more  ambitious  than  in  previous  programmes. 
Countries  in  excessive  deficit  need  to  remain  fully  committed  to  bringing  their  deficits  to  below  3% 
within the agreed deadline via adequate and credible structural consolidation. Other countries need to 
make clear progress towards their medium-term objectives in line with the requirements of the Stability 
and Growth Pact. In all cases, any revenue windfalls from faster than expected growth should be used 
to  speed  up  deficit  reduction  or  to  increase  surpluses.  Pro-cyclical  policies  should  be  avoided  and 
expenditure  restraint  is  of  particular  importance,  also  given  the  high  spending  ratios  and  taxes  as 
compared with many other industrialised countries. Experience has shown that expenditure reform is 
key to successful consolidation, and consolidation is essential for reducing overall public debt and for 
making public finances less vulnerable to the impact of ageing populations.  
Fiscal  consolidation  is  likely  to  be  most  successful  when  coupled  with  comprehensive  structural 
reforms.  These  are  urgently  needed  to  help  to  cushion  the  unfavourable  economic  effects  of  the 
projected demographic change in the euro area. The decline in the working age population will place 
further  pressure  on  pension  and  health  care  systems,  and  may  have  wide-ranging  economic 
consequences.  In  order  to  support  the  potential  economic  growth  of  the  euro  area,  to  foster 
macroeconomic flexibility and dynamism, and to safeguard the future standard of living of our citizens, 
labour and product market reforms are urgently needed. This will increase labour market participation 
and  employment  and  strengthen  innovation  and  the  other  forces  driving  productivity  and  economic 
growth.  The  ECB  will  play  its  part  by  continuing  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.       
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2006
