Christian Noyer: Does money matter? A European perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  4th  ECB  Central  Banking 
Conference “The role of money: money and monetary policy in the twenty-first century”, Frankfurt am 
Main, 9 November 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure and honour for me to take part in this Central Banking Conference. 
My communication will be organised as follows: I will first review some stylized facts about money and 
inflation that show that money still matters; second, I will relate these stylised facts to the two-pillar 
monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem.  I  will  conclude  my  presentation  by  addressing  some 
interesting challenges we face in implementing our monetary analysis. 
Some stylized facts about money and inflation 
Let  me  start  with  a  well  known  paradox  which  can  be  articulated  in  three  propositions:  first,  price 
stability is the objective of all Central Banks; second, as Milton Friedman put it "inflation is always and 
everywhere a monetary phenomenon"; and third, nevertheless, in most countries, money has little or 
no part in the design or implementation of monetary policy. 
There is, of course, one noticeable exception: the euro area. Before getting into more details about our 
approach,  I  would  like  to  mention  two  reasons  why  I  think  money,  as  such,  remains  an  essential 
component for the design and implementation of monetary policy. 
• 
First,  money  is  still  of  direct  relevance  to  monetary  policy  in  exceptional  circumstances: 
either strong (or hyper) inflation or deflation. When Paul Volker brought down US inflation 
from 13 % to 3 % in three years, he did it by setting a cap on Central Bank money growth. 
And symmetrically, when the Japanese authorities had to fight deflation, they resorted to a 
"quantitative easing" policy, which basically meant they were targeting a specific amount of 
Central  Bank  money.  There  has  been  considerable  debate  over 
theoretical 
underpinnings  of  those  policies:  namely  whether  a  specific  channel  of  transmission  of 
monetary  policy,  independent  of  interest  rates,  could  be  identified.  In  any  case,  those 
experiments show, in my view, that setting a path for money growth (or its level) can prove 
very  effective  in  controlling  expectations  -  or  pin  down  the  price  level  -  in  an  extreme 
environment. 
In more normal circumstances, however, the relationship between money and prices is more 
subtle and uncertain. In modern market economies, the demand for money exhibits - at least 
in the short and medium run - some chronic instability, if not unpredictability, a point to which 
I  shall  come  back  later.  This  has  led  to  the  demise  of  monetary  aggregates  as  targets  of 
monetary policy, and, in some countries, they have been abandoned as indicators as well. 
the 
 But  we  still  think,  in  the  euro  area,  that  Friedman  is  right  in  the  very  long  run.  Our  research  has 
established  that  low  frequency  movements  in  money  growth  and  inflation  are  closely  correlated, 
retaining fluctuations with a period of 8 to 10 years. This is because, in our view, money can directly 
influence  output  and  inflation  in  particular  due  to  monetary  and  financial  frictions  existing  in  the 
economy and also some stickiness in the price determination process. 
Those facts underpin the two pillar approach of the Eurosystem 
As  you  know,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  grounded  on  two  pillars:  economic 
analysis, on the one hand, and monetary analysis, on the other. A wide set of short-term indicators 
(economic  analysis)  are  complemented  by  the  longer-term  determinants  of  inflation  (monetary 
analysis). This setup is based on a premise and has one important implication. 
The premise is that even if money has no systematic and immediate influence on prices, it can provide 
valuable and specific information on future inflation, at time horizons stretching beyond those usually 
adopted  for  the  construction  of  central  bank  inflation  projections.  Because  of  the  long-term  relation 
between  money  growth  and  inflation,  money  has  leading-indicator  properties  on  future  price 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 1
developments.  One  could  make  the  case  that  this  is  only  an  "empirical  argument".  But,  in  Central 
Banking,  empirical  realities  do  matter  much.  One  could  also  argue  that  other  strategies  -  such  as 
targeting  the  price  level  or  an  average  level  of  inflation  over  the  long  run  -  would  have  the  same 
stabilizing properties as looking at money growth. I do not disagree in theory. But it is not clear to me 
that  those  strategies  would  be  easier  to  implement  or  have  the  same  anchoring  effect  on  inflation 
expectations. 
The implication is the need to cross-check the information on inflationary pressures and risks to price 
stability; this cross-checking implies that we bring together and compare different analytical strategies 
and that we use systematically all the information relevant to decision-making. 
Of  course,  monetary  policy  does  not  react  mechanically  to  monetary  developments,  but  rather 
responds to the information in monetary aggregates that is relevant for maintaining price stability over 
the  medium  term.  This  is  the  rationale  behind  the  definition  of  "a  reference  value"  for  monetary 
aggregates. 
The monetary pillar supports a risk management approach to monetary policy. It allows for an early 
assessment  and  detection  of  potential  imbalances.  It  sheds  light  on  those  risks  at  a  longer  time 
horizon  than  the  one  usually  contemplated  by  monetary  policy,  but  still  relevant  for  the  ultimate 
objective of price stability. 
This  is  of  special  significance  and  importance  when  financial  imbalances  build  up  in  the  economy, 
which are fueled by excess money or liquidity growth. Unwinding of those imbalances can be brutal 
and  discontinuous  –  the  so  called  non  linear  reaction  –  and,  as  such,  very  destabilizing.  Empirical 
evidence  suggests  that  asset  booms  have  typically  occurred  when  money  and  credit  growth  were 
above their long-term average. Whatever the loss function and ultimate objectives of Central Bankers, 
all would agree that monetary policy should not willingly contribute to the formation of such credit and 
asset booms. 
To make best use of the informational role of money, however, we have to face numerous and 
increasing challenges  
One  major  difficulty  is  to  identify  in  real  time  the  nature  of  monetary  developments  and  their 
implications for future price developments. The challenge of monetary analysis is to see through the 
noise  in  monetary  data  to  recover  those  underlying  trends  which  are  relevant  for  monetary  policy 
decisions.  Meeting  this  challenge  has  not  been  straightforward  in  recent  years  as  the  euro  area 
economy was hit by several shocks: financial instability in the aftermath of the stock market collapse in 
2000, exceptionally high economic and geopolitical uncertainty between 2001 and 2003, just to name 
a few. 
First  of  all,  short-run  monetary  developments  are  often  affected  by  transitory  shocks.  We  need  to 
identify  and  account  for  such  temporary  “special  factors”  or  “distortions”  that  may  affect  monetary 
developments  and  blur  their  information  content.  To  some  extent  it  is  the  aim  of  the  methodology 
developed  at  the  ECB  which  allows  for  periodic  adjustments  to  measured  monetary  aggregates  in 
order  to  account  for  portfolio  shifts  which  impact  the  demand  for  money  without  any  incidence  on 
future inflation. This approach has met with great success in the period 2000-2004. 
Second,  and  more  permanently,  it  is  necessary  to  disentangle,  in  monetary  and  credit  evolutions, 
those which reflect structural and permanent changes from those which simply result from moves in 
the  level  of  interest  rates  and  the  position  in  the  economic  cycle.  Here,  no  mechanistic  or  ad  hoc 
approach  would  do  the  trick.  We  need  to  look  at  the  fundamental  determinants  of  money  demand. 
Ideally, we should have a full and comprehensive model of portfolio allocation and choices which, as 
an  aside,  would  produce  a  determination  of  the  demand  for  money.  We  might  be  a  long  way  from 
building such a model. 
But we can have some intuitions. We could start from the fact that money is both substitutable and 
complementary to financial assets. Because it is substitutable, money demand depends on changes in 
relative returns - i.e. the actual and expected moves in interest rates. But money is also a complement 
to  financial  assets,  and  as  such  reacts  to  permanent  changes  in  the  supply,  availability  and 
characteristics of those assets. Our economies are becoming more and more "financial" in the sense 
that the ratio of financial wealth to GDP is constantly increasing. Since economic agents - especially 
financial  intermediaries  and  corporates  -  need  to  keep  part  of  their  total  financial  assets  in  liquid 
holdings, there may be a structural increase in the demand for money (everything equal). The euro 
and the integration of European capital markets may have accelerated this evolution. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2006
This could help explain the apparent break in the trend of the income velocity of money that took place 
in the euro area in 2000/2001. In effect, since 2001, income velocity has been declining by 3.5% a 
year, much faster than the rate embedded in the reference value. 
According to one possible interpretation, this trend is a reflection of two consecutive shocks: from 2000 
to 2004, a temporary "demand" shock, mainly reflecting portfolio shifts; and, since 2004, a "supply" 
shock i.e. an increase in liquid assets triggered by the fall in the opportunity cost of holding money in a 
context of historically low interest rates. 
But the fact that this situation has now lasted since 2001 may suggest another explanation: that the 
apparent  break  in  trend  velocity  that  took  place  at  that  time  is  of  a  structural  nature.  On-going 
econometric research carried out at the Banque de France confirms this intuition. The sharp decrease 
in interest rates, of course has played a role. Nevertheless, econometrics seems to show that this only 
accounts for a very small part in the break in the trend visible since 2001. So we might be facing a 
permanent increase in the demand for money. 
Consistent with this hypothesis is the fact that money holdings by corporates and financial institutions 
have grown much faster, in recent years, than those of households. Money and credit growth could 
then  be  related  to  a  common  cause:  financial  development  and  the  increasing  weight  of  financial 
assets in our economies. 
A lot of work, however, remains to be done to fully understand the changes we are facing. This, in my 
view, is the beauty of our monetary analysis. It invites us - indeed it forces us – to face the complexity 
of our world and the ever changing nature of our environment and our behaviour. This is precisely the 
aim of this conference. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 3
