Krzysztof Rybiński: A day in the life of Homo Sapiens Globalus 
Address  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the 
11th Teleinformatics Forum, Legionowo, 21 September 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today,  I  would  like  to  present  a  vision  of  the  citizen  of  the  world  in  the  year  2026.  Homo  sapiens 
globalus will be found almost everywhere on the globe, and his traits will be identified by his ability to 
capture  the  benefits  brought  by  the  global  financial  market,  global  labour  market,  and  global 
knowledge market. He will work, obtain information, establish and foster his professional relations as 
well as arrange his leisure activities primarily with the aid of the Internet. Homo sapiens globalus has 
mastered the fine art of capturing the benefits of the (continuously improved) functions available on the 
Internet. He is able to absorb frequent changes, and he turns them to his advantage. This makes him 
increasingly effective, knowledgeable, and capable of pursuing activities he finds interesting. 
Let us now consider a typical example of homo sapiens globalus, namely John Global. I would like to 
introduce him to you, but in order to do so, I have to take you on a short journey. This will be time and 
space travel. Just imagine that by the time I will have finished the previous sentence, twenty years 
have passed. This means that we are now in the year 2026. In order to prepare for the meeting with 
John Global, I suggest that we take a closer look at his daily routine. 
Let us take a sunny day of September 2026. 
Time: 5 a.m. Place: somewhere in the city of Poznan. 
John Global is still asleep, but the world is already getting ready to wake him up. The news aggregator 
is ready to provide him with a set of most recent news in line with his interests. As John Global tends 
to look through newspapers before 07:00 CET when he is in Poznan, and before 16:00 CET when he 
is in Hong Kong, the aggregator is already preparing a ‘special edition’. And Global always begins his 
day  with  looking  through  online  newspapers  and  drinking  well-brewed  coffee.  Coffee  is  one  of  his 
indulgences, a look back to recall past events, as coffee has been his morning ritual for more than 20 
years. As far as other things are concerned, our Global tries to be more flexible and not to fall into any 
habits. 
It's 6:30 a.m. 
John Global wakes up. He enjoys the view from the window – the forest and lake. It is indeed different 
from the one he saw two days ago in Hong Kong – skyscrapers and smog blotting out the sun. He left 
Warsaw for Poznan 20 years ago, in 2006, when he realized that administrative issues are too time-
consuming and generate negative emotions. It was at that time – as early as in August 2006 – that 
Poland's  first  fully  electronic  public  service  was  launched  in  Poznan.  This  service  helps  make 
transactions via the Internet. This means that it is possible to download and fill in an electronic form, 
authorize  it  (for  instance  with  electronic  signature),  make  a  payment  (including  stamp  duty)  and 
receive  confirmation  that  a  given  service  has  been  provided  by  the  e-authority  –  and  all  this  takes 
place  via  the  Internet.  If  a  physical  document  is  necessary  (extremely  rarely  though  it  happens  in 
2026), the relevant document is delivered to the indicated address by courier within 24 hours. When 
Global was moving to Poznan, he was hoping that e-government would grow fast here, and that it will 
be possible to set up a company via the Internet within several minutes or to file a passport application 
from any photographer’s shop immediately after the photo has been taken, etc. He knew that things 
already looked like this in many places around the globe, but not yet in Poland. He analyzed strategic 
documents of local authorities in Poznan, took a closer look at their aims and methods to measure the 
results, and decided that Poznan was very likely to meet his expectations. He knew that government 
bodies  were  frequently  inefficient  only  because  they  did  not  know  or  employ  modern  yet  already 
proven methods of administration. Poznan, however, was different. Here, everything was well thought-
out, consistent and done so as to fulfil a clear vision of e-government that was supposed to be citizen-
friendly and to make their life easier. And Global was not in the wrong. He is still satisfied with his 
choice.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  he  hesitated  over  the  decision  to  move.  The  final  straw  was  an 
argument at Warsaw district office where Global had gone to in order to obtain some certificate. The 
certificate was ready, but Global – who had paid the stamp duty by an online transfer – had no proof of 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 1
payment. Without such confirmation the officer would not issue the certificate. The argument reached 
its climax when the officer shouted out his anger: ‘If only you had paid in cash at the counter here, 
there would be no problem now!’ 
Today,  in  September  2026,  John Global  recalls  this  situation with  a  tint  of  amusement.  How  things 
have changed since that day, and how much easier life is now. Today, administrative issues take him 
only  several  minutes  monthly,  because  all  these  are  handled  via  the  Internet,  regardless  whether 
located  in  Asia  or  Europe.  And  officers  are  doing  their  utmost  to  provide  services  to  John  Global 
efficiently, as the contract for these services will only be renewed when customers are satisfied with 
them. Needless to say, customer satisfaction surveys take place via the Internet. 
As for Global's satisfaction with his metabolism, he can measure it himself. He steps onto e-scales 
and  it  only  takes  him  seconds  to  get  feedback  from  the  e-dietician.  Things  look  good.  Besides,  he 
knows that his e-dietician has delivered relevant guidance to the restaurant where Global is going to 
have lunch with one of his friends. 
Now  it's  time  for  his  favourite  coffee  and  online  newspapers,  that  is  a  special  edition  of  news, 
commentaries,  lists,  reports,  quotes,  similarities,  differences  etc.  related  to  our  Global’s  interests. 
News aggregator turns out to be very helpful in getting access to useful information, filtered from noise 
and randomness. While at home, Global looks through the newspapers using his TV-set. When he is 
out, he uses his communicator to do this (the name ‘mobile phone’ fell into disuse in 2015). Sipping his 
coffee, he starts reading. After a while, his wife joins in. They both use the aggregator, but they have 
different interests and different news search criteria. John Global's wife comes from Scotland. She is 
much attached to the Global Scott Network. She believes that the Scottish population is shrinking, so 
in order to sustain growth in Scotland it is necessary to employ the Scottish intellectual capital spread 
all  around  the  world.  The  Global  Scott  Network  is  so  efficient,  that  it  has  been  outpacing  large 
competitive consulting companies for more than twenty years, by receiving orders related for example 
to biotechnological clusters. The Global Scott Network is an example of a diaspora understood as an 
ethnic or a religious community living in a foreign country or environment (e.g. the Chinese in the US, 
Jews in different countries or the Portuguese in France). A diaspora is characterized by an internal 
need to integrate, act together, help one another and to share one vision of the future. This internal 
motivation has been recognized as a fundamental factor behind the success of a community. It has 
been  observed  that  talks,  discussions  and  attempts  to  convince  one  another  will  never  lead  to  the 
level  of  involvement  and  commitment  present  in  diasporas,  where  participation  and  activities  are 
voluntary.  ‘Death  of  distance’  causes  diasporas  to  be  increasingly  extensive.  One  example  is  the 
Mexican diaspora where the distance between two members was “up to two phone calls” already 20 
years ago. This means that a person in need who has called up the diaspora for help had to wait only 
two phone calls to find somebody who would be able to help. 
As a matter of fact, this very topic is already known to us, Poles. I am quite sure that you are familiar 
with the articles in the Polish press in the period from Poland's accession to the EU to the mid-2006. 
These articles lamented the fact that during this period more than a million people, mainly young Poles 
from the so-called PLN 1,200-gross-pay-generation, left Poland for other EU countries in search for 
work. It was not until 2007 that it became self-evident that this was not a tragedy but an opportunity for 
Poland, which got a million ‘ambassadors’ in Europe, who were hardworking, acquired new experience 
and spoke foreign languages. Similarly to the Global Scott Network, the Polish diaspora emerged in 
the European Union. Over time, this diaspora turned into the Global Polish Network. Therefore, we 
were successful in turning the brain drain into brain gain. Obviously, the Global Polish Network would 
not have been possible without the E-Ambassador Internet System, which was set up in 2007. 
Whenever the Globals want to look together through the world news on issues they are interested in, 
they sit down so as to see the screen from different angles and each of them, holding their respective 
coffee  cups  and  remote  controls,  looks  through  the  Internet  special  edition  produced  by  the 
aggregator. If they want to hear the sound, they just put on earphones. 
7:00 a.m. After breakfast. Lucky. He can always get what he wants. 
Lucky is a Bavarian Mountain Hound. He loves long walks, freedom and, above all, he adores roaming 
the  neighbourhood.  Obviously,  Lucky  has  a  microchip  implanted  behind  his  ear,  and  John  Global's 
bicycle is equipped with a GPS, which keeps track of Lucky's every move. The system protects Lucky 
from getting into trouble, as it has been configured to send a message to the communicators of every 
member  of  the  Global  family  if  the  dog  strays  more  than  200  metres  away  from  the  house  (or  the 
bicycle, depending on the circumstances) for more than 10 minutes. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2006
8:00 a.m. After the walk. 
John Global finds his son sitting in front of a computer, learning Mandarin Chinese. He is preparing for 
the Global Baccalaureate and has chosen Chinese as his foreign language because that is the most 
widely used language in the world. 
The education system is becoming increasingly refined globally. This enables young people to have 
equal chances regardless of their country of origin. Every family that has a child of school age, has 
also a computer. The first country to put this goal into its development strategy was Singapore, which 
announced  the  iN2015  program  –  Intelligent  Nation  2015.  Singapore’s  success  was  a  milestone  in 
many  countries'  development.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  computers  are  now  treated  by 
schoolchildren the way pens were some 20 years ago. Most of the classes John Global's son attends 
are  videoconferences,  and  materials  can  be  obtained  from  vast  online  encyclopedia,  which  is 
constantly  being  updated  by  experts  from  all  around  the  world  and  is  available  in  any  language. 
However, this afternoon he has got a real meeting in the Warsaw Rising Museum in Warsaw. He is 
going to meet with an international team working on an essay about Warsaw Rising for a global writing 
contest, which they are going to place online. A journey from Poznan to Warsaw takes now only 45 
minutes (compared with 150 minutes 20 years ago), so he doesn't need to hurry. And a return ticket 
costs  as  much  as  a  cinema  ticket,  so  he  can  pay  for  it  from  his  own  pocket  money  that  his  father 
transfers every month to his RFID payment card in his watch. He pays for the ticket by simply placing 
his wrist in front of the ticket terminal. 
Travelling  has  become  so  inexpensive  as  new  cheap  fuel  was  invented.  John  Global  had  the 
opportunity to work on this project ten years ago. At that time, he used to spend quite a lot of time in 
Hong  Kong  in  the  laboratory  of  a  global  fuel  baron.  Ever  since,  he  has  been  frequently  receiving 
lucrative  job  offers  from  Hong  Kong  (due  to  environmental  pollution  Hong  Kong  is  becoming  less 
attractive  and  Hong  Kong-based  companies  try  to  compensate  for  this  by  offering  higher  pay).  He 
occasionally accepts such offers, but he still spends most of his time working with experts in global 
networks. As a knowledge worker, he has no permanent job. He takes part in different projects on the 
basis of networking. These project are implemented not by specific companies (as was the case some 
20  or  30  years  ago),  but  by  self-organizing  networks  of  knowledge  experts.  Do  you  recall  how 
innovative topical communities of practice seemed as they emerged at the turn of the 20th and 21st 
century? They gained momentum at the end of the first decade of our era, when it became self-evident 
that most innovations are developed outside organizations. For that very reason, it became necessary 
to develop relations between practitioners in a given field. As a consequence, self-organizing networks 
of  knowledge  experts  were  first  formed.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  was  roughly  how  Web  3.0  was 
developed, a fact described in a book written by Thomas Friedman in 2005 and entitled The World is 
Flat: A Brief History of the Globalised World in the 21st Century. 
One  of  the  underlying  principles  operating  in  networks  of  experts  is  voluntary  participation  and  the 
willingness to cooperate, just as is the case with diasporas. There are no geographic limitations, as 
they have been eliminated by the Internet. There are no language barriers, either, as Web 3.0 offers 
automatic translation live among several dozen world languages. There are no constraints in expert 
knowledge, as specialists in a given field provide inspiration for one another – ornithologists, chemists, 
biologists,  engineers,  economists and  IT  specialists can work  on  one  project.  This  fosters creativity 
and innovation. 
Currently, John Global is working on a number of projects, including organization of expert networks in 
public  government  bodies.  These  networks  could  operate  effectively  in  the  global  market  of  public 
services. Little wonder that after his already mentioned experience with ‘paying cash at the counter’ 
Global was keen to join the team introducing innovative thinking and acting into public administration. 
And how does e-government work in 2026? 
There are no traditional buildings, long queues or problems with solving intricacies related to taxes or 
administration. Today, Global reaches the authorities through the global network from anywhere in the 
world by submitting documents signed with his own electronic signature. He does not have to carry a 
briefcase  filled  with  documents,  as  was  the  case  20  years  ago.  Now,  Global's  unique  ID  allows  to 
validate  his  authorization  whenever  necessary.  An  e-officer  makes  sure  that  Global  is  notified  in 
advance of his civic duties by delivering him already prepared documents for approval via electronic 
mail. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 3
Tax returns are a trifle, too. Global's employers transfer his remuneration to indicated bank account 
numbers, and details of his salary reach the relevant revenue office. Each year, he receives tax return 
from the revenue office, accepts it and sends it back to the office. 
The  current  project's  innovativeness  consists  in  establishing  specialized  centres  that  would  provide 
public services of highest quality, not only in terms of the country but also the entire world. Currently, 
the project of a global revenue service is being developed. 
The project schedule is as important as the plan of project communication. It has long been known 
that  projects  usually  end  in  failure  not  because  they  are  bad  but  because  somebody  does  not 
understand  what  his  or  her  role  in  the  process  involves,  or  even  why  this  process  exists. 
Communication improves the level of understanding and acceptance on the part of all stakeholders. It 
helps create commitment observed in diasporas, and also creates room for internal motivation. It was 
as early as at the beginning of the 21 century that public administration in Singapore knew the art of 
project implementation, which institutionalised the role of communication in project planning. 
1 p.m. 
Lunch with a friend. Global brought him a small gift from his weekend family trip to an exotic country. It 
was a real bargain, and it only took a few minutes to arrange for the trip on the way home from the 
Friday visit to a modern art gallery. Both Global and his wife are lovers of modern art. All they had to 
do  was  to  get  in  touch  with  their  virtual  travel  agent  and  they  could  both  go  through  the  offers 
displayed on the screen in his car, consulting an e-expert. They decided to go for the most exotic trip, 
which was also quite affordable. Global competition does its job. Their only concern was not to miss 
the plane. 
Global  and  his  friend  do  not  waste  their  time  ordering  meals,  as  an  e-waiter  has  already  sent 
suggested menu to their communicators (in Global’s case, consulted with his e-dietician). The lunch 
was  excellent,  and  the  ambience  was  fostered  by  a  holographic  show  of  pictures  from  the  trip  that 
Global  stores  on  a  photo  server  accessible  via  the  Internet.  They  were  watching  the  pictures  on  a 
display fixed in the restaurant. Global is a regular here, so his bank will take care of the bill. 
On his way home, Global buys flowers paying e-money by accepting the receipt in his communicator. 
As the weather is stunning, he takes a walk home. Passing by a sweet shop, he gives in to temptation 
and  indulges  in  a  big  portion  of  ice-cream.  He  pays  by  his  communicator,  which  includes  a  RFID 
payment card. (It is worth pointing out that the communicator is one of the most useful gadgets, as it 
plays  many  roles,  e.g.  that  of  electronic  signature,  ID  card,  driving  license,  passport,  global  tax  ID, 
social  security  ID,  season  ticket  in  domestic  and  international  transport,  to  name  just  a  few.  It  is 
biometrically protected. This means that in order to activate it, Global touches a scanner which needs 
only a fraction of a second to read his papillary ridges). 
Afternoon 
At home, Global finds his son in front of the computer. He is preparing to go to Warsaw to take part in 
a workshop. Moving and communicating is easy, so Global has more time to spend with his son than 
his parents had for him. Even during his business trips, he can have eye contact with his child. This is 
possible thanks to the communicator he keeps wearing, which is equipped with a video camera. One 
of their common passions is building a wooden boat in which they hope to go to the lake. They spend 
most of their time working on details and learning the wood processing technology by chatting through 
their communicators with other amateur boat builders from England, Canada and China, among other 
countries. 
Sailing  is  one  of  Global’s  favourite  sports,  but  not  the  only  one  he  does.  Global  takes  care  of  his 
health, which  is  under  constant surveillance  of an  e-doctor. Global  rarely  falls  ill,  because he  takes 
preventive  measures  displayed  on  his  communicator  in  accordance  with  his  preferences  twice  a 
month. Today, he got a text message reminding him that two months had elapsed since he last took 
his  blood  pressure.  He  confirms  his  willingness  to  be  re-examined,  and  his  watch  takes  his  blood 
pressure and sends the result to the communicator, which automatically transmits the data to his e-
doctor. Everything is OK, but Global does not even notice this, because he is already engrossed in 
working on another issue – reducing the costs of building a city that 25 years ago was referred to as 
the knowledge city or intelligent city. It is simply a city that is comfortable for its citizens, a city where 
beauty and functionality go hand in hand, where life is easier and architecture fosters social life, a city 
where innovations are born and a city that attracts visitors. Obviously, Global works in an international 
group of experts brought together through the global network of experts. His participation in the project 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2006
is highly welcome, even though he is not an urban planner or sociologist. He has been included in the 
project  team  because  of  his  valuable  experience  won  during  his  participation  in  numerous  already 
completed  projects.  Problems  they  are  dealing  with  include  optimal  location  of  a  sewage  treatment 
plant and usage of treated water in public lavatories, sending waste via pneumatic mail at 100 km/h 
directly from a rubbish chute to a waste incineration facility and using the heat from their incineration to 
generate power and produce heating for the neighbouring area, or the arrangement of car parks in 
central city districts in the form of a remotely controlled warehouse (no room for people means much 
more room for cars and no more problems with battered doors). Perhaps you recall that such solutions 
existed in Tokyo Teleport Town, the Japanese town of future, already in 2006. 
Evening 
Global  takes  his  wife  to  the  theatre.  Two  days  ago,  when  he  was  in  Hong  Kong,  during  a  video-
conversation they decided that they would love to spend an evening together in a theatre. They both 
approved  the  idea  and  could  simultaneously  see  the  repertoire,  and  were  assisted  in  making  their 
choice by an e-reviewer. They chose to see Shakespeare – his plays will never grow old. Global’s wife 
can listen to this play in English via her own mini communicator earphone. 
During the interval they have an encounter with Global’s friend from the time he was a student. It turns 
out that he recently got married and his wife used to work with Global on a project several years ago. 
They decide to go for a drink together. Using their communicators they choose a cosy restaurant next 
to  the  theatre  and  book  a  table.  After  the  performance  they  are  all  in  great  mood,  and  recall  the 
beginning of the 21st century with amusement. 
The  waiter  discreetly  charges  Global’s  non-contact  e-wallet  for  actually  ordered  dishes.  John  can 
easily accept the payments after he comes back home. 
Global registers all transaction details in his financial organizer build into the communicator. Thanks to 
it  he  can  track  and  analyze  his  transactions  and  schedule  expenses.  He  is  fully  in  control  of  his 
finances. His personal communicator receives financial operations on an ongoing basis, and confirms 
or accepts them. Once a weak it receives a financial e-analysis drawing Global’s attention to offers 
better tailored to his appetite for risk and lifestyle.  
Small hours. 
Mr. and Mrs. Global are coming back home. 
Why have I told you this story? Why does a central banker tell stories about future instead of delivering 
a  30-minute  speech  of  the  success  achieved  by  the  National  Bank  of  Poland  and  its  partners  in 
building a safe, efficient and modern payment infrastructure in Poland? The reason for this is that we 
have to prepare for the future. And the best prepared people are those who know what they want to 
achieve, in other words people who have a vision of a certain state in future they are pursuing. Lack of 
vision  poses  a  risk  of  discrepancies  in  understanding  the  goal,  pursuit  of  inconsistent  goals  and  in 
consequence leads to wavering and wasting time and money. Lack of vision almost certainly leads to 
failure, as today everything happens very fast. And sharing one vision does make a difference. First of 
all, we are all moving in the same direction. And we are likely to accelerate the pace. A clearly defined 
vision allows – after reviewing what we have now – choose suitable methods and means to achieve 
a desired state, that is to set indirect goals. 
The  vision  of  John  Global  may  seem  a  distant  future,  but  in  fact  it  can  come  true  faster  than  it  is 
currently believed. The majority of examples from John Global’s life in 2026 are already a reality, not a 
figment of my imagination. That is how life is in Asia now, and with increasing frequency in Europe too. 
I do not know your morning routine, but in my case it is not significantly different from John Global’s. 
True, while driving to work I still scan papers (I completed a course in speed-reading). When I am at 
work,  though,  I  start  my  day  with  reading  an  e-newspaper  I designed  myself  by  using  the  features 
offered by Web 2.0. Thanks to specialized software, every morning I receive information from the web 
that has tags I am interested in (for instance in the Technorati service), along with information about 
the blogs I am interested in (for example from bloglines) and search results on .gov and .edu domains 
for  the  entries  I  am  interested  in.  I  get  RSS  messages  from  the  selected  newspapers  from  several 
continents containing information I am interested in. Moreover, I have a number of favourite websites 
with articles by outstanding economists or columnists. Specialized software informs me once a day 
when there have been any changes to these websites, that is when these people publish something 
new. As you can see, my problem today – and simultaneously John Global’s problem in 20 years’ time 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 5
– is not lack of information but its abundance, and the ability to smartly select important and useful 
information. Today, I use a program that summarizes texts in English. I use 25% compression. It is 
sufficient  and  allows  to  make  reading  4  times  more  efficient.  What  is  more,  I  occasionally  visit  the 
website of the People’s Bank of China translated live into English by specialized software. Soon, I will 
start my own blog on economics, which will allow me to use the emerging global networks of experts 
to solve problematic issues, exchange views and create knowledge along with other experts. 
That  was  about  our  Global  and  a  bit  about  me,  too.  And  what  can  be  said  about  e-government  in 
today’s Poland? Not much.  
In a Capgemini’s survey covering e-government in the European Union1 and published in June 2006, 
Poland ranks third from the bottom in the EU, in terms of advancement of online public services. We 
only managed to outpace Slovakia and Lithuania. Even though we made large progress measuring in 
per cent in 2005, we are still below EU(10) and EU(28) average. 
When set against the world findings, Poland ranks somewhere before the fortieth place, outpaced by 
Estonia, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Mexico.  
Table 1. UN Index of E-Government Readiness, 2005 
Pos. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
19 
27 
29 
31 
36 
37 
38 
39 
Country 
USA 
Denmark 
Sweden 
United Kingdom 
South Korea 
Australia 
Singapore 
Canada 
Finland 
Norway 
Germany 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Japan 
Island 
Estonia 
Hungary 
Czech Republic 
Mexico 
Slovakia 
Cyprus 
Poland 
Spain 
Index 
0.9062 
0.9058 
0.8983 
0.8777 
0.8727 
0.8679 
0.8503 
0.8425 
0.8231 
0.8228 
0.8050 
0.8021 
0.7987 
0.7801 
0.7794 
0.7347 
0.6536 
0.6396 
0.6061 
0.5887  
0.5872 
0.5872 
0.5847 
Source: Global E-Government Readiness Report 2005. From E-Government to E-Inclusion, United Nations, 2005 
                                                      
1   Capgemini  Online  Availability  of  Public  Services:  How  Is  Europe  Progressing?  Web  Based  Survey  on  Electronic  Public 
Services. Report of the 6th Measurement, June 2006 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2006
When compared against other EU countries, we rank very poorly2 in such categories as the ability to 
file  tax  returns  online  (submit  tax  forms  and  make  payments),  obtaining  a  driving  license  online  or 
registering  a  car.  We  ranked  last  in  the  EU  for  the  lack  of  online  company  registration,  as  it  is  not 
possible to download forms to fill in, whereas in as much as 7 EU countries it is possible to register a 
company online without the necessity of filling in any paper forms. The only area where Poland meets 
all requirements to join the group of leaders is online submission of customs declarations. It is a rare 
example of an area whose development proceeded in line with a daring and clearly defined vision. 
WE  NEED  TO  HAVE  A  VISION,  SHARE  A  VISION,  a  well-defined  vision  that  will  help  us  take 
advantage of emerging opportunities and will allow us to prepare for possible dangers associated with 
homo sapiens globalus society.  
Please, take a look around you… I can assure you that there is more than one John Global in this 
room… I suggest that after leaving the room each one of us should take a moment to think what you 
yourself, as an individual, can do to start preparing today for a meeting with John Global in 20 years. 
And what can each of us individually do to make us share a vision so that we can become citizens of 
the  world  and  master  the  fine  art  of  capturing  the  benefits  brought  by  the  homo  sapiens  globalus 
society. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention and I announce the topic open for discussion. 
                                                      
2   Methods  employed  in  European  Commission’s  survey  to  assess  the  services  provided  involve  defining  a  five-stage 
framework to determine the level of services provided. STAGE 0 – Total absence of any publicly accessible website or lack 
of possibility to qualify the existing website to any of levels 1 to 4 (0% – 24% in the figure). STAGE 1 – INFORMATION – 
The information necessary to start the procedure to obtain this public service is available on-line (25% – 49% in the figure). 
STAGE 2 – ONE-WAY INTERACTION – The publicly accessible website offers the possibility to obtain in a non-electronic 
way (by downloading forms) the paper form to start the procedure to obtain this service (50% – 74% in the figure). STAGE 3 
–  TWO-WAY  INTERACTION  The  publicly  accessible  website  offers  the  possibility  of  an  electronic  intake  with  an  official 
electronic form to start the procedure to obtain this service. This implies that there must be a form of authentication of the 
person requesting the services (75% – 99% in the figure). Stage 4 – Full electronic case handling: The publicly accessible 
website offers the possibility to completely treat the public service via the website, including decision and delivery. No other 
formal procedure is necessary for the applicant via "paperwork" (100% in the figure). More information available in Online 
Availability of Public Services: How is Europe Progressing? Web Based Survey on Electronic Public Services. Report of the 
Fifth Measurement, Capgemini for European Commission, October 2004. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 7
