Lucas Papademos: Monetary policy in a changing world – commitment, 
strategy and credibility 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Fourth 
Conference  of 
International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy,  Washington  DC, 
1 December 2006. 
the 
 Introduction  
I. 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference of the International Research Forum on 
Monetary Policy. This is the fourth conference of its kind, and testifies to the increasing significance of 
this  forum,  which brings  together  academics  and  policymakers  from  both sides  of  the  Atlantic.  This 
year’s programme confirms the previously established trend by including papers that address a broad 
range of issues and which are highly topical and relevant for the practice of monetary policy. I would 
like  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  their  judgement  and  hard  work  that  has  resulted  in  putting 
together an exciting programme for this fourth conference. I find it intriguing that in many cultures the 
number  4  symbolises  the  qualities  of  practicality,  application  and  tenacity,  and  that  it  suggests 
organisation and hard work. I have to say as far as this conference is concerned, the numerologists 
have hit it right on the spot!  
Since the forum provides an occasion for a transatlantic exchange of views, I would like to address 
some monetary policy issues as viewed from the European perspective of the still relatively young – 
though mature – European Central Bank. When Europe took the historic step of introducing a single 
currency, it was a quantum leap into uncharted policy territory. Understandably, some had expressed 
doubts  about  the  prospects  for  success.  And  everybody  fully  recognised  the  great  uncertainty  and 
potential difficulties that could be encountered. Eight years on, however, I think we can safely say that 
the evidence confirms that the ECB’s monetary policy has been a great success in terms of keeping 
inflation  under  control  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  a  level  in  line  with  our  quantitative 
definition  of  price  stability.  I  believe  the  effectiveness  of  our  policy  can  be  attributed  to  three  key 
features  that  characterise  it:  commitment,  strategy  and  credibility.  But  let  me  add  that  we  are  fully 
aware  that  we  cannot  be  complacent.  A  central  bank’s  job  is  “never  done”,  especially  in  a  rapidly 
changing world. The ongoing changes in the external environment within which policy is conducted 
and in the structure of the economy pose new challenges to us policy-makers.  
In  my  presentation,  I  would  like  to  address  three  challenges  for  monetary  policy.  They  have  in 
common that they derive from ongoing changes in the structure and functioning of the economy that 
have bearing on the conduct of monetary policy and the transmission of its effects, notably:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
I will first address these three processes and their consequences for the inflation process. Afterwards, 
I will discuss their common implications for the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy. Although these 
issues  are  particularly  important  for  us,  I  believe  they  are  also  of  relevance  for  all  monetary 
policymakers  –  and  for  economic  research  that  can  help  provide  answers  to  as  yet  unresolved 
questions. 
the process of globalisation;  
technological advances and changes in productivity growth; and  
financial innovation and development.  
The effects of globalisation 
II.  
Generally speaking, globalisation can simply be defined as the process of increasing global economic 
integration and, in particular, the growing internationalisation of trade in goods, services and financial 
assets.  Over  the  past  15  years  international  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  flows  have 
expanded  rapidly.  The  value  of  world  exports  of  goods  and  services  relative  to  world  GDP  has 
increased by over ten percentage points in the last fifteen years or so, rising from 19% in 1990 to 30% 
in  2006.  [see  Chart  1]  Since  the  mid-1990s,  the  share  of  cumulated  FDI  flows (FDI stock)  in world 
GDP has increased at an even faster pace, particularly in non-Japan Asia and in the new Member 
States of the European Union. [see Chart 2] The current wave of globalisation is largely related to the 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 1
integration into the global market economy of emerging Asia and of the former socialist countries in 
central and eastern Europe. In fact, the share of both regions in world exports has essentially doubled 
over the past 15 years to 22% and 4%, respectively. 
Globalisation  affects  the  functioning  of  the  world  economy  and  of  the  national  economies  through 
many channels and in various ways. Today, I will concentrate on its effects on inflation, which are both 
direct and indirect. The increasing economic opening up of many countries has led to the emergence 
of two major and fairly direct effects on world inflation dynamics, which partly offset each other. On 
one  hand,  raw  materials  and  basic  commodities,  most  importantly  oil  and  other  sources  of  energy, 
have become scarcer relative to world demand, leading to substantial upward pressure on prices. [see 
Chart 3] For example, Brent crude oil prices have almost tripled over the last three years, reflecting to 
a very large extent the impact of rising demand, especially in emerging market economies [see Chart 
4], although supply-side factors have also played a role during some periods.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  integration  of  an  enormous  reserve  of  low-cost,  skilled  labour  in  the 
international  economy  and  the  increasing  production  of  manufactured  goods  in  emerging  market 
economies have put downward pressure on import prices of manufactured goods as well as on wage 
demands  in  industrial  economies.  As  a  consequence,  the  prices  of  a  wide  range  of  manufactured 
goods have been declining since 2000. This is reflected in the unit value of imports of manufactured 
products in the euro area which in mid-2006 was virtually at the same level as in the year 2000. [see 
Chart 5] 
The counteracting effects of these global price pressures on euro area inflation can be observed more 
clearly  if  we  take  a  look  at  the  development  of  the  overall  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices 
(HICP) and selected components (energy and non-energy industrial goods). [see Chart 6] The prices 
paid  by  consumers  for  energy  products,  which  account  for  approximately  9%  of  euro  area  private 
consumption, have surged at an average rate of 5.4% per annum following the series of sharp oil price 
increases since 1999. However, the prices of other consumer goods, such as non-energy industrial 
goods, which account for over 30% of total private consumption, have increased at a more moderate 
rate of 0.7% per annum on average since 1999. 
In an environment of significant changes in relative prices, some price increases, for example those of 
energy  goods,  may  be  more  visible  to  consumers  than  the  relatively  stable  prices  of  many  other 
consumer  goods,  and  may  as  a  result  affect  inflation  expectations.  Consequently,  it  is  particularly 
crucial for monetary policy to anchor inflation expectations to price stability, in order to minimise the 
likelihood of second-round effects of energy price increases.  
The impact of globalisation on HICP inflation excluding energy products also reflects its indirect effects 
on  the  cost  of  labour  as  well  as  the  increased  competition  it  has  entailed.  Euro  area  labour  cost 
developments have remained moderate in recent years despite the strong increase in energy prices. 
[see  Chart  7]  There  are  two  major  reasons  for  this  welcome  development.  First,  the  successful 
anchoring of inflation expectations has helped contain possible second-round effects on wages from 
energy price increases. Second, globalisation and the increased openness of the euro area economy 
have  influenced  labour  demand  as  a  result  of  increased  competition  and  outsourcing  and  through 
higher real wage elasticity of labour demand due to a reduction in the bargaining power of workers. It 
is interesting to note that all labour cost measures increased at a decelerating rate starting in early 
2002 until late 2005. Recently, however, a pick-up in the rate of change of some labour cost measures 
has been observed. 
What  is  the  overall  net  effect  of  globalisation  on  the  dynamics  of  euro  area  inflation?  Attempts  to 
quantify the extent to which the globalisation process has helped contain inflation in the euro area over 
recent years are subject to substantial uncertainty, for the fundamental reason that it has been difficult 
to  identify  all  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  inflation  dynamics  and  disentangle  them  from  the 
influences  of  other  factors,  for  example  those  that  have  contributed  to  wage  moderation  and 
productivity growth in recent years. More specifically, moderate wage developments in the euro area 
partly  reflect  such  factors  as  the  threat  of  relocation  of  production  owing  to  global  competitive 
pressures  or  “social  pacts”  that  take  into  account  competitiveness  objectives.  They  also  reflect, 
however, the favourable effects on inflation expectations resulting from a credible monetary policy, the 
reduced bargaining power of labour unions due to changes in workers’ preferences and a larger share 
of part-time and short-term labour contracts, and the refocusing of bargaining on non-wage elements, 
such  as  working  hours  and  benefits.  Similarly,  it  has  not  been  easy  to  isolate  the  impact  of 
globalisation on competition and productivity growth and separate it from the effects of other factors. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2006
One  conclusion  that  has  some  empirical  support  is  that  domestic  inflation  is  no  longer  determined 
predominantly by domestic demand and supply constraints, but seems to depend more on the degree 
of  global  economic  slack.  This  can  be  illustrated  if  we  examine  the  relationship  between  domestic 
inflation and capacity utilisation in the G10 economies, which was rather close until the mid-1990s, but 
has essentially broken down over the past decade.1 [see Chart 8]  
Against  the  background  of  all  these  uncertainties,  it  is  even  more  difficult  to  predict  the  impact  of 
globalisation  on  inflation  in  the  future.  The  favourable  influence  of  globalisation  on  inflation  can  be 
expected  to  continue  in  the  future  as  a  result  of  its  direct  effects  on  the  prices  of  imported 
manufactured goods from low-cost countries and, more importantly, as a consequence of its indirect 
effects on wages and productivity, reflecting the increased competition in labour and product markets. 
At the same time, this disinflationary impact of globalisation may be partly offset – or more than offset 
– by global inflationary pressures in energy and commodity markets. The available evidence for the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  suggests  that  the  overall  effect  of  globalisation  on  inflation  has  been  very 
modest,  or  almost  negligible,  in  recent  years,  although  global  factors  have  been  a  main  source  to 
short-term inflation volatility.2 Of course, long-term inflation will ultimately be determined by monetary 
policy in line with the ECB’s price stability objective. Nevertheless, the dynamics of inflation, especially 
over the short to medium term, are likely to be more influenced by global factors and to be surrounded 
by greater uncertainty than in the past. 
The impact of changes in productivity growth 
III.  
Productivity growth is an important determinant of aggregate output and inflation dynamics, and has 
significant  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Long-term  or  trend  productivity  growth, 
which  reflects  the  average  pace  of  technological  advances,  is  a  key  determining  factor  of  the 
economy’s growth potential. In the short to medium term, changes in labour productivity growth can 
affect  the  dynamics  of  inflation  and  its  response  to  an  adjustment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance. 
Therefore,  measuring  productivity  developments,  assessing  their  nature,  and  estimating  their  likely 
impact on the economy is important for the effective conduct of monetary policy. 
In the euro area, productivity growth developments have been unsatisfactory over the past ten years, 
compared  to  Europe’s  productivity  performance  in  previous  decades  and  the  productivity  growth 
recorded  in  the  United  States  since  the  mid-1990s.  [see  Chart  9]  Specifically,  labour  productivity 
growth (as measured by real GDP per hour worked) in the euro area declined from an average annual 
growth  rate  of  2.3%  in  the  period  1980-1995  to  just  1.2%  in  the  most  recent  ten-year  period 
1996-2005. By contrast, there was a marked improvement in the productivity performance of the US 
economy,  where  average  annual  productivity  growth  rose  significantly  from  1.3%  in  1980-1995  to 
2.3% in 1996-2005.3 This reversal of the relative productivity growth performances of the euro area 
and  US  economies  since  the  mid-1990s  is  striking  and  it  is  also  symmetric.  Moreover,  it  is 
independent of whether productivity is measured by GDP per employed person or per hour worked. 
The key issue is, of course, to what extent the remarkable rise in productivity growth in the US, and 
the relative decline in the euro area, are of a fairly temporary nature, or whether they represent a more 
permanent trend. With regard to the US, it has been argued that, while the increase may partly reflect 
cyclical factors, the apparent resilience of US productivity growth during the recent downturn and the 
significant  further  pick-up  over  the  last  two  years  supports  the  thesis  that  the  mid-1990s  marked  a 
structural  improvement  in  US  productivity  growth.  In  the  euro  area,  the  trend  decline  in  labour 
productivity  growth  has  been  partly  related  to  higher  levels  of  employment  of  relatively  low-skilled 
workers, but it also reflects an insufficient use of new productivity-enhancing technologies especially in 
the services sector.  
                                                      
1   See Frey and Moëc (2006). In a recent study Borio and Filardo (2006) find that for many euro area countries the global 
output  gap  is  statistically  significant  in  explaining  domestic  inflation,  while  the  contribution  of  the  domestic  output  gap  is 
reduced,  especially since the 1990s. For the  euro area as a  whole, their findings  are more  ambiguous: the  effect  of the 
global output gap is not statistically significant when import prices and oil prices are included in the equations explaining the 
dynamics of inflation. 
2   See Ciccarelli and Mojon (2006) and Borio and Filardo (2006). 
3   The average annual growth rates of productivity in the US and the euro area during the period 1980-1995 remained fairly 
stable. 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 3
Partly  as  a  result  of  these  developments,  estimates  of  the  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area 
have been revised downwards over the past few years and are now close to the lower bound of the 
range of 2.0 % to 2.5% of potential growth, published by the ECB in 1998, just before the launch of the 
euro.4 [see Chart 10]  
However,  annual  productivity  growth  (per  person  employed)  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  more 
recently, rising from 0.4% in early 2005 to 1.4% in the second quarter of 2006, and we expect this 
level to remain broadly stable over the coming quarters. This improvement is confined to the industrial 
sector,  which  is  more  affected  by  cyclical  developments.  In  the  services  sector,  labour  productivity 
growth has remained subdued, with an annual rate of growth of only 0.6% in the second quarter of 
2006.  Nevertheless,  these  recent  developments  may  turn  out  to  be  the  initial  signs  of  an  overall 
improvement of the euro area’s productivity performance. 
What are the policy implications of the observed recent improvement in productivity growth in the euro 
area? The crucial question is whether this recent improvement is temporary, influenced by the current 
upturn in the cycle, or permanent. To disentangle temporary and persistent changes in productivity – 
and  to  do  so  in  real-time  –  is  a  formidable  challenge  for  policymakers  who  have  to  make  forward-
looking assessments. But we have to face this challenge, because temporary and persistent shocks to 
productivity growth may have opposite effects on inflation developments. If the decline in productivity 
growth  is  temporary,  its  effect  on  aggregate  demand  is  likely  to  be  limited  because  the  lifetime 
incomes of households are not significantly affected. At the same time, the aggregate supply of output 
will be temporarily depressed. The resulting excess demand is likely to have an inflationary impact. If, 
by contrast, the productivity decrease is considered to be persistent, (perceived) wealth and aggregate 
demand are likely to decline, leading to a situation of excess supply that will have a negative impact on 
inflation. 
Incorrect  perceptions  or  estimates  of  underlying  productivity  developments can  easily  lead  to  policy 
errors  and  costly  adjustment  processes.  The  inflationary  episodes  of  the  1970s  provide  telling 
examples in this respect and research at the Federal Reserve clearly highlighted the potential risks.5 
Research  carried  out  at  the  ECB  confirms  these  findings  and  suggests  that  imperfect  information 
about  potential  output  growth  can  have  substantial  adverse  effects  on  macroeconomic  outcomes. 
Even if central banks continuously update their estimates of potential output and, in doing so, they fully 
exploit  all  available  information,  misperceptions  of  potential  output  growth  can  be  substantial  and 
persistent ex post. 
Of course, “to make no mistakes is not in the power of men; but from errors and mistakes the wise and 
good  learn  wisdom  for  the  future”  –  as  Plutarch  once  remarked.  Heeding  his  counsel,  it  appears 
advisable  for  us  policymakers  to  account  for  and  address  the  uncertainties  that  are  inherent  in 
identifying  the  underlying  productivity  pattern  by  employing  an  appropriate  and  robust  policy 
framework and implementing policy in a consistent manner. 
The influence of financial innovation and development 
IV.  
Structural  changes  and  associated  uncertainty  about  the  stability  of  structural  and  behavioural 
relationships  are  not  confined  to  the  real  economy.  Financial  markets  and  institutions  have  been 
undergoing a remarkable transformation over the past 20 years as a result of deregulation, advances 
in information technology and financial innovation. The pace of financial development and innovation 
has  markedly  increased  in  recent  years.  Let  me  just  give  you  one  figure  that  exemplifies  the 
dimensions  of  this  phenomenon:  in  the  first  six  months  of  this  year,  the  global  derivatives  market 
(according  to  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements)  increased  by  almost  25%,  reaching  370,000 
billion  US  dollars.  That’s  370  and  twelve  zeros!  New  financial  instruments  are  continuously  being 
introduced, and non-bank financial institutions are playing a more prominent role in the intermediation 
process than in the past. 
                                                      
4   See  ECB  (1998).  This  assessment  is supported  by  subsequent  revisions  of  euro area  potential  growth  by  the  European 
Commission, the International Monetary Fund, and the OECD. 
5   For  example,  in  the  1970s,  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisers  revised  its  real-time  forecasts  of  trend  productivity  growth 
downwards in a sequence of adjustments, which brought it from 2.8% in 1970 down to 1.5% in 1980. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2006
There are various consequences of these developments for economic efficiency, financial stability and 
monetary developments. Let me focus on the latter which are pertinent for the conduct of monetary 
policy. As a result of financial innovation and the introduction of new financial products, coupled with 
changes in payment technologies and practices (e.g. internet banking), the demand for monetary and 
financial assets as well as the characteristics of available financing instruments have been affected. 
Consequently,  the  interpretation  of  developments  in  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  and  the 
extraction  of  information  for  the  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  require  more  detailed 
analysis. Let me give an example. How do we ascertain the effects of the development of deeper and 
more liquid securities markets and the increasing importance of non-monetary financial intermediaries, 
other  than  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds  (other  financial  institutions,  or  OFIs),  on 
monetary developments? [see Chart 11] The OFI sector comprises a variety of financial firms, such as 
investment  funds,  corporations  engaged  in  securitisation,  lending  and  factoring,  or  clearing  houses, 
which  maintain  specialised  relationships  with  banks  and  whose  operations  may  affect  monetary 
developments  in  several  ways.  For  instance,  if  changes  in  the  money  holdings  of  clearing  houses 
reflect a shift in former interbank business to electronic trading platforms, this could affect the indicator 
properties  of  M3  for  future  price  developments.  However,  discarding  money  holdings  of  OFIs 
altogether when assessing the information content of M3 – on the grounds that these holdings reflect 
portfolio considerations and are not directly related to the demand for goods and services – would be 
premature. After all, OFIs’ money holdings are likely to mirror to a very large extent developments in 
private  sector  wealth,  and  may  thus  help  explain  the  more  complex  relationship  between  monetary 
growth and future developments in economic activity and prices. 
This is just one example of how financial innovation can influence the information content of monetary 
aggregates – and I could mention others – but it points to the need for a deeper and more refined 
monetary analysis that separates the “noise” from the “signals” in monetary aggregates which contain 
relevant information with regard to risks to price stability. This example also suggests that it may be 
intrinsically difficult to determine the extent to which the observed monetary developments reflect the 
effects of financial innovation that can be characterised as noise – that is, shocks that may “distort” 
money  demand.  In  a  low  interest  rate  environment,  the  fast  pace  of  financial  innovation  and  the 
increased importance of OFIs might also reflect the so-called search for yield rather than a structural 
change in fundamental market relationships. Moreover, another pertinent issue is the extent to which 
new innovative derivative products held by households and non-financial firms have liquidity and risk 
characteristics  that  would  justify  their  inclusion  in  a  broad  monetary  aggregate,  such  as  M3.  These 
observations  underscore  the  importance  of  further  research  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the 
implications of ongoing financial innovation for the analysis of monetary developments and the signals 
they provide about the risks to price stability.  
Implications for monetary policy 
V.  
The  three  processes  I  have  examined  –  globalisation,  productivity  developments,  and  financial 
innovation – pose challenges for monetary policy for two interrelated reasons. First, they influence the 
functioning and dynamics of the economy in ways that may affect the assessment of the outlook for, 
and the risks to, price stability as well as the transmission of the effects of monetary policy. Second, 
and  more  importantly,  a  common  feature  of  these  three  processes  is  the  considerable  uncertainty 
associated with  the  size and  nature of  their  effects on  the  economy  over  time,  particularly on  price 
developments,  and  the  difficulties  we  face  in  sufficiently  accurately  measuring  these  effects  in  real 
time. As policymakers we have to take into account and assess the ongoing stochastic changes in the 
structure and functioning of the economy. Moreover, we must do this on the basis of data that may be 
revised significantly and of indicators whose informational content may be impaired by noisy signals. 
Using the technical jargon of our economic profession, we face not only the “usual” type of uncertainty 
resulting  from  unanticipated  shocks  to  demand  and  supply,  but  also  model,  parameter  and  data 
uncertainty. 
What are the implications of all this for the formulation and implementation of monetary policy? There 
are  several  conclusions  pertaining  to  the  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  the  overall 
monetary  policy  strategy,  and  the  actual  conduct  of  policy.  Let  me  elaborate  on  these  issues  with 
particular reference to the ECB’s monetary policy. 
A  first  conclusion  that  emerges  from  the  ongoing  changes  in  the  real  economy  and  the  financial 
system  is  that  we  must  deepen  our  analysis  and  sharpen  our  statistical  tools  so  as  to  better 
understand  these  phenomena,  improve  the  measurement  of  their  development  and  impact  in  real 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 5
time,  and  thus  enhance  our  assessment  of  their  implications  for  the  risks  to  price  stability.  The 
uncertainty we face makes it advisable to use insights drawn from various modelling approaches, and 
to avoid any exclusive dependence on a single approach which may primarily rely on certain structural 
relationships,  as  these  may  be  suffering  from  instability.  In  this  context,  it  should  be  noted  that 
globalisation and productivity developments affect the functioning of labour and product markets and 
the stability of the “generalised Phillips curve relationship”. In other words, they affect the workings of 
the real economy which is at the centre of the economic analysis of the inflationary process. Financial 
development and innovation, on the other hand, impinge on the functioning of the financial system and 
the stability of the demand for money and its counterparts – and therefore affect our analysis of the 
monetary factors determining price developments.  
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy which relies on both economic and monetary analysis allows us to 
use all available information in order to extract, in a comprehensive manner, signals concerning the 
risks to price stability that are as meaningful as possible. Our analytical framework permits us to cross-
check the assessment derived from our economic analysis, which (given the current state of models 
and  statistical  tools)  is  more  pertinent  for  short  to  medium-term  horizons,  with  the  assessment 
resulting  from  our  monetary  analysis,  which  can  be  especially  relevant  over  the  medium  to  longer 
term.  This  cross-checking,  which  may  also  lead  to  an  averaging  out  of  possibly  “noisy”  signals  or 
persistent prediction errors that may be associated with a particular analytic approach, contributes to a 
more  robust  assessment  of  the  evidence  available  and  the  risks  to  price  stability.  It  is  therefore 
conducive to robust decision-making in the presence of heightened uncertainty. Our experience has 
shown that the ECB’s strategy has proven effective because it has employed all available information 
to  reach  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  medium  to  long-term  economic  outlook  and  inflation 
risks. This has been essential for taking decisions on the appropriate monetary policy stance.  
However,  the  effectiveness  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  also  depends  on  other  features  of  its 
strategy  and  its  conduct.  Let  me  therefore  now  turn  to  two  elements  which  characterise  the  ECB’s 
monetary  policy:  commitment  and  credibility.  The  ability  of  any  central  bank  to  maintain  inflation 
expectations well anchored depends crucially on these two notions which concern the central bank’s 
intentions and the perception of these intentions by the markets and the public. For monetary policy to 
be effective, especially in a world of changing economic structures and heightened uncertainty, it is 
essential  that  the  central  bank  has  a  well-defined  objective  and  that  it  expresses  clearly  and 
unambiguously its commitment to do everything that is needed to achieve that objective. Yet by itself 
this may still not be sufficient, as this commitment must also be perceived as credible by all the actors 
affected by the decisions of the central bank. I think that almost eight years since the introduction of 
the single European currency, it is fair to say that the ECB has been successful in demonstrating this 
type of credible commitment.  
For  this  success,  it  was  instrumental  that  the  ECB  decided  early  on  to  adopt  and  announce  a 
quantitative definition of price stability, namely to keep HICP inflation below but close to 2% over the 
medium term, as a clear yardstick which serves two purposes. On one hand, it clarifies and quantifies 
the  notion  of  price stability,  as  mentioned  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  which,  therefore,  represents  the 
benchmark  to  assess  our  performance  over  the  medium  term.  On  the  other  hand,  the  quantitative 
definition  of  the  price  stability  objective  guides  and  helps  to  anchor  private  sector  expectations  of 
future inflation rates to a clearly defined objective.  
The  commitment  to  pursue  a  publicly  announced  explicit  price  stability  objective  is  important  for  a 
successful  monetary  policy.  However,  it  is  not  on  its  own  sufficient.  It  will  lead  to  the  appropriate 
anchoring of expectations only if policy is implemented in a credible manner, that is, in such a way that 
markets and the public are convinced of the central bank’s commitment and ability to conduct policy 
effectively. In other words, ex ante commitment must be confirmed ex post. This requires the central 
bank  to  respond  in  a  timely  and  determined  manner  to  shocks  to  price  stability,  and  to  effectively 
communicate its policy actions, so that markets and the public understand the rationale behind these 
actions  and  their  consistency  with  the  objectives  and  the  strategy  adopted.  In  an  environment  of 
increased  uncertainty  and  structural  change,  the  potential  for  making  mistakes  increases.  An 
undesirable,  and  possibly  substantial,  decoupling  of  inflation  expectations  from  the  central  bank’s 
objective can occur if the policy response to inflation is not sufficiently determined – or is perceived not 
to be. If inflation expectations were to become “unanchored”, a much tighter monetary policy would 
have  to  be  pursued  to  secure  price  stability,  and  high  inflation  is  likely  to  be  accompanied  by  an 
economic slowdown or recession. These arguments are supported by analysis concerning the optimal 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2006
conduct of monetary policy under uncertainty and imperfect knowledge.6 Credibility is established over 
time  on  the  basis  of  the  policy  outcomes  achieved,  and  as  the  public  understands  and  learns  that 
policy actions are consistent with the central bank’s quantitative objective and strategy. 
Increased uncertainty about the economy’s structure and functioning and its response to a change in 
monetary  policy  may  have  another  implication  for  its  conduct.  As  pointed  out  a  long  time  ago  by 
William Brainard (1967) and subsequently by other economists7, this type of uncertainty suggests that 
it is prudent for a central bank to adopt a more cautious attitude in responding to shocks, leading to a 
more  “gradualist”  approach  in  the  conduct  of  policy.  This  conclusion  seems  to  imply  that  structural 
uncertainty  and  imperfect  knowledge  about  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  may  pose  a  trade-off 
between a cautious, gradualist response to shocks, and the need for timely and determined action. 
Addressing such a potential trade-off will require reliance on the most comprehensive and high-quality 
analyses  as  well  as  judgement.  But  under  most  circumstances,  prudence,  timeliness  and 
determination  are  not  likely  to  be  conflicting,  but  rather  complementary,  attributes  of  an  effective 
monetary policy. The commitment to an explicit price stability objective, the adoption of a well-defined 
strategy,  and  the  credible  conduct  of  policy  in  line  with  this  commitment  should  enhance  its 
effectiveness:  it  calls  for  determined  and  prompt  action,  though  without  unwarranted  activism  in 
responding to shocks and noisy signals. 
What does the available evidence tell us about the effectiveness and credibility of the ECB’s monetary 
policy? Euro area long-term inflation expectations, as measured in surveys or derived from financial 
market data, have remained remarkably well-anchored to price stability during a period characterised 
by numerous and sizeable inflation shocks.8 [see Chart 12] This conclusion is clearly supported by the 
findings  from  the  surveys  conducted  by  Consensus  Economics  and  from  the  ECB  Survey  of 
Professional  Forecasters.  Alternative  measures  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  can  be  obtained 
from the so-called breakeven inflation rates, derived from index-linked bonds, which are often referred 
to  as  “inflation  compensation”  in  the  United  States.  Breakeven  inflation  rates  have  been  higher  – 
occasionally considerably higher – than our definition of price stability and much more volatile. But this 
concept does not represent a pure measure of inflation expectations because the breakeven inflation 
rate incorporates inflation-risk and liquidity premia which may affect its level and time profile. Recent 
ECB studies have constructed quantitative estimates of euro area inflation-risk premia based on so-
called  macro-finance  and  affine  models  of  the  term  structure  of  interest  rates.  If  corrected  for  such 
premia,  long-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  breakeven  inflation  rates  appear  to  be  fully 
consistent  with  those  derived  from  survey  data  and  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability  (as 
shown in Chart 13). 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  credible  commitment  of  the  ECB  to  price  stability  and  the 
effective  communication  of  its  readiness  to  act  when  necessary  to  achieve  this  objective  have 
favourably  influenced  inflation  expectations  during  certain  periods,  without  making  it  necessary  to 
change  the  policy  stance  in  response  to  shocks  or  temporarily  deteriorating  expectations.9  This  is 
illustrated in Chart 13, which shows that inflation expectations, as measured by the consensus inflation 
forecast as well as by the five-year forward breakeven inflation rate, adjusted to take into account the 
inflation-risk and liquidity premia, have remained firmly anchored or have rapidly converged to price 
stability, even during the two-year period when the policy rate of the ECB remained unchanged. In that 
period, however, the ECB made it clear that it was exercising “strong vigilance” and was ready to act 
to  secure  price  stability.  More  recently,  since  last  December,  and  despite  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations,  policy  rates  have  been  steadily  adjusted  in  the  light  of  our  assessment  of  the  upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term. The credible commitment of policy must be preserved by 
action when this is warranted by the assessment of potential inflation risks over the medium term. 
                                                      
6   See Orphanides and Williams (2002). 
7   See Brainard (1967) and also, inter alia, Orphanides and Williams (2003) and (2006). 
8   These included, in addition to sizeable and persistent oil shocks, the effects of the cash changeover to the euro banknotes 
and coins, indirect tax increases, etc. 
9   See Trichet (2005). 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 7
Concluding remarks 
VI.  
“Nothing endures but change,” Heraclitus observed more than 2,500 years ago. His observation is still 
valid today. However, what is particular about the past decade and half is the acceleration of the rate 
of  change  coupled  with  the  all-encompassing  nature  of  the  change.  Globalisation,  technological 
advances, and financial innovation are altering economic relationships at an unprecedented pace. In 
such an environment of continuous and rapid change, it is vital that certain key values remain stable: 
one  of  these  is  the  real  value,  the  purchasing  power,  of  money.  A  central  bank  which  publicly  and 
credibly commits itself to attaining its price stability objective provides a compass that helps orient the 
expectations and actions of economic agents towards price stability.  
But  there  is  another  element  that  should  also  remain  stable:  the  need  to  continuously  improve  our 
analysis and extend the frontier of our knowledge about the structure, functioning and dynamics of the 
economy. And it is for this reason that I am looking forward to the sessions of this conference and to 
the fifth conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy to be held in May 2008 at 
the  ECB  in  Frankfurt am Main.  Incidentally,  if  we  return  to  the symbolic meaning of  numbers  that  I 
referred to at the start of my speech we find that, the number 5 is said to represent growth through 
experience, intellectual capacity, and the ability to think analytically and critically. In other words: the 
fifth conference is undoubtedly an event to look forward to! 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References: 
Borio, C. and A. Filardo (2006), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross country evidence on the global 
determinants of domestic inflation”, BIS, March. 
Brainard, W. (1967), “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy”, American Economic Review, Vol. 
57, No 2, May, pp. 411-25. 
Ciccarelli, M. and B. Mojon (2006), “Global inflation”, ECB working paper No. 537. 
European  Central  Bank  (1998)  “The  Quantitative  Reference  Value  for  Monetary  Growth”,  press 
release, 1 December, http://www.ecb.int/press/pr/date/1998/html/pr981201_3.en.html. 
Frey,  L.  and  G.  Moëc  (2006),  “Are  we  heading  towards  a  heightening  of  global  inflationary 
pressures?”, Bulletin Digest, Banque de France, No. 153, September. 
Orphanides,  A.  and  J.  C.  Williams  (2002),  “Robust  Monetary  Policy  Rules  with  Unknown  Natural 
Rates”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, pp. 63-118 . 
Orphanides, A. and J.C. Williams (2004), “Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations and Monetary 
Policy”, in B. Bernanke and M. Woodford (eds)., The Inflation-targeting Debate, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Orphanides, A. and J. C. Williams (2006), “Inflation Targeting under Imperfect Knowledge”, Finance 
and  Economics  Discussion  Paper  No 
Federal  Reserve  Board,  April, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2006/200620/200620abs.html
Trichet,  Jean-Claude  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Credible  Alertness”,  Intervention  at  the  Panel 
Discussion at the Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
27 August, http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2005/html/sp050827.en.html
2006-20, 
8 
 BIS Review 118/2006
 BIS Review 118/2006 
   9
   10 
 BIS Review 118/2006
   11
BIS Review 118/2006 
    12 
 BIS Review 118/2006
   13
BIS Review 118/2006 
    14 
 BIS Review 118/2006
 15
BIS Review 118/2006 
 