Petar Goshev: Importance of the relevant statistical data for the market 
economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  at  the 
Statistics Symposium "Importance of statistical data in the process of creation of domestic policy and 
accession to the EU", Skopje, 4 October 2006. 
 Importance of the statistics 
"Nothing  is  more  important  for  monetary  policy  than  good  statistics"  says  the  first  President  of  the 
European  Monetary  Institute,  Alexandre  Lamfalussy,  in  the  foreword  of  the  publication  "Statistical 
Needs of the Monetary Union" (1996).  
The relevance of this statement is known to all those who work at the central banks and are directly or 
indirectly involved in the monetary policy outlining and implementation. Even though, nowadays, the 
central banks operate in far more stable economic and political environment, they are aware that their 
capability  of  conducting  a  good  policy,  largely  depends  on  the  quality  of  their  statistics.  The 
performances  of  the  complex  economic  models  which  have  been  developed  recently  and  the 
capability of the policy makers to achieve the set objectives and tasks depend, more than ever, on the 
relevance of the information they get on the economy. 
Hence, the statistical data represent a key input in the macroeconomic policy making, including the 
monetary  policy.  They  are  an  indicator  for  the  performances  of  the  economy  and  a  basis  for  the 
adoption  of  current  decisions,  and  at  the  same  time  they  underlie  the  projections  for  the  future 
developments. Therefore their quality, impartiality and timeliness are crucial for successful functioning 
of  the  economy  of  any  country.  In  addition,  the  statistical  indicators  are  also  a  basis  for  the 
comparative  analyses  with  the  economies  of  other  countries  and  are  essentially  relevant  for 
positioning of the economy, worldwide. 
Statistics in the National Bank  
The  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  is  largely  focused  on  the  design  and  the 
development of the statistics. Two years ago, in the process of reorganization of the National Bank 
operations,  a  separate  Statistics  Department  was  formed  that  unites  all  macroeconomic  statistics, 
previously processed in several departments. Its establishment constitutes a centralized organization 
of  the  macroeconomic  statistics  maintained  by  the  National  Bank.  It  ensures  larger  coordination, 
methodological conformity and consistence between each type of statistics.  
The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, together with the State Statistical Office are main 
institutions  that  prepare  statistical  data  in  the  country.  Same  as  most  central  banks  throughout  the 
world,  the  National  Bank,  as  specified  by  the  Statistical  Research  Program  generates  three  sets  of 
macroeconomic statistics:  
• 
Monetary statistics that includes processing and presentation of data on the money supply 
(monetary  aggregates),  banks'  interest  rates  on  approved  credits  and  accepted  deposits, 
and many other data on the banking sector; 
Balance  of  payments  statistics  that  includes  processing  and  compiling  data  on  the 
developments in the balance of payments in the Republic of Macedonia; and  
External debt statistics that includes processing and presentation of data on the foreign debt 
of the country.  
  The  National  Bank  has  developed  all  these  major  sets  of  macroeconomic  statistics  in  line  with  the 
international recommendations and standards. The harmonization of the method of developing such 
statistics  with  the  international  recommendations  and  standards  has  permanently  been  subject  to 
verification  by  international  institutions  and  organizations,  primarily  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund, as an institution that creates the methodological standards and recommendations in the area of 
central banking statistics. I would like to take this opportunity to mention the report of the so-called IMF 
ROSC (Report of the Observance on Standards and Codes) Mission, where the assessments of the 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
central  bank  statistics  are  particularly  positive,  i.e.  the  development  of  the  NBRM  monetary  and 
balance  of  payments  statistics  is  largely  harmonized  with  the  international  recommendations  and 
standards. We are particularly focused on the given comments and recommendations for the purposes 
of further improvement and development of the statistics.  
We, however, consider that we still lack a sufficiently good statistics, but we have a good foundation 
for that purpose. By ascertaining this, I do not only imply to the necessity of ongoing methodological 
harmonization of the various statistics with the international standards and what has not been done in 
this  light,  but  particularly  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  new  needs  and  requirements  for  new  statistical 
researches. 
Challenges of the statistics 
The change in the conditions of the operating environment of the central banks brings about a change 
in their needs and interests in statistical data. I would therefore like to underline several events in the 
economy that happened over the recent several years that considerably affected the development of 
the statistics and that indicate the need of new statistical researches:  
• 
First, the rapidly increased role of the financial sector that significantly affected the dynamics, 
quality  and  structure  of  the  economy  in  the  future.  For  the  central  banks,  this  means  an 
obligation to make deeper analyses in this area, requiring an availability of more detailed and 
relevant  statistical  data.  Here,  I  especially  refer  to  more  detailed  data  on  and  from  other 
financial  institutions  (investment  funds,  private  pension  funds,  insurance  companies,  etc.) 
and to the new financial instruments developed in line with the development of the financial 
market.  
Second, the central banks in developed economies are increasingly focused on more subtle 
analyses  of  the  financial  system  stability  in  their countries,  and  inevitably,  as  a  result  and 
consequence of the globalization, in wider terms. It requires access to various information. 
We also face this imperative, if seeking to successfully address the potential financial market 
vulnerabilities  and  crises.  Thus,  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  economy  and  its 
interdependence with all other sectors created a need of establishment of a proper financial 
account statistics. Statistics that shows the flow of the financial assets across each sector in 
the  economy.  The  successful  delivery  of  this  project  needs  joint  work  and  cooperation 
between  the  National  Bank  and  the  State  Statistical  Office.  I  believe  that  the  team  of  Ms. 
Novkovska and the experts of the National Bank will deliver this project successfully. Without 
this type of statistics, our financial stability analyses will lie on less certain ground. 
Third, there is a higher need of statistical treatment of the funds with the household sector. 
The steady increase in the funds of the household is an important trend which is present in 
the modern economy, and lately in our country, mainly owing to the fact that they have better 
access to banking credits. Considering the importance of this sector in the economy, there is 
a  need of  increasing  the  range  of statistical  information  that  refer  to  the  household sector 
with a view to more relevant determining and analyzing of their current and future behavior. 
Certainly, once more aimed at more successful financial risk management.  
Fourth,  the  European  Union  membership  requires  methodological  harmonization  of  the 
statistics  with  the  requirements  and  standards  of  the  European  Union,  which  is  not  easy. 
This  is  particularly  important  for  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  as  a  future  European  Union 
member-state, and requires immediate actions for improving and adjusting of the statistics to 
the European Union requirements and standards.  
   Besides the need of holding relevant statistical data, the National Bank pays special attention to the 
reporting  costs  incurred  by  those  who  reports.  For  that  purpose,  activities  for  rationalization  and 
reduction  of  the  reporting  encumbrance  are  underway,  by  simplifying  the  reporting  forms,  careful 
selection  of  requested  data,  etc.  Certainly,  such  rationalization  takes  into  account  the  need  of 
providing and holding data necessary for preparation of the macroeconomic statistics in line with the 
international requirements and recommendations.  
2 
 BIS Review 100/2006
Cooperation with other institutions 
The National Bank, same as other central banks worldwide, is an institution that permanently conducts 
numerous macroeconomic researches and analyses, for successful performance of its core functions 
and tasks. Therefore, apart from the development of own statistics, the National Bank plays the role of 
a large user of statistical information from other institutions. In this light, I would like to emphasize the 
cooperation  of  the  National  Bank  with  both  domestic  and  foreign  institutions  in  the  exchange  of 
statistical information.  
Among the foreign institutions, I would like to highlight the successful cooperation with the Bank for 
International  Settlement,  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank,  EUROSTAT,  etc.  in  the 
area of exchange of statistical information. I would particularly like to note that this year, the National 
Bank  officially  became  a  member  of  the  Irving  Fisher  Committee  on  central  bank  statistics  that 
operates  within  the  International  Statistical  Institute,  and  represents  a  forum  of  central  bank 
economists and statisticians. This is a good opportunity to improve the statistics of the National Bank, 
since the primary objective of the Committee is to promote an exchange of viewpoints between the 
economists, statisticians and central bank policy makers, on all relevant statistical issues of interest for 
the central banks.  
The State Statistical Office, as an institution responsible for the official state statistics, that produces 
data covering various sectors in the economy, is an indispensable source of data for the needs of our 
analyses. So far, we have a successful cooperation with the State Statistical Office, underpinned by 
the  Agreement  on  Mutual  Cooperation  and  Exchange  of Data. Our macroeconomic  analysis  mainly 
make  use  of  the  data  covering  the  real  sector  of  the  economy,  such  as  data  on  prices,  economic 
activity, employment, wages, etc., as well as data on the foreign trade sector. We strongly support the 
endeavors of the experts and leaders of this institution to improve their work and we join the requests 
of the State Statistical Office to the competent state institutions to make efforts to provide better and 
more stimulating work conditions of this institution that is vitally important for the country. 
Improvement of the statistics 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Econometric  modeling  and  econometric  analyses  are  worldwide  developed  practices,  in  which  the 
National  Bank  and  our  country,  in  general,  are  still  taking  the  first  steps.  Given  the  fact  that 
econometrics is based on statistics, having adequate and consistent statistical data at disposal is of 
key importance for the development of this type of contemporary analyses. Therefore, again we call 
for  making  greater  efforts  in  the  area  of  statistics  and  for  increased  awareness  of  all  competent 
institutions in the country about its vital importance for the national economy. The employees of the 
State  Statistical  Office  are  best  aware  of  how  important  it  is  to  have  detailed  statistical  databases 
which are  public and easily  accessible for  the users.  They know how  important  it  is  to  improve  the 
statistics in the area of gross domestic product on a quarterly basis, which is very important for regular 
and updated monitoring of the economic activity. They have our full support and cooperation for the 
purpose of providing that statistics, too.  
At  the  same  time,  it  is  our  understanding  that  there  is  a  need  of  additional  calculations  related  to 
inflation, and especially to the core inflation rate, on which the State Statistical Office has not been 
publishing data so far. Inflation index weight structure is of utmost importance for detailed and quality 
analysis  of  the  movement  of  inflation  and  determining  the  main  generators  of  inflation.  In  other 
countries, weights are publicly available and are published on the statistical offices' web sites, while in 
our country, they are still treated as confidential data, which restricts the analytical possibilities. The 
Central Bank needs improved statistics in the area of employment, id est, unemployment, as well as in 
the area of construction. As a result of lack of more detailed data, so far the Central Bank had to make 
its own additional calculations for the analyses, and to create its own databases, which in the other 
countries are products of the official statistical offices. We understand that the State Statistical Office 
has been working on the improvement of the statistics in these sectors also, and we are very eager to 
see the results. 
Within the scope of its activities, NBRM participates in the preparation of the official macroeconomic 
projections. Due to the need for improvement of the analyses and the projections and for following the 
contemporary trends in central banks' operations, the National Bank has started to conduct surveys. 
For the time being, that includes the survey of the most important exporters and importers, the inflation 
expectations survey, and the survey of banks' credit activity. The State Statistical Office contributed to 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 3
the realization of part of the aforementioned surveys, by providing information and consultations, for 
which we are especially grateful. However, I would take this opportunity to ask the entities selected for 
the needs of these surveys to maintain and improve their cooperation with the Central Bank, since at 
the end of the day, those surveys serve for the needs of the entire economy, including themselves. 
Central  banks  are  providers,  but  also  massive  users  of  statistical  information  and  data,  which  will 
continue to be the case in the future, too. However, the nature of the information and data necessary 
for performing the tasks of the central banks constantly changes. Statistics departments are aware of 
this fact and in order to be able to take the new challenges and meet the new requirements they have 
to  improve  their  knowledge  and  techniques  continuously,  and  apply  operational  methods  in 
accordance with the international standards and recommendations. It is a great task, which will never 
come to an end. 
Therefore, in conclusion of this speech, being aware of the importance of statistics, I would like once 
again to emphasize the readiness of the officials in the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia to 
cooperate  with  every  institution  in  the  country  for  the  purpose  of  improving  this,  I  would  call  it, 
"unsubstitutional food", for any kind of more serious economic analyses and providing fundamentals 
for economic decision-making of any kind.  
4 
 BIS Review 100/2006
