Timothy Ridley: Reading the tea leaves – whither the private trust industry in 
the Cayman Islands 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Ridley,  Chairman  of  the  Cayman  Islands  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
10th Anniversary Dinner of STEP Cayman, George Town, Grand Cayman, 25 October 2006. 
 First, may I thank the STEP council for paying me the honour of inviting me to address you on the 
occasion of the 10th anniversary of STEP Cayman. Secondly, I must issue the usual caveat that my 
comments tonight are personal and do not necessarily reflect the official Cayman Islands Monetary 
Authority (CIMA) position. Finally, may I warn you that it is indeed daunting to speak to those who are 
considerably  more  expert  than  I  on  trust  and  trust  related  matters.  So  please  consider  this  an 
avuncular ‘fireside chat” from a retired warhorse that must be suffered politely by those paying for his 
nosebag. 
We have enjoyed a breathless two decades in the Cayman Islands and not simply due to Hurricanes 
Gilbert  and  Ivan.  Cayman  and  other  small  international  financial  centres  (SIFCs  as  we  are  now 
termed) have struggled to deal with the onslaught of the UK, the US, the EU and their client alphabet 
soup international standard setters (who seem dedicated to the game of leapfrog). The enthusiasm of 
the  UK  is  particularly  ironic,  given  that  the  mother  country  had  for  many  years  encouraged  her 
offspring to develop as financial centres in order to reduce the financial burden on the UK. The cost to 
the SIFCs in terms of financial and human resources and lost opportunities has been significant, as 
was perhaps the very intention of the anti competitive and protectionist drivers of the onslaught. But by 
dint  of  fleet  footwork,  hard  work  and  some  good  fortune  we  have  survived  and  indeed  thrived  and 
have  become  an  important  cog  in  the  wheel  of  global  capital  markets.  But  the  onslaught  is  by  no 
means finished. Indeed we may merely be at the end of the beginning. Where the initiatives can be 
expected to go next must be left for another evening. 
Tonight, I propose to spend a little time on the subject nearest and dearest to the hearts and minds of 
many a STEP member. If there is one piece of the Cayman success story that lacks the full luster of 
the others it is perhaps the private client segment. It may very well be not so much that Cayman is 
losing ground to its competitors but that private client and trust business, while reasonably successful, 
has been overshadowed by the overwhelming success of the banking, insurance, structured finance 
and  more  recently  fund  industries  that  have  been  the  primary  focus  of  the  local  and  international 
professionals and service providers. Dare I say it, because the pickings have been far better. Local 
anecdotal cocktail party chat seems to be that we think we are perceived as not much interested in 
private client and trust work, as not being the dynamic innovators we once were and as not having 
moved with the times both to innovate and also to relax some of the more burdensome aspects of our 
regulatory regime, particularly with respect to the licensing of private trust companies. Against that, we 
still have an excellent cross section of major brand named trust companies and a good and growing 
number  (around  80)  of  licensed  private  trust  companies.  Of  course  we  do  not  know  the  number  of 
private trust companies in our main competitor jurisdictions as they are generally not required to be 
licensed. 
Over the past few months I have been informally polling local and overseas professionals to ascertain 
their  views.  It  is  certainly  the  case  that  the  feedback  from  the  local  enquiries  was  somewhat 
pessimistic. The overseas feedback less so. 
Apart  from  immigration,  the  high  cost  of  doing  business  in  Cayman  (including  may  I  say  local 
professional  fees)  and  the  knock-on  effects  (subjects  for  yet  another  evening),  the  common  theme 
from most local (and some overseas) professionals is the uncompetitive regulation or overregulation of 
private trust companies and the cumbersome and sometimes intrusive licensing procedures. Following 
discussions  between  CIMA  and  STEP,  I  am  hopeful  that  you  will  see  an  improvement  in  the 
processing  of  applications  and  a  reduction  in  the  time  taken  to  carry  out  the  due  diligence.  In 
particular, CIMA welcomes an early filing of the details of directors, shareholders, settlers etc so we 
can  commence  our  due  diligence  as  early  as  possible.  We  are  also  reviewing  the  personal 
questionnaire  to  see  if  it  can  be  shortened  and  also  made  more  “user  friendly”.  The  proposal  that 
CIMA issue a general advisory or guidance as to what we consider not “carrying on trust business” 
and thus not requiring licensing runs the risk of making black white and did not find favour with us. So 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 1
we will not be so proceeding. Nevertheless, CIMA will continue to entertain specific submissions for 
“no action” letters as has happened occasionally in the past. 
The  foregoing  may  be  a  temporary  band-aid.  We  at  CIMA  very  much  prefer  to  see  a  legislative 
solution to the problem and have so indicated to STEP. I believe the Deputy Financial Secretary, Ms 
Deborah  Drummond,  leans  to  this  view  also.  I  personally  would  be  supportive  of  a  less  stringent 
regime,  given  that  an  application  of  CIMA’s  internal  risk  rating  has  resulted  in  nearly  all  existing 
licensed private trust companies being categorized as “low” risk. But these matters are not always as 
simple as they may first seem. We must be mindful that there is significant pressure from outside to 
extend  regulation  rather  than  reduce  it.  And  it  is  necessarily  more  difficult  to  argue  the  case  for 
deregulation  than  simply  not  to  regulate  something  in  the  first  place.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  not 
aware that there was any in-depth analysis of the need to regulate private trust companies in the early 
1960’s immediately prior to the enactment of the Banks and Trust Companies Law in 1966 (Cayman 
simply copied the Bahamas legislation lock, stock and barrel). Demand for the animal in the form we 
now know it was small if not non existent. Wealthy settlors (often with inherited UK/US wealth) were 
content to entrust their assets passively to brand named trust companies. Today, the drivers of the 
private trust companies are very much entrepreneurial families from all around the globe who have 
little time for traditional corporate trustees and who wish to control more closely the investment of the 
assets. Equally, old line corporate trustees struggle to fit the demands of such clients and their risk 
appetites within the traditional trust framework. The best solution to these frictions is often the private 
trust  company  controlled  by  the  family  (or  family  friends  or  friendly  trustees  or  charities)  perhaps 
administered by an unrelated corporate trustee (or more likely by the family office). 
Since  CIMA’s  position  is  that  regulation  must  meet  the  test  that  it  be  necessary,  appropriate  and 
proportional and that the benefits must outweigh the burdens and costs, it seems to me very timely 
that we revisit the 41 year old regulatory regime for private trust companies in that light. Prima facie, it 
appears to me the burdens of the current system outweigh the benefits. This is underscored by the 
fact that a number of key competitor jurisdictions such as Bermuda, BVI, Jersey and even Singapore 
choose  not  to  regulate  private  trust  companies  or  subject  them  to  a  lighter  touch.  Further,  there  is 
currently  no  international  standard  setter  mandating  the  regulation  of  trust  companies  or  company 
managers. To-date CIMA has followed the Offshore Group of Banking Supervisors Statement of Best 
Practice for Trust and Company Service Providers. This Statement interestingly notes that a number 
of jurisdictions do not regulate trust and company service providers, but does not specifically address 
the  issue  of  private  trust  companies,  although  it  does  recognise  a  “lighter  touch”  is  appropriate  for 
those, such as company formation agents, who do not act as trustees. 
Cayman has recently set something of a precedent by reducing the regulation of debt issuing trustees 
wholly owned by licensed trust companies. I hope that this first toe in the water can be the basis for a 
broader review of the regulatory regime so that we can enhance Cayman’s attractiveness for Islamic 
finance structures (that require the use of a special purpose trustee company) and for family/private 
trust companies by reducing the level of regulation or by eliminating it entirely. My personal preference 
would be to amend the definition of “carrying on trust business” in the Banks and Trust Companies 
Regulation Law so that the activities of a typical special purpose trust company or family/private trust 
company fall outside the scope of the Law. 
There is proper concern about not watering down the scope of our anti money laundering regime. It is 
arguable that the general AML regime that applies to all Cayman entities is sufficient for private trust 
companies.  An  alternative  would  be  to  require  that  any  private  trust  company  (even  if  no  longer 
licensed)  continue  to  appoint  a  local  unrestricted  trust  company  as  its  authorized  agent  with 
responsibility for ensuring AML compliance. While on the subject of AML, I should mention that the 
Guidance Notes Committee has started its work to see how we can move our AML regime to a more 
flexible (dare I say it common sense) principle and risk based system rather than the current overly 
prescriptive  and  rule  based  system.  This  will  certainly  help  reduce  the  unfortunate  perception  of 
Cayman’s gold-plated and over egged regime. 
There are also concerns about the loss of revenue to the Government if the existing 80 or so restricted 
trust  companies  were  to  deregister.  No  doubt  the  auditors  would  also  file  objections  but  I  think  we 
could safely ignore those. To solve the loss of revenue, I would suggest that the precedent set by the 
mutual  fund  industry  be  followed.  So  if  the  sector  servicing  private  client  business  recommends 
deregulating private trust companies, I trust they will support the quid pro quo of an increase in their 
fees to balance the Governments books. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2006
The  final  issue  is  how  to  retain  some  overall  monitoring  and  to  obtain  useful  statistical  information 
about  the  number  of  private  trust  companies  in  existence  in  Cayman.  I  personally  dislike  a  system 
whereby CIMA does not (properly) regulate an entity yet still bears the reputational risk because there 
is a filing or registration with it, and perhaps a nominal fee. And I think we need to steer clear of words 
such as “exempted” or “excluded” as these seem now to raise red flags in the eyes of the alphabet 
soupers. One suggestion to consider is that there be a separate PTC category under the Companies 
Law (perhaps in the same manner as LDCs or SPCs) in a way that would enable the Government to 
keep track of the number of these entities and also charge an additional fee! An alternative may be to 
require  the  local  authorized  agent  to  file  with  CIMA  or  the  Government  a  quarterly  list  of  its 
unregulated private trust company clients. 
Let me now turn to what we might consider doing to regain our reputation for innovation. Let me back 
up a little by saying that I do not think that “compliance fatigue” alone stopped us innovating. For many 
years Cayman was the leading inventor and enhancer. In the trust field alone we saw the Fraudulent 
Dispositions Law, the Trusts (Foreign Elements) Law, the STAR trust, the Perpetuities Law and the 
reserved powers trust. But inevitably the speed of innovation slowed as we could find no new Holy 
Grails. Other jurisdictions simply turned the photocopier on (as admittedly we do too), and there has 
thus been a great convergence of products in the various competitor jurisdictions. But there are some 
things out there we should look at. And we must always listen closely to what our business producers 
are telling us. So I put these ideas forward for you to chew on. First, should we abolish the rule against 
perpetuities entirely and allow South Dakota style dynasty trusts and as also proposed in some SIFCs. 
Second, should we reduce the 6 year period in our Fraudulent Dispositions Law to match that of the 
Bahamas? In this connection, is our Bankruptcy Law a potential deterrent to wealthy clients actually 
coming  to  live  here  (check  the  sections  on  settlements)?  Third,  should  we  move  ahead  with  a 
Foundations Law? Fourth, should we revisit extending the Hague Convention on Trusts to the Cayman 
Islands?  Fifth,  would  investor  protection  treaties  help?  Sixth,  should  we  include  a  Delaware  style 
statutory limitation on trustees’ liability? Seventh, what can we do to deal with the long term threat that 
the  EUSD  will  be  expanded  to  include  all  types  of  passive  income  and  cut-through  provisions 
applicable  to  companies,  trusts,  partnerships  and  other  entities  (even  Foundations  and  Anstalts!)? 
Lastly, is our court and judicial structure of respected generalists the right one for increasingly complex 
and lengthy litigation? 
These are all ideas that various of you and your overseas colleagues have floated. I suggest that the 
time has come to stop floating and to get some focused discussion and agreement on what should be 
done. I know that STEP will find that the Deputy Financial Secretary will lend a willing ear. 
I hope this evening I have given you some small cause for optimism and much food for thought. Thank 
you very much for listening. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 3
