Ardian Fullani: Past and future banking reforms in Albania and the region 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  The  Fifth  International  Banking 
Forum, Athens, Greece, 6 December 2006. 
 Honorable Dr. Margret Doyle, 
Dear Mr. Chairman,   
Distinguished participants, 
Before starting my speech I would like to briefly address the perennial question that stands at the heart 
of our quest: “Are the prosperous times ahead of us?” It comes to my assistance an old saying of one 
of  your  ancient  philosophers,  Eupides:  “Prosperity  is  full  of  friends”.  As  we  are  gathered  here  as 
friends, I believe we have a positive answer to this question.  
I  would  like  to  thank  “The  Economist  Conferences”  for  inviting  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  this  very 
important  forum.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today.  The  topic  of  my  speech  will  be  economic 
reforms.  I  will  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  views  on  past  and  future  banking  and  financial 
reforms  in  Albania  and  the  region.  The  topic  is  not  new  of  course.  However,  reforms  and  their 
implementation  are  a  dynamic  process  that  must  reflect  changes  and  expectations  for  future 
developments in both domestic and global markets. Therefore, it will always be an open discussion in 
need for new ideas and solutions. 
Central banks are important contributors to the economic reforms and their implementation. They not 
only welcome and support but also generate reforms in the capital, labor, and product markets. Such 
reforms have ripple effects that go beyond economic benefit of a long run stable growth and financial 
stability.  I  believe  that  positive  spillovers  will  be  materialized  in  the  South  East  European  region’s 
prosperity and its economic and political integration in European Union. 
The Bank of Albania has been a constant generator and supporter of reforms both institutionally and 
as the provider of stable prices, sound macroeconomic conditions and financial stability. It makes an 
undeniable fact that financial integration which we are experiencing will be to the forefront of European 
Union  integration  process.  It  will  ease  the  challenges  and  speed  up  the  process  of  European 
integration which Albanians have embraced by wide popular consent. 
Like in many other transition economies banking reforms in Albania were implemented as an integral 
part  of  the  structural  reforms  undertaken  to  transform  the  Albanian  economy  in  a  market  oriented 
economy.  Continuous  improvement,  along  with  approval  and  implementation  of  new  banking 
legislation and supervisory regulation; liquidation and privatization process of the state owned banks; 
and foreign ownership; have change banking and financial markets.  
Foreign banks have been an important push factor toward increasing efficiency, number, quality, and 
coverage of financial intermediation. New entries, mergers and acquisitions are recently altering the 
market  structure  in  both  asset  and  liabilities.  Reforms  that  brought  big  European  players  and  their 
capital in the market, have further increased confidence in our economy and in the region as whole.  
However,  the  presence  of  foreign  banks  does  not  replace  the  need  for  legal  and  institutional 
framework. Moreover, latest developments in banking and financial markets might foster additional risk 
factors related to asymmetric exposure, issues of home host supervision and financial safety net with 
foreign  banks  dominance. These challenges  and  the  expected  financial  developments  in  the  region 
will outline the scope and the structure of reforms in the future. So, please allow me to briefly present 
my view on the future trends of regional financial markets.   
Financial  markets  in  the  region  are  becoming  part  of  broader  global  developments  which  fuels 
financial  integration,  liberalization,  and  financial  innovation.  The  lucrative  regional  market  and  the 
consolidation  process  have  imposed  a  vertical  financial  integration  in  the  region.  Less  than  ten 
European banks with headquarters in Vienna, Athens or Milan dominate the regional banking markets. 
The process of financial integration will continue, making the region more and more integrated to the 
European Countries. Financial systems are leading the road to financial integration and the positive 
spillovers of such process will spread over.  
Financial markets are and will continue to be bank dominated. Non banking financial sector will grow 
very rapidly, but banks will continue to be the major players. They will help to further build the needed 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 1
financial infrastructure for nonbanking financial activities, and support growth in our economies. Not 
long ago I asked a friend of mine who had recently returned from migration after 15 years: “Why did 
you come back”? His answer was simple but true: “It is not important for me where I like to live – he 
said – it is important where the opportunities are”. As the gap in living standards closes and Albanians 
see opportunities flourishing in Albania, they will come back. They will bring important human capital 
and  managerial  skills,  which  they  have  gained  in  the  countries  where  they  work.  Many  Albanian 
emigrants are at this stage of the migration cycle and we see potential benefits from such a process. It 
is the role of banks to match this human capital with necessary financial capital and provide financial 
services to develop their entrepreneur skills.  
This role comes very naturally to Greek commercial banks that operate in Albania, which I take the 
opportunity  to  thank  for  their  early  confidence  in  Albania.  They  are  natural  partners  for  these  new 
entrepreneurs  who  are  familiar  with  the  culture,  and  probably  have  a  long  history  operating  with 
respective Greek offices. The fact that such ventures could also involve Greek capital in the case of 
pure joint investments makes one more argument in support of my observation. According to the Bank 
of Albania surveys, Greek companies are ranked first by the size of capital invested in the Albanian 
economy, while holding the second place for the number of Foreign Direct Investments.  
The  involvement  of  these  banks  in  financing  such  activities  will  play  a  positive  role  in  shifting  the 
balance of the loans portfolio from retail and consumer crediting toward production activities in industry 
and agriculture. At the same time, it might also fuel the growth rate of credit to economy, which has 
already experienced very rapid growth during the last two years, raising concerns for macroeconomic 
and financial stability. 
The results of reforms were not limited only to the openness and development of domestic financial 
market. They generated price and financial stability, sustained economic growth, assisted institutional 
building and increased confidence. These developments attracted interest of, and brought big financial 
groups in the region in general and Albania in particular. As I mentioned above entry of big financial 
groups,  and  the  consolidation  process  that  has  followed  since  will  continue  to  grow.  What  we  are 
observing right now in the market is that the big fish is eating the small fish; the very big fish is eating 
the big fish in the European market with implications for the host countries. However, the process is far 
from over, gigantic fish (global player) might enter the region by eating the very big fish. Last but not 
the least, there will be mergers among domestic banks as well.  
Despite the increase in the concentration ratio that comes with these mergers and acquisitions, we 
have  started  to  observe  increased  competition  in  our  market.  This  competition  increases  efficiency, 
introduces new services and products, lowers spreads and generates positive spillovers for economic 
activity. While this makes a good precondition to foster financial stability, it is not a sufficient condition 
to increase financial discipline.  
Currently, the activities of financial institutions and commercial banks have a limited scope; however, 
we are starting to see the signs of financial conglomeration. We have no doubt that this trend will grow 
and  continue  in  the  future.  It  will  bring  innovation,  new  financial  instruments  and  products  in  the 
market. Along with this, rapid growth of credit and debit cards as well as other systems of payments 
will continue to grow. While these instruments might not subside or even reduce the use of cash, this 
trend must be taken into account.  
Transition economies of the region are lucrative markets. They are growing substantially faster than 
traditional European markets and offer impressive prospects for high profits and significant growth. To 
give you an example, return on banking activity in Albania during the last two years has been around 
20 percent. These positive prospects and the eagerness to compete quickly and beyond rational limits 
for profits and market share may create potential risks. If managers were to lose sight of the entire 
picture,  and  financial  constrains,  such  competition  might  result  in  mismanagement,  nonperforming 
loans, and other banking problems. Therefore, there is no room for sloppy managerial attitude. It is 
very important that managerial staff must be up to the challenges which, if materialized, could be more 
complex  than  in  the  self-regulated  developed  markets.  It  is  important  to  act  enbloc  and  engage  in 
regional projects of infrastructure including here the financial ones.  
We  have  great  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  banking  system  to  promote  the  best  banking  and 
cautionary  practices;  however,  I  believe  that  preemptive  action  is  needed  to  ensure  that  latest 
observed  trends  do  not  hamper  financial  stability.  Therefore,  we  cannot  neglect  improving  our 
legislative,  regulatory  and  prudential  measures  as  a  major  element  of  financial  sector  reforms  in 
Albania.  
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
In  this  regard,  a  new  Draft  Banking  Law  is  prepared  by  Bank  of  Albania;  likewise,  a  new  Law  on 
Securities will be introduced shortly. In addition, efforts are underway to revise legislation on Pension 
and Investment Funds, and draft a Law on the Payments Systems, which will substitute several sub-
legal acts issued by the Bank of Albania until now. This process aims at gradual harmonization of the 
banking legislation with that of the Acquis Communnautaire.  
To  address  issues  of  increased  competition,  poor  managerial  practices  and  safeguard  stability,  the 
Bank  of  Albania  is  working  toward  establishing  a  Credit  Registry,  revising  regulatory  framework  on 
capital adequacy ratio and credit risk management, increasing on-site supervision, and improving its 
stress-testing  models.  Following  Financial  Stability  and  Assessment  Program 
(FSAP) 
recommendations,  a  separate  entity  “The  Authority  of  Financial  Supervision”,  has  been  established 
recently to supervise the securities, insurance and pension funds markets.  
Last but not the least, I would like to address the implementation of the Basel II accord. While it will 
shape the financial market, I believe it will pose challenges to our banking system and to us at the 
moment.  We  have  initiated  the  implementation  of  the  new  accord,  but  we  are  currently  being 
pragmatic  to  approve  only  the  adoption  of  well  understood  elements  of  Basel  II  that  can  be 
implemented in a safe way.  
Now, I would like to shift your attention to the other important pillar of banking reforms: the role of the 
central bank itself and its monetary policy. The contribution of the Bank of Albania to the economic 
reforms comes also through maintaining stable prices and helping to ensure financial stability. Over 
the last five years the Bank of Albania stability oriented monetary policy has generated low and stable 
inflation;  it  has  also  ensured  that  medium  and  long  run  inflation  expectations  have  been  well 
contained. The economic growth has been robust at around 5-6 percent of GDP, while enjoying a high 
degree of financial stability. Reflecting broadly on the nature of the monetary policy I would say that it 
has always been focused on maintaining price stability and using the control of monetary aggregates 
as an intermediate target. Current account and foreign exchange transactions were liberalized at the 
early stages of transition along with the adoption of the free floating exchange rate regime.   
Indirect instruments are been used to transmit interest rate and liquidity signals to the market. Repo 
rate has become the signaling tool for short term interest rates while repo and reverse-repo operations 
are  used  to  manage  liquidity.  Reforms  in  the  conduct  of  the  monetary  policy  have  granted  greater 
flexibility to banks to determine both the volume and terms of lending and deposits.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  provided  all  necessary  conditions  to  ensure  sustainable  economic  growth 
and  stable  prices;  however  it  alone  can  not  guarantee  that  the  objectives  will  be  fulfilled.  All  these 
positive  developments  have  taken  place  in  the  presence  of  a  well  contained  fiscal  expansion,  as 
element of sound fiscal policy and bold structural reforms.  
Banking  system  has  become  an  important  provider  of  domestic  financing  for  the  government. 
Commercial banks have played a major role in it, while direct financing from the Bank of Albania was 
limited to address issues of independence and deficit monetization. Recently Government introduced 
to  market  papers  of  five  years  maturity.  In  addition,  with  the  consent  of  the  IMF,  government  will 
shortly issue euro denominated government securities. Bank of Albania welcomes such development 
as a certification of cautious and responsible fiscal policy. At the same time we call for more prudence 
and proper addressing additional risks.  
It is undeniable however, that these latest developments have been achieved under the watchful eye 
of  International  Monetary  Fund.  IMF  has  been  an  important  element  of  the  reforms  in  Albania.  Its 
presence and the memorandum of understanding signed under the framework of ESAF and current 
blend  of  PRGF  and  EEF  Programs,  enhanced  credibility  of  our  economic  reforms  and  served  as 
external anchors. However, as our economy grows and current agreement ends at 2009, we will soon 
get  full  ownership  of  our  economic  policies  with  a  reduced  role  of  IMF  under  article  4  of  the 
Agreement.  
The Bank of Albania has a proven track record of competence, credibility and professionalism in the 
service of our economy. These three elements provide necessary conditions to support and guarantee 
achievement of economic goal of stable prices and boost credibility in Albanian economy; but, we can 
not be hold responsible for the behavior of the other players. I am convinced that we need to find and 
implement clear domestic and foreign anchors to preserve the credibility of our reforms in the future. 
For the way ahead we are focusing our efforts in the identification and utilization of key elements of the 
state, politics, markets, institutions and general public that could efficiently play the role of domestic 
anchors. As part of this preemptive action, the Bank of Albania is carefully considering the possibility 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 3
to  launch  a  fully  fledged  inflation  targeting  regime  of  monetary  policy  in  the midterm.  This will  be  a 
conditional decision based upon results of current ongoing research, evaluation of the preconditions 
and building up of capacities. Other possible anchors such as a memorandum of understanding with 
ministry of finance and public education are considered as well.  
On  the  foreign  side  we  see  numerous  prestigious  partners  which  understand  our  concerns  and 
appreciate the value of fiscal discipline. They enjoy the power and the virtues of an influential voice. 
Some of them have already been partners in reforms and will be shaping the future ones. European 
integration process and the Association and Stabilization Agreement that we just signed in provides 
nominal anchors. In addition, sovereign ratings and other independent country reports could also play 
this  role.  The  Bank  of  Albania  intends  to  establish  open  lines  of  communication  and  adopts 
instruments that will automatically start building up pressures before it is too late.  
My personal conviction is that European Accession lies out as a natural process, where central banks 
have  a  vital  role  to  play.  This  approach  would  be  of  mutual  benefit  and  it  will  speed  up  the 
convergence  toward  European  standards,  making  the  political  decision  a  natural  outcome  of  our 
efforts. To make this process more effective the central banks and the European institutions should 
continue  the  dialogue,  why  not  even  by  surveillance,  supporting,  assisting  and  guiding  us  in 
fundamentals  and  economic  financial  and  legal,  infrastructure.  This  process  would  increase  our 
responsibility and accountability to make Albania an eligible partner. 
Let me conclude my discussion quoting Euripides who says: “Much effort, much prosperity”.  
Thank you again. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2006
