Toshihiko Fukui: Overall review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary 
policy  
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Councillors, Tokyo, 31 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2005 to the Diet on June 9, 2006. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's economy is expanding moderately. 
Exports  have  continued  to  increase  due  to  the  expansion  of  overseas  economies.  Business  fixed 
investment  has  also  continued  to  increase  against  the  background  of  high  corporate  profits  and 
favorable business sentiment. The positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector has been 
feeding through into the household sector. While firms have been increasingly feeling a shortage of 
labor,  the  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing  steadily  and  wages  have  also  been  rising 
gradually.  In  this  situation,  private  consumption  has  been  on  an  increasing  trend.  With  the  rise  in 
demand both at home and abroad, production has been increasing, and inventories have been more 
or less in balance with shipments. 
Looking  forward,  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  experience  a  sustained  period  of  expansion  with  a 
virtuous circle of production, income, and spending in operation. 
There are various risks concerning future developments in Japan's economy. For example, although 
international commodity prices, primarily crude oil prices, have declined since posting record highs this 
summer,  they  still  remain  at  high  levels.  In  this  situation,  whether  the  world  economy  can  maintain 
sustainable growth while containing inflationary risks continues to warrant attention. 
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been increasing recently. However, the pace 
of  increase  is  expected  to  slow  in  the  immediate  future,  due  to  the  recent  drop  in  international 
commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh 
food) has been on a positive trend, although retroactive revisions following the rebasing of the index 
caused  the  figure  to  be  revised  downward.  The  output  gap  is  positive  and  is  likely  to  widen  at  a 
moderate pace going forward. Under these circumstances, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
is projected to continue to follow a positive trend. 
As  for  financial  conditions,  the  environment  for  corporate  finance  has  been  accommodative.  In  the 
corporate  bond  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  has  been  favorable.  Private  banks  have 
been maintaining a proactive lending posture. Credit demand in the private sector has been rising and 
the amount outstanding of lending by private banks thus has continued to increase. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
The Bank terminated the quantitative easing policy in March and raised the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate target from effectively zero percent to around 0.25 percent in July. For the first time in about 
five years, interest rates in the money market are again above zero, and the market mechanism has 
started to function again. Despite such a significant change in the environment, financial markets have 
remained stable. A factor that contributed to the smooth policy shift was that the new framework for 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  which  the  Bank  introduced  in  March  when  it  terminated  the 
quantitative  easing  policy,  functioned  effectively  as  a  means  of  communicating  with  market 
participants and the public. 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
Regarding  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  will  conduct  monetary  policy  by  carefully 
assessing economic activity and prices under the new framework. If developments in economic activity 
and prices follow the Bank's projection presented in the Outlook Report, the Bank will adjust the level 
of the policy interest rate gradually in the light of these developments. Of course, the timing of any 
policy  change  and  the  level  of  interest  rates  will  also  depend  on  these  developments.  The  Bank  is 
determined to conduct monetary policy appropriately in the light of developments in economic activity 
and prices, and contribute to sustainable economic growth under price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
