Caleb M Fundanga: Catering for the un-banked population in Zambia 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of Stanbic 
Bank Limited’s Mazabuka branch, Mazabuka Town, 10 October 2006. 
   The incoming Member of Parliament for Mazabuka, Honourable Gary Nkombo, 
The Regional Managing Director of Stanbic Africa, Mr. Clive Tasker 
The Town Clerk, Mr. Chingangu 
The District Commissioner, Mr. Chinda 
Traditional  leaders  here  present;  Chief  Mwanachingwala,  Chief  Mwenda,  Chief  Hanjalika, 
Chief Nalwama, Chief Monze 
The Chairman of Stanbic Bank (Zambia) and all Board members present 
The  Managing  Director  of  Zambia  Sugar  Plc,  and  Managing  Director  of  Stanbic  Bank 
(Zambia) Ltd 
Stanbic Bank Management and staff present 
Distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen 
• 
• 
It is an honour and privilege to be invited to officiate at this important occasion. Today I join the Bank’s 
Board Chairman in thanking the people of Mazabuka for the effort and support that has been extended 
in establishing this Stanbic Branch, which I believe is the first in Southern Province. 
Distinguished Ladies and gentlemen,  I  have  keenly  followed  the  progress  and  growth  of  Stanbic 
Bank  in  the  last  few  years  and  I  must  say  that  as  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank,  it  has  been  very 
gratifying to witness the progressive strategies of a privately owned commercial bank. 
I recall that not too long ago (about 18 months or so) Stanbic Bank took the very bold step of entering 
the community banking sector by adding Matero Branch to the bank’s network and thereby brought 
superior banking services to the bottom end of the market. This was later followed by the opening of 
the Solwezi Branch, in what is now regarded as the new Copperbelt. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, what has particularly caught my attention is that Stanbic Bank expansion has 
gone  in  tandem  with  the  introduction  of  ATM  services  to  these  markets  via  the  ‘state-of-the-art’ 
Stanbic Auto Bank to improve service delivery to our people. This is commendable. 
Mr.  Chairman,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  one  of  the  major  concerns  that  the  Financial  Sector 
Development  Plan,  and  the  Bank  of  Zambia  in  particular,  have  identified  is  the  spectre  of  the  un-
banked public that hangs over the Zambian economy. The problem with having a greater number of 
our  population  being  left  out  of  the  banking  system  is  that  it  discourages  the  culture  of  saving  and 
removes the un-banked population from the formal structure of the financial system. This ultimately 
leads to reduced funds being available in the economy for investment purposes. 
Mr  Chairman  Sir,  The  opening  of  Mazabuka  Stanbic  branch  is  therefore  particularly  significant 
because it will not only address the problem of catering for the un-banked population, but also tap the 
tremendous business growth potential that this town offers. The expansion of the Zambia Sugar Plc 
operations and the anticipated opening of the Nickel Mine around Munali hills will all make a significant 
impact in boosting the living standards and job opportunities for the community of this town and the 
surrounding areas. 
Besides,  Mazabuka  is  a  successful  and  expanding  farming  district.  I  therefore  wish  to  take  this 
opportunity, to extend my congratulations and good wishes, to the Board, Management and Staff of 
Stanbic  Bank  for  the  excellent  business  foresight  in  having  decided  to  make  Mazabuka  the  new 
location of your latest branch. 
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia, has on a number of occasions indicated 
that  the  cost  of  banking  services  is  relatively  high  in  Zambia  as  compared  to  our  neighbouring 
countries.  This  contention  has  been  backed  by  studies  conducted  by  the  Bank  of  Zambia  whose 
results have been communicated to commercial banks. As such, we take this opportunity to implore 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
commercial  banks  to  reduce  their  lending  rates  and  service  charges  in  order  to  encourage  greater 
economic activity. 
With  these  few  words,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  declare  Stanbic  Bank  Mazabuka  Branch  officially 
open. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
