Radovan Jelašić: The development of small and medium size enterprises in 
Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  during  his  visit  to  the 
enterprise  “DOO  PAVLE”  PANCEVO,  user  of  a  loan  under  the  credit  line  granted  by  the  Italian 
government, Pančevo, 24 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The outstanding performance of this enterprise is the best example of what can be achieved when a 
powerful private business initiative is given adequate bank credit support. It is one of 36 enterprises 
that were granted such support on exceptionally favourable terms under credit line in the total amount 
of EUR 33.25 million granted to Serbia by the Italian government in mid-2005. So far, over EUR 13.2 
million have been disbursed and 200 new jobs created. We expect that disbursement of the second 
and the third tranche in the amount of EUR 10 million each will also result in the creation of a notable 
number  of  new  jobs.  The  results  achieved  by  this  enterprise  are  yet  another  proof  of  our  ability  to 
compete in business if the state secures a stable macroeconomic environment, the NBS provides for 
stable prices and the banking sector grants adequate credit support. 
Since  the  beginning  of  transition  in  Serbia,  the  NBS  has  acted  as  agent  for  disbursement  of  funds 
under another two credit lines: 
1) 
When  in  2001  we  began  disbursing  funds  under  European  Agency  for  Reconstruction 
donations for small and medium size enterprises it took us almost two years to disburse RSD 
1.2 billion via credits granted through domestic banks. Now we need much less time. Due to 
regular servicing of debt under these loans, a revolving fund was created and additional RSD 
1.1  billion  was  granted  to  private  enterprises.  In  late  2005  funds  under  this  credit  line 
became property of the Republic of Serbia and shall be disbursed over the next 10 years 
under the same terms and conditions (EUR 200,000 loans with five year maturity and one 
year  grace  period  and  annual  interest  rate  down  to  8.08%)  and  for  the  same  purpose  – 
development of small and medium size enterprises. On the overall, so far 303 enterprises 
were granted RSD 2.3 billion from this credit line, which provided for the creation of 2,486 
new jobs. 
First  long  term  loans  to  finance  domestic  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  and  local 
government infrastructure projects were granted in 2002 from the first Financial Agreement 
on APEX Global Loan in the amount of RSD 1.6 billion granted by the European Investment 
Bank  (EIB).  All  of  the  funds  under  this  agreement  were  disbursed  through  a  selection  of 
domestic banks by 25 enterprises and one municipality over the period of two years only and 
another 550 new jobs were created. The loans granted to small and medium size enterprises 
had  the  maturity  of  up  to  12  years  and  a  3  year  grace  period  and  those  granted  for  the 
development of the infrastructure projects had the maturity of 15 years and a five year grace 
period. Fixed interest rate is 7.8% and the variable rate 6.93%. Signing of the second APEX 
Global  Loan  provided  for  additional  RSD  3.6  billion  of  which  28  loans  have  so  far  been 
granted in the amount of over RSD 1.1 billion and 287 new jobs have been created. In the 
meantime, EIB has expressed its willingness to provide additional credit lines to small and 
medium  size  enterprises  directly,  via  commercial  banks,  without  the  backing  of  the 
government guarantee which is a proof enough of the superfluousness of the state, and it 
should be so! 
2) 
I am pointing out these facts because the NBS is of the opinion that the development of small and 
medium size enterprises is not achievable by either political declarations or strong or weak political 
stance or by “giving a cut” of state funds through budgetary support under any name. That is the task 
to be performed by commercial banks and all these loans that have been granted under much more 
favourable terms than those prevailing in the market as regards interest rates and maturity, represent 
a real trigger for the development of small and medium size enterprises which are normally a driving 
force behind development of any economy and a means for resolving employment issues. 
With  the  aim  of  encouraging  banks  to  increase  lending  to  small  and  medium  size  enterprises,  in 
October, the NBS abolished the obligation of banks to engage their own funds in arranging two credit 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 1
lines – European Investment Bank and the Revolving Fund – which shall make such loans even more 
attractive to their end users. Bearing this aim in mind and owing to a further decline in inflation and 
interest rates in Serbia, NBS feels confident that a further decline in interest rates on these loans is 
soon to follow. 
One  of  the  major  problems  which  cannot  be  solved  without  a  strong  government  backing  remains 
unfinished  business  with  respect  to  a  bulk  of  property  that  has  not  yet  been  entered  into  the  Land 
Registry and could otherwise be used as security in arranging mortgage loans. Finding a solution to 
this problem will not be helpful for small and medium size enterprises only. 
During our visit today we have found yet another evidence that there are successful entrepreneurs in 
our country. The good news is that banks are willing to grant loans and the “bad” news is reserved for 
the Italian government: Stand ready and start arranging yet another credit line! 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
