Xiang Junbo: Harmonious financial development – the expectation of the 
world’s economy and financial industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Xiang  Junbo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Opening 
Ceremony of Lujiazui Financial Culture Week and Lujiazui International Financial Forum, Shanghai, 
1 September 2006.  
 in  the  balanced  global  economic 
Honorable Deputy Chairman Jiang Zhenghua of the Standing Committee of NPC, 
Ladies and gentlemen,   
I’m  very  pleased  to  attend  this  Financial  Culture  Week.  My  topic  today  is  harmonious  financial 
development: the expectation of the world’s economy and financial Industry. And I’d like to speak from 
the following three aspects.  
First,  the  enormous  contribution  China  has  made 
development.  
China’s economy has achieved sustained and rapid development in the past two decades. With the 
increase of aggregate strength, China is playing a bigger role in the world’s economy. In 2004, China 
became  the  sixth  largest  economy  with  its  GDP  accounting  for  4.4%  of  the  world’s  total  output.  In 
2005,  China  became  the  world’s  fourth  largest  economy.  The  size  of  China’s  manufacture  industry 
ranks the fourth in the world, and the output of more than 170 sectors ranks the first. In 2005, China’s 
external trade ranked third in the world, accounting for 6.5% of the global aggregate. In 2003, the FDI 
inflow, for the first time, surpassed that into the US to become the largest in the world; in 2005, foreign 
investment  in  China  accounted  for  6.7%  of  the  world’s  total.  Between  2002  and  2004,  China’s 
contribution  to  global  economic  growth  was  13.8%,  16.7%,  and  14.5%  respectively.  It  is  fair  to  say 
China’s rapid economic growth is becoming more and more important to global economic stability and 
growth. 
The  global  economic  imbalances  have  become  one  of  the  major  issues  confronting  the  world’s 
economy, as reflected in the huge current account and rising fiscal deficits in the US on the one hand, 
and continuous expansion of trade surplus and foreign exchange reserves in some Asian economies 
and  major  oil  exporting  countries  on  the  other.  The  causes  of  economic  imbalances  are  very 
complicated  and  to  resolve  it  requires  concerted  efforts.  In  recent  years,  China  has,  with  a  view  to 
improving the balance of BOP, adopted various effective measures to boost domestic demand, reduce 
savings rate, increase import, open up market, and reform the exchange rate regime. With respect to 
domestic demand, measures such as tax reduction, increase of household income, speed-up of rural 
infrastructure building, and expansion of financial service to individuals were adopted. And we have 
also quickened the pace of reform of pension system, health service system, education system and 
the cultivation the residential mortgage business in order to lower savings rate. All these measures 
indicate that China is seeking to rely less on export and more on domestic demand to achieve growth. 
This will contribute to a more balanced development in China and the world at large. 
The  sustained  and  rapid  development  of  China’s  economy  has  played  an  important  role  in  the 
balanced  development  of  global  economy.  Global  consumers  have  benefited  a  lot  from  good  and 
cheap  goods  from  China.  Companies  especially  the  multinational  ones  get  great  profits  from  their 
investment or trade with China. Some western economists have pointed out that it is the good and 
cheap Chinese exports that made 10 years of low-inflation and continuous economic growth possible. 
According to the estimates of the European Central Bank, without the positive factor of cheap Chinese 
exports, the price index of the Euro zone would have risen 2 percentage points on average from 1996 
to 2005. At the same time, China’ s economic development pattern characterized by high input, high 
energy consumption and low domestic demand has brought about domestic imbalances. In terms of 
industrial structure, some capital intensive sectors such as the manufacturing sector have witnessed 
rapid  development  and  become  engines  of  China’s  economic  development.  But  agriculture  and 
modern services have lagged behind. With respect to regional development, while the coastal areas in 
East China has put in place a virtuous economic development mechanism, vast middle and western 
areas have developed relatively slowly. As for the driving force of economic development, despite high 
investment and export growth rate as well as excessive energy consumption, growth of China’s per 
capita national income has been slow, and domestic consumption remains slack. Some rural areas 
even  haven’t  got  out  of  poverty.  So  China’s  economic  development  mode  must  be  transformed  to 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
support balanced development between eastern, middle and western area as well as urban and rural 
areas through boosting domestic demand and a new type of industrialization.  
Second,  harmonious  financial  development  is  an  important  part  of  the  balanced  economic 
development.  
Financial industry is the core of modern economy. Linking commodity market with factors of production 
markets  and  bridging  production,  distribution,  and  consumption,  finance  plays  an  essential  role  in 
resource allocation. With the deepening of China’s economic reform, financial industry became more 
and  more  market  oriented,  and  the  enhanced  role  and  position  of  financial  industry  enable  it  to 
contribute more to sustained economic development and global economic adjustment. 
First,  we  have  built  a  diversified  and  multi-layered  system  of  financial  institutions  and  of  financial 
market that supplement each other. At the end of 2005, the total assets in both domestic and foreign 
currencies of banking sector, securities sector and insurance sectors combined reached 5 trillion US 
dollars,  about  2.5  times  of  GDP.  The  assets  of  the  banking  sector  stood  at  37.5  trillion  RMB,  2.06 
times  of  GDP.  At  the  same  time,  the  development  of  money  market,  capital  market  and  insurance 
market  also  made  headways.  The  non-tradable  shares  reform  progressed  smoothly,  and  some 
institutional issues restricting the development of capital market has been gradually resolved. 
Second, the improvement of financial macro-management system has helped support the stable and 
rapid  development  of  national  economy  and  maintain  price  stability.  Market-based  interest  rate 
reforms have made important progress with financial market interest rates basically liberalized. The 
upper  limit  of  lending  rates  and  lower  limit  of  deposit  rates  have  been  liberalized,  and  financial 
companies have more autonomy in pricing.  
Third,  the  reform  of  exchange  rate  regime  has  advanced  significantly.  On  July  21st,  2005,  China 
reformed its exchange rate regime and adopted a managed, floating exchange rate regime based on 
market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. Practices have proved that this 
reform are consistent with the fundamental and long-term interest of domestic and global economy, 
and reflects the direction and goal of China’s market-oriented reforms. 
Fourth, the shareholding reforms of state-owned commercial banks produced good results. The CCB 
and BOC have been successfully listed in Hong Kong, and BOC also issued A shares in the domestic 
market.  The  ICBC  has  already  established  a  shareholding  company,  and  the  value  of  domestic 
financial asset has been maintained and increased. 
Fifth,  the  opening-up  of  the  financial  industry  is  conducted  in  an  all-around  way,  and  international 
financial  cooperation  has  been  improved.  At  the  end  of  2005,  25  foreign  banks  made  equity 
investment in 20 domestic banks, and some foreign banks or investors invested in several banks. The 
number of cities that have been opened for RMB business has increased from 18 to 25. China has 
fully fulfilled its WTO commitment with respect to market access and business scope in securities and 
insurance sectors. 
China  is  still  a  developing  country  in  transition  despite  its  achievement  in  financial  reforms  and 
development.  There  are  many  issues  and  challenges  facing  the  financial  industry.  The  financial 
industry cannot fully meet the requirement of economic development in the process of transforming 
economic  growth  pattern.  More  efforts  should  be  made  to  build  a  harmonious  financial  system 
compatible with the comprehensive, balanced and sustainable economic development. To be explicit, 
we will make efforts in the following aspects: 
First, harmonize the relationship between economic and financial development. The ultimate goal of 
financial  development  is  to  promote  economic  development.  So  the  scale  and  structure  of  financial 
industry should serve the need of economic development. But at present, the development of China’s 
financial industry is lagging behind. China’s share in international financial market is still very limited 
despite  its  increased  involvement.  The  trading  volume  of  China’s  foreign  exchange  market  is  very 
small compared with the $2.41 trillion trading volume per day of the global forex market; The trading 
volume of China’s stock market is only 1% of the daily transaction in international stock market; The 
trading volume of China’s bond market is only 3.7% of the outstanding balance of bonds in the US 
market, and bonds in China are far less diversified; The spot transaction volume of the Shanghai gold 
exchange, although large, is less than 1% of the London gold market. So we should pool our efforts to 
enhance the weight of financial industry in national economy. And during the process, we should well 
handle the relationship between scale expansion and  risk prevention, scale quality and scale profit, 
improve ability of management and risk prevention, cultivate the virtuous interaction between finance 
and economy, and thus build up the harmonious relationship.  
Second, foster a harmonious system for financial institutions. The soundness of this system means 
financial industry can satisfy the needs of participants at different levels. Banking sector especially big 
banks still dominate the financial industry despite the relatively complete financial system. Small and 
medium  sized  companies,  especially  small  ones  with  innovative  capability  can  not  get  loans  from 
prudently managed banks due to their uncertainty in development and the lack of credit record and 
production  scale.  And  this  limit  of  China’s  financial  system  hinders  its  shift  from  investment-driven 
growth to one driven by technology advance and pursuit of efficiency, featuring knowledge economy 
and  information.  So  the  system  for  financial  institutions  should  be  bettered  so  as  to  provide  good 
financial service for various economic agents. 
Third, build a harmonious financial market. Not a capital rich country, China’s fund cost should not be 
very low. But current interest rate cannot reflect real fund cost due to the absence of market-based 
pricing mechanism. As a result, some fund-consuming and over-productive sectors cannot be driven 
out of market in time, and the ineffective allocation of resources exacerbates economic imbalances. 
An improved and integrated financial market system is the precondition and basis of effective financial 
resource  allocation.  Unless  fund  flows  orderly  in  different  markets,  interest  rates  cannot  reflect  real 
market  supply  and  demand,  and  energy  saving,  efficient  industries  cannot  be  cultivated.  Various 
financial  markets  including  money  market,  capital  market  exist  in  China,  but  the  small  number  of 
market  participants,  the  inadequate  products,  and  the  excessive  restriction  all  hinder  the  free 
movement of fund among different market, and therefore affect the effective fund allocation. We need 
to  have  the  development  of  financial  markets,  analyze  the  relationship  between  them  so  as  to 
enhance the balanced development between basic financial product market, derivative market, money 
market, capital market, foreign exchange market and home currency market. 
Fourth,  promote  the  development  of  regional  financial  industry  in  a  harmonious  way.  Financial 
development is an important force driving regional development. Sufficient fund injects vigor into the 
regional  development,  while  the  lack  of  it  harms  regional  development.  A  comparatively  sound  and 
strong financial system and financing system have been set up in eastern China, but lending of state-
owned commercial banks is still the dominant financing method in the middle and western region. In 
some less developed rural areas, the financial system, instead of supporting economic development, 
has become a major channel for fund outflow and prevented capital formation. So, regional financial 
development must be harmonized to promote balanced economic development. To achieve this goal, 
the following aspects must be emphasized. First, regional financial institutions should be encouraged 
to  facilitate  balanced  economic  development.  Special  emphasis  should  go  to  the  cultivation  of  rural 
financial  service  system  to  improve  the  insufficient,  weak  financial  service  in  rural  area.  Second, 
regional  financial  cooperation  should  also  be  highlighted.  The  influence  of  financial  sector  in 
developed  regions  should  be  extended,  and  the  conflict  between  various  regional  financial 
development should be coordinated. Fiscal support should also be balanced with financial support to 
increase the multiplier effect of the latter. 
Fifth,  blueprint  the  harmonious  reform,  development  and  opening-up  of  financial  industry.  The 
development of China’s financial industry benefits from its opening up. During the opening-up process, 
we  have  learned  how  to  employ  financial  instruments  and  international  capital  to  serve  economic 
development,  and  domestic  financial  institutions  have  improved  their  management  amid  market 
competition. So it has always been China’s basic policy to further open up its financial industry. China 
will honor its WTO commitments to open the financial industry on schedule and some commitments 
have already been materialized ahead of schedule. But international practice also tells us over-hasty 
financial  opening-up  incompatible  with  the  economic  and  financial  development  will  exacerbate  the 
vulnerability of financial system and thus leads to financial crisis. This will negatively affect the world 
economy.  Faced  with  many  issues  such  as  the  industrial  sector  imbalance  and  the  weak  financing 
channels, China’s financial opening-up will be a long and arduous process. At the same time, financial 
opening-up also needs a relatively relaxed international environment. We will make efforts towards this 
end. We also need the understanding and support from the international society. 
Third,  Shanghai’s  growth  as  the  international  financial  center  will  play  an  important  role  in 
building a harmonious financial system 
To build Shanghai into an international financial center is a national strategy established in 1992. This 
strategy has two aims: one is to promote economic and financial development of the Yangtze River 
Delta and even the whole country; the other is to develop Shanghai into a window for China’s opening-
up,  foreign  capital  utilization  and  international  financing.  Thanks  to  fourteen  years’  development, 
Shanghai has become the most financially advanced city in China.  
BIS Review 119/2006 
 3
Shanghai’s  international  financial  center  build-up  has  taken  up  new  responsibilities  in  the  new  era 
characterized  by  the  shift  of  development  mode  and  the  harmonious  economic  development.  A 
financial  center  basically  undertakes  the  function  of  financial  intermediary  and  is  the  core  part  of 
resource  allocation.  Home  to  lending,  securities,  foreign  exchange,  and  insurance  transaction,  and 
sensitive  to  market  changes,  a  financial  center  can  mobilize  and  distribute  huge  funds  quickly, 
effectively allocate financial and economic resources. An international financial center, also a center of 
economic and financial information, reflects regional and global economic changes, and realizes the 
price discovery function. The world’s major international financial centers have always had the above 
features.  
To build Shanghai into an international financial center contributes to the cultivation of a nationwide 
financial  system,  the  improvement  of  financial  organization system,  the  growth  of  financial  markets, 
the  cooperation  between  regional  financial  institutions  and  the  further  opening  up  of  the  financial 
industry.  Shanghai’s  growth  as  a  financial  center  will  serve  the  whole  country,  and  promote  the 
stability and development of the entire global economy. We hope that the experts participating in the 
Financial Culture Week can come up with suggestions and proposals on transforming Shanghai into 
an  international  financial center.  And we  also hope  this  Financial  Culture Week will  be  a  bridge  for 
further exchange and cooperation between Shanghai and various international financial centers and 
contribute to the harmonious economic and financial development in the world. 
