European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 2 November 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Mr Heinäluoma, 
President of the Ecofin Council, and Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to  increase  interest  rates  in 
October.  It  has  also  confirmed  that  strong  vigilance  remains  of  the  essence  so  as  to  ensure  that 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent  with  price  stability.  With  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  at  still  low  levels,  money  and  credit 
growth dynamic, and liquidity ample by all plausible measures, our monetary policy continues to be 
accommodative.  If  our  assumptions  and  baseline  scenario  continue  to  be  confirmed,  it  will  remain 
warranted to further withdraw monetary accommodation. Indeed, acting in a firm and timely manner 
remains  essential  to  ensuring  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  As  emphasised  on  previous 
occasions,  this  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards 
supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, turning first to the economic analysis. 
Eurostat’s  second  estimate  confirmed  that  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  was  0.9%  quarter  on 
quarter  in  the  second  quarter  of  2006,  after  0.8%  in  the  first  quarter.  Looking  through  the  usual 
volatility  of  quarterly  growth  rates,  economic  activity  has  been  growing  at  an  average  quarter-on-
quarter rate of 0.7% over the four quarters to mid-2006, and thus faster than generally expected a year 
ago. On the basis of various monthly indicators of economic activity and confidence surveys, available 
up to October, the momentum of the economic expansion is expected to have continued in the second 
half  of  this  year.  In  addition,  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  declining,  employment  growth  has 
recovered  and  employment  expectations  remain  favourable.  All  in  all,  the  assessment  of  a  more 
broadly  based  and  more  self-sustaining  recovery  continues  to  be  confirmed  by  the  incoming  data, 
notwithstanding some possibility of a somewhat slower pace of quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth in 
the second half of this year than in the first. 
Looking further ahead, the conditions remain in place for the euro area economy to grow at solid rates 
around potential, although some volatility in the quarterly growth rates is likely to emerge around the 
turn  of  the  year,  mainly  reflecting  the  impact  of  an  increase  in  indirect  taxes  in  a  large  euro  area 
country  in  January  2007.  Global  economic  activity  has  become  more  balanced  across  regions  and 
remains robust, thereby providing ongoing support for euro area exports. Investment is expected to 
remain dynamic, benefiting from an extended period of very favourable financing conditions, balance 
sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business  efficiency. 
Consumption  growth  in  the  euro  area  should  also  strengthen  further  over  time,  in  line  with 
developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions continue to improve.  
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  are  broadly  balanced  over  the  shorter  term,  taking  into 
account, in particular, the recent slowing down in the US economy on the one hand and the recent fall 
in oil prices on the other. The oil price decline – if it were to prove lasting – has the potential to lead to 
somewhat  stronger  demand  and  output  growth  than  embodied  in  our  current  baseline  scenario  for 
activity in the coming quarters. Over the longer term, risks to growth continue to lie on the downside, 
relating  mainly  to  the  possibility  of  a  renewed  increase  in  oil  prices,  fears  of  a  rise  in  protectionist 
pressures, especially after the suspension of the Doha round of trade talks, and possible disorderly 
developments owing to global imbalances.  
As regards price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate annual HICP inflation was 1.6% 
in October, after having declined to 1.7% in September from 2.3% in August. The recent decline in 
inflation  is  the  combined  result  of  favourable  base  effects,  given  in  particular  the  strong  rise  in  oil 
prices  a  year  ago,  and  the  recent  significant  fall  in  oil  prices.  While  the  outlook  for  energy  prices 
remains uncertain, on the basis of current energy prices and the higher quotations on futures markets, 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 1
inflation rates are likely to increase again in the next few months and early 2007. As a consequence, 
we expect a high degree of short-term volatility in the annual HICP inflation rate. Looking through this 
volatility, however, HICP inflation will remain elevated at a level above 2% on average in 2006 and is 
likely to remain so in 2007.  
Risks to the outlook for price stability remain clearly on the upside. They continue to include a stronger 
pass-through  of  past  oil  price  rises  into  consumer  prices  than  currently  anticipated  and  additional 
increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus far. Furthermore, 
renewed  increases  in  oil  prices  cannot  be  excluded.  More  fundamentally,  given  the  favourable 
momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters and the ongoing improvement in 
labour markets, stronger than currently expected wage developments pose substantial upward risks to 
price  stability.  Against  this  background,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their 
responsibilities, particularly in the context of a more favourable environment for economic activity and 
employment. 
The  monetary  analysis  continues  to  point  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  rose  again  to  8.5%  in  September,  after  having  increased  to  8.2%  in 
August. Although the annual growth rate of M1 has moderated somewhat in recent months, reflecting 
shifts into instruments with more market-related returns in a context of rising interest rates, this has 
been more than compensated by the stronger expansion of the other components of M3.  
More generally, the rate of monetary and credit expansion remains rapid, reflecting the still low level of 
interest rates in the euro area and the strengthening of economic activity. In particular, loans to the 
private  sector  continue  to  grow  at  double-digit  rates  on  an  annual  basis,  their  dynamism  remaining 
broadly based across the household and corporate sectors. While the growth of household borrowing 
shows some signs of stabilisation, albeit at very high rates, the growth of borrowing by non-financial 
corporations continues to trend upwards and has now reached rates of over 12% on an annual basis, 
the highest seen since the early 1990s. Thus, when the counterparts of M3 are considered, the main 
driver of strong monetary growth remains the expansion of credit to the private sector. 
Taking  the  appropriate  medium-term  perspective,  the  latest  developments  are  consistent  with  a 
continuation of the persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion, identified by 
the ECB’s monetary analysis since mid-2004. Furthermore, following several years of robust monetary 
growth, the liquidity situation in the euro area is ample by all plausible measures. Continued strong 
monetary and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity point to upside risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments  therefore  continue  to  require  very  careful 
monitoring, particularly against the background of improved economic conditions and strong property 
market developments in many parts of the euro area.  
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks to this 
outlook remaining clearly on the upside. Given the ongoing marked dynamism of monetary growth in 
an environment of ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with that of 
the  monetary  analysis  supports  the  assessment  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail  over  the 
medium  to  longer  term.  It  is  essential  that  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. If our assumptions and baseline scenario continue to be confirmed, it will 
remain  warranted  to  further  withdraw monetary  accommodation.  Indeed,  acting  in  a  firm and  timely 
manner remains essential to ensuring price stability over the medium term. The Governing Council will 
therefore exercise strong vigilance. 
As regards fiscal policy, euro area countries have recently notified their deficit and debt figures for 
2005  to  the  European  Commission,  and  most  have  reported  on  developments  in  2006  and  budget 
plans  for  2007.  While,  on  average,  this  information  points  to  further,  albeit  slow  improvements  in 
budget balances, this should not give rise to complacency. It is important that commitments under the 
revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  met  in  all  euro  area  countries.  It  is  essential  that  budgetary 
consolidation  is  strengthened  in  the  current  economic  upswing  and  that  pro-cyclical  policies  are 
avoided. This would boost confidence among market participants and the public. To that effect any 
revenue windfalls from faster than expected growth should be pre-committed and used in full to speed 
up  deficit  reduction  or  to  increase  surpluses  in  good  times.  The  prospects  for  attaining  sound 
budgetary positions improve when consolidation plans are based on credible commitments to reduce 
expenditure ratios and better expenditure control mechanisms. Finally, let me reiterate previous calls 
for  high quality  statistical data  and sound statistical reporting, which are key  for  the  prevention  and 
correction of budgetary imbalances. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2006
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  stressed  the  importance  of  creating  a  fully 
operational Single Market and flexible product and labour markets in order to enhance the adjustment 
capacity of the euro area economy and its resilience to external shocks. Liberalising product markets 
to  allow  more  competition  would  raise  incentives  for  firms  to  invest  and  innovate,  thereby  raising 
productivity growth. Removing labour market rigidities and distortions in wage and price formation are 
key conditions for promoting more homogeneous cost and price competitiveness trends among euro 
area  countries  and  for  generating  sustained  output  growth  and  job  creation.  In  particular,  wage 
increases  should  be  guided,  in  general,  by  the  trend  in  labour  productivity  growth,  while  taking  full 
account of the present level of unit labour costs, in order to preserve or restore price competitiveness. 
Moreover,  it  is  desirable  that  wage  settlements  move  away  from  automatic,  backward-looking 
indexation mechanisms. The successful implementation of reforms aimed at removing rigidities and 
inefficiencies in euro area countries would raise potential growth and employment prospects. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 3
