Krzysztof Rybiński: Single euro payments area from the point of view of the 
National Bank of Poland 
Address  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the 
Conference  of  the  Polish  Bank  Association,  Single  Euro  Payments  Area,  SEPA  Organisational 
Structure in Poland – SEPA PL, Klub Bankowca (Bankers’ Club), Warsaw, 10 October 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Not all of you may know that the first bank that fulfilled many functions of a modern central bank was 
established in 1609. It was the Bank of Amsterdam. This bank issued its own money, managed its 
supply through open market operations and operated an RTGS system for large volume payments, 
although the meaning of the term “system” was slightly different four hundred years ago as compared 
to  its  current  meaning1.  Four  hundred  years  ago,  the  RTGS  system  of  the  Bank  of  Amsterdam 
completed payments equal to the Netherlands’ GDP within three weeks. Today, many countries need 
less than a week for the same task.  
Bankers  who  managed  floren’s  agio  in  the  seventeenth  century  could  have  never  dreamt  that  four 
hundred  years  later  we  all  would  not  only  use  a  single  European  currency,  but  also  implement 
standards of the Single Euro Payments Area, or SEPA. 
SEPA is to be real. It is part of a vision of united Europe where payment services are part of the single 
market. You can rest assured that payment systems of European countries will cease to be national 
payment systems sooner or later. As intended by the European Union decision-makers, in a few years 
cross-border  euro  payments  will  be  as  unified  and  cheap  as  is  the  case  for  cashless  money 
settlements  in  national  payment  systems  now.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  central  bank,  SEPA 
should be beneficial first of all to the citizens of Europe, but it is also to contribute to the development 
of the payment services market. 
As  politicians  refine  their visions  of united  Europe,  tax-payers  ask  questions about  the  price.  In  the 
long term, the balance of benefits and costs of united Europe is undoubtedly favourable. The same 
pertains to the idea of SEPA. However, it is worth remembering that the final shape of the European 
payment system should be determined, to the largest possible extent, by the market that will choose 
the best solution for banks’ clients.  
The assumptions made in order to streamline and increase the efficiency of cashless turnover in euro 
are well justified economically across Euroland. However, in countries outside the Euro area, such as 
Poland, the implementation of SEPA should be subject to a thorough debate in a relevant community. 
This is why the National Bank of Poland appreciates the establishment of Forum SEPA Polska by the 
Polish banking community and is deeply convinced that all programmes and decisions worked out and 
made  in  the  course  of  such  cooperation  will  increase  the  satisfaction  of  Poles  who  use  services  of 
national banks through making product offers more attractive, through increasing security and level of 
services and through reducing their prices. 
Inhabitants of the euro area obtained many benefits upon the introduction of the euro in the cashless 
turnover  in  1999  and  in  cash  handling  in  2001.  Transaction  costs  of  foreign  currency  exchange 
disappeared, home bias on financial markets was reduced, risk premium decreased and the euro has 
become  an  important  currency  in  which  securities  are  issued  on  international  financial  markets. 
Menzie Chinn and Jakob Frankel, well-known American economists project that if Great Britain joins 
the euro area, the euro will replace the dollar as the international reserve currency2 as early as in the 
late second decade of the 21st century, which might entail additional benefits for European consumers 
                                                      
1   See  also  S  Quinn  and  W  Roberds  “An  Economic  Explanation  of  the  Early  Bank  of  Amsterdam,  Debasement,  Bills  of 
Exchange,  and  the  Emergence  of  the  First  Central  Bank”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  Working  Paper  2006-13, 
September 2006. 
2   M Chinn, J Frankel, “Will the Euro Eventually Surpass the Dollar As Leading International Reserve Currency?”, presented at 
NBER Conference, Newport, RI, 1-2 June 2005. 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 1
since  Europe  will  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  what  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas  and  Helene  Rey 
describe as the “exorbitant privilege”3. 
Payment  systems  of  the  Euroland  countries  do  not  follow  these  changes  swiftly  enough.  These 
systems have supported national and international retail operations in various European currencies so 
far. The only exception were activities of the central banks under the aegis of the European Central 
Bank.  These  banks  quickly  developed  and  launched  the  TARGET  system  for  real-time  gross 
settlements  of  large  volume  euro  transactions.  As  regards  the  cashless  turnover  in  pan-European 
relations,  foreign  currency  exchange  savings  were  the  only  measurable  benefit  stemming  from  the 
introduction of the euro for the consumers. Apart from that, the settlement time and the costs of cross-
border  transactions  remained  on  the  same  high  level  as  before  the  implementation  of  the  single 
currency. These costs were much higher than prices of national transactions. One of the causes was 
the  lack  of  the  appropriate  technical  infrastructure,  discrepancies  in  information  and  business 
standards  applied  in  individual  countries  and  the  willingness  of  the  banking  sector  to  gain  financial 
benefits from higher fees for cross-border transactions. This problem was raised already at the very 
beginning of the implementation of the single currency in Europe and the lack of visible and effective 
activities undertaken to change the situation encouraged the European Union decision-makers to take 
regulatory action. The aim was to provide mechanisms for effective euro payments in the Euroland 
and uniform principles for cashless payments. The policy stemmed directly from the Lisbon Strategy 
that  assumed  the  creation  of  a  strong  European  economy  that  would  be  able  to  compete  on  the 
international  market.  Moreover,  there  were  no  specific  activities  in  the  banking  sector  to  modernise 
payment systems. This induced the European Commission to act.  
The main document that stimulated development in that area was Regulation No. 2560/2001 of the 
European  Parliament  and  the  European  Commission  on  cross-border  payments  in  euro  in  the 
European  Union  that  established  coherent  legal  regulations  for  all  payment  services  to  enable  the 
application  of  various  solutions  and  provided  uniform  technological  and  business  standards  for 
suppliers of payment services. The Euroland’s banking community decided that the best way to fulfil 
requirements  stipulated  in  the  Regulation  was  to  implement  self-regulating  mechanisms  and  to 
establish the European Payments Council, an inter-bank organisation that coordinates and supervises 
works on SEPA. 
SEPA will be an area where citizens, entrepreneurs and other parties will be able to make and obtain 
payments  in  euro  in  the  territory  of  Europe –  both cross-border  payments and  payments  within  the 
borders of the Member States – according to the same simple rules, legal regulations and obligations 
regardless of the geographical location of the citizens and entrepreneurs.  
The main aim of the works on SEPA, carried out by the European banking community, is to implement 
mechanisms for effective euro payments in Europe and to treat this area as a local market with all its 
consequences, including transaction completion time and fees (i.e. these parameters will be equal for 
national and cross-border payments). 
The following assumptions have been made to achieve the objective:  
- 
a  coherent  and  technically  neutral  (i.e.  independent  of  any  specific  type  of  devices)  legal 
framework should be provided for all payment services within the European Union (excluding 
cash handling and cheques); this framework should allow for the implementation of various 
solutions, 
uniform technological and business standards should be provided for suppliers of payment 
services, 
self-regulating mechanisms in business relations between participants of payments should 
be  provided;  simultaneously,  intervention  of  legislative  authorities  should  be  kept  at 
minimum.  
  European  authorities  play  an  important  role  in  the  implementation  of  SEPA.  The  European 
Commission and the European Parliament are the main initiators and promoters of the idea of SEPA. 
They stimulate works on the project by issuing specific regulations and directives. 
                                                      
3   P  O  Gourinchas,  H  Rey,  “From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture  Capitalist:  US  External  Adjustment  and  the  Exorbitant 
Privilege”, UC Berkeley Working Paper, August 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2006
The European Central Bank is also an active participant of the SEPA project. However, it acts only as 
an observer in the EPC.  
Central banks of individual Member States do not directly participate in the EPC works on SEPA. Their 
involvement is important in groups organised under the aegis of the ECB, especially as regards the 
works within the Eurosystem. 
The European Central Bank is one of the main initiators and active supporters of the idea of SEPA 
and related projects. 
The ECB participates as an observer in the works of the EPC Plenary, thus exercising some kind of 
“supervision” over the works on SEPA. 
Independently of the above, the ECB cooperates with the banking community through other SEPA-
related initiatives, e.g. through COGEPS (Contact Group on Euro Payments Strategy). Moreover, ECB 
representatives participate in meetings of the EPC working groups as observers. 
Until last year, the Eurosystem’s central banks were less active in this respect. However, as the time 
goes by and the risk of failure of SEPA keeps growing, central banks have decided to become more 
involved and to act as a catalyst that could lead to the implementation of the vision of SEPA in Europe. 
You should also remember that most decisions on payment systems in the euro area are taken by the 
Eurosystem’s central banks, which means that the National Bank of Poland and other central banks 
from beyond the Eurosystem have had limited access to information and little influence on the works 
on SEPA.  
According  to  the  NBP,  the  representatives  of  the  Polish  banking  system  and  other  institutions  that 
participate in the works on SEPA should continue their activities taken to prepare and work out SEPA 
standards  and  mechanisms  for  their  implementation.  It  is  thus  crucial  that  the  above  mentioned 
persons present views agreed upon in Poland when stating their stance before authorities responsible 
for decisions regarding SEPA. Such views should take into consideration the interests of European 
and Polish consumers, the interests of Polish banks and the interests of the institutions comprising the 
infrastructure of the Polish payment system. Moreover, they should be coherent with the assumptions 
of  the  Lisbon  Strategy,  i.e.  with  the  obligation  to  prepare  the  European  Union  economy  for  global 
challenges of the 21st century.  
A separate issue is to specify the pace of works in Poland as regards the implementation of SEPA 
standards and mechanisms that have already been worked out. According to the timetable approved 
by the EPC, Poland will have to comply with SEPA standards for euro transactions already in 2008. 
However,  the  lack  of  established  date  for  Poland’s  accession  to  the  euro  area  means  that  Poland 
should have more time to implement solutions specific for SEPA, which would mean that necessary 
investments  and  changes  could  be  spread  over  time.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  that  early 
involvement of Polish banks and infrastructural institutions in the approved solutions, e.g. through the 
implementation  of  mechanisms  to  lower  costs  in  the  sector,  through  increased  efficiency  and 
attractiveness of offered payment services and through strengthened security of financial transactions, 
could be extremely significant for increasing their own competitive edge on the overall European scale. 
Thus,  it  seems  that  the  above  dilemma  over  the  appropriate  pace  of  works  should  be  thoroughly 
analysed by the banking community and infrastructural institutions. 
SEPA-related works in Poland are coordinated by the Polish Banking Association, which results from 
the  approved  model  for  SEPA  implementation  through  self-regulation  of  the  financial  sector.  The 
banking  community  holds  consultations  on  payment  systems  with  the  NBP  through  the  Payment 
System Council which is a consultative and advisory body of the Management Board of the NBP and 
follows  developments  on  individual  projects.  The  cooperation  within  the  Council  has  led  to  the 
identification of main challenges, including currently: the specification of the pace of works performed 
in  Poland  as  regards  the  implementation  of  approved  SEPA  standards  and  mechanisms,  effective 
exchange  of  information  between  the  interested  parties,  including  those  from  outside  the  banking 
community,  such  as  for  instance clients  of banks.  The  major  directions  of activities  have  also been 
prepared. Their aim is to prepare the Polish community for SEPA-related activities.  
The  role  of  the  PBA  as  the  coordinator  of  SEPA  works  in  Poland  might  change  in  the  future  if  the 
approach  based  on  the  self-regulation  model  is  discontinued  in  Europe  and  if  the  EU  and  ECB 
authorities  apply  a  different  model  for  SEPA  adjustments  (e.g.  through  issuing  regulations  for  the 
banking sector) that could assume a greater role of the government and the central bank. We do not 
assume  that  this  will  be  the  case  because  the  efficiently  working  self-regulation  model  might  bring 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 3
better solutions than a model enforced through regulations. Regardless of the target model for SEPA 
implementation, the National Bank of Poland declares its readiness to support the process.  
Important activities on the part of the NBP, as regards SEPA-related works, include the strengthening 
of the infrastructure for cross-border euro settlements and the participation in TARGET2 system, as 
well as the support of the implementation of SEPA standards in the Polish payment system. In order to 
achieve  these  goals,  it  is  necessary  to  follow  the  works  undertaken  by  the  banking  community  in 
relation  to  SEPA  on  the  EU  and  national  level.  It  is  also  important  to  foster  cooperation  on  the 
government  level  to  prepare  and  implement  possible  new  regulations  for  the  banking  sector.  The 
Payment System Council can further play an important role in this respect.  
SEPA is a crucial challenge for the Polish banking sector and for many clients of that sector. This is 
why it is critical to hold wide-scale consultations not only to develop a vision of SEPA PL that would be 
coherent with the European vision of SEPA, but also to take into consideration specific niche needs of 
Polish entities.  
Many questions, including the following, should be answered when developing the vision of SEPA PL: 
what is the target model of the European payment infrastructure and how to make sure that 
- 
economies of  scale  are used  on  the  single  payment market  in  order  to  lower  the costs of 
services for consumers, the appropriate competition is simultaneously provided and specific 
niche needs of each country are met; 
what  is  the  best  pace  for  implementing  changes,  considering  the  lack  of  straightforward 
declarations of the government regarding the date of Poland’s accession to the euro area; 
 The experience gained so far suggests that the maintenance of the national payment infrastructure is 
beneficial for Poland. For instance, the launch of Euro-Elixir and Sorbnet-Euro significantly reduced 
fees for cross-border payments in correspondent banking. So far, the decrease in prices has benefited 
mainly banks while their clients have felt the positive effects to a lesser extent. The National Bank of 
Poland  hopes  that  clients  of  banks  will  soon  more  strongly  experience  positive  price  developments 
brought by the modern, safe and effective infrastructure of euro payments. Such a development would 
indicate undoubtedly that the National Bank of Poland should strengthen its activities to counter the 
marginalisation  of  the  Polish  settlement  and  payment  infrastructure  because  the  existence  of  a 
national payment infrastructure would not only support payments specific to Poland (such as ZUS – 
Social  Insurance  Institution  payments  and  payments  to  tax  offices),  but  also  bring  unquestionable 
benefits to Polish citizens and companies. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  implementation  of  SEPA  is  a  huge  challenge  for  the  Polish  banking 
system, for companies that make up the Polish payment infrastructure and for many large clients of 
banks, including clients from the public finance sector. Such a huge challenge requires the creation of 
the vision of SEPA, the vision that will unite activities of all stakeholders of this process – from banks, 
through its clients up to infrastructural and telecom companies. The vision should treat the interests of 
the  clients  of  the  Polish  and  European  payment  infrastructure  as  a  priority.  All  stakeholders  should 
remember that only those companies will be successful in the global economy of the 21st century that 
deliver value to their clients. Companies that use cyclical market trends to gain benefits at the expense 
of  their  clients  are  doomed  to  fail.  I would  like  to call  on  all  those who  develop  the  vision  of  SEPA 
Poland to analyse the functioning of payment systems in the most advanced parts of the world and to 
benefit  from  the  experience  of  such  countries  as  Singapore,  as  expressed  in  the  vision  entitled 
“Intelligent Nation 2015”4. Let us use the SEPA Poland process to create a payment system for the 
21st  century.  Let  us  inspire  others,  including  public  administration,  to  act  and  implement  e-
administration and e-economy so that Poland and Europe can be successful in the global economy of 
the 21st century.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                      
4   See www.iN2015.sg
4 
 BIS Review 97/2006
