Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark 
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, 
at the Annual Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 6 December 2006. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here at the annual meeting of the Danish Bankers Association. 
The Danish economy is still booming, and there is no sign of any slowdown in the near future. 
The upswing started in mid-2003 and has gained momentum since then. Originally underpinned by 
income-tax  cuts,  the  upswing  has  been  gradually  reinforced  by  the  remarkable  growth  in  the 
international economy. In this picture, Europe has generally lagged behind the rest of the world, but 
now that economic growth seems to be receding in the USA, activity is on the increase among our 
most important trading partners in Europe. The Danish upswing has brought unemployment down to 
the lowest level since the oil crisis in the 1970s. 
In contrast to previous upswings, the balance of payments is still strong and the government surplus 
rests on a sound structural foundation. 
However, a complete picture of the Danish economy also includes risks. The global imbalances are 
still  significant,  with  the  enormous  US  current-account  deficit  as  the  dominant  feature.  Overall,  the 
imbalances are still generally expected to be redressed over time. The US economy is slowing down 
due to the receding housing market. The risk of more abrupt adjustment cannot be ruled out, though. 
However, the danger signals regarding the Danish economy come from within. The future course will 
depend on Denmark's ability to tackle the situation. For a long time low inflation and moderate wage 
increases  have  been  the  order  of  the  day  in  Denmark,  just  like  in  many  other  countries.  This 
phenomenon  is  among  other  things  the  result  of  growing  recognition  of  the  favourable  economic 
effects of low inflation.  
Low unemployment combined with continued robust growth in the demand for Danish goods entails a 
risk of the pressure on the labour market leading to higher inflation. It is well-known that this can cause 
unemployment to rise at a later stage. Although this is not considered to be the most likely course of 
events,  the  risk  of  detrimental  overheating  of  the  economy  is  growing.  Against  this  background 
Danmarks Nationalbank  has recommended  –  and continues  to recommend –  measures  to  dampen 
the  overall  increase  in  demand  in  order  to  ensure  sustained  favourable  economic  development  in 
Denmark. 
Danmarks Nationalbank has noted that the government has adopted a wait-and-see approach.  
As stated, the labour market will be the pivotal issue in the years to come. The number of people in the 
groups  with  the  highest  participation  rates  is  declining,  which  sets  limits  to  labour-force  growth.  All 
indicators point to by and large unchanged employment, in contrast to the preceding years’ increases 
by 70,000 since 2003 when the upswing began. 
The labour shortage will dampen the continued upswing.  
In  2006,  wage  increases  have  been  gaining  momentum,  and  domestic  price  pressure  has  been 
building  up  gradually.  It  is  uncertain  how  much  this  adjustment  process  will  ultimately  impact  on 
inflation. 
The housing market attracts high attention, and rightly so. We have witnessed very strong increases in 
real property prices, especially in the Greater Copenhagen area. The most recent indicators point to 
continued,  but  more  moderate,  price  increases.  Some  of  the  most  expensive  areas  show  signs  of 
slightly receding prices, and in more and more cases the price when the property was first put up for 
sale is later reduced.  
The low interest rates have been a principal driver of the growth in housing prices.  
In 1998 fixed-rate loans accounted for 80 per cent of the households' total borrowing from banks and 
mortgage-credit  institutes.  This  share  has  now  shrunk  to  40  per  cent.  So  more  than  half  of  the 
outstanding  loans  are  adjustable-rate  or  outright  variable-rate  loans,  and  it  is  expected  to  be  more 
expensive for borrowers to service their loans in 2007 due to the increases in short-term interest rates 
over the last year. 
BIS Review 122/2006 
 1
Taking into account that the households also have interest income, their net interest expenses after 
tax will increase by just over kr. 2 billion, or 0.3 per cent of consumption. 
Interest rates have the strongest impact on activity via their effect on the timing of decisions regarding 
consumption and investment. Despite the higher interest rates, real interest rates after tax are still very 
low  –  barely  over  1  per  cent  in  most  cases.  The  level  of  interest  rates  therefore  still  has  an 
expansionary effect on the Danish economy. 
The  economic  upswing  is  also  reflected  in  the  financial  system.  The  banks'  balance  sheets  are 
growing strongly. At the same time, profits are record-high, labour is in short supply, wages are on the 
increase and there have been cases of large bonus payments. 
The banks’ lending is growing by more than 20 per cent year-on-year. The breakdown on business 
lending and lending to households follows a familiar pattern. Lending to households enters the stage 
first in a consumption-driven upswing, and has shown double-digit growth rates since 2004. The banks 
have strongly penetrated the market for home financing with their mortgage loans. In addition, the risk 
appetite  of  many  households  has  increased  –  supported  by  the  marketing  efforts  of  a  number  of 
banks.  Business  lending gathers steam  later  in  an  upswing when  business enterprises  invest  more 
than  their  internal  sources  of  financing  can  support.  Business  lending  reached  double-digit  growth 
rates at the end of 2004, and growth has now reached 20 per cent year-on year.  
The high rate of growth in lending is an average for all banks. There is considerable dispersion. For 
some banks lending increases by more than 50 per cent year-on-year.  
The strong growth in lending is clearly reflected in the composition of the banks' balance sheets. The 
difference  between  banks’  lending  and  deposits  has  increased  considerably  in  recent  years.  Total 
lending now exceeds total deposits by a three-digit billion kroner amount. So the banks have become 
increasingly  dependent  on  financial  markets  to  raise  money-market  loans  from  other  banks  and  to 
issue  securities  both  nationally  and  internationally.  The  individual  bank  will  also  find  it  important  to 
maintain  access  to  these  sources  of  financing.  These  sources  are  more  sensitive  than  traditional 
deposits  to  changes  in  market  conditions  and  the  assessment  of  the  individual  bank's  financial 
performance. This could make the banks more vulnerable.  
The  Minster  of  Economic  and  Business  Affairs  is  finalising  a  bill  which  will  enable  banks  to  issue 
covered  bonds  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  mortgage  credit  institutes.  You  may  ask  why  it  is 
necessary to change the Danish system of financing real property via the mortgage-credit institutes. 
The Danish mortgage credit system is a well-functioning and stable system, which has given owners 
of real property access to financing on capital-market terms, with a transparent cost structure.  
Let  me  be  blunt.  This  change  has  been  imposed  on  us,  and  it  does  have  its  positive  elements.  It 
increases competition between Danish financial institutions, and gives them access to operate on the 
same  terms  and  conditions  as  foreign  credit  institutions.  It  should  also  be  born  in  mind  that  the 
amendment  will  not  entail  radical  changes  in  Danish  home  financing  overnight.  Many  adjustments 
have  already  taken  place  in  the  last  couple  of  years.  Here,  I  have  in  mind  the  "mortgage  loans" 
launched by the banks with great success. Seen in this perspective, covered bonds issued by banks 
can promote financial stability as a stable source of financing mortgage loans, thereby covering the 
large deposit deficit in a more satisfactory manner.  
When  the  covered  bond  legislation  is  amended,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  prefers  a  simple,  robust 
model.  The  banks  have  called  for  abolition  of  the  current  restrictions  on  redemption  profiles  and 
maturities.  We  support  this  wish,  and  at  the  same  propose  that  the  threshold  for  housing  loans  be 
reduced to 70 per cent of the property value. This would also make it easier for the institutes to comply 
with  the  requirement  that  a  loan  based  on  covered  bonds  must  never  exceed  80  per  cent  of  the 
collateral value for the entire duration of the loan. If this entails some degree of tightening, that is not 
entirely unintentional. 
In  connection  with  the  work  on  covered  bonds,  two  committees  have  been  set  up  to  deal  with  the 
balance principle and "joint funding", respectively. Danmarks Nationalbank's position is that the Danish 
balance principle could be adapted and made more flexible to bring it more in line with modern risk-
management  principles.  In  that  connection  it  is  important  that  a  new  balance  principle  provides  the 
same degree of security as the existing system. 
Joint funding is an important issue to many of you who are present here. Market conditions dictate that 
issuance of bonds at favourable prices requires large volumes. At the same time, it is the wish of the 
Danish  Bankers  Association  "that  throughout  the  customer  relationship  the  customer  perceives  the 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2006
bank as the creditor for the loan and thereby the customer's banker, even though the bank in fact just 
administers the loan on behalf of the funding company".  
I  understand  that  it  is  important  for  the  individual  bank  that  decisions  can  be  made  locally  at  the 
counter. However, I am not quite sure to which extent this would require changes to fundamental legal 
principles.  Banks  already  act  as  intermediaries  on  behalf  of  other  legal  entities  such  as  investment 
associations, insurance companies, etc. Ultimately it is up to the Ministry of Justice to assess whether 
this request can be met. 
It is Danmarks Nationalbank's assessment that the Danish banking system is currently robust . Profits 
are extremely good, and buffers are large, albeit declining. For the banks overall, the buffers in relation 
to the statutory minimum capital requirement have over the last three years fallen from 7.5 to 4 per 
cent of lending and guarantees. 
The  regulation  of  the  Danish  banking  sector  is  undergoing  major  changes  in  current  years.  The 
accounting  rules  have  been  changed  so  that  loans  can  only  be  written  down  on  the  basis  of  an 
objective value assessment. Provisions can no longer be made on the basis of the prudent accounting 
principle. In 2007, the new capital-adequacy rules will come into force, so that the solvency ratio of a 
credit institution will be calculated on the basis of risk weights that better match the actual risk on the 
portfolio. The statutory capital requirement will be lower in actual terms, but will fluctuate more. 
I would like to emphasise that the amendments to the accounting rules and to the capital-adequacy 
rules mean that legislation does not to the same degree as previously provide for reserves in credit 
institutions. This responsibility has to a large extent been transferred to the boards and managements, 
and it is very important that they establish an adequate buffer when determining the solvency ratio of 
the individual credit institution. 
Finally, I would like to say that Danmarks Nationalbank is pleased to note the good performance of the 
financial  sector,  which  reflects  the  sound  Danish  economy.  On  behalf  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  I 
would like to thank you for our fine cooperation.  
BIS Review 122/2006 
 3
