Jean-Pierre Roth: Implications for business of the new international monetary 
order 
Address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Annual 
Conference  of 
International  Business  Academy,  University  of  Fribourg,  Fribourg, 
8 December 2006. 
This address has been prepared with the help of Mrs Maria Rueda Maurer, International Research and Technical Assistance 
Unit, Swiss National Bank. 
the 
 It is a pleasure for me to be here discussing one of the most important issues of our times: financial 
globalisation and its implications for international business. Globalisation, the landmark of the dawn of 
the  21st  century,  has  opened  up  new  opportunities  for  growth  and  prosperity  on  the  planet.  It  has 
created fantastic investment perspectives to those firms that can compete internationally. But it has 
also changed the rules of the game and brought about new challenges. 
Today, the success and the survival of international business are determined more than ever at the 
private  level.  Because  goods  and  capital  are  free  to  move  across  national  borders,  protection  from 
risks emanating from globalisation can be a matter for private strategy only, rather than public policy. 
This, I think, is the main difference between the globalised world of today and the partitioned world of 
separated nations in the past. 
Let me share with you my views on how the globalisation of financial markets and the concomitant 
emergence of a new monetary order have changed the playing field for international business, and on 
what roles you, the private sector, and we, the central banks, are now called to play. 
What is the new international monetary order? 
The globalisation of finance has led to important changes in the ways monetary authorities implement 
their  policies.  Over  the  last  decades  we  have  witnessed  the  reorganisation  of  the  world  monetary 
order, with choices polarised around two extremes: at one extreme the flexible exchange rate regimes 
such as the ones in the USA, the UK and in Switzerland, and at the other extreme very fixed regimes, 
such  as  the  monetary  union  chosen  by  the  countries  belonging  to  the  euro  area.  Pegs  still  exist, 
especially in Asia, but they are less numerous than in the past. 
Let  me  talk  first  about  how  different  national  monetary  choices  meet  the  challenges  of  financial 
globalisation. We have left behind us a time where international monetary relationships, based on the 
Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  gave  us  a  nice  feeling  of  order  and  security.  The 
keepers of that order were central banks, and their main job was to maintain the exchange rates for 
their currencies within a narrow band. International businesses, for their part, were free to plan ahead, 
unaware of nasty surprises emanating from sudden currency exchange disorders. 
And  yet  this  world  of  apparent  security  collapsed.  By  the  late  1960s,  fundamental  misalignments 
between the major economies had become too great to support an international fixed exchange rate 
system and, reluctantly, we had to accept that the security we had taken for granted had become an 
unsustainable  fiction:  with  ever  growing  international  capital  mobility,  pegged  regimes  had  become 
increasingly difficult to maintain. The reason is easy to understand: with capital free to move across 
national  borders,  the  price  of  any  currency  is  determined  like  the  price  of  any  other  internationally 
traded asset – through the interaction and expectations of actors that operate beyond the borders of 
the  issuing  country  and  in  response  to  variables  that  are  beyond  the  area  of  influence  of  national 
authorities. By the early 1970s, central banks could not ignore this basic truth, and by 1976 all major 
currencies were floating. The Bretton Woods system was dead. 
In the decades that followed, many countries, especially developing ones, tried to cling to a dollar peg 
with periodic adjustments, in an effort to bring stability to their currencies. They were operating what 
economists  call  intermediate  exchange  rate  regimes.  The  series  of  costly  crises  of  the  1980s  and 
1990s proved how dangerous this path could be. The adjustable pegs that were able to channel thin 
capital  flows  were  completely  ineffectual  when  it  came  to  containing  the  huge  capital  flows 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
encountered  in  a  more  globalised  world.  By  1996,  flexible  exchange  rates  predominated  in  Africa, 
Asia, the Middle East, non-industrial Europe and the Western Hemisphere.1
Today,  many  advanced  countries  and  emerging  economies  have  adopted  a  flexible  exchange  rate 
regime.2  By  this  I  understand  a  regime  in  which  the  exchange  rate  is  basically  left  to  fluctuate  in 
response to market pressures. True, the central bank can, and in some circumstances will intervene to 
mitigate extreme exchange rate fluctuations. But the main objective of the central bank is domestic 
price  stability,  not  exchange  rate  stabilisation.  This  is  the  system  that  Switzerland  has  chosen  to 
pursue. It has served us well. Exchange rate flexibility allows national budgetary and monetary polices 
to diverge from one country to another. It confers monetary authorities more room to adapt policies to 
domestic economic realities. 
A  different  strategy  has  been  followed  by  many  European  countries.  Abandoning  their  domestic 
currencies, these countries have fully insulated themselves from intra-zone exchange rate fluctuations 
by adopting the hardest possible peg, which is a monetary union. Monetary policy is the responsibility 
of a supranational institution, the ECB. Towards the rest of the world, the euro is allowed to float, and 
the necessary adjustment of prices in member countries, rather than taking place via movements in 
the  exchange  rates,  is  expected  to  occur  by  means  of  changes  in  wages  and  product  prices  in  an 
increasingly integrated economic area. 
Thus  the  Bretton  Woods  system  has  been  replaced  by  an  order  of  sorts,  in  which  there  are  two 
extreme choices which increasingly dominate national strategies. At the one extreme, countries have 
opted to let their currencies float and be determined by market forces. At the other, some countries 
have opted for full insulation from exchange rate fluctuations by renouncing monetary independence. 
Consequences of the new international monetary order 
What are the consequences of this new international monetary order? The first positive consequence 
is  undoubtedly  the  increased  stability  of  the  international  monetary  system.  Indeed,  one  of  the 
paradoxes of our times is that the apparent disorder of today is far more stable than the apparently 
ordered system of the past. In the presence of high capital mobility, the two most resilient exchange 
rate regimes are those that today dominate the planet: very flexible regimes and very hard pegs. The 
move away from intermediate regimes has reduced the probability of costly financial crisis. Thus the 
priority given by central banks to price stability and the abandonment of the exchange rate anchor has 
resulted in more – rather than less – foreign exchange stability. Evidence of this are recent potentially 
destabilising events, like the recent war in Lebanon, which have passed without major international 
financial turmoil. 
This brings me to the new division of labour between private and public agents that I mentioned in the 
introduction.  The  increased  stability  is  based  on  a  new  contract  between  society  and  monetary 
authorities:  Those  countries  that,  like  Switzerland,  have  chosen  the  flexible  exchange  rate  regime, 
base the success of their monetary policy on the credibility and transparency of their central banks. 
We are no longer – thankfully – attempting to construct a kind of Maginot line to contain international 
capital flows. This effort would be as costly and as ineffectual as the Maginot line itself was. Instead 
we, the central banks, are endeavouring to provide markets with timely, clear and reliable information 
on our views about the future path of inflation and the effect this may have on our interest rate policy. 
You, the private sector, analyse this information and act upon it. Unlike the situation in the past, when 
international businesses were led to believe that the future path of exchange rates was predictable, 
today  we  have  a  more  realistic  situation  in  which  the  business  community  knows  that  shocks  can 
occur, and that what is predictable is the way in which the central bank will react to them. 
In  addition  to  a  more  stable  international  monetary  order,  this  new  paradigm  has  brought  us  many 
other  advantages:  Lower  inflation,  lower  real  interest  rates  and  lower  international  spreads  are 
additional achievements. After decades of high inflation and even recurrent episodes of hyperinflation 
in  various  emerging  markets,  the  last  ten  years  have  been  marked  by  low  stable  inflation  in  most 
                                                      
1   Caramazza, F. and J. Aziz (1998), Fixed or Flexible? Getting the Exchange Rate Right in the 1990s', IMF, Economic Issues 
13, April. 
2   Eichengreen, B. and Raul Razo-Garcia (2006), The Evolution of Exchange Rate Regimes, Economic Policy, July, pp. 309-
442, Table 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2006
countries of the world. Price stability has benefited all. Consumers benefit, of course, because their 
income is no longer eroded by price growth. But producers have also gained because price stability 
helps  them  to  plan  ahead.  Lower  inflation  and  confidence  in  central  bank  policies  have,  in  turn, 
reduced uncertainty about future price developments. The lower inflation risk premium is allowing even 
industrial economies to grow at lower real interest rates than in the past. 
And, finally, an unambiguously beneficial consequence of the new international monetary order is that 
it  allows  for  more  efficient  distribution  of  capital.  At  the  same  time  as  the  current  polarisation  of 
exchange rate regimes has come into being, financial globalisation has intensified. Capital controls are 
being lifted in a growing number of developing countries. In the 1970s, net flows of private capital to 
the world's poor countries amounted to a little over 1% of host-country GDP.3 By the end of the 1990s, 
this  percentage  figure had  grown  by  a factor  of  three.  Today,  there  is  a  broader  acceptance  of  the 
benefits to be derived from financial liberalisation. 
Indeed, the gains expected from a free market for international capital are substantial. Global finance 
allows for a better allocation of world resources, enhancing the prospects for growth of all nations. For 
richer countries of the world, there are new investment opportunities to finance the expanding needs 
of their aging populations. Younger and poorer nations obtain access to capital to realise their high 
potential  growth.  This  is  the  basic  teaching  of  the  theory  of  international  capital  flows.  Financial 
integration, 
financial  market 
instruments, is benefiting the world at large by allowing capital to be invested where returns are higher. 
technological  advances 
financial  markets  and 
together  with 
in 
Where are the risks? 
But these benefits also entail new risks. Indeed, despite better institutions, better policies and better 
markets, we feel more vulnerable nowadays than we used to in the past. How can we reconcile this 
image of a more prosperous and safer world with our increased feeling of danger? To some extent, 
our  sense  of  vulnerability  simply  reflects  advances  in  telecommunications  that  have  enhanced  our 
awareness  of  the  world.  I  am  not  a  geologist  and  therefore  I  cannot  tell  you  whether  we  are  now 
experiencing more earthquakes than we did 30 or 40 years ago. However, I do know that nowadays I 
am informed within hours, if not minutes, of any earthquake, flood or terrorist attack that occurs, even 
in  the  remotest  corner  of  the  planet.  Our  sense  of  security  is  bound  to  be  affected  by  this  kind  of 
information. 
But  it  is  not  just  a  matter  of  perceptions.  Globalisation  means  that  we  in  Switzerland  are  indeed 
affected  by  events  occurring  in  India,  Brazil,  Australia,  Japan,  Argentina…  To  a  certain  extent,  our 
perception of heightened vulnerability is justified. SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) or "bird 
flu" have the potential to become pandemics of unprecedented reach because we travel more than in 
the past. A terrorist attack in any city around the globe will be felt immediately by investors worldwide. 
Global companies may see their chains of supply disrupted by strikes in far away lands. We have no 
control  over  these  events  and  no  possible  way  to  guess  where  the  next  catastrophe  –  natural  or 
manmade – will occur. 
Let me return to global finance. I have said before that the world today is less likely to witness the 
recurrent crises that afflicted so many countries in the 1980s and 1990s. I am convinced that this is the 
case. By choosing a flexible exchange regime, they have chosen a more resilient system, and many of 
them are pursuing sensible macroeconomic policies that should help them navigate turbulent waters 
more safely than in the past. But I am also convinced that not all countries are equally well prepared to 
cope with free capital mobility. For those countries with weak institutions and underdeveloped financial 
sectors, globalisation means more rather than less vulnerability. International financial integration may 
look like a blessing when foreign capital flows in, but it will look like a curse when foreign investors 
head  for  the  door.  The  present  monetary  order  is  more  resilient  than  the  previous  regime  of  fixed 
exchange rates, but crises can still occur, and if they occur they are more likely to be extensive and 
spread rapidly. 
And globalisation, of course, goes far beyond financial integration. Global companies are located all 
over the world. They have to deal with different legal frameworks, with different business cycles, with 
different political realities. The range of risks to be met by international business is thus far broader 
                                                      
3  The Economist, Global Finance Survey May 2003. 
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
than in the past and demands permanent monitoring and continuous improvement of risk management 
at all levels. Financial, operational and reputational risks are all new by-products of globalisation, and 
we are only just beginning to come to terms with them. A survey of corporate directors quoted by the 
Economist in 2004 showed that a clear identification of risks is still too difficult for many well trained 
CEOs: 36% of the corporate directors polled actually admitted that they did not fully understand the 
risks faced by their company. 
Implications for the private sector 
With globalisation, your lives have undoubtedly become more difficult. Operating at a global level is 
infinitely  more  complex  than  the  regional  approach  of  the  past.  Globalisation  is  a  challenge  for 
business management. It entails many sources of uncertainties but also offers many vehicles to cope 
with risk. 
Can  we  beat  these  new  risks?  No.  We  must  prepare  ourselves  to  face  them.  We  can  only  insure 
against some risks, but we cannot predict where the next blow will come from. I think that this is the 
most important characteristic of our times. What has increased is not our insecurity. We are, in many 
respects, safer than in the past. This, I hope, is what I have managed to convey to you. My conviction 
is  that  the  world  today  is  better  managed  than  in  the  past  and,  in  that  sense,  is  safer.  What  has 
increased, however, is the magnitude of a potential crisis. This is what I refer to as uncertainty. The big 
challenge for international business of today is to learn to live with uncertainty. 
And  in  this  domain we  still  have  a  way  to  go.  Nowadays,  our  difficulties  in  dealing  with  uncertainty 
permeate all our discussions about the responsibilities of different private and government agents. I 
perceive  an  understandable  –  but  in  my  opinion  misconceived  –  nostalgia  for  a  world  that  used  to 
appear  safer,  thanks  to  regulation.  We  hear  demands  for  the  construction  of  barriers  to  protect 
ourselves from the menacing world outside – demands for more regulations to ensure that financial 
providers cannot go bust, cannot cheat, cannot make wrong decisions; more trade barriers to ensure 
the  survival  of  domestic  producers;  more  restrictions  to  the  movement  of  persons  to  protect  our 
workers… The problem with this dreamworld cocoon is that it has never worked and will not work. And 
what  is  even  worse,  if  it  did  work,  if  it  were  possible  to  barricade  ourselves  against  all  possible 
menaces, we would still not be better off. 
Globalisation is a great opportunity and it can make us all richer and safer. But we have to learn to live 
with risk. In fact, the main danger I see today is that because we live in a more stable world, in a safer 
world, we may become complacent. And here I must say that I do not feel comfortable with the recent 
developments  in  financial  markets.  The  surge  in  asset  prices  in  many  countries,  the  absence  of 
volatility  in  many  markets  and  the  low  level  of  credit  spreads  show  that  today's  investors  have  an 
unprecedented confidence in the future and a strong appetite for all types of risks. For sure, economic 
fundamentals have improved in industrialised and in emerging countries. It is, however, hard to believe 
that the world economy has now entered a phase of lasting and accelerating prosperity. 
We must remain alert. No major financial crisis has shaken the world in recent years in spite of the 
Iraq war, rising oil prices, major natural disasters, various terrorist attacks and permanent rumours of 
new  terrorist  attacks.  The  resilience  that  financial  sectors  have  shown  may  cause  us  to  forget  that 
crises are still a possibility. 
Thus, the major challenge for international business today is, to my mind, to keep a weather eye open 
even when the waters appear calm. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2006
