T T Mboweni: A historical review and a look at the future prospects of the 
National Payments System in South Africa 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 10th Anniversary 
function of the Payment Association of South Africa, Pretoria, 15 November 2006. 
Honoured guests,  
ladies and gentlemen. 
 Introduction 
1.  
It is with great pleasure that I join you in celebrating the tenth anniversary of the Payment Association 
of South Africa (PASA). As financial systems have become increasingly complex, stricter regulation, 
overview  and  co-ordination  of  payment  systems  has  been  required.  South  Africa  has  been  no 
exception, and PASA was born as an integral part of this process. As with most young children, there 
have been many growing pains, but it is a tribute to all those involved with the organisation that with 
the passage of time, PASA is developing into a mature adult.  
For  the  benefit  of  those  unacquainted with  the  system,  the NPS  is a  broad concept which  not  only 
entails systems to clear payments (cheques, electronic payment and card payments) between banks, 
but encompasses the total payment process. This includes all the systems, mechanisms, institutions, 
agreements, procedures, rules, laws etc that come into play from the moment an end-user issues an 
instruction to pay another person or a business, through to the final settlement between banks at the 
South African Reserve Bank. The NPS thus enables transacting parties to exchange to do business 
efficiently. 
Background to the creation of PASA 
2.  
In the late 1980s, the risks emanating from the settlement of payment-related activities increasingly 
became of particular concern to central banks. The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) gave this 
issue further prominence when it started publishing reports highlighting the risks associated with the 
payment system. These reports highlighted the discomfort of central banks with the level of credit and 
liquidity risks to which participants in the payment system were exposed. Furthermore, concern was 
also  raised  about  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities  of  central  banks  in  the  payment 
system.  
In  response,  central  bank  Governors  agreed  to  establish  an  ad  hoc  committee  to  investigate  the 
findings  of  the  various  reports.  Consequently,  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems 
(CPSS) at the BIS was established. The Committee is currently convened by Mr Timothy Geithner, 
President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  It  has  become  a  trend,  especially  among  the 
central  bank  fraternity,  for  regular  attention  to  be  paid  to  payment  systems.  This  is  part  of  the 
contribution that central banks make to overall financial system stability. 
With the reintegration of South Africa into the world economy in the early 1990s, it was clearly evident 
that this would bring increased obligations in order to ensure that the domestic clearing and settlement 
systems and risk management procedures conformed to international best practice.  
In February 1994, the banking industry requested the South African Reserve Bank to take the lead in 
the modernisation process of the domestic payment system. The NPS project, which was initiated by 
the  Bank  in  April  1994,  was  launched  as  a  collaborative  effort  between  the  Bank  and  the  banking 
industry  and  the  initial  focus  was  to  formulate  a  long-term  strategy  for  the  modernisation  and 
development  of  the  domestic  payment  system.  This  initial  work  resulted  in  the  development  of  the 
South African National Payment System Framework and Strategy document (the so-called Blue Book) 
which was published by the Bank in 1995. The Blue Book contained the vision and strategy for the 
NPS up to 2004.  
An  important  component  of  the  implementation  strategy  entailed  the  establishment  of  an  umbrella 
body – the Payment Association of South Africa (PASA). It was envisaged that PASA would play a 
central  role  in  establishing  and  controlling  Payment  Stream  Associations  representing  the  banks 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
participating  in  each  particular  payment  stream.  It  was  the  view  at  the  time  that  although  the  Bank 
would remain responsible for the overall safety and soundness of the NPS, the clearing environment 
should be managed by an association made up of participants in that environment. 
Although the NPS Act, which makes provision for a Payment System Management Body, was only 
promulgated in October 1998, PASA was already formally established on 26 September 1996. The Act 
made  provision  for  a  Payment  System  Management  Body,  not  only  to  manage  the  affairs  of  its 
members in relation to payment instructions, but also to act as a medium of communication with the 
different stakeholders, namely the Bank, Government, public bodies, the media and even the general 
public. 
From what we understand there were some "teething" problems but PASA has over the past ten years 
matured in terms of both the structural arrangements and its stature. Today PASA has a governing 
council,  an  executive  office  and  several  strategic,  risk  and  payment  clearing  house  workgroups  or 
committees which has increased its operational efficiency and effectiveness quite significantly. This is 
good progress for which all of us must take credit. 
Much of what has been achieved in the development of our NPS over the past ten years has been 
through  consultation,  collaboration  and co-operation  between  the  members  of PASA  and  the  Bank. 
While the Bank supports the consultative and collaborative approach, we have observed on occasion 
that  competitive  issues between  the  banks  themselves,  and  the banks  and  other stakeholders, can 
impede the collaborative process and sometimes cause unnecessary delays in the implementation of 
certain initiatives. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  collegiality,  co-operation  and  inter-operability  are  vital  elements  of  a 
world class payment system. To achieve this does sometimes require an above average effort from 
stakeholders.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  new  developments  or  any 
response to problems in the NPS will always be taken in the interest of the system as a whole, and not 
in the interest of individual participants. 
Achievements in the NPS over the past 10 years 
3.  
Collaboration between the Bank and the banking industry, particularly with PASA, has resulted in the 
South African Payment System being recognised as an example or model for development initiatives 
in the region and internationally. Much has been achieved during the past ten years and although I do 
not want to go into detail of any particular achievement, there are a few major milestones which are 
worth highlighting tonight.  
The  first  major  milestone  was  reached  on  9  March  1998,  when  the  South  African  Multiple  Options 
Settlement  (SAMOS)  system  was  implemented,  enabling  banks  to  settle  their  obligations  on  a  real 
time gross settlement basis (RTGS). Various changes and upgrades to the SAMOS framework have 
been implemented since 1998, including facilities for the South African financial markets to conform to 
international best practice with the introduction of the principle of delivery versus payment (DVP) for 
settlement of equity, bond and other financial market transactions.  
The second milestone was reached with the promulgation of the NPS Act in October 1998. The Act 
provides the SARB with the mandate to oversee and monitor the payment system and provides the 
objectives  and  rules  for  the  Payment  System  Management  Body.  It  also  provides  for  the  final  and 
irrevocable settlement in the SAMOS system. The oversight function of the Bank was extended in the 
amendment of the Act in 2004 when the Bank was given the power to issue directives to any person 
regarding a payment system or the application of the provisions of the Act. I will return to the role of 
the Bank in the NPS later on. 
The third highlight relates to risk-reduction initiatives in the retail payment environment. The Blue Book 
identified several risk-reduction measures to be implemented in the retail environment. Although risk 
reduction is an ongoing process in the NPS, two important issues have been dealt with recently. Firstly 
there  was  the  signing  of  new  contractual  agreements  between  the  participants  of  each  payment 
clearing  house  in  the  NPS.  Secondly,  there  was  the  introduction  of  item  limits  for  retail  payment 
streams  to  a  maximum  of  R5  million  to  reduce  the  values  being  settled  in  these  streams  and  to 
encourage high value payments to be processed through the SAMOS system.  
Finally, perhaps one of the most important achievements in the NPS recently was the inclusion of the 
South African Rand in the CLS Bank settlement system. The Bank and the banking industry were pro-
active in this regard and the Bank issued a position paper late in 2002 supporting the inclusion of the 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
rand  as  a  settlement  currency  in  the  CLS  system.  South  African  registered  banks  were  also 
encouraged to become members of CLS. Following a major collaborative effort, the Rand became a 
CLS currency in December 2004.  
The Competition Commission investigation 
4.  
We are all aware of the current Competition Commission investigation into the NPS. This investigation 
was triggered by the report on The National Payment System and Competition in the Banking Sector. 
The Bank will most certainly not want to give an opinion on the matter or in any way pre-empt the 
conclusions  or  recommendations  that  the  Commission  may  make.  However,  I  should  point  out  that 
despite the achievements to date, there is little doubt that there is still a perception that access to the 
NPS  is  restricted,  and  that  it  operates  like  a “closed  club”  or a  cartel  of  the  big  four  banks.  This  is 
probably related in part to the lack of transparency in entry criteria. Indeed, if anti-competitive pricing 
collusion does exist, it is appropriate for the Competition Commission to investigate this and make a 
ruling so that fairness and competition can be the rule of the day. 
It  is  heartening  to  see  a  new  willingness  by  the  banking  industry  to  open  access  to  the  payment 
system. I should however point out that the Bank as the current overseer of the NPS has an obligation 
to ensure that restricting or facilitating access to the system does not compromise the overall integrity 
of  the  system.  Access  should  be  available  to  any  institution  qualifying  in  terms  of  internationally 
accepted  risk-based  criteria,  as  contained  for  example  in  the  BIS  core  principles  for  systemically 
important payment systems which are geared at ensuring safety and efficiency of payment systems. 
The way forward 
5.  
There are new and complex challenges facing the NPS and the different stakeholders operating within 
the system. As you are aware, the Bank, after consultation with the industry and other stakeholders, 
published  a  new  Vision  and  Strategy  document  (Vision  2010)  for  the  NPS  in  April  this  year.  The 
purpose of this document was to provide high-level strategic guidance for the payment system up to 
2010. 
Finally, there appears to be a general misunderstanding that the Bank has a "hands off" approach to 
the oversight and regulation of the NPS. I would remind all NPS stakeholders that section 10 (i) (c) of 
the South African Reserve Bank Act states clearly that the Bank, " perform such functions, implement 
such rules and procedures and, in general take such steps as may be necessary to establish, conduct, 
monitor,  regulate  and  supervise  payment,  clearing  or  settlement  systems”.  Furthermore,  as  I  noted 
earlier,  the  2004  amendment  to  the  NPS  Act  makes  provision  for  the  Bank  to  issue  directives 
pertaining to the NPS. 
We  raise  this  issue  as  the  Bank  will  soon  be  issuing  directives  in  terms  of  the  NPS  Act  which  will 
regulate non-bank participants in the NPS for the first time. We have noticed that the number of non-
bank participants has increased to the extent that the risk associated with their operations and the risk 
that they bring to the clearing and settlement environment requires some formalisation. Of particular 
relevance in this regard are system operators and third party service providers, who mostly operate in 
or on behalf of the retail sector. We want to make it clear, particularly to the banking sector, that strict 
regulation will be applied as far as the NPS is concerned. This should not be perceived negatively, nor 
do  we  wish  to  stifle  innovation  or  competition  in  the  industry.  However  we  need  to  apply  strict 
supervision and regulation to both bank and non-bank participants in the critical area of the NPS and 
avoid the risk of turbulence that may emanate from a hands-off approach to regulation. 
This may require some adjustment to current structures in the NPS and the Bank will have to start 
playing  a  far  more  prominent  role  in  areas  such  as  supervision,  regulation  and  licensing  of 
participants. We also need to ensure that these newly regulated entities have channels to engage with 
the Bank and other stakeholders, including PASA, in a fair and transparent way. The Bank has already 
initiated discussions with various international central banks and consulted with NPS stakeholders with 
a view to adopting a model which will facilitate such engagement. This may take some time but I can 
assure you that the Bank will continue with the collaborative approach it has used for NPS matters in 
the past before making any final decisions in this regard.  
BIS Review 111/2006 
 3
Concluding remarks 
6.  
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate PASA and the industry for the effort, and achievements of 
the past ten years, not only in the area of systems and infrastructure, but also in the manner in which 
they have co-operated in the flow of liquidity and the conclusion of commitments in the system on a 
daily basis. The Bank looks forward to the continued co-operation of PASA and other stakeholders as 
we tackle the challenges that lie ahead in an effort to ensure that the NPS continues to comply with 
international best practice.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2006
