Nils Bernstein: The role of the pension sector in the economy 
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, 
at the Labour-Market Pension Conference 2006, Copenhagen, 26 October 2006.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Thank you for inviting me to present Danmarks Nationalbank's view of the role of the pension sector in 
the economy. 
Some of you will perhaps ask what Danmarks Nationalbank knows about the pension sector? Isn't it a 
bit like asking women about football? 
The women-and-football metaphor is not my own. It is taken from an article in the sector's membership 
magazine Forsikring (Insurance) from 2002, after Danmarks Nationalbank and the Danish Economic 
Council had voiced a critical stance on the nominal interest-rate guarantees of the pension sector. In 
the article it was pointed out that Danmarks Nationalbank and the Chairmanship ("Wise Men") of the 
Economic Council did not have a comprehensive understanding of the pension system and that we 
were too partial in our analyses. That is naturally one way of viewing it, which I will not reject outright. 
However, even though the pension sector is not a core area for Danmarks Nationalbank, we do have 
several interfaces. 
Before  I  elaborate  on  these  areas,  I  would  like  to  present  my  perspective  on  the  pension  sector  in 
Denmark. 
 Perspective on the pension sector 
2.  
The  classical  Danish  encyclopaedia,  Salmonsen,  from  1923,  says:  "it  was  formerly  believed  that 
human life should not be the subject of valuation and consequently could not be insured. Maintenance 
allowances, particularly life annuities, were an entirely different matter. Unlike life assurance policies, 
such annuities did not put a price on human life, and therefore the sale of annuities was not deemed to 
be unethical." 
Today, both life insurance and life annuities are an integral part of the pension companies' activities, 
and  the  pension  sector  is  an  important  element  of  the  economy  –  and  its  business  is  not  deemed 
unethical. The sector's transactions have major implications for the individual citizen, not only because 
of the popularity of pension saving schemes among wage earners and the self-employed, but also due 
to the volume of the assets managed. 
Only 15 years ago, the Danes' total pension savings (via pension companies) amounted to just under 
kr.  350  billion,  equivalent  to  40  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  pension  prospects  of  large  groups  of  the 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 1
population consisted solely of the state retirement pension and ATP (Labour Market Supplementary 
Pension), plus any private savings, e.g. home equity. 
Why has that changed today? Why are pensions no longer a government responsibility? 
Back in the 1960s and 1970s, the predominant (but not universal) view was that pensions should at all 
times be taken from current output. The greater the share to be allocated to pensioners, the smaller 
the share left for the labour force in the same years, so it did not make sense for society as such to 
save for pensions. The spending power of the labour force and of senior citizens had in any case to be 
adjusted to the current consumption potential via fiscal policy. 
Naturally, a nation's economic strength, and thus its ability to provide decent pensions, depended on 
its wealth: what was not apparent was that this wealth depended on savings in the private rather than 
in the public sector. 
Against that background there was a widespread belief that pensions should preferably be based on 
the  "pay  as  you  go"  principle,  i.e.  each  generation  should  finance  the  pensions  of  the  previous 
generation  via  taxation.  This  also  allowed  for  a  certain  degree  of  wealth  redistribution  between  the 
affluent and less affluent members of society. 
This  approach  to  pension  financing  was  also  confirmed  by  the  experience  with  the  Social  Pension 
Fund. The latter was conceived in 1970 as a counter-cyclical instrument. For as long as the Fund only 
received  contributions  there  were  no  major  policy  issues,  but  no  concrete  proposal  for  a 
supplementary pension financed by the Social Pension Fund was ever tabled. Instead, some of the 
Fund's revenue was used to finance e.g. housing allowances. In terms of communication, it was an 
impossible  task  to  balance  overall  economic  interests  when  designing  a  supplementary  pension 
against senior citizens' expectations of disbursements from the Fund. After some years it was decided 
to discontinue payments into the Fund. 
And then there was the balance of payments. The deficits were a constant barrier to activities, and in 
the worst years we even sent 4 per cent of our annual output abroad as interest on our external debt. 
On the other hand, this meant that if we had external assets rather than debt, we would be able to 
spend  more  than  we  produced.  This  explains  why  politicians  began  to  view  pension  savings  as  a 
means  of  increasing  total  savings  in  society,  without  considering  what  would  happen  when  the 
pensions matured. 
It was indeed balance-of-payments concerns that led the government in 1987 to enter into the "joint 
declaration" with the two sides of industry concerning the introduction of labour-market pensions via 
collective  agreements.  Four  years  later,  this  declaration  was  implemented  in  an  actual  collective 
agreement between the Danish Federation of Trade Unions and the Danish Employers' Confederation 
introducing compulsory pension contributions. 
There were several reasons why the pensions were privately based. In my opinion, the decisive factor 
was the tax burden in Denmark, which by the mid-1980s had reached a level of around 50 per cent. 
There was broad political consensus that a further increase in taxation would lead to unsustainable 
imbalances in society. 
It could also be claimed that a pension system based on individual contributions is more robust to the 
development  in  the  EU  with  an  increasingly  mobile  workforce,  although  I  am  not  aware  that  this 
argument was put forward. 
So, out of the almost universally acknowledged need for increased savings in the economy and wage 
earners' wish for pensions that were more in line with the incomes they had grown accustomed to, 
arose the mixture that became the Danish pension system. In many ways it has served us well, and it 
has certainly helped to solve the problem of insufficient savings in the economy. 
In fact, multi-pillar pension systems such as the Danish system are often singled out in international 
contexts  as  a  good  benchmark  for  countering  the  demographic  challenges  that  we  will  face  in  the 
coming decades as the population ages. 
Our pension system is based on three pillars: firstly, the state retirement pension and ATP; secondly, 
the compulsory labour-market pensions; and finally, private pensions, including capital pensions. To 
this should be added equity in homes and summer cottages, as well as other savings. The system is 
also based on three financing pillars: financing via taxes, compulsory savings and voluntary savings. 
Consequently,  the  individual  citizen's  risk  in  relation  to  the  size  of  future  pension  disbursements  is 
diversified, which makes the system robust. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2006
Pension savings have boomed throughout the 1990s and into the new millennium. It all started with 
the collective bargaining in 1991, when the two sides of industry agreed that 0.9 per cent of wages 
should be paid into a pension scheme. Wage earners were to pay one third, while employers were to 
pay two thirds. Since then we have seen a continuous increase in pension contributions in connection 
with subsequent collective bargaining. 
Today, the pension contributions of many wage earners constitute more than 10 per cent of their basic 
wages,  and  the  labour-market  pension  funds  –  i.e.  excluding  ATP,  LD  Pensions  and  the  Special 
Pension Fund – manage assets of approximately kr. 1,300 billion, equivalent to almost 85 per cent of 
GDP. 
As Chart 1 shows, this figure has almost quadrupled in 15 years. For comparison, deposits in Danish 
banks have doubled in the same period. 
The prevalence and building up of labour-market pension schemes also mean that more people now 
have pension savings besides the state retirement pension and ATP. In 2002, 85 per cent of all wage 
earners working full time contributed to a labour-market pension scheme. For the entire labour force, 
the figure is approximately 75 per cent. 
 BIS Review 123/2006 
  3
The percentage of wages paid into pension schemes varies considerably, however, but as the Chart 
shows, it is increasing. 
This is good news for the individual citizen, who can look forward to having more money to spend after 
retirement, but also for Danish society. 
In  the  longer  term,  demographic  trends,  i.e.  a  rising  number  of  retired  people  in  proportion  to  the 
labour  force,  will  mean  that  disbursements  from  the  pension  funds  will  gradually  catch  up  with  and 
probably exceed payments into the pension funds. Viewed in isolation, this will strengthen government 
finances since pension contributions are tax-deductible while pension disbursements are taxed. We 
have  thus  seen  a  swelling  of  the  balance  sheet,  as  some  of  the  assets  managed  by  the  pension 
companies  are  merely  deferred  tax,  and  the  trend  towards  positive  net  disbursements  entails  the 
gradual realisation of the government's tax asset. 
On the other hand, this trend will increase spending power as a ratio of production output from today's 
level. Whether that will lead to actual balance-of-payments problems remains to be seen. 
But just imagine a situation where we had not succeeded in increasing pension savings, with pensions 
mainly based on current tax revenue! 
A safe and secure currency system 
3.  
Section 1 of the Danmarks Nationalbank Act from 1936 states that:  
 Low  inflation  is  a  precondition  for  a  safe  and  secure  currency  system.  Since  1982,  Denmark  has 
pursued the target of low and stable inflation via a fixed-exchange-rate policy. 
Consequently, maintaining a stable exchange rate is now one of Danmarks Nationalbank's principal 
responsibilities.  The  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  is  a  cornerstone  of  Denmark's  economic  policy. 
Danmarks Nationalbank has a declared objective of keeping the krone stable vis-à-vis the euro. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  two  exchange-rate  instruments  at  its  disposal.  These  are  intervention 
using the foreign-exchange reserve, and the short-term interest rate. The foreign-exchange reserve is 
used to manage small fluctuations in the supply of and demand for Danish kroner, while the interest 
rate is only used in connection with imbalances of a more sustained nature. 
As players in the international capital markets, the pension companies may influence the exchange 
rate by purchasing and selling securities. It is therefore important for Danmarks Nationalbank to keep 
abreast of developments within this sector. 
In  connection  with  major  portfolio  restructuring  we  sometimes  see  large  inflows  and  outflows  of 
currency. If Danmarks Nationalbank does not act in such a situation, the result could be inappropriate 
exchange-rate  fluctuations.  On  average,  capital  imports  of  kr.  10  billion  strengthen  the  Danish 
currency by kr. 0.12 per 100 euro. 
Our  analyses  show  that  the  pension  sector's  trading  in  foreign  securities  contributes  to  explaining 
changes in the exchange rate of the krone. It is interesting to note that the significance of this sector to 
the exchange rate appears to have increased in recent years. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2006
Our analyses also show that portfolio investments to and from the euro area have a greater impact on 
the exchange rate of the krone than equivalent portfolio investments to and from the rest of the world. 
This indicates that market participants are less inclined to hedge the exchange rate on investments to 
and from the euro area due to Denmark's fixed-exchange-rate policy vis-à-vis the euro. 
Portfolio  restructuring  by  pension  companies  is  not  problematic.  It  is  a  natural  element  of  the  free 
movement  of  capital,  which  is  a  precondition  for  a  well-functioning  capital  market.  Fortunately, 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  competent  employees  who  monitor  the  day-to-day  fluctuations  in  the 
foreign-exchange market and are therefore ready to act if the krone strengthens or weakens too much. 
We also appreciate the credibility enjoyed by Denmark's fixed-exchange-rate policy – nationally and 
internationally. 
Let me take this opportunity to explode a myth. The fact that the Danish economy is fundamentally 
sound,  with  declining  government  debt  and  a  savings  surplus,  is  not  problematic  in  relation  to 
maintaining  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy.  Any  exchange-rate  fluctuations  arising  from  portfolio 
restructuring will only be of a short-term nature. The opposite situation – i.e. a weak economy – might 
constitute a problem, however. 
Macroeconomic development – from debtor to creditor nation 
4. 
Danmarks Nationalbank cannot take full credit for the faith in Denmark's fixed-exchange-rate policy. 
Part of the explanation is that up through the 1980s Denmark managed to get its fiscal policy under 
control, and slowly, with a few obstacles in our path, a structural current-account deficit was turned 
into a surplus. 
Sustainable fiscal policy and a clear distribution of responsibilities in relation to economic policy make 
it easier for the central bank to meet its objectives. In Denmark, this distribution of responsibilities has 
been explicitly formulated: monetary policy is aimed at ensuring a stable exchange rate vis-à-vis the 
euro, while any specifically Danish need to stabilise cyclical fluctuations is handled via fiscal policy. 
As  regards  the  favourable  development  of  the  balance  of  payments,  it  is  obvious  that  the  pension 
sector has also played a role, primarily through increased savings. 
As I have already mentioned, the increasing pension savings via e.g. labour-market pension schemes 
have influenced the economic development in Denmark in recent years. While the economic debate 
was previously focused on the lack of savings, with current-account deficits and government deficits, 
we now have a savings surplus. 
One of the drivers of this development has been the increase in pension savings. 
 BIS Review 123/2006 
 5
However, we should not forget that net savings would hardly have been positive if the real interest rate 
after tax had not also – in most cases – been positive, thus creating an incentive to save. The fixed-
exchange-rate policy has played a vital role since it has helped to keep inflation at bay. 
Whether overall savings in real terms increase when compulsory pension contributions are introduced 
naturally depends on whether such contributions replace other savings. Calculations by the Ministry of 
Economic  and  Business  Affairs  indicate  that  the  increased  pension  contributions  have  had  a  full 
impact on total savings. This means that other savings have not been supplanted by higher pension 
savings. 
The  trend  towards  increased  savings  meant  that  by  the  end  of  2005  Denmark  had  become  a  net 
creditor vis-à-vis other countries for the first time since World War II. 
Pension companies and financial stability 
5.  
At Danmarks Nationalbank we have defined financial stability as a state that exists: 
 In other words, the focus is on the functioning of the financial system – on the smooth provision of 
money in our society. 
The pension sector is part of the financial system and can influence financial stability in Denmark. 
 6 
 BIS Review 123/2006
Unlike banks, pension companies have a more indirect impact on financial stability, however. Pension 
companies  are  characterised  by  long-term  obligations  which  cannot  be  terminated  overnight.  This 
means that the risk of a "run" – i.e. a situation where all policyholders simultaneously seek to redeem 
their savings at short notice – is virtually non-existent. 
Let me emphasise that financial stability cannot merely be defined as the lack of "runs". This is an 
essential precondition, but not sufficient in itself. As I have already said, the focus is on the functioning 
of the financial system, and in that respect confidence is of paramount importance. 
It is essential that pension savers trust the pension companies, i.e. that they feel confident that the 
money  will  be  there  when  it  is  pay-out  time.  The  best  way  to  ensure  that  is  for  the  assets  of  the 
pension companies to fluctuate in step with the liabilities when the economic assumptions change. 
"Traffic lights" 
Today, pension companies focus more on risk management and risk hedging than they did 5-10 years 
ago. 
The  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  has  prepared  risk  scenarios  –  known  as  traffic  lights  – 
which  are  "snapshots"  used  to  test  the  robustness  of  the  pension  companies  to  negative  market 
development. 
The principle behind the traffic lights is to visualise the pension companies' investment and insurance 
risks so that the pension companies have time to react to a changing risk scenario before it is too late. 
This  has  undoubtedly  helped  to  make  the  Danish  pension  sector  more  robust  to  financial  and 
insurance risks. 
This has also been necessary in an increasingly more globalised world where external shocks are also 
reflected  in  the  Danish  economy.  The  introduction  of  new,  more  complex  financial  products  makes 
great demands on the pension sector, but also on the authorities. 
It is important that the boards and managements of the pension companies understand the underlying 
risks in relation to a given investment or liability. Otherwise they may be in for a nasty shock one day. 
A case in point is the failure of LTCM in 1998. Long-Term Capital Management was a large US hedge 
fund specialising in building up large geared positions across several markets, financed via loans from 
numerous US and European financial institutions. LTCM sought to exploit imperfections in the market. 
The success of the strategy depended on a number of assumptions concerning the underlying market 
correlations and volatilities. However, with the Nobel Prize winners Myron Scholes and Robert Merton 
on board things could not go wrong! 
Nevertheless,  they  did.  The  underlying  assumptions  proved  not  to  be  valid  in  the  face  of  turbulent 
market conditions, and in 1998 LTCM folded after losing 4.6 billion dollars in less than four months. 
Danish  pension  companies  are  scarcely  likely  to  make  equally  risky  investments,  but  the  case 
illustrates that what does not seem very risky beforehand may subsequently prove to be so. 
However, stress tests such as the traffic lights do have a downside. Under turbulent market conditions 
such as those seen in the autumn of 2001, all pension companies are compelled to undertake major 
portfolio  restructuring  at  the  same  time  in  order  to  observe  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority's traffic lights. 
This entails a risk of exacerbating a negative spiral. And players in a falling market never obtain the 
best prices for their assets. 
The solution is naturally not to abolish the traffic lights, but to seek to avoid situations where they may 
be inappropriate. More specifically, this means that the companies must adjust their reserves to match 
their risks. 
The responsibility of the sector 
The  growth  in  Danish  pension  assets  makes  demands  of  the  sector  in  terms  of  accountability  in 
relation to investment behaviour, as well as product range and marketing. 
Both  the  commercial  pension  companies  and  the  labour-market  pension  funds  have  increasingly 
encouraged customers to choose market-rate products, i.e. products where the return is more directly 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 7
linked to the developments in the financial markets. In this way a larger part of the investment risk is 
transferred to the individual policyholder. 
An argument often used by the pension companies when selling "market products" is that the return is 
typically higher than for traditional pension savings. That may well be the case, but there is usually no 
"free lunch". Higher expected returns invariably involve greater risk. If the customer understands and 
accepts  this  correlation,  there  is  no  problem.  The  problem  arises  in  cases  where  advertising  and 
"clever" marketing make customers opt for products for which they do not understand the related risk! 
It is therefore important that the pension companies are aware of their responsibilities as advisors. 
We cannot say for sure how interest rates and share prices will develop in the future. The pension 
company  may  entertain  certain  expectations,  but  no-one  knows  what  will  actually  happen.  So  what 
seemed like sound advice ex ante may prove not to be so ex post. The same applies to advice based 
on taxation aspects. No-one knows what our tax system will look like in 20-30 years' time in relation to 
the structure of individual incomes. 
The pension sector  crisis  in  the  wake  of  the  plummeting  share prices  in  2000-2002  obviously  gave 
many companies rather a shock. Falling share prices combined with lower interest rates and rising life 
expectancy was a potent cocktail. 
One of the challenges to the sector has therefore been to avoid a similar situation in the future. Many 
companies  have  opted  for  solutions  based  on  individual  products,  i.e.  the  policyholders  themselves 
bear most of the risks. 
This  is  a  remarkable  development.  To  put  it  bluntly,  insurance  companies  seek  to  avoid  selling 
insurance – both insurance in relation to market developments, and in relation to life expectancy (I am 
thinking of the great prevalence of annuity pension policies). In this area the companies surely ought 
to have a comparative edge in terms of pension savings compared to the rest of the financial sector. 
Conclusion 
6.  
I have spoken of the pension sector as a unified sector, which is by no means the case. Overall, it can 
be divided into two subsectors of almost the same size: the labour-market pension funds, which are 
owned by the customers, and the commercial pension companies, which are typically part of a larger 
financial group. 
The commercial pension companies compete for customers in more or less the same way as other 
financial enterprises, i.e. they basically seek to convince customers that they offer the best product in 
relation to price. 
The labour-market pension funds live a more quiet life. In many cases, their members have no choice 
of pension fund; this has been laid down in a collective agreement. 
When analysing market shares in the Life and Pension sector, it only makes sense to consider the part 
of the sector where policyholders or enterprises have a real choice of provider. 
Based on this approach, the five largest pension companies accounted for approximately 90 per cent 
of the market at end-2005, in terms of both gross premiums and total balance sheet. 
8 
 BIS Review 123/2006
 Competition is a good thing! 
Turning to the costs of the pension companies, the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority states in its 
2005 report on market developments for life-insurance companies and professional pension funds that 
the average costs of the pension schemes based on collective agreements are lower than those of the 
market-oriented  companies.  This  is  an  interesting  observation  since  competition  should  increase 
efficiency and thus drive costs down. I am sure that the market-based companies can list a number of 
good reasons explaining why this is not the case, so I will not go into further detail. 
I will merely point out that, unlike returns, costs can often be predicted with relatively great certainty on 
the basis of historical observations. Empirical studies have thus shown that costs are characterised by 
a considerable degree of persistence. 
In  plain  language,  this  means  that  a  company  that  has  high  costs  today  is  also  likely  to  have  high 
costs tomorrow. The same applies if a company has low costs. 
Over  a  working  life,  even  small  differences  is  cost  ratios  can  amount  to  several  hundred  thousand 
kroner in savings for the individual policyholder at the time of retirement. 
This  emphasises  the  importance  of  focusing  on  costs,  but  also  the  need  for  transparency  so  that 
customers can see what they are paying and what they are paying for. 
 Today the pension sector is an important part of the Danish economy, and there are no indications 
that this will change in the future. 
As the large wartime generation retires, and the life expectancy of the population increases, Denmark 
will see a number of structural changes, and the need for a well-functioning pension sector will be very 
obvious. It is therefore positive that the pension sector has increasing focus on risk management and 
risk hedging, and that a growing number of Danes are saving up for their retirement. 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 9
