Ben S Bernanke: Community development financial institutions – promoting 
economic growth and opportunity  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  at 
the  Opportunity  Finance  Network’s  Annual  Conference,  Washington,  DC, 
1 November 2006. 
 Good afternoon and thank you for inviting me to speak to your annual conference. Since I assumed 
my new responsibilities earlier this year, as well as during my earlier stint at the Federal Reserve as a 
member of the Board of Governors, I have met numerous times with community development leaders 
to  discuss  both  their  achievements  and  the  challenges  they  face.  In  visiting  some  underserved 
communities, I have seen first-hand the effects of various development initiatives. I have also regularly 
attended the meetings of the Board’s Consumer Advisory Council, which brings together community 
representatives  and  lenders  to  discuss  a  range  of  consumer  and  community  development  issues. 
These experiences have helped me appreciate the many ways that community development financial 
institutions (CDFIs) work to strengthen communities and improve the lives of lower-income people.  
Ensuring that every American has the chance to improve his or her economic circumstances through 
hard  work,  saving,  entrepreneurship,  and  other  productive  activities  is  essential  for  building  healthy 
communities  and  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  CDFI 
community  share  a  common  interest  in  increasing  economic  opportunity  for  all  Americans.  The 
Federal Reserve supports local economic development, for example, through its active engagement in 
financial  literacy  programs,  through  its  community  outreach  efforts,  through  aspects  of  its  role  in 
regulating  banking  and  financial  markets,  and  by  its  research  in  regional  economics.  But  the  Fed’s 
central  mission  -  to  help  maintain  a  financial  and  macroeconomic  environment  that  fosters  price 
stability  and  maximum  sustainable  employment  -  is  of  necessity  focused  on  the  economic 
performance  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  tool  that  cannot  target  industries, 
population groups, or regions. In contrast, as you know, CDFIs operate primarily at the microeconomic 
level, community by community. Using techniques such as financial counseling, local market research, 
and specialized lending, CDFIs work with partners in both the public and the private sectors to help 
unlock the economic potential of lower-income and underserved communities. 
The  theme  of  my  remarks  today  is  our  shared  goal  of  increasing  economic  opportunity.  I  will  first 
discuss some of the progress that has been made in recent years in the economic situations of lower-
income households and communities as well as some of the important challenges that remain. I will 
also offer my perspective on how CDFIs and their partners can help to meet those challenges.  
Improvements in economic opportunity and some challenges 
In the past decade or so, U.S. households overall have experienced notable gains in terms of some 
key indicators of economic opportunity. Three such indicators that I will briefly discuss are access to 
credit, rates of homeownership, and small business development. Moreover, as measured by these 
indicators, recent improvements in traditionally underserved markets appear to have been as great as 
or greater than those in middle- and upper-income households and communities. At the same time, 
however,  the  gaps  between  lower-income  households  and  other  households  with  respect  to  these 
measures of opportunity remain wide. 
Access to credit 
Access  to  credit  is  an  important  element  of  economic  opportunity  and  community  economic 
development: It supports homeownership and small-business creation and provides greater financial 
flexibility for households. In recent years, advances in information and communication technologies, 
improved methods of risk measurement and risk assessment, the availability of more-comprehensive 
information about individuals’ credit histories, and an increased ability of retail lenders to obtain funds 
from capital markets have led to what has been called the “democratization” of credit. As the pricing of 
credit risk has become more sophisticated and more consistent, as scale economies have reduced 
costs, and as funding sources have increased, lenders have been able to extend credit to households 
and businesses that might previously have been considered uncreditworthy. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
The growth of subprime mortgage lending is one indication of the extent to which access to credit has 
increased  for  all  households,  including  those  with  lower  incomes.  In  1994,  fewer  than  5  percent  of 
mortgage originations were in the subprime market, but by 2005 about 20 percent of new mortgage 
loans were subprime.1 Indeed, the expansion of subprime lending has contributed importantly to the 
substantial increase in the overall use of mortgage credit. From 1995 to 2004, the share of households 
with mortgage debt increased 17 percent, and in the lowest income quintile, the share of households 
with mortgage debt rose 53 percent.2  
Although the emergence of risk-based pricing has increased access to credit for all households, it has 
also raised some concerns and questions, which are magnified in the case of lower-income borrowers. 
For example, although subprime lending has grown substantially, are prime credit products sufficiently 
available  and  do  lenders  effectively  compete  in  all  communities,  including  historically  underserved 
communities? How well are lower-income borrowers matched with credit products and loan terms that 
fit  their  circumstances?  Are  borrowers  aware  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  their  loans,  and  more 
generally,  are  consumers  sufficiently  well  informed  to  be  wary  of  potentially  misleading  marketing 
tactics  and  to  shop  effectively  among  lenders?  Some  evidence,  including  recent  Federal  Reserve 
research  on  consumers  holding  adjustable-rate  mortgages,  suggests  that  awareness  could  be 
improved,  particularly  among  borrowers  with  lower  incomes  and  education  levels.3  This  research 
suggests the need for greater financial literacy and increased access to financial counseling, a point to 
which I will return. 
The release this year and last of mortgage price data gathered under the Home Mortgage Disclosure 
Act (HMDA) has highlighted a different, but potentially related, concern about access to credit on equal 
terms. The data show that blacks and Hispanics are considerably more likely than other borrowers to 
receive  higher-priced  loans.4  This  finding  has  several  possible  -  and  not  mutually  exclusive  - 
explanations, ranging from illegal discrimination to the effects of legitimate pricing factors not captured 
in the HMDA data, such as loan-to-value ratios and borrower credit history. Of course, as an agency 
committed to the rigorous enforcement of the fair lending laws, our job is to distinguish legitimate from 
illegitimate  sources  of  pricing  differentials  among  the  banking  institutions  we  supervise.  In  our 
enforcement efforts, we analyze the HMDA price disparities in conjunction with other information, such 
as the adequacy of the lender’s fair lending controls and the presence of business practices that may 
put lenders at risk for pricing discrimination. For example, a lender might offer its loan officers financial 
incentives that have the effect of inducing them to charge some applicants higher interest rates or to 
“steer” them to higher-priced loan products. Lenders at risk for pricing discrimination receive targeted 
reviews of their pricing to ensure that they are complying with fair lending laws. 
Loan price disparities, however, are not just a legal and supervisory issue. They also raise important 
social  and  policy  concerns.  The  questions  I  raised  earlier  about  access  to  prime  products,  lender 
competition, and borrower awareness and financial literacy may well be relevant to understanding the 
price  disparities  we  observe.  Further  research  to  explore  these  questions  and  their  possible 
connection to disparities in lending to members of minority groups would be highly worthwhile. In fact, 
the Federal Reserve’s upcoming Community Affairs Research Conference will feature several papers 
that explore these issues.5  
                                                      
1   Estimates are based on information from Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2005 and earlier years), Mortgage Market 
Statistical Annual (Bethesda, Md.: IMFP), www.imfpubs.com
2   Calculations by Federal Reserve Board staff from the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995 and 
2004. Further information on the Survey of Consumer Finances is in Arthur B Kennickell, Martha Starr-McCluer, and Annika 
E Sunden (1997), “Family Finances in the U.S.: Recent Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve 
Bulletin, vol. 83 (January), pp. 1-24; and Brian K Bucks, Arthur B Kennickell, and Kevin B Moore (2006), “Recent Changes 
in U.S. Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,” (444 KB PDF) Federal Reserve 
Bulletin, vol. 91 (Winter), pp. A1-A38, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/financesurvey.pdf. 
3   Brian  Bucks  and  Karen  Pence  (2006),  “Do  Homeowners  Know  Their  House  Values  and  Mortgage  Terms,”  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2006-03 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March). 
4   Robert  B  Avery,  Kenneth  P  Brevoort,  and  Glenn  B.  Canner  (2006),  “Higher-Priced  Home  Lending  and  the  2005  HMDA 
Data,”  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  vol.  92  (September),  www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/hmda/bull06hmda.pdf 
(580 KB PDF). 
5   Federal Reserve System Community Affairs Research Conference, “Financing Community Development: Learning from the 
the  Future”,  March  29-30,  2007,  www.philadelphiafed.org/econ/conf/financingcd/callforpapers-ca-
to 
Past,  Looking 
research2007.pdf (489 KB PDF). 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
Homeownership 
The  important  issue  of  loan  pricing  aside,  expanded  access  to  mortgage  credit  has  helped  fuel 
substantial  growth  in  homeownership.  The  national  rate  of  homeownership  increased  from  1995 
through mid-2006, reaching nearly 69 percent of all households this year.6 All major racial and ethnic 
groups have made gains in homeownership, but in percentage terms the largest increases have been 
made  by  minority  households.  In  particular,  since  1995  the  homeownership  rate  has  increased  7 
percent  among  white  households,  11  percent  among  black  households,  and  19  percent  among 
Hispanic households. However, despite the relatively more rapid growth in minority homeownership, 
significant differences persist: For example, the homeownership rate for blacks and Hispanics remains 
about two-thirds the rate for non-Hispanic whites. 
As for homeownership in lower-income areas, the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances 
indicates  that,  from  1995  to  2004,  census  tracts  in  all  income  groupings  experienced  gains  in 
homeownership,  with  rates  in  lower-income  areas  growing  somewhat  faster  than  those  in  higher-
income areas.7 But, again, important gaps remain. For example, in 2004, the rate of homeownership 
in lower-income areas was roughly 47 percent, compared to 72 percent in middle-income areas.  
Small businesses 
Another area in which progress has been made both generally and in lower-income communities is 
small business development. Small businesses are essential to the economic well-being and vibrancy 
of local communities and of the U.S. economy as a whole. The U.S. Small Business Administration 
estimates that small businesses account for about half of private-sector output and employ more than 
half  of  private-sector  workers.8  Moreover,  because  small  businesses  sometimes  become  big  ones, 
small-business ownership can be a significant stepping stone for economic advancement, particularly 
in traditionally underserved populations. Between 1997 and 2002, the number of businesses owned by 
Asians, blacks, Hispanics, and women grew more than 20 percent for each group - more than twice 
the  national  rate  of  increase  for  all  businesses.9  Nevertheless,  small  businesses  face  continual 
challenges. Each year, about half a million firms close, in some cases because of difficulties obtaining 
credit.10 Interestingly, the data do not indicate that experiences in obtaining credit differ greatly across 
neighborhoods  of  different  income  levels.  According  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Survey  of  Small 
Business Finances, for example, the proportions of businesses that were either denied credit or did 
not apply for fear of being turned down were similar across neighborhood income groups.11  
to 
the  economic  gains 
factors  have  contributed 
CDFIs as a solution to market failures 
Many 
including  broad 
macroeconomic forces and advances in the delivery of financial services. CDFIs have also played a 
valuable role by analyzing the economic potential of lower-income markets and developing strategies 
and marshaling resources to tap that potential. 
As CDFI leaders, you are keenly aware of the economic challenges that you work to overcome each 
day.  Economists  find  it  useful  to  think  about  these  challenges  in  the  context  of  the  economics  of 
market  failure.  Standard  economic  analysis  tells  us  that  when  competitive  conditions  prevail  in  a 
market, the resulting prices induce firms and individuals to allocate resources in a manner that tends 
to  maximize  social  welfare.12  However,  economists  also  recognize  that  various  deviations  from 
I  have  cited, 
that 
                                                      
6   www.huduser.org/periodicals/ushmc.html
7   Calculations by Federal Reserve Board staff from the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995 and 
2004, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/scfindex.html. 
8   U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, www.sba.gov/advo/stats/sbfaq.pdf (91 KB PDF). 
9   U.S. Census Bureau, Survey of Business Owners, www.census.gov/csd/sbo/. 
10   U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, www.sba.gov/advo/stats/sbfaq.pdf (91 KB PDF). 
11  Calculations  by  Federal  Reserve  staff  from  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  2003  Survey  of  Small  Business  Finances.  For 
further information, see www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/smallbusiness/smallbusiness.pdf (178 KB PDF). 
12   Kenneth  J  Arrow  (1951),  “An  Extension  of  the  Basic  Theorems  of  Classical  Welfare  Economics,”  in  J  Neyman  (ed.), 
Proceedings  of  the  Second  Berkeley  Symposium  on  Mathematical  Statistics  and  Probability  (Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles: 
University of California Press), pp. 507-32. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
idealized market conditions, termed market failures, can inhibit the efficient allocation of resources.13 
In one type of market failure, called a neighborhood externality, the actions of one person affect the 
well-being or economic welfare of others in the local area, but the individual taking the action neither 
bears the full costs of nor reaps the full benefits from those actions. Because the individual does not 
bear the full consequences of the actions taken, he or she may act in a way that is not in the best 
economic  interest  of  the  neighborhood  as  a  whole.  For  example,  the  failure  of  some  owners  to 
maintain their properties can lower the value of well-maintained properties in the same neighborhood. 
Ultimately, such spillover effects from neglected properties can lead to underinvestment in the whole 
community, potentially harming all neighborhood residents and businesses. 
A  related  type  of  market  failure  studied  by  economists  is  known  as  an  information  externality.  An 
information externality may arise when information about economic opportunities in an area has the 
potential to benefit many investors but is costly to gather. As a result, no single potential investor may 
find  obtaining  the  data  to  be  profitable.  For  example,  on  average,  lower-income  areas  have  fewer 
owner-occupied homes and record fewer home-purchase loans than higher-income areas do.14 Lower 
transaction  activity  makes  accurately  gauging  property  values  and  evaluating  credit  risks  in  those 
areas  more  difficult,  which  may  inhibit  the  extension  of  credit.15  Alternatively,  lower-income  people 
may  have  shorter  and  more-irregular  credit  histories,  making  an  evaluation  of  their  individual 
creditworthiness  more  difficult  and  costly.  Because  a  potential  investor  who  bears  the  costs  of 
obtaining  data  about  underserved  neighborhoods  may  be  able  to  obtain  only  a  portion  of  the  full 
economic benefits, these data may remain uncollected.16  
One purpose of CDFIs is to help overcome these and other market failures that inhibit local economic 
development.  For  example,  by  facilitating  larger-scale  property  development  projects,  coordinating 
public and private investment efforts, and working to improve amenities and services in a local area, 
CDFIs may help to solve collective action problems and reduce neighborhood externalities. CDFIs can 
counter information externalities by assuming the cost of learning about their local communities and 
developing  specialized  financial  products  and services  that  better  fit  local  needs.  In  general,  CDFIs 
provide  coordinated  development  activities  and  community-specific  information  that  the  market  may 
not supply on its own. 
Among other benefits, the familiarity with each community that CDFIs develop can help to gauge and 
control risk.17 For example, the use by CDFIs of appraisers who specialize in evaluating properties in 
a particular community produces more-reliable estimates of the value of the loan collateral. Likewise, 
CDFIs  structure  loans  and  use  public  and  private  credit  enhancements  both  to  increase  borrowers’ 
ability to qualify for loans and to spread the associated credit risk among a mix of private creditors and 
other providers of funds. 
Although  these  specialized  techniques  can  reduce  credit  risk,  they  are  labor-intensive  and, 
consequently, expensive. Most private lending institutions reduce costs by adopting processes that are 
highly  standardized  and  automated.  Such  systems  are  not  necessarily  compatible  with  lending  to 
borrowers who require substantial screening, counseling, and monitoring or with acquiring specialized 
information about community development lending. Part of the explicit mission of CDFIs is to assume 
the costs of conducting such research and analyses in underserved communities. CDFIs have also 
developed techniques and strategies - such as flexible underwriting criteria, specialized loan products, 
and intensive financial education programs - to meet the financial circumstances of their communities. 
Moreover,  in  recent  years,  CDFIs  have  been  working  to  expand  their  role  as  information  brokers 
beyond the local communities they serve. Through national initiatives to collect industry-wide data and 
to securitize community development loan portfolios, CDFIs are working to expand access to credit 
                                                      
13   Paul Milgrom and John Roberts (1992), Economics, Organization, and Management (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall). 
14   The decennial census and annual HMDA data indicate, for example, that the average number of owner-occupied properties 
and home purchase loans in lower-income areas is less than half the average number in higher-income areas. 
15   This argument is developed in detail in William W Lang and Leonard I Nakamura (1993), “A Model of Redlining,” Journal of 
Urban Economics, vol. 33 (March), pp. 223-34. 
16   A  detailed  model  of  this  phenomenon  is  in  William  C.  Gruben,  Jonathan  A.  Neuberger,  and  Ronald  H.  Schmidt  (1990), 
“Imperfect  Information  and  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act,”  (2.7  MB  PDF)  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco, 
Economic Review, vol. 3 (Summer), pp. 27-46. 
17   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1993), Report to the Congress on Community Development Lending by 
Depository Institutions (Washington: Board of Governors, October). 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2006
and capital in lower-income markets. In short, knowledge and expertise - together with the ability to 
build  new  relationships  -  are  the  principal  contributions  that  CDFIs  bring  to  the  marketplace  and  to 
underserved communities. 
Is community development lending profitable? 
Can  private-market  participants  profit  from  community  development  lending?  Data  based  on 
Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) examinations tell us much about the volume of such loans but 
less about their performance and profitability. However, a Federal Reserve survey found that nearly all 
banks reported that their community development activities were profitable, at least to some degree.18 
About two-thirds of the banks also reported receiving some benefit from their lending unrelated to loan 
profitability, such as an improved image in the community.  
Since the Federal Reserve report, studies undertaken by the CDFI Data Project show that, for 2004, 
charge-off rates for CDFI portfolios were similar to those for the banking industry as a whole.19 These 
studies  and  market  data  suggest  that  banks  and  other  private  organizations  may  become  an 
increasingly significant source of competition for CDFIs. That is good news, not bad news. Indeed, the 
surest  sign  of  a  CDFI’s  success  is  that  private  investors  see  viable  investment  opportunities  in  the 
neighborhoods in which the CDFI has been operating. 
The continuing relevance of CDFIs 
Although in some sense the mission of CDFIs is to make themselves unnecessary, I expect that the 
knowledge and good will that they have accumulated in local communities will continue to make them 
relevant.  For  example,  I  mentioned  earlier  the  loan  pricing  disadvantages  faced  by  members  of 
minority  groups  that  have  appeared  in  the  HMDA  data.  CDFIs  may  be  able  to  help  reduce  those 
discrepancies  by  using  their  local  knowledge  and  financial  expertise  to  offer  alternatives  to 
conventional subprime lending. The Opportunity Finance Network, for instance, will be competing with 
subprime lenders via a mortgage-credit platform that centralizes some CDFI lending processes and 
directly links counseling and lending services. At the same time, CDFIs continue to expand their ability 
to attract private investment funds, for example, through increasing transparency and developing the 
means of providing objective evaluations of their financial and mission-related effectiveness.  
These efforts demonstrate the ability of CDFIs to adapt their business strategies to evolving markets, 
as indeed they have done throughout their thirty-year history. I expect that the local knowledge and 
specialized financial expertise that CDFIs provide will continue to add significant economic value and 
complement market forces in the support of community economic development. Thus, CDFIs are likely 
to contribute to our shared goal of expanding economic opportunity for many years to come. 
                                                      
18   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2000),  The  Performance  and  Profitability  of  CRA-Related  Lending, 
Report to the Congress submitted pursuant to section 713 of the Gramm-Leach Bliley Act of 1999 (Washington: Board of 
Governors, July), www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/surveys/craloansurvey/default.htm. 
19   CDFI  Coalition,  CDFI  Data  Project,  2004,  www.cdfi.org/cdfiproj.asp#fy;  and  Elizabeth  C  Klee  and  Gretchen  C  Weinbach 
(2006),  “Profit  and  Balance  Sheet  Developments  at  U.S.  Commercial  Banks  in  2005,”  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  vol.  92 
(June) www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2006/bankprofits/0606bankprofit.pdf (221 KB PDF). 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 5
