Rakesh Mohan: Monetary and financial policy responses to global imbalances 
Paper presented by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bank 
Indonesia Annual International Seminar, Jakarta, 16-17 November 2006. 
The assistance of R K Pattnaik and Sangeeta Misra is gratefully acknowledged. 
 I would like to compliment Bank Indonesia for arranging this conference on the theme "Monetary and 
Financial Policy Responses to Global Imbalances" at the Annual International Seminar 2006. This is 
an  issue  that  has  been  among  the  top  concerns  of  central  bankers  in  the  last  few  years:  so  the 
opportunity to have this discussion at this opportune time is very welcome for all of us. 
The issue of large global imbalances has been debated at length since the beginning of this decade, 
both at international fora and also in regional conferences and seminars. In India, we have regularly 
highlighted  this  issue  in  our  Annual  Reports  and  Annual  Policy  Statements.  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India has also addressed these issues in two of his recent speeches.  
It is pertinent to note that whereas the existence of global imbalances is well recognised, there are still 
no  definite  answers  on  its  possible  impact  and  what  policy  responses  need  to  be  considered. 
Therefore, seminars of this kind assume importance in exploring the implications of global imbalances 
for Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) and developed countries alike. 
In  my  talk  today,  I  will  first  give  a  brief  introduction  to  the  concept  of  global  imbalances,  while 
highlighting  some  of  the  recent  global  initiatives  that  have  been  undertaken  to  correct  these 
imbalances. This will be followed by discussion of the efforts that are further required in this direction. 
Thereafter, I would present the Indian perspective on global imbalances against the backdrop of the 
strength and resilience of the Indian economy exhibited in the recent years.  
I.  
Global imbalances: concept and contributing factors 
Concept 
Conceptually, from a single country perspective, imbalances arise when the economy exhibits, on a 
sustained basis, large current account deficits or surpluses that are essentially external manifestations 
of large domestic saving-investment gaps in a macro economic framework. From a global perspective, 
however,  the  balance  of  payments  identity,  in  principle,  should  ensure  that  high  surpluses  in  some 
countries are matched by deficits in other countries. Thus, the emergence of a large surplus or deficit 
in one country’s external account implies the mirror image elsewhere. Hence, the global concerns are 
not about the existence of current account deficits or surpluses per se, but the persistence of large 
deficits and surpluses, particularly in large and systemically important economies.  
In  reality,  global  imbalances  in  the  international  economic  system  today  refers  to  the  large  and 
increasing  current  account  deficits  (CAD)  of  the  US  and  correspondingly  large  surpluses  in  other 
regions,  particularly  in  Asia.  The  extent  of  these  imbalances  has  become  large,  particularly  in  the 
aftermath of the Asian crisis and has generated issues of unsustainability of such global imbalances 
and chances of disorderly adjustment hampering the global economy, in general.  
The contributing factors 
Twin deficits in the United States 
(i)  
The current global imbalance is largely attributed to the large and increasing CAD of the US that has 
been financed by surpluses elsewhere, especially in emerging Asia, oil exporters and Japan. The US 
has  been  experiencing  a  current  account  deficit  in  each  year  since  1982.  The  US  deficit  remained 
below 3 per cent of GDP till the mid-1990s. Since then, however, it has risen substantially. The period 
following  the  bursting  of  the  information  technology  bubble  in  the  US  was  marked  by  highly 
accommodative monetary policy along with expansionary fiscal policies. On the one hand, the decline 
in the rate of interest led to the housing boom and increase in housing and other asset prices while, on 
the  other  hand,  fiscal  stimulation  led  to  increase  in  consumption.  While  real  activity  in  the  US  did 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 1
provide a stimulus to activity in the rest of the world, it has been accompanied by large and growing 
twin deficits - fiscal as well as current account deficits. In absolute terms, the CAD of the US has seen 
a seven fold increase from US $ 114 billion in 1995 to US $ 791 billion in 2005. As a percentage of 
GDP, the CAD of the US almost doubled itself every 5 years since the early 1990s. During 2005, the 
CAD to GDP ratio was close to 6.4 per cent of GDP, the highest ever CAD for the US (Table 1). 
 It is widely agreed that wealth effects arising from increasing asset prices, particularly of housing, have 
also contributed significantly to lower savings rates and higher consumption rates in the U.S. The large 
current  account  and  fiscal  imbalances  in  the  US  also  find  its  reflection  in  the  savings-investment 
mismatches that have risen substantially in the present decade. The private net savings in the US has 
declined from 8 per cent of GDP in the 1980s to less than 2 per cent in 2005.  
Surpluses in the emerging economies 
(ii)  
Contrary to the US that has fed the domestic demand, in Asia and other emerging economies, growth 
since  the  late  1990s  has  been  led  by  external  demand.  The  current  account  has  recorded  large 
surpluses since 1999, particularly for China and other East Asian emerging market economies (EMEs) 
(Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Taiwan,  Thailand).  Surpluses  of  two  island  economies  viz.  Hong  Kong  and 
Singapore have also increased significantly. India too registered current account surpluses between 
2001 and 2004, albeit small.  
In  the  post  Asian  crisis  period  the  savings  rate  in  most  East  Asian  EMEs,  which  has  generally 
remained  higher  than  the  industrialized  countries  exhibited  a  modest  decline.  Investment  rates, 
however, showed sharp declines resulting in the widening of the savings investment gap in the EMEs 
(Table 2)1. India, however, remains an exception to this trend, and still continues to have a negative 
savings investment gap.  
                                                      
1   According to Barro and Lee (2003), the East Asian Crisis has exerted permanent depressing effects on investment in these 
economies. There has been an investment drought rather than a savings glut. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2006
 Surpluses in oil exporting countries  
(iii)  
The large current account surplus of the oil exporting countries has also emerged as a new source 
contributing to the global imbalances. The Middle East region recorded current account surpluses of 
18.5 per cent of GDP in 2005. Oil revenues in the Middle East region have risen further in the first half 
of  2006  because  of  both  higher  prices  and  some  expansion  in  production.  The  surplus  for  2006  is 
projected by the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO, September 2006) to 
rise further to 23 per cent of GDP (almost US $ 280 billion). Higher net savings by oil exporters are 
also believed to have contributed towards the softening of global interest rates and consequent boost 
to  demand  in  economies  with  market  based  financial  systems  such  as  the  US.  The  depth  of  US 
financial markets together with rapid innovation of new products for effective risk management have 
made US an attractive destination for global investors’ funds. Any correction of global imbalances on 
this  account  depends  on  what  oil  producers  do  with  their  surging  oil  revenues  in  terms  of  their 
domestic absorption.  
Move towards correction 
II. 
Currently, there is an emerging consensus that US consumers cannot continue to support worldwide 
demand  indefinitely  and  Asian  EMEs  and  oil  exporting  countries  cannot  continue  financing  these 
perpetually.  Yet  there  are  differing  views  on  the  process  of  correction,  its  nature,  pace  and 
consequences.  In  this  context,  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee  (IMFC) 
Communique,  April  22,  2006  reiterates  'Any  action  for  orderly  medium-term  resolution  of  global 
imbalances is a shared responsibility, and will bring greater benefit to members and the international 
community than actions taken individually.' Key elements of an orderly global rebalancing which are 
generally advocated include increase in US savings, structural reforms in the Euro area and Japan 
and exchange rate flexibility in EMEs.  
Some  developments  observed  in  the  recent  months  may  contribute  towards  correcting  global 
imbalances in future. These are set out below. 
First, in the US, the fiscal deficit has come down to 2.0 per cent of GDP in the second quarter of 2006 
mainly because of revenue buoyancy. Federal tax revenues have remained buoyant in 2005 and 2006 
so far and expenditure discipline has been maintained, suggesting that the federal budget deficit in 
fiscal 2006 is likely to outperform initial budget estimates and fall modestly to 2.25 per cent of GDP 
(IMF, 2006c). The US fed funds rate has risen to reach 5.25 per cent. The U.S dollar in the recent 
period has depreciated marginally against some other major currencies.  
Second,  higher  investment  witnessed  in  some  Asian  emerging  economies  may  contribute  towards 
correcting imbalances. China has recently exhibited a very rapid investment growth, though concerns 
have been raised about the possibility of an investment boom-burst cycle (World Economic Outlook, 
September 2006). In the first three quarters of 2006, the total investment in fixed assets in China has 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 3
been 27.3 per cent higher than that in the same period last year. As has been advocated repeatedly 
by the Chinese policy makers, the need now is for Chinese consumption to increase faster than their 
investment growth. 
Third, increased exchange rate flexibility has been observed in some of the Asian countries. The US 
dollar  has  seen  some  depreciation  while  the  non-US  currencies  have  appreciated.  During  2005 
currencies  in  many  developing  countries  have  also  appreciated  steadily  against  the  US  dollar 
accompanied by some movement towards more flexible exchange rate policies. This is noticed most 
notably in China, which has revalued its currency against the dollar by around 2.1 per cent. Malayasia 
has  also  taken  similar  steps.  During  2006,  there  were  significant  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  of 
Euro/US dollar (from US $ 0.84 per Euro in early 2006 to US $ 0.78 per Euro by September 2006), yet 
there has been little significant impact in US Euro trade patterns. In view of this, the efficacy of the 
exchange rate as an equilibrating mechanism needs to be investigated. For industrial countries, the 
exchange rate pass-through to consumer price inflation has been found to have almost halved in the 
1990s  compared  to  the  pre-1990s  period  (Gagnon  and  Ihrig,  2001).  Furthermore,  the  pass-through 
has reportedly declined more in developing countries in the 1990s than in the advanced economies 
(Frankel, Parsley and Wei, 2004). Financial innovations such as the availability of hedging products 
have  also  lowered  the  degree  of  pass-through  by  enabling  exporters  and  importers  to  ignore 
temporary shocks and set stable product prices despite large currency fluctuations. Besides, studies 
have also shown that within EMEs, the impact of exchange rate movements on trade balances varies 
significantly  depending  upon  whether  they  are  predominant  exporters  of  manufactures,  non-oil 
commodities or oil (Allen, 2006).  
The increasing share of non-tradables in GDP has also worked towards containing the exchange rate 
pass  through.  Non-tradables  generally  approximated  by  services  have  increased  their  share  in  all 
major  industrial  countries  as  also  in  China  and  India.  As  populations  age,  demand  moves  more  in 
favour of services than for goods. Thus, the aging population in industrial countries has provided much 
of  the  growth  impetus  for  services.  With  the  shift  in  demand  composition  in  favour  of  services,  the 
extent of exchange rate pass-through, which works primarily through tradables has been limited. The 
role of exchange rate movements or policy induced adjustments in influencing behaviour of economic 
agents  through  the  domestic  price  mechanism  appears  to  have  been  significantly  truncated.  If 
exchange rate depreciation (appreciation) does not appreciably increase (decrease) domestic prices 
of imported goods, there would be little reason to expect a reduction (increase) in demand for imported 
products.  Hence  small  exchange  rate  changes  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  help  significantly  in 
effecting changes in the current account (Mohan, 2005). 
Thus, the following issues assume importance  
• 
Will the recent developments see some domestic correction in the US, leading to a decline in 
its CAD?  
Are there chances of investment increasing in the Asian countries and whether this would 
reduce their surplus?  
Can  exchange  rate  adjustments  contribute  significantly  towards  correcting  current  account 
imbalances?  
  Further efforts 
Notwithstanding the progress that has been made towards correcting imbalances, further efforts are 
desirable - with every country doing its part - to help reduce medium-term risks associated with the 
imbalances.  
The  US  will  have  to  try  to  curb  household  and  government  borrowings  and  strengthen  national 
savings, without hurting recovery and excessive dollar depreciation. The focus of fiscal consolidation 
in the US has to remain on the expenditure side, though revenue measures aimed at broadening the 
revenue  base  and  tax  system  with  greater  emphasis  on  consumption  tax  rather  than  income  tax 
cannot be ruled out (WEO, September 2006). With the housing market slowing down in the US, some 
increase  in  private  savings  is  expected.  This  will  be  further  helped  by  policy  initiatives  such  as 
introduction of health savings accounts that would raise incentives for household savings and passing 
of pension legislation.  
The Euro area needs to pursue structural reforms, especially product and labour market policies, to 
boost domestic demand and broad base the recovery. Japan has started recovering finally. Its current 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2006
account surplus has begun to narrow down from 3.8 per cent of GDP in 2004 to 3.6 per cent of GDP in 
2005 and the trend is continuing in 2006 with domestic demand strengthening. It is widely agreed that 
Japan should further strengthen its financial system and carry out other structured reforms to provide 
further flexibility in the economy.  
Further  flexibility  in  exchange  rate  policies  is  desirable  for  the  emerging  market  economies.  Any 
attempt  by  EMEs  to  intervene  excessively  and  sterilize  their  forex  reserves  to  maintain  their 
competitiveness will further delay the adjustment process. However, as indicated earlier that unless 
there are substantial changes in exchange rates, it seems that one cannot expect corrections to global 
imbalances. Studies have shown that with unchanged growth rates in the US and the rest of the world, 
the US dollar would need to depreciate by nearly 33 per cent - equivalently, the non-US currencies 
would have to appreciate, on average, by 50 per cent - to balance the US trade account (Obstfeld and 
Rogoff, 2004, 2005). Another study has pointed out that dollar should depreciate by 30 per cent in real 
terms to bring US CAD within 2 per cent (Mussa, 2004).  
Promoting  efficient  absorption  of  higher  oil  revenues  in  oil-exporting  countries  with  strong 
macroeconomic policies should also be a key element of this correction mechanism. It is suggested 
that these countries could boost expenditures to some extent in areas where social returns are high 
like  education,  health,  infrastructure  and  social  security.  Given  economic  interlinkages,  all  countries 
and  regions  will  have  a  role  to  play  by  increasing  the  flexibility  of  their  economies  and  adapting  to 
changing global demand patterns. 
Let me quote our own Mid-term Review of the Annual Policy Statement announced on October 31, 
2006, 
“Global imbalances have continued to widen during 2006. With some central banks 
actively  reassessing  their  stance  now,  the  potential  drainage  of  global  liquidity 
would test the resilience of world financial markets and weigh upon the outlook on 
the global economy. It is in this context that the IMF’s projection of the U.S. current 
account deficit at about 7 per cent of GDP in 2007 with large surpluses continuing 
in Japan, emerging Asia and oil-exporting countries is disturbing. The sharp rise in 
the net foreign liability position of the US raises the risks of abrupt and disorderly 
adjustment of major currencies as the global imbalances unwind. However, there is 
an  interesting  lull  in  the  serious  concerns  expressed  both  by  policy  makers  and 
financial markets in regard to the global imbalances, possibly on the assumption 
that universal recognition of the problem would per se lead to harmonised actions 
that would avoid hard landing.”  
The Indian setting 
III.  
In  recent  years,  the  Indian  economy  has  seen  a  massive  transformation  from  a  closed,  controlled, 
slow growing economy to a more open, liberalised and one of the fastest growing economies of the 
world.  Economic  reforms  in  India  since  July  1991  have  accelerated  growth,  enhanced  stability  and 
strengthened  both  external  and  financial  sectors.  India  has  remained  an  attractive  destination  for 
foreign investors. Despite high capital flows, India has been successful in managing liquidity. India’s 
foreign  exchange  reserves  are  in  excess  of  the  total  outstanding  external  debt  of  the  country.  The 
trade  as  well  as  financial  sector  is  considerably  integrated  with  the  global  economy.  Even  during 
difficult times i.e. the East Asian crisis, the Russian crisis during 1997-98 and post-Pokhran sanctions, 
Indian economy has shown substantial resilience in withstanding the contagion. 
Since the 1970s, India's current account has exhibited surplus only on six occasions (Table 3). The 
deficit has been modest and has remained below 2 per cent of GDP in most years. Only in 1990-91 on 
the brink of a balance of payments (BoP) crisis, the CAD to GDP ratio had marginally crossed the 3 
per cent mark. Thus, in so many years, India has had a balanced external account that has also been 
reflected in the corresponding savings-investment gap.  
In the recent period i.e. 2001-02 to 2003-04, India experienced a surplus in the current account though 
the magnitude was small and it was essentially the consequence of business cycle slow down in early 
part of the decade along with corporate restructuring. With a turn around in business cycle, investment 
picked up in 2004-05 and India moved back to a current account deficit scenario. The current account 
deficit further widened during 2005-06 reflecting the cumulative impact of the high level of international 
crude oil prices and growth in imports emanating from strong industrial activity. The sustained rise in 
its invisibles surplus during 2005-06 emanating from the buoyant software exports, remittances and 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 5
various  professional  and  business  services  continued  to  moderate  the  impact  of  a  growing 
merchandise trade deficit. According to current projections, during the 11th Plan period (2007-08 to 
2011-12), current account is projected to remain in deficit and the normal and stable capital flows are 
expected to finance the deficit comfortably.  
 Unlike in many of the Asian EMEs where current account surpluses have mainly contributed towards 
greater accumulation of reserves in these economies, in India reserve accumulation has been mainly 
due  to  large  capital  flows  and  the  current  account  surplus  had  only  a  minimal  role  to  play  in  this 
regard, for a few years. Thus, it is clear that India, as such, has not contributed towards enhancing 
global imbalances. 
India's  macro  policy  has  clearly  laid  a  lot  of  stress  on  maintaining  financial  stability.  The  Indian 
economy as a whole and the financial sector in particular is now more resilient and in a better position 
to  absorb  financial  shocks.  This  resilience  has  been  achieved  by  improving  the  macroeconomic 
fundamentals and regulatory frameworks. Besides, unlike some EMEs that have seen demand to be 
predominantly driven externally, the Indian economy is mostly domestic demand driven. While India’s 
exports constituted 11.5 per cent of GDP, its share in world trade is only 0.8 per cent. Second, India's 
export  basket  is  fairly  diversified  (Reddy,  2005).  Hence,  its  exposure  to  volatility  in  growth  patterns 
across the world is limited than most EMEs. Higher GDP growth in India during last three years has 
also seen a rise in savings rate from 23.5 per cent in 2000-01 to 29.1 per cent in 2004-05. A significant 
turn  around  in  public sector  savings  has  been  a  major  cause  for  the  increase  in  domestic  savings. 
Given  the  reform  initiatives  envisaged  under  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management 
(FRBM)  Act,  public  savings  are  expected  to  improve  further.  Besides,  households  in  India  are  the 
major contributors to savings and given the favourable Indian demographics over the next 20 years, 
the  savings  rate  in  India  is  expected  to  remain  high.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  other  East  Asian 
countries  as  well  as  in  the  US,  where  major  contributor  to  savings  are  the  corporates  that  largely 
depend on the cyclical path of the economy.  
IV.  
Possible impact of global imbalances on India  
Fiscal 
India  continues  to  have  a  high  fiscal  deficit  by  international  standards  though  it  has  declined 
significantly in recent years. In order to achieve sustainable fiscal correction and consolidation, both 
the  central  and  state  governments  have  adopted  fiscal  responsibility  legislations  i.e.,  Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Acts. The combined fiscal deficit of the centre and 
states is budgeted to come down to about 6.5 per cent by 2007 (Table 4). Even if it is assumed that 
the  centre  and  the  states  comply  with  their  respective  FRBMs,  their  combined  fiscal  deficit  would 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2006
continue to remain above 6 per cent by 2009-10. Generally, one would presume that India remains 
somewhat vulnerable to the impact of global imbalances on this account. However, the Indian case is 
unique as the Government does not resort to external financing to finance domestic debt. This would 
help India in not being subject to the consequences of global imbalances.  
 In addition, both Reserve Bank of India and Government of India have undertaken various initiatives to 
develop  the  government  securities  market.  The  earlier  features  of  an  administered  market  with 
automatic  monetisation  have  been  done  away  with.  The  Indian  G-sec  market  today  is  more  broad 
based,  characterised  by  an  efficient  auction  process,  an  active  secondary  market  supported  by  an 
active Primary Dealer system and electronic trading and settlement technology (Mohan, 2006).  
The effect of global imbalances, however, could be indirect through a rise in domestic interest rates as 
a consequence of rise in international rates. There could be an increase in the cost of borrowings of 
the  Government.  However,  since  most  of  the  outstanding  debt  is  at  fixed  rates  and  not  on  floating 
rates, the rise in the borrowing cost will be incremental. This situation also provides greater headroom 
for  a  flexible  monetary  policy  to  adjust  policy  rates, as  and  when  warranted,  without  any excessive 
impact on the fiscal deficit (Reddy, 2005).  
Private corporate sector 
Private corporate external borrowing has been liberalised substantially in India. The stock of private 
external debt rose from about US $ 5 billion at end March 1996 to US $ 15.6 billion at end-March 2001 
and has further risen to US $ 32.4 billion as at end-March 2006 (Table 5). Potentially, corporates are 
expected  to  borrow  more  in  future  and  hence,  could  be  susceptible  to  the  consequences  of  global 
imbalances.  If  there  are  sharp  fluctuations  in  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  on  account  of  the 
adjustment  process,  corporates  that  have  borrowed  at  variable  rates  would  be  subject  to  both 
exchange rate and interest rate risk, depending on the magnitude and efficacy of the risk mitigation 
activities. However, without full capital account convertibility in India, the Government and the Reserve 
Bank  of  India  administer  the  overall  incremental  debt  exposure  and  put  ceilings  on  total  external 
commercial borrowings. Besides, corporates in India are encouraged to hedge their foreign exchange 
exposure.  
BIS Review 113/2006 
 7
 Financial intermediaries 
In India, exposure of the financial intermediaries to external debt is limited and regulated. Their foreign 
currency  borrowings  have  been  subject  to  the  prudential  limit  of  25  per  cent  of  their  Tier-I  capital. 
These limits amounted to US $ 2.7 billion as of March 31, 2006. With a view to enabling banks to raise 
resources overseas, the latest monetary policy announcement on October 31, 2006 has enhanced this 
limit to 50 per cent of their Tier I capital, or US $ 10 million, whichever is higher. Foreign currency 
borrowings by the banks beyond this ceiling are linked to their net worth, exclusively for the purpose of 
export  finance.  With  a  move  towards  fuller  capital  account  convertibility,  banks  are  likely  to  access 
forex  markets  more,  underscoring  the  need  for  further  enhancement  of  the  risk  management 
capabilities of the banking system.  
Banks  in  India  have  been  financing  investment  in  assets,  home  loans  and  retail  market  as  well  as 
equities. Like in many EMEs, asset prices and the equity market have seen a rising trend in the recent 
past  in  India  as  well.  Should  there  be  any  reversal  of  capital  flows,  asset  prices  could  potentially 
decline as did happen in May 2006. The most significant impact on banks’ balance sheet, however, 
could  be  felt  through  their  investment  portfolio.  Banks  in  India  hold  substantial  investments  in 
Government  and  other  fixed  income  securities.  To  the  extent  a  rise  in  international  interest  rates 
impacts  the  domestic  interest  rates,  it  would  entail  marked-to-market  losses  on  the  investment 
portfolios (Reddy, 2006).  
To  prevent  any  unforeseen  eventualities,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  constantly  monitoring  the 
Banks’ exposure to risky assets and has put ceilings on their exposure to equity markets. In addition to 
a capital to risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) for the sector of 12 per cent, specific steps have been 
taken  to  meet  the  interest  rate  risk.  Separate  provision  for  capital  against  market  risk  has  been 
introduced.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
More importantly, one needs to look at the impact on monetary policy. As indicated in a speech that I 
made  sometime  back  in  Colombo  (Mohan,  2004),  in  a  globalised  world,  it  is  difficult  to  formulate 
monetary  policy  independent  of  international  developments.  Monetary  policy  has  become  more 
complex and central banks will have to take into account, among other issues, developments in the 
global economic situation, the international inflationary situation, interest rate scenario, exchange rate 
movements and capital flows while formulating monetary policy. Besides, in developing countries like 
India  considerations  relating  to  maximising  output  and  employment  weigh  equally  upon  monetary 
authorities as price stability. As far as the impact of the adjustment policies on India's monetary policy 
is  concerned,  any  significant  readjustment  of  the  currencies  and  rise  in  interest  rates  could  affect 
global growth inturn affecting growth prospects  of several emerging economies including India. The 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  will  have  to  factor  in  these  downside  risks  to  inflation  and  any  kind  of 
turbulence to financial markets due to repricing of risks while maintaining the delicate balance in terms 
of growth vis-a-vis price stability. A key feature of Indian monetary policy formulation in recent years 
has been to look at both domestic and global factors and to guard against various risks as and when 
they evolve. The Indian economy now is more resilient and in a better position to absorb a financial 
shock. 
8 
 BIS Review 113/2006
As indicated in our Mid-Term Review on Annual Policy Statement for 2006-07 announced on October 
31, 2006,  
“Barring  the  emergence  of  any  adverse  and  unexpected  developments  in  various 
sectors of the economy and keeping in view the current assessment of the economy 
including the outlook for inflation, the overall stance of monetary policy in the period 
ahead will be 
  To  ensure  a  monetary  and  interest  rate  environment  that  supports  export  and  investment 
demand  in  the  economy  so  as  to  enable  continuation  of  the  growth  momentum  while 
reinforcing price stability with a view to anchoring inflation expectations.  
To maintain the emphasis on macroeconomic and, in particular, financial stability.  
To  consider  promptly  all  possible  measures  as  appropriate  to  the  evolving  global  and 
domestic situation."  
Downside risks 
Notwithstanding these positive aspects of the Indian economy, downside risks remain as indicated in 
the various monetary policy statements released by the Reserve Bank of India.  
First, moderation of demand on account of high oil prices poses the biggest challenge. The oil market 
remained highly volatile during 2005 and first half of 2006 on account of geopolitical uncertainty and 
supply disturbances. The average international oil prices increased from about US $ 25 per barrel in 
2002 to US $ 54 per barrel in 2005 and further to US $ 73 per barrel around mid-July 2006. Though oil 
prices have softened in the more recent period (US $ 61 per barrel during September 2006), they still 
continue  to  remain  at  high  levels.  The  medium  term  outlook  also  does  not  give  much  comfort, 
especially to the oil importing developing economies, in view of the continued geopolitical tensions in 
the  middle-east  and  possible  disruptions  in  other  major  oil  producing  regions,  along  with  the  tight 
global demand supply scenario. Though pass through of the hike in international oil prices to domestic 
consumers  is  limited  in  the  Indian  context  because  of  Government  policies,  its  impact  on  the  trade 
deficit via increase in oil imports bill cannot be ruled out. This further worsens the global imbalances by 
creating higher surpluses in the oil exporting countries.  
Second, as mentioned before, India has not directly contributed to the global imbalances and has built 
in  enough  stabilizers  to  keep  it  insulted  from  the  consequences  of  global  imbalances.  Yet  any 
disorderly  unwinding  of  global  imbalances  is  likely  to  have  global  ramifications  and  may  affect  the 
Indian  economy  indirectly.  The  speed  at  which  the  US  current  account  ultimately  returns  towards 
balance,  the  triggers  that  drive  that  adjustment,  and  the  way  in  which  the  burden  of  adjustment  is 
allocated  across  the  rest  of  the  world  have  enormous  implications  for  the  global  exchange  rates. 
Private  corporates  and  financial  intermediaries  are  bound  to  get  exposed  to  exchange  rate  risks  if 
these variables exhibit substantial fluctuations, though the impact might be less than other EMEs.  
Third,  any  reversal  of  global  capital  flows  from  emerging  and  developing  economies  in  the  case  of 
realignment of interest rates and slow investment growth on account of higher interest rates with the 
tightening of monetary policy stance by major central banks remain the other downside risks.  
Fourth, domestic developments exhibit strength and resilence with some down side risks. There is a 
pick-up in the momentum of growth which also appears to be spreading across all constituent sectors 
of  the  economy.  Domestic  financial  markets  have  exhibited  stable  and  orderly  conditions.  In  the 
external  sector,  there  are  signs  of  abiding  strength  and  the  current  account  deficit  has  been 
well-managed  so  far.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  indications  of  growing  demand  pressures  and 
potential risks from rapid credit growth and strains on credit quality. High levels of monetary expansion 
and the evolution of the liquidity situation will need to be continuously monitored for any signs of risks 
to inflation. The elevated levels of asset prices also represent a risk to the outlook for macroeconomic 
and financial stability. In brief, at the current juncture, for policy purposes, the two major issues that 
exert conflicting pulls are exploration of signs of overheating firming up to warrant a policy response, 
and,  the  impact  of  lagged  effects  of  earlier  policy  action  on  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic 
developments.  
BIS Review 113/2006 
 9
Concluding observations 
V.  
To  sum  up,  being  a  closed  economy  earlier  India  had  remained  relatively  insulated  from  global 
developments and hence, had little experience in dealing with them. During the last fifteen years, India 
has  opened  up  considerably,  while  simultaneously  reforming  the  financial  sector,  improving  its 
fundamentals and creating some built in measures to ensure financial stability. The overall approach 
has given the Indian economy enough resilience to withstand some major global risks. Indian growth 
prospects remain bright in the future and any significant correction to global imbalances via abrupt and 
sharp changes in exchange rates and international interest rates will be taken into account.  
References 
Allen, Mark (2006), 'Exchange Rates and Trade Balance Adjustment in Emerging market Economies', 
IMF Staff Paper, October 2006.  
Barro,  Robert  and  J.  W.  Lee  (2003):  "Growth  and  Investment  in  East  Asia  before  and  After  the 
Financial Crisis", Seoul Journal of Economics, Vol. 16, No. 2. 
Frankel, J, Parsley D and Wei S.J. (2005), 'Slow pass trough around the World: A new import for the 
developing  countries?'  Working  Paper  No.  116,  Center  for  International  Development,  Harvard 
University. 
Gragnon,  Joseph  &  Ihrig  Jane  (2001),  'Monetary  Policy  and  Exchange  Rate  Pass  through',  FRB 
International Finance Discussion Paper No. 704, July 2001 
Gregorio,  J  (2005),  'Global  Imbalances  and  Exchange  rate  Adjustments',  Central  Bank  of  Chile, 
September 2005 
International Monetary Fund (2005), IMF World Economic Outlook, September 2005. 
International Monetary Fund (2006a), IMF World Economic Outlook, April, 2006. 
International Monetary Fund (2006b), Communique issued by the International Monetary and Financial 
Committee (IMFC), April 22, 2006 
International Monetary Fund (2006c), Article IV Consultation with the United States, Public Information 
Notice, July 28, 2006.  
International Monetary Fund (2006d), IMF World Economic Outlook, September 2006. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2004), 'Challenges to Monetary Policy in Globalising Context' Reserve Bank of India 
Bulletin, January 2004. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2005), 'Some apparent puzzles for Contemporary Monetary Policy' Reserve Bank of 
India Bulletin, December 2005 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2006),  'Recent  Trends  in  the  Indian  Debt  Market  and  Current  Initiatives'  Reserve 
Bank of India Bulletin, April 2006. 
Mussa,  M  (2004),  Exchange  rate  adjustments  needed  to  reduce  global  payments  imbalances:,  in 
Dollar  adjustment:  How  Far?  Against  What?  C.F.Bergsten  and  J.Williamson  (eds),  Institute  of 
International Economics, Washington, D.C.  
Obstfeld,  M.  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff,  'The  Unsustainable  US  Current  Account  Position  Revealed', 
NBER Working Paper No. 10869, November 2004. 
Obstfeld, M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2005), 'Global current account Imbalances and Exchange rate 
Adjustments', The Brookings institution, 2005. 
Reddy, Y.V (2005), 'Implications of global financial Imbalances for the Emerging Market Economies' 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, December 2005  
Reddy, Y. V (2006), 'Global Imbalances – An Indian Perspective' speech delivered at the Financing for 
Development (FFD) Office, Department of Economic and Social Office (DESA), United Nations, New 
York on May 11, 2006, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, June 2006. 
Reserve Bank of India (2006), Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy for the year 2006-07, October 2006. 
10 
 BIS Review 113/2006
