Erkki Liikanen: Finland, the EMU and the introduction of the euro  
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Economic  Forum  of 
Hospodarske Noviny Club, Bratislava, 20 October 2006. 
 Introduction  
Finland joined the euro area among the first eleven countries on 1 January 1999. The EMU and the 
introduction of the euro marked a major step towards deeper integration within the EU, and viewed 
from the Finnish perspective, have affected our economy and economic policies in many respects.  
In the debate before the introduction of the euro, it was recognised that while the EMU and the euro 
would  bring  with  them  many  benefits  in  terms  of  economic  efficiency,  their  impact  on  economic 
stability was open to dispute.  
Finland  was  different  from  other  potential  EMU  countries  and  the  question  was:  Could  the  single 
monetary policy be suitable for the Finnish economy?  
Firstly, I will walk you through this "asymmetry discussion", which at the time received a great deal of 
attention, both among economists and a broader audience.  
Secondly, I will tell you about the changeover process, including the information campaigns organised 
by  the  Bank  of  Finland  and  others,  as  well  as  about  the  lessons  we  learnt  from  the  changeover. 
Special focus is placed on attitudes and expectations, as measured by various opinion polls.  
And finally, I shall conclude by discussing the performance of the Finnish economy during the eight 
years we have now been in the EMU.  
Doubts before the start of the monetary union: macroeconomic stability  
to 
the  so-called  asymmetry  of 
Asymmetric shocks  
Before we joined the EMU, there was a lively and intensive debate about its pros and cons. It was 
recognised that the monetary union would bring about many benefits in terms of economic efficiency, 
such  as  less  uncertainty  over  exchange  rates,  lower  costs  of  currency  exchange,  more  price 
comparability and greater competition, as well as more efficient money and other financial markets.  
But opinions were sharply divided as to the impact of the monetary union on economic stability.  
the  Finnish  economy.  While 
Much  attention  was  devoted 
macroeconomic trends in EU countries such as Germany, France and the Benelux countries usually 
were broadly similar, economic developments in Finland diverged a lot.  
There were differences in the both the timing of the fluctuations and the amplitude of the fluctuations, 
which was much greater in Finland than elsewhere. As the single monetary policy was to be tuned 
according  to  the  economic  situation  of  the  whole  euro  area,  it  was  feared  that  the  single  monetary 
policy could be inappropriate or even grossly inappropriate for the Finnish economy.  
The following reasons were put forward for the asymmetry of the Finnish economy vis-à-vis the other 
euro countries:  
The structure of our production and foreign trade was one-sided. The share of the forest industry in 
production  and  exports,  although  declining,  was  much  larger  in  Finland  than  in  other  European 
countries.  In  the  1990s  our  industry  became  very  technology-intensive,  largely  as  a  result  of  the 
growth  of  the  mobile  phone  and  network  industry.  This  made  the  Finnish  industry  vulnerable  to 
negative developments in the telecom sector.  
Only a third of our exports went to the euro area, so Finland was also more vulnerable to disturbances 
from  outside  the  euro  area  than  the  others.  There  was  a  particular  concern  about  exchange  rate 
movements: it was feared that the movements of the Swedish krona, the pound sterling and the US 
dollar vis-à-vis the euro would undermine the competitiveness of the Finnish economy.  
BIS Review 98/2006 
 1
A specific asymmetric feature in the Finnish economy was the bilateral trade with the Soviet Union. It 
enabled  Finland  to  pay  its  higher  oil  bill  by  increasing  exports  to  the  Soviet  Union.  Even  after  the 
collapse of the Soviet Union, trade between Finland and Russia has correlated positively with the price 
of oil.  
Deregulation after mid-1980s resulted in a large credit boom and in a rapid increase in asset prices, 
investment  and  consumption.  The  interest  costs  were  deductible  in  taxation.  This  together  with 
inflation contributed to low real interest rates.  
Monetary policy was tied to defending the exchange rate and while fiscal policy was tightened, it could 
not  prevent  the  economy  from  overheating.  High  inflation  and  high  cost  pressures  undermined 
competitiveness and the credibility of the fixed exchange rates.  
When  monetary  policy  in  Germany  was  tightened  following  the  reunification  of  East  and  West 
Germany,  high  real  interest  rates  spread  within  Europe  and  the  economic  climate  started  to 
deteriorate. The situation intensified and speculation against the Finnish markka contributed to Finland 
allowing the markka to float in the autumn of 1992, after protracted resistance.  
The rising real interest rates, partly due to the defence of the exchange rate, aggravated the domestic 
situation.  Asset  prices  and  GDP  fell  strongly  while  unemployment  and  the  budget  deficit  increased 
rapidly. In consequence, Finland suffered a severe banking crisis. Other EMU countries were also in 
recession in the early 1990s, but the depth of Finland's recession was exceptional.  
To summarise, before Finland's entry to the monetary union it was feared that in monetary union our 
economy would be vulnerable to external shocks and neither the single monetary nor the exchange 
rate of the euro would respond to these 'asymmetric' country-specific shocks.  
The traditional tool used to deal with unfavourable shocks and competitiveness problems, namely the 
devaluation of the markka, was no longer available in the monetary union. To the opponents of the 
monetary union, this was the key argument, in particular if our important trading partners Sweden and 
the UK remained outside the currency union – or at the very least the exchange rate mechanism ERM 
II – as it in fact happened.  
Process of preparing for the euro  
Two-phased introduction of the euro to Finland  
After this lively debate Finland joined ERM 1996 and introduced the euro with 10 other member states 
in 1999.  
Slovakia and the other new EU countries have also committed themselves to joining the euro area. 
They  all  plan  to  introduce  the  euro  in  a  "Big  Bang",  with  the  changeover  to  the  euro  happening 
overnight.  
This was not the case with the first group. The euro was introduced as an account currency in 1999, 
when the conversion rates of the participating member states' currencies were irrevocably fixed and 
the euro was substituted for these currencies. Euro banknotes and coins were put into circulation in 
2002. The three years between 1999 and 2002 were a transition period, during which euro banknotes 
and coins were produced and other necessary preparations made.  
Finland started practical preparations for the euro almost three years before the first changeover – by 
establishing an EMU project to draw up a national plan for the euro adoption. The EMU project was 
led by a committee, which was chaired by the Ministry of Finance. The Bank of Finland and all the 
other competent authorities participated in the committee. The final changeover plan was published in 
December 1997. After the changeover in 1999 the EMU project focused on the introduction of the euro 
notes and coins in 2002.  
Opinions and expectations  
Ten years ago, in autumn 1996, and two years before the changeover, a half of the EU citizens (51%) 
supported for the euro and one third (33%) was against. In Finland the situation was much worse: 62% 
were against the euro, only 29 % supported.   
2 
 BIS Review 98/2006
By spring 1998, support in the euro area countries grew to 2/3 of the populations (66%) in the euro 
countries. Little by little knowledge about the euro rose in Finland as did its acceptance. By August 
2001 it was as high as 72%. The euro was more accepted by men and young people than by women 
and senior citizens.  
One reply pattern in the surveys is especially worth mentioning. As late as in December 2001 a third of 
Finns (34%) had not yet started to study euro prices at all. And an equal share of the Finns considered 
that learning euro prices was the hardest thing about the changeover.  
Today, almost five years later, we can observe that these citizens were right. Learning euro prices was 
indeed the hardest thing and continues to be so.  
Preparing the citizens for the euro  
Three major campaigns  
When the euro was introduced as an account currency in 1999, a rather limited national campaign was 
run in Finland. It was managed by the Ministry of Finance and co-financed by the EU.  
At  the  end  of  1999,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  started  planning  for  the  cash  changeover.  It  chaired  a 
group  of  authorities  that  ran  the  national  campaign.  The  campaign  was  financed  by  the  Finnish 
government and the EU. (1996 to 2002 the campaign budget was seven million euro.)  
In  the  end  of  1999,  the  Bank  of  Finland  initiated  information  efforts  for  the  cash-changeover  and 
started regular cooperation with the national campaign. (The Bank of Finland spent about two million 
euro on its own euro information efforts. All in all, the financial resources allocated to the campaigns 
were quite modest.)  
In  most  of  the  euro  countries  a  special  changeover  board  was  established.  It  managed  and/or 
supervised all preparations, including a single information campaign for the general public.  
In  Finland  we  took  a  more  decentralised  approach.  There  were  three  separate  campaigns  –  each 
conducted by authorities with a special emphasis on their field of expertise.  
1) 
2) 
A national campaign conducted by government authorities and the European Commission.  
A  euro  area-wide  campaign  conducted  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national 
central banks of the Eurosystem.  
The Bank of Finland's own campaign.  
3) 
The  joint  campaign  of  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs  (called  Euro  2002  Campaign)  concentrated  on  the 
banknotes  and  coins  themselves.  The  Bank  of  Finland  complemented  it  with  a  Finnish  emphasis, 
providing training and details of the cash changeover.  
The national campaign informed the general public on the changeover process as a whole. It gave 
general  information  on  the  changes  in  shopping,  banking  transactions  and  other  everyday-life 
activities.  The  national  campaign  also  focused  on  the  most  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  the  elderly, 
handicapped and immigrants.  
The approach of three campaigns had several advantages.  
Firstly, the target groups were different. The national campaign aimed at both ordinary citizens and the 
most vulnerable groups. The European campaign focused on the young and urban people in, whereas 
the  Bank  of  Finland  was  most  concerned  about  the  elderly  and  those  living  in  rural  communities. 
Focusing on different target groups also led to a variation in the visual appearance of the campaign 
material.  
Secondly,  the  tone  of  the  campaigns  varied.  The  European  campaign  celebrated  the  euro  and 
welcomed  it.  The  Finnish  authorities  –  knowing  the  many  doubts  that  the  Finns  had  –  decided  to 
choose a neutral approach. The Bank of Finland, for example, advised its advertising agency to give 
only factual information. The fundamental idea was to reassure Finland's citizens that the introduction 
of the euro might not necessarily be fun, but it would not be painful either. The key to survival or even 
success was to know the facts.  
BIS Review 98/2006 
 3
Thirdly, keeping the campaigns small and simple meant there was a lot of room for manoeuvre up to 
the last minute. For example the Bank of Finland received continuous feedback from the public via 
telephone and adjusted the main focus accordingly. Therefore we were able to address even the most 
recent questions posed by the public.  
Lessons from the campaigns  
It is our experience that the general public is more prone to learn from a campaign, if information is 
presented with familiar words and in a familiar environment, even with some nostalgia. Another key is 
coordination.  All  efforts  must  be  carefully  coordinated  and  adjusted.  Even  if  there  are  several 
campaigns, they must communicate with a single voice.  
Last but not least, the authorities need partners from the private sector. Cash handlers in Finland were 
trained by the partners of the Bank of Finland. And their trainers were first trained by the Bank. Many 
companies had a direct stake in the process and they were an excellent information channel. Through 
them leaflets, posters, videos etc. were delivered exactly to those who most needed them.  
Of  course  we  must  remember  that  different  nationalities  prefer  different  information  channels.  For 
example,  Italians watch  a lot  of  TV.  Finns  also  watch  television, but  they  want  to  learn  by  reading. 
Therefore, reaching these people by sending them euro leaflets and brochures proved very effective. 
According  to our  survey,  the readership  level of  the  brochure we  had  delivered  to every  household 
was an impressive 80%.  
Changeover – a success story in Finland and all euro area  
Finland's cash changeover was successful 
The changeover to euro as an account currency in 1999 went smoothly. Also the introduction of euro 
banknotes and coins in 2002 proceeded extremely smoothly in Finland, as it did in the rest of the euro 
area. The speed of the cash changeover was such that Finland was one of the first in the euro area to 
reach completion.  
Essential to the successful introduction was the fact that the various parties involved in maintaining 
currency  supply  and  the  key  enterprises  had  prepared  themselves  effectively  and  had  trained  their 
staff properly. And there was also a lot of good will from the side of the staff. This was a "once in a 
lifetime" exercise.   
All of the country's ATMs were fully converted to dispense euros within four days. Within a week three 
quarters of all cash transactions were being carried out in euro. Two weeks after the changeover, the 
European  Commission  reported  that  the  changeover  was  practically  complete  in  five  countries: 
Finland,  Germany,  Luxembourg,  Ireland  and  the  Netherlands.  In  those  countries  95%  or  more  of 
payments were already made in euro. Finland functioned completely in euro within one month.  
According  to  a  survey  commissioned  by  the  Bank  of  Finland  at  the  end  of  January  2002,  75%  of 
respondents felt that the euro changeover had been simple and easy. Only 15% considered it difficult.  
Today – almost five years after the cash changeover  
Many  Finns  were  uncertain  before  the  changeover,  but  most  of  the  citizens  now  support  the  euro. 
According to the Eurobarometer, conducted by the European Commission a year ago, 2/3 (67%) of 
Finns think that the adoption of the euro was beneficial to them and to the country. Finland was the 
fourth most positive country in the euro area after Luxembourg, Ireland and Belgium. Finns are more 
critical to the EU.  
Euro – higher prices?  
In many euro area countries, citizens say that prices went up with the introduction of the euro. This is a 
major concern for the countries currently planning the introduction of the euro.  
4 
 BIS Review 98/2006
What about Finland, did prices actually rise in our country? Statistics show that there was no notable 
change in Finnish inflation with the changeover to euro cash. In fact, the rate of increase in consumer 
prices in 2002 was slightly lower than in 2001. While it is true that many product prices were rounded 
upward at the time of the changeover, the impact on overall inflation was modest and short-lived.  
Statistics Finland estimated the changeover effect on Finnish inflation in January 2002 as small and 
noticeable mainly in a few services. According to Eurostat, the price-rise effect of the changeover for 
the whole euro area in 2002 was about 0.1–0.3 percentage points.  
Consumers' perceived inflation and CPI inflation in Finland  
However, survey results suggest that the consumers' perceived inflation has been considerably higher 
after the introduction of the Euro. There are similar differences between perceived and actual inflation 
in many other countries that moved to the Euro.  
In a recent report by the Bank of Finland, several possibilities for explanations are proposed for the 
gap between real and perceived inflation. Firstly, it seems that consumers form their price perception 
on the basis of much smaller composites of goods and services than those included in the consumer 
price index.  
Secondly, the changeover to euro cash has obscured the comparison of prices, and consumers are 
now  apparently  less  precise  when  they  follow  price  developments  than  before.  Sellers'  pricing 
practices have also changed: 'psychological prices', eg those ending in the digits 5–9, now account for 
a smaller portion of nominal prices as a result of the euro-cash changeover.  
Finally, the fact that consumers have generally used an even six and not the exact figure (5.95) as the 
euro-to-markka conversion coefficient has resulted in a slight (0.9%) overestimation of prices.  
The  Finnish  Consumer  Research  Centre  has  also  studied  the  price  awareness  of  the  public.  The 
results  indicate  that  consumers'  price  awareness  has  diminished  with  the  changeover.  Perhaps  the 
most  surprising  was  that  price  awareness  had  not  essentially  improved  by  2005,  more  than  three 
years after the cash changeover.  
Finland's experience of the monetary union: evidence and conclusions  
We  now  have  almost  eight  years'  experience  of  the  monetary  union.  Interestingly,  many  of  the 
asymmetric  shocks  feared  by  the  opponents  to  Finland's  adoption  of  the  euro  have  already  been 
realised over this relatively short period.  
The telecom industry, which is important for Finland's economy, experienced a strong boom-bust cycle 
around  the  turn  of  the  century,  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  vis-à-vis  the  dollar,  which  is 
important for Finland's exports, first depreciated nearly 30% and then appreciated 50%.  
Moreover,  the  price  of  oil  has  multiplied  during  the  existence  of  the  euro.  However,  contrary  to  the 
opponents' expectations, neither the positive external shock experienced at the turn of the century nor 
the increase in the price of oil served to push Finland's economy into an inflationary spiral, and the 
Finnish economy was also able to weather the recession of the telecom industry and the appreciation 
of the euro rather painlessly.  
Eight years is too short a period for a definitive assessment of the pros and cons of a monetary union, 
but let me draw some tentative conclusions from our experiences thus far.  
In spite of these asymmetric shocks, it can be said that the single monetary policy has suited Finland's 
economy rather well. This is indicated among other things by the fact that, except for the initial period, 
Finland's  inflation  has  remained  for  the  most  time  within  the  range  of  the  ECB's  definition  for  price 
stability and in fact in recent years has been among the lowest ones in the EU.  
At the same time employment and output have grown well in comparison to most of the other euro 
area countries. On top of which, the profitability of Finland's industry has been at a good level. Our 
experience  seems  to  indicate  that  even  in  a  small  and  'asymmetric'  country  the  ECB's  credible 
monetary  policy  and  stability  orientation  can  offer  a  large  majority  of  the  citizens  and  enterprises  a 
sound monetary environment.  
BIS Review 98/2006 
 5
