Mario Draghi: Measures for the protection of savings and the regulation of 
financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at an inquiry into matters relating to the 
implementation of Law 262/2005, before the Sixth Standing Committee of the Italian Senate, Rome, 
26 September 2006. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The  law  on  savings  (Law  no.  262  of  28  December  2005)  is  a  sweeping  reform  with  commendable 
objectives: to strengthen companies’ internal controls and public controls for the protection of savings, 
enhance the transparency of markets and foster cooperation between authorities by establishing rules 
to govern their coordination. 
Together  with  many  appreciable,  necessary  changes,  the  new  rules  also  have  several  problematic 
points, chiefly as regards the division of the regulatory framework between laws, administrative rules 
and self-regulation. 
The  quality  of  financial  regulation  is  gauged  by  its  effectiveness  in  preventing  improper  conduct, 
protecting  investors  against  uninformed  risk-taking,  and  averting  systemic  crises.  With  today’s 
increasingly  complex  financial  markets  and  financial  products,  it  would  be  illusory  to  pursue  these 
objectives by means of ever-more detailed and pervasive formal constraints and prohibitions. The fact 
is that constant financial innovation often results in the rapid obsolescence of formally rigorous and 
detailed  rules  crystallized  in  a  law,  thus  imposing  unwarranted  costs  on  economic  agents  and 
undermining  their  competitiveness,  with  counterproductive  effects  for  investor  protection.  It  is 
important  that  the  fundamental  principles  the  law  must  establish should  fully  exploit  the  potential  of 
mechanisms  based  on  transparency  and  reputation,  the  application  of  self-regulatory  codes,  and 
flexible action by the supervisory authorities. 
The law on savings takes this course, but only up to a point. On the matter of conflicts of interest within 
financial intermediaries in particular, it introduces detailed and rigid prescriptions that are not always in 
line  with  the  rules  prevailing  at  European  and  international  level,  which  make  the  most  of  the  self-
regulatory capacity of the markets and the flexibility and adaptability to concrete cases characteristic of 
secondary legislation issued by regulatory authorities. 
In  the  field  of  corporate  governance  as  well,  the  reform  appears  to  be  torn  between  measures 
designed  to  strengthen  internal  arrangements  and  the  role  of  self-discipline,  and  more  dirigiste 
instruments based on meticulous prescriptions. 
In  coordinating  the  new  rules  with  existing  codified  laws  and  other  sectoral  legislation,  the  draft 
legislative decree under examination introduces many useful elements of rationalization and solves a 
number of problems. I shall offer some considerations in this regard later, after reporting on the steps 
the  Bank  of  Italy  has  taken  in  recent  months  to  apply  the  law  on  savings  within  its  sphere  of 
competence. 
I  shall  treat  questions  of  corporate  governance  only  in  passing  and  concentrate  instead  on  matters 
relating more directly to the responsibilities of the Bank of Italy. Here let me just mention some of the 
changes proposed in the draft decree that move in the direction indicated: revised rules on corporate 
disclosure  by  companies  adhering  to  codes  of  conduct  that  would  assign  responsibility  for  the 
truthfulness of such statements to corporate bodies, without prejudice to Consob’s powers to publicize 
the  codes;  a  new  supervisory  approach  to  stock  option  plans,  confirming  Consob’s  duty  of 
guaranteeing  complete  disclosure  to  the  market  of  the  working  of  the  plans  but  eliminating  over-
detailed rules on matters properly left to the independent management of the company, such as the 
methods  for  setting  prices  and  the  deadlines  for  exercising  the  options;  and  finally,  abolition  of  the 
secret ballot requirement for the election of corporate officers, a mandatory norm that is unparalleled in 
any other system, raises serious problems of opacity in decision-making by the shareholders’ meeting, 
and is not conducive to the transparency of the market for corporate control. 
It is necessary to move progressively towards a set of rules allowing sufficient scope for shareholders 
to  perform  the  controls  envisaged  by  internal  corporate  mechanisms  in  a  fruitful  fashion  and  make 
effective use of judicial remedies. This means bringing the efficiency of the civil courts up to a level 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 1
that has so far proved hard to reach, despite the recent reform of civil procedure. In short, a proper 
balance between internal mechanisms and public regulation requires that there be effective protection 
of individuals’ contractual positions. 
Given the scope of delegated legislation, the draft decree could not deal with all the problems of the 
legislation on savings. Another opportunity to rationalize the rules, especially on securities, is offered 
by the transposition of the European directives on offering and listing prospectuses1 and markets in 
financial instruments.2
As  for  the  protection  of  savings,  it  would  appear  advisable  to  start  studying  forms  of  crisis 
management cooperation between the technical authorities and the Government. 
2.  
Implementation of the law on savings 
Cooperation between authorities 
2.1  
The law on savings confirms the independence of the supervisory authorities, reinforces the division of 
regulatory  and  control  functions  by  purpose  and  emphasizes  cooperation  between  the  authorities, 
leaving it largely to their discretion to devise the best forms of collaboration and coordination. 
The  Bank  of  Italy’s  contacts  with  other  authorities,  frequent  even  before  the  new  law,  have  been 
stepped  up  with  a  view  to  agreeing  on  how  to  implement  the  legislative  changes.  The  reflections 
underlying the draft legislative decree on coordination are the fruit of a joint analysis on the part of the 
authorities, which participated in the working group chaired by Vice-Minister Pinza. 
Together with the Antitrust Authority, we identified the problems with the provision for a “single act” 
authorizing acquisitions of equity stakes in banks and agreed on appropriate correctives. The Bank’s 
former antitrust powers in banking were handed over without prejudice to proceedings already under 
way. 
A  memorandum  of  understanding  will  be  signed  with  Consob  on  the  ways  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  to 
contribute to the examination of prospectuses for bank securities. Another memorandum, also nearing 
completion,  will  determine  the  technical  procedures  whereby  Consob  may  access  Central  Credit 
Register  data  to  verify  possible  abuses  of  market  power  without  harm  to  the  confidentiality  of  the 
service. 
Bank of Italy administrative and regulatory procedures 
2.2 
The  law  on  savings  lays  down  the  principles  that  are  to  govern  the  supervisory  authorities’ 
administrative  and  regulatory  action,  leaving  implementation  to  regulations  to  be  issued  by  the 
authorities themselves. 
The law provides expressly for individual proceedings to be subject to the standards of transparency 
and  efficiency  laid  down  by  Law  241/1990  on  administrative  proceedings,  insofar  as  these  are 
compatible with the specificity of control activities. The Bank of Italy has adapted its earlier measures 
in  this  field  to  the  new  legislation  and  issued  regulations  establishing  the  time  limits  and  persons 
responsible  for  administrative  proceedings.  Regulations  governing  access  to  documents  and 
participation in administrative proceedings will follow. 
In implementing the principles of the law on savings, the Bank of Italy has also issued measures to 
separate,  within  the  framework  of  the  administrative  sanction  procedure,  the  investigative  from  the 
decision-making function. This was made necessary by the direct attribution to the Bank of the power 
to impose administrative sanctions for violations of the Consolidated Law on Banking. 
The law on savings also sets forth principles governing the procedures for approving regulatory and 
general  acts.  Their  adoption  must  be  preceded  by  consultations  with  the  financial  industry  and 
consumers and by assessments of their impact on the existing regulatory framework, the activities of 
financial institutions, and the interests of customers. The reasons for measures must be stated and 
                                                      
1   Directive 2003/71/EC. 
2   Directive 2004/39/EC. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2006
consideration  given  to  the  principle  of  proportionality.  Regulations  must  be  reviewed  at  least  every 
three years. Even before the reform it was standard practice for the Bank of Italy to give the reasons 
for  its  regulatory  measures  and  to  hold  consultations  with  the  financial  industry.  The  new  law  turns 
these practices into mandatory requirements, which the Bank will comply with fully. 
The  quality  of  regulation  is  a  factor  in  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is 
engaged in constant adaptation of its regulations to reduce the costs they entail and to adapt them 
effectively and promptly to the evolution of the market. The prudential regulation of banks and other 
intermediaries  is undergoing  far-reaching  change,  partly  driven  by  convergence  at  international  and 
EU level.3 The Bank has issued public consultation documents setting out the regulatory options and 
policy guidelines for the implementation of the new prudential rules. The banking and financial industry 
is called on for comments, suggestions and proposals. 
More broadly, a programme of regulatory simplification has been launched to remove constraints and 
costly formalities that are no longer needed. Most recently the requirement to notify the Bank of Italy of 
transactions that would entail acquisition of control of a bank even before discussion of the operation 
by management bodies has been abolished. This change, in line with the standards of transparency 
confirmed by the reform, abrogates an obligation that the market perceived as an obstacle to domestic 
and cross-border banking concentrations. Planned concentrations are still subject to authorization, an 
instrument essential for the Bank of Italy to perform its duty of controlling the quality and soundness of 
all those intending to acquire control of a bank. 
The institutional structure of the Bank of Italy 
2.3 
The law on savings contains principles that bear on the institutional structure and functioning of the 
Bank  of  Italy  and  serve  to  protect  the  independence  of  the  Bank  and  its  governing  bodies.4  The 
implementation of some of these principles required revisions of the Bank’s Statute. 
On 27 July the Board of Directors approved the draft of a new Statute that incorporates the indications 
of the law. The text was sent to the European Central Bank, which on 25 August issued a broadly 
positive opinion, suggesting only limited changes. In order to take these suggestions into account, the 
text will now be submitted to the Board of Directors again and then to the extraordinary shareholders’ 
meeting.  Subsequently,  the  law  requires  that  the  Statute  be  approved  with  a  decree  issued  by  the 
President of the Republic acting on a proposal from the Prime Minister in concert with the Minister for 
the Economy and Finance following a decision by the Council of Ministers. 
One of the major innovations introduced by Law 262/2005 is the principle of collegiality, whereby the 
Directorate  is  required  to  adopt  measures  of  external  significance  that  were  previously  within  the 
scope  of  the  Governor’s  authority.  The  new  rule  was  promptly  applied  in  decision-making.  Some 
delicate problems nevertheless emerged during the rule’s initial application, as the law lends itself to a 
diversity  of  interpretations.  In  transposing  the  principle  of  collegiality  into  the  Statute,  an  effort  has 
been made to define the scope of the measures to be adopted by the Directorate more precisely. 
Other  changes  concerned  the  procedural  rules  for  appointing  and  removing  the  Governor  and  the 
other  members  of  the  Directorate  and  their  term  of  office.  These  rules  have  been  rewritten  in  full 
conformity with the new legislation and the principles of the European System of Central Banks. 
The law also required the Statute to be amended with regard to the powers of the Board of Directors, 
which was to be expressly entrusted with functions of supervision and control within the Bank. With the 
amendments  accordingly  made  to  the  Statute,  the  system  of  controls  will  involve  three  actors:  the 
Board of Directors is charged with overseeing operations in accordance with the responsibilities of the 
administrative body; the Board of Auditors is charged not only with ensuring conformity with the law 
but also with exercising accounting control; and, as required by the Statute of the ESCB, the Bank’s 
accounts will be examined by external auditors. 
The  law  also  lays  down  that  the  Government  is  to  issue  a  regulation  revising  the  Bank  of  Italy’s 
ownership  structure  and  governing  the  procedures  for  the  transfer  of  those  of  its  shares  held  by 
persons other than the State or other public entities.5
                                                      
3   The New Capital Accord (Basel 2) and Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC on the business of credit institutions and the 
capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions, respectively. 
4   Article 19 of Law 262/2005. 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 3
The ownership of the Bank of Italy has been a topic of debate and analysis of late. It is not up to the 
Bank  of  Italy  to  choose  its  owners,  but  it  is  appropriate  to  reflect  on  some  general  principles  that 
should  guide  regulation  of  the  ownership  of  a  modern  central  bank,  in  the  light  of  European  rules, 
international standards and the experience of other major countries. 
This comparison shows a variety of arrangements. The model of exclusively public ownership, though 
widespread  (France,  Germany),  is  not  the  only  solution;  there  are  examples  of  public  and  private-
sector  shareholders  both  being  present  (Austria,  Belgium)  as  well  as  the  totally  private  ownership 
structure of the Federal Reserve System of the United States, where the capital of the central bank is 
held by the privately-owned banks belonging to the System. 
But  the  findings  are  far  more  uniform  in  other  respects,  reflecting  common  principles  serving  to 
safeguard the central bank’s institutional and operational independence. The owners must in no way 
interfere in the institutional functions. 
As  for  the  monetary  functions,  the  principles  are  codified  in  the  Treaty.  They  include  financial 
independence,  meaning  the  possibility  for  the  central  bank  to  allocate  sufficient  resources  to  the 
performance  of  its  tasks  without  being  influenced  by  other  public  authorities.  On  more  than  one 
occasion the European Central Bank has drawn the attention of the national parliament to the need to 
establish adequate guarantees for the autonomy of the central bank in legislation on the ownership of 
the  Bank  of  Italy.6  The  presence  of  multiple  shareholders  is  important  in  the  light  of  this  principle. 
Under the new Statute7 there must be a “balanced” distribution of shares among the shareholders and 
the power exercised in voting cannot exceed certain limits; the task of ascertaining whether potential 
purchasers  satisfy  the  requirements  is  assigned  to  the  Directorate  and  the  Board  of  Directors,  in 
conformity with the opinion of the ECB, as an additional guarantee of the Bank’s independence. 
An international consensus is also found in the approach taken to the area of banking and financial 
supervision.  Here  the  independence  rule  must  hold  at  two  levels.  The  first,  essential  for  every 
supervisory authority, is that of impermeability to the interests of the institutions subject to supervision. 
It is based on solid institutional safeguards. The argument, sometimes made, that there is a conflict of 
interest between some supervised entities (the shareholder banks) and the supervisor (the Bank of 
Italy)  is  without  foundation.  Not  only  does  the  Board  of  Directors,  elected  by  the  shareholders’ 
meeting,  not  have  the  power  to  intervene  in  questions  of  monetary  policy,  but  it  is  also  explicitly 
excluded  by  law8  from  all  tasks  relating  to  banking  supervision.  The  law  on  savings  (and  the  new 
Statute) assign these tasks to the Directorate. Pursuant to the law, the Governor is now appointed by 
the Government.9 It should also be borne in mind that the votes any one shareholder may cast in a 
shareholders’ meeting are limited by the Statute10 to a maximum of 50 (out of a total of 665 today), 
regardless of the number of shares held, in order to prevent individual shareholders from exerting a 
preponderant influence on the Bank’s decision-making even in the restricted scope of the matters in 
which the shareholders intervene. 
The  other  level  regards  the  possible  influence  of  politics  on  the  technical  decisions  of  banking 
supervision.  The  principle  of  the  supervisory  authority’s  independence  is  affirmed  by  international 
organizations and is a value incorporated into the Bank’s de facto constitution. Clearly enunciated in 
the  Core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision  prepared  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,11 it is now sanctioned in domestic legislation by Article 19.3 of the law on savings, which 
establishes the independence of the Bank of Italy’s governing bodies. Consistently, the Bank’s new 
Statute12 prohibits the Bank’s decisionmaking bodies from accepting instructions from other public or 
private-sector entities. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
5   Article 19.10 of Law 262/2005. 
6   See, in particular, the opinions issued with regard to the law on savings (CON/2005/34 and CON/2005/58) and the Statute 
of the Bank of Italy (CON/2006/44). 
7   Article 3.2. 
8   Article 5.1 of Legislative Decree 691/1947 issued by the Provisional Head of State. 
9   Article 19.8 of Law 262/2005. 
10   Article 8 of the Statute now in force, Article 9.3 of the new Statute. 
11   See the recent consultation documents of April 2006. 
12   Article 1.2. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2006
The comparative picture, the approaches adopted in national and Community legislation, and the long-
standing orientations of international organizations suggest the usefulness of reflecting further on the 
possible configurations of the Bank’s ownership and comparing the principles referred to above with 
the solution chosen by Law 262/2005. 
Implementation of the enabling clause on legislative coordination 
3.  
The Bank of Italy participated in the work at the Ministry for the Economy and Finance to implement 
the mandate to coordinate the consolidated laws on banking and finance and other sectoral laws with 
the  changes  introduced  by  the  law  on  savings.13  The  work  was  carried  out  in  a  climate  of  full 
cooperation  among  the  authorities  concerned  and  between  them  and  the  representatives  of  the 
Executive. The draft decree as a whole is consistent with a rational interpretation of the mandate: it 
accomplishes coordination between the new legislative text and pre-existing financial legislation and 
allows selective corrections to some critical aspects of the law on savings. 
To  begin  with,  the  text  contains  some  provisions  on  the  Interministerial  Committee  for  Credit  and 
Savings. It formalizes the practice, established in recent years, of involving the chairmen of the other 
financial sector authorities in the work of the Committee on the basis of an invitation decided by the 
Minister for the Economy and Finance from time to time for topics “relevant to the matters assigned to 
them  by  law  and  pertaining  to  aspects  of  the  overall  stability,  transparency  and  efficiency  of  the 
financial system”. 
For the aspects directly bearing on the tasks of the Bank of Italy, the dropping of the rule that requires 
the Bank and the Antitrust Authority to adopt their respective measures authorizing bank acquisitions 
in  a  “single  act”  is  commendable.  Besides  involving  problems  of  implementation,  the  provision  is 
asystemic and does not serve the objectives pursued. It would be superseded by one in which the two 
authorities are required to adopt their respective measures within 60 days of the time the application, 
accompanied by all the necessary documentation, is filed. The draft decree appropriately specifies that 
only acquisitions giving control of a bank fall within the scope of the new rule. 
Consistently with the new division of tasks, the Antitrust Authority, acting on a request from the Bank 
of  Italy,  may  authorize  agreements  and  concentrations  that  restrict  competition,  on  grounds  of  the 
functionality of the payment system or the stability of the banks concerned. 
By enlarging the tasks with which the authorities are charged and rendering them more complex, the 
law on savings makes it necessary for the authorities to enjoy a form of legal protection for good-faith 
conduct  in  the  exercise  of  their  institutional  functions,  in  order  to  safeguard  the  independent  and 
impartial performance of supervision. The draft decree inserts into the part of Law 262/2005 governing 
administrative  procedures  a  provision  that  limits  the  liability  of  the  authorities  (the  Bank  of  Italy, 
Consob,  Isvap  and  Covip),  the  members  of  their  respective  decision-making  bodies  and  their 
employees  to  cases  of  bad  faith  or  gross  negligence.  This  rule  is  in  line  with  the  most  advanced 
international standards14 and with what the International Monetary Fund has suggested on more than 
one occasion. 
The draft decree addresses the question of conflicts of interest in banking and amends the provisions 
of the Consolidated Law on Banking concerned with connected lending15 and the obligations of banks’ 
corporate officers.16
On  connected  lending,  the  draft  decree  introduces  general  principles  and  eliminates  excessively 
detailed prescriptions. Flexibility is restored to the prudential rules by referring to sources of secondary 
legislation and specific measures adopted by the credit authorities. The guidelines recently established 
by the Interministerial Committee for Credit and Savings in conformity with the indications of the law 
on savings establish a very stringent discipline, in view of both the broad definition of related parties 
and  the quantitative  limits  set  on risk assets.  The amendments provided  for  in  the  draft  decree will 
require  the  Committee  to  reexamine  the  matter.  Work  is  already  under  way  on  the  secondary 
                                                      
13   Article 43 of Law 262/2005. 
14   Core principles for effective banking supervision, Basel Committee, 1997. 
15   Article 53 of Legislative Decree 385/1993 (the Consolidated Law on Banking). 
16   Article 136 of the Consolidated Law on Banking. 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 5
legislation  that  the  Bank  of  Italy  must  issue,  based  in  part  on  solutions  adopted  in  other  leading 
countries.  Great  care  is  needed,  not  least  in  view  of  the  potentially  significant  impact  on  the 
relationship between banking and industry. 
As  for  the  obligations  of  banks’  corporate  officers,  problems  emerged  in  applying  the  new  rules  as 
soon as the reform came into force. As is well known, under Article 136 of the Consolidated Law on 
Banking banks’ lending to their corporate officers and other business dealings with them are subject to 
a  special  procedure  and  non-compliance  is  a  penal  offence.  The  law  on  savings  has  extended  the 
scope of the provision to such a broad range of “relevant” persons and made their identification so 
complex  that  they  risk  committing  violations  unwittingly.  The  problem  is  aggravated  by  the  large 
number of intragroup transactions to which the provision applies, since for the most part they have no 
bearing on the provision’s objective. 
Although useful, the changes that the coordination decree would make to Article 136 do not solve all 
the problems this provision of the law on savings has created, especially as regards the broad range 
of persons falling within its scope. If the limits of the legislative mandate are deemed not to permit any 
other solution, addressing the question as soon as possible in a different legislative form should be 
considered.  Rather  than  multiply  constraints  and  prohibitions,  it  would  be  better  to  fully  exploit  the 
strengthening of transparency obligations as the means of limiting conflicts of interest. 
The draft decree also contains provisions intended to coordinate the innovations introduced by the law 
on savings concerning the transparency of financial products issued by banks with the Consolidated 
Law  on  Banking  and  the  Consolidated  Law  on  Finance.  The  law  on  savings  establishes  that  all 
investment contracts, including those of banks (and insurance companies), fall within the scope of the 
Consolidated Law on Finance and are subject to Consob controls. The draft decree explicitly clarifies 
that such contracts are no longer covered by the Consolidated Law on Banking or subject to Bank of 
Italy controls; it also provides for the same rules to apply to “mixed” products with banking, securities 
and insurance components. On the other hand it clarifies that the “financial products” defined in the 
Consolidated  Law  on  Finance  do  not  include  bank  or  postal  deposits  that  are  not  represented  by 
financial  instruments,  since  such  deposits  normally  serve  a  purpose  other  than  investment.  This 
eliminates interpretative doubts and the overlapping of some border areas. 
The draft decree also radically revises Article 129 of the Consolidated Law on Banking, which, as it 
stands,  grants  the  Bank  of  Italy  powers  of  prior  control  on  issues  of  securities.  The  amendments 
eliminate the Bank of Italy’s ex ante control and introduce a system of ex post notifications intended to 
permit the monitoring of markets and financial instruments. The change is consistent with the purpose-
based allocation of tasks among the regulatory authorities and is therefore welcome. 
Lastly,  the  draft  decree  addresses  the  question  of  the  circulation  among  the  public  of  financial 
products  originally  placed  with  professional  investors.  The  law  on  savings  added  a  provision  to  the 
Consolidated Law on Finance17 requiring professional investors who transfer financial products to the 
public  either  to  make  information  available  or  to  guarantee  the  issuer’s  solvency.  The  aim  of  the 
provision is to protect investors more effectively and to prevent elusive and opportunistic behaviour on 
the part of intermediaries. The objective is commendable; if achieved, it will also help to safeguard the 
stability  of  intermediaries  by  reducing  the  reputational  risks  associated  with  improper  behaviour 
towards  clients.  However,  as  currently  formulated,  the  provision  involves  serious  problems  of 
interpretation and enforcement. 
The draft decree seeks to overcome the difficulties by introducing a different system for the protection 
of non-professional investors. It establishes that there is a public offering, and a consequent obligation 
to  publish  a  prospectus,  when  financial  products  that  were  the  subject  of  a  placement  reserved  to 
professional  investors  are  systematically  sold  on  to  nonprofessional  clients  in  the  twelve  following 
months. Failure to comply with the rules would be punished by the annulment of the contracts and be 
subject to civil action. In view of the purpose of the provision, these sanctions should apply only to 
intermediaries that sell the products to small investors in the retail market; there is no reason to extend 
their  application  to  other  professional  investors  that  had  traded  the  securities  among  themselves 
benefiting from their exemption from information requirements. A revision of the Consolidated Law on 
Finance along these lines would be desirable. 
                                                      
17   Article 100-bis. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2006
Transposition of EU financial directives 
4.  
The  matters  covered  by  the  law  on  savings  will  shortly  be  affected  by  the  implementation  of  some 
important EU directives. 
The  transposition  of  the  directive  on  offering  and  listing  prospectuses  will  be  completed  with  the 
exercise of the delegated legislative powers provided for in the law on savings. The Bank of Italy has 
been consulted by the Ministry for the Economy and Finance on a preliminary draft of the legislative 
decree and has submitted some observations concerning matters bearing on the banking sector. In 
particular,  it  has  drawn  attention  to  the  need  for  a  more  flexible  regime  for  the  exemption  of  bank 
securities, where many of the rules do not have to be laid down by law but could be left to Consob. 
The transposition of the MiFID directive could be an opportunity to re-examine the question of conflicts 
of interest in the securities industry. The law on savings has introduced solutions intended to prevent 
conflicts of interest by imposing stringent constraints on intermediaries’ organizational and operational 
freedom.18  This  choice  diverges  from  the  line  followed  by  the  Community.  According  to  the  MiFID 
directive,  intermediaries  are  required  to  identify  conflicts  of  interest  themselves  and  adopt 
organizational arrangements capable of preventing them; the regulatory authorities are controlling the 
effectiveness of the measures adopted and establishing appropriate transparency obligations. 
The Minister for the Economy and Finance has recently consulted the Bank of Italy on draft criteria for 
the mandate to transpose the MiFID directive. The document envisages solutions consistent with the 
orientation  of  the  Community.  In  line  with  the  purpose-based  allocation  of  functions,  secondary 
legislation and controls concerning conflicts of interest would be entrusted to Consob. This will require 
close coordination with the Bank of Italy, which would remain responsible for all the prudential aspects 
concerning intermediaries’ organization and internal controls. 
Configuration and coordination of the regulatory authorities 
5.  
The  configuration  of  supervision  defined  by  law  essentially  reflects  a  purpose-based  allocation  of 
tasks. The Bank of Italy is entrusted with ensuring the stability of the financial system and with the 
controls on intermediaries’ sound and prudent management, Consob with the controls on transparency 
and proper behaviour for the protection of investors. The law on savings removed some exceptions to 
this approach, for example by bringing financial products issued by banks within the scope of the rules 
on  investment  services  and  public  offerings.  The  same  logic  governed  the  transfer  to  the  Antitrust 
Authority of responsibility for safeguarding competition in the banking sector. 
The  purpose-based  criterion  for  the  allocation  of  tasks  meets  the  needs  deriving  from  the  growing 
integration  of  the  different  segments  of  the  financial  market  and  makes  the  identification  of  the 
responsibilities of each regulatory authority clearer. 
The law provides, pragmatically and flexibly, for the authorities themselves to manage the boundaries 
between their responsibilities and identify the necessary forms of coordination and information sharing. 
I have described the steps already taken in this respect and the initiatives under way. Apart from any 
technical  improvements  required,  this  model  appears  to  be  decidedly  preferable  to  the  creation  of 
complex and rigid entities. It makes it possible to perform coordination more efficiently, to adapt the 
latter’s forms and content to the evolution of the market with the necessary rapidity, and not to impinge 
on the authorities technical independence. 
The  introduction  into  the  banking  industry  of  the  system  for  legislating  and  providing  supervisory 
coordination and cooperation known as the Lamfalussy system,19 with the creation of the European 
Banking Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors, has eroded the scope for 
autonomous regulation by the member states and shifted both legislative choices and the process of 
establishing uniform supervisory practices to Community level. There thus appears to be a decline in 
the importance of the Interministerial Committee for Credit and Savings, whose function of providing 
legislative  guidelines  has  shrunk  considerably  as  a  consequence  of  the  integration  of  European 
financial regulation, not infrequently by way of maximum harmonization solutions, in both primary and 
secondary legislation. 
                                                      
18   Articles 9 and 10 of Law 262/2005. 
19   Commission Decisions of 5 November 2003, 2004/5/EC and 2004/10/EC. 
BIS Review 95/2006 
 7
On  the  other  hand  new  coordination  needs  are  emerging  that  involve  the  political  as  well  as  the 
technical sphere and make it desirable to find ways of linking up the Ministry for the Economy and 
Finance  and  the  supervisory  authorities.  These  needs  primarily  concern  the  prevention  and 
management of financial crises with potentially systemic effects. The problem has not only a national 
but  also  a  European  dimension.  The  necessity  of  tackling  it  was  referred  to  in  the  proposals  put 
forward by the EU Economic and Financial Committee in March 2006 on the basis of the indications 
expressed by the informal Scheveningen ECOFIN meeting. The Minister for the Economy and Finance 
also mentioned this point when he reported to Parliament on the ministry’s policy guidelines. 
These matters need to be studied, including by reference to the best solutions adopted in other legal 
systems and the experience being gained with crisis simulations coordinated at European level. It is 
necessary  to  find  forms  and  methods  of  coordination  that  distinguish  properly  between  the 
responsibilities of the regulatory and political authorities. The former include the identification, on the 
basis of technical evaluations, of a state of crisis. On the other hand, the management of crises that 
have  been  declared,  when  they  are  of  a  systemic  nature  and  have  their  origin  in  defaults,  must 
necessarily involve not only the technical authorities but also the political authorities because they may 
require interventions that, directly or indirectly, have a cost for the public purse. 
Modern  and  efficient  regulation  provides  protection  for  the  weak  and  at  the  same  time  fosters 
competition. It is an essential instrument for promoting the growth of the economy. Partly in response 
to  traumatic  events,  Parliament  and  the  Government  have  laid  the  foundations  for  a  far-reaching 
reform that will affect basic aspects of the framework of rules governing finance. The work must be 
completed.  Legislation  in  the  pipeline  will  provide  an  opportunity  to  do  so.  The  Bank  of  Italy’s 
collaboration is unstinting. 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2006
