Lim Hng Kiang: The Tokyo Stock Exchange and Singapore 
Speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Minister 
for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  Singapore  Representative  Office  10th 
Anniversary, Singapore, 14 December 2006. 
 Congratulatory remarks 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  with  you  this  evening  to  celebrate  the  10th  anniversary  of  Tokyo  Stock 
Exchange Singapore Representative Office. Firstly, I would like to thank the Tokyo Stock Exchange for 
its commitment to Singapore and the region over the past decade and I hope Tokyo Stock Exchange 
will continue to scale greater heights in coming years.  
Growth of Asia and Japan 
When Tokyo Stock Exchange established its overseas office in Singapore in 1996, Singapore and the 
region were experiencing strong economic growth with Asian economies developing at rates of about 
5 to 10% per year. Today, we continue to witness the rise of Asia on the back of the twin drivers of 
China and India. Prospects for South-East Asia have improved considerably and Japan, after years of 
stagnation,  is  firmly  back  on  the  track  of  healthy  sustained  growth  and  is  a  major  investor  in 
South-East Asia. As of 2005, Japan's FDI into South-East Asia totaled $38 billion, and it is the top 
investor in Indonesia, and the third largest investor in Vietnam.  
Changes in the global exchange landscape 
The competitive landscape in the global exchange arena has also changed significantly. Equity and 
derivatives exchanges are consolidating globally in the bid to establish greater market share and to 
expand product offerings. The New York Stock Exchange-EURONEXT cross-Atlantic merger to create 
the first multi-time-zone exchange, and the recently announced merger between the Chicago Board of 
Trade  and  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  could  lead  to  more  centralized  liquidity  pool  for 
derivatives trading in the US and Europe.  
Asian exchanges can do more - TSE can take greater leading role 
The  consolidation  trend  has  yet  to  reach  Asia  and  Asian  exchanges  may  face  the  risk  of 
marginalisation.  In  order  to  remain  relevant,  the  Asian  exchanges  may  need  to  explore  ways  to 
deepen collaboration and product differentiation in the face of strong competition.  
In Asia, the Tokyo Stock Exchange is the largest stock exchange by market capitalization. Since its 
establishment in 1878, it has grown to be the 2nd largest bourse globally, with a market capitalization 
of its listed companies exceeding US$4 trillion, second only to the New York Stock Exchange. It also 
registers high average daily trading volume for domestic equities of about US$19 billion for 2005.  
I understand that the Tokyo Stock Exchange is currently in talks with major exchanges about alliances 
and I am heartened to hear its efforts to work more closely with the Asian exchanges. For example, 
the Tokyo Stock Exchange and the Singapore Exchange have been discussing about such strategic 
cooperation  which  would  benefit  both  markets  and  their  investors,  including  the  possible  trading 
linkage, and I urge both parties to work together more closely.  
We  need  to  cultivate  and  foster  greater  bilateral,  if  not,  multilateral  cross-border  relationships  with 
each  other  to  develop  greater  liquidity  in  regional  securities  and  derivatives  markets.  The  current 
economic growth in Japan, Singapore, as well as in the broader South-East Asian region, gives us a 
window of opportunity to act swiftly to deepen and enhance trading linkages so as to strengthen Asia's 
competitive edge. Together, I believe we can present an attractive value proposition to global investors 
who are looking to Asia for growth. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
Conclusion 
On  that  note,  let  me  extend  my  heartiest  congratulations  to  the  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  on  its 
Singapore  Representative  Office  10th  anniversary  celebration.  The  Tokyo  Stock  Exchange  and 
Singapore have enjoyed an excellent relationship over the years and I do treasure the very important 
ties and partnerships between Japan and Singapore. I certainly look forward to many more years of 
close and fruitful cooperation between the 2 countries in future projects.  
I wish Tokyo Stock Exchange great success in their endeavours. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
