Ewart S Williams: Financial literacy 
Address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the 
breakfast meeting of The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Trinidad and Tobago, Port-of-Spain, 
7 November 2006. 
 Good  morning  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  and  thanks  for  inviting  me  to  share  this  celebration  of 
Accountant’s Week with you. 
I am happy that The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Trinidad and Tobago (ICATT) has seen the 
need to celebrate Accountant’s Week, if only to remind the community of how essential and noble your 
profession is. 
There is no doubt that the accounting profession worldwide has gone through tough times in recent 
years, with Enron, Worldcom and other scandals. These problems have made accounting a far more 
regulated profession than it once was, as the standard-setters seek to ensure more transparency and 
restore confidence in the profession. However, business practices will always evolve at a much faster 
rate than the adaptive capacity of the profession and thus it is impractical to have rules that anticipate 
every business transaction. 
In  the  final  analysis,  you,  as  accountants,  would  need  to  depend  on  your  integrity  and  on  the 
fundamental principles and standards which emphasize that financial statements should clearly and 
faithfully represent the economic substance of business transactions. 
We in Trinidad and Tobago are fortunate to have an accounting profession with a reputation for the 
highest standards of competence and ethics. 
I  did  not  plan  to  talk  about  the  demands  and  challenges  of  your  profession.  Instead  Ms.  Lee  Loy 
(Angela) gave me permission to introduce a topic which I hope is of personal interest to you, since 
from my vantage point, it should have considerable national interest. Even if you hadn’t thought about 
it, I would like to enlist your personal support, and that of a credible and respected organization like 
ICATT, in getting national recognition for the importance of a financial literacy programme. 
Let me first give some background as to why I am convinced that we need such a programme. While 
we  focus  disproportionately  on  the  economic  challenges  we  face,  we  tend  to  forget  the  remarkable 
strides  we  have  made  during  the  last  decade,  both  in  terms  of  economic  growth  and  structural 
transformation. 
For  the  record,  over  the  last  decade,  our  per  capita  income  has  moved  from  around  US$4,500  to 
US$14,000  currently.  Even  adjusting  for  inflation,  real  per  capita  income  has  more  than  doubled. 
Admittedly, the main driver of our income growth has been the energy sector. But even taking out the 
energy sector, non-energy per capita GDP has almost doubled from around US$3,500 to US$6,000 
currently. That is an extraordinary accomplishment. 
Behind these macroeconomic statistics are important changes that are real. What are some of these 
changes? Well, while the labour force has increased by about 100,000, employment has increased by 
140,000, driving unemployment to the lowest level in decades. 
With the significant increase in personal incomes, more people are now aspiring to what two decades 
ago  were  considered  to  be  middleclass  trappings  -  like  cars,  foreign  travel  -  and  home  ownership, 
which has increased sharply over the past decade. 
There  have  also  been  other  important  societal  changes;  more  young  and  middle-aged  people  are 
combining  work  and  study;  small  business  or  self-employment  has  become  more  widespread;  and 
young people are leaving home earlier to live on their own. (Yes, there is a downside, whereby too 
many of our youth fit into an “at-risk” category). 
All these adjustments and improvements have put demands on personal financial management. 
To  further  complicate  the  picture,  deregulation  and  financial  liberalization  have  spawned  a  rapid 
evolution of our financial sector. As a result, credit cards which were once confined to a small segment 
of the society are now being aggressively marketed to the wider population by the commercial banks. 
Customers are being bombarded to contract consumer loans once they have a secure job and their 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 1
income could be channeled through the financial institution. Rapidly changing lifestyles have forced 
the bulk of the population to open bank accounts, to use ATMs, to own credit and debit cards and 
generally to participate actively in the formal financial system. But with the diverse range of product 
choices,  banking  has  become  more  complicated.  The  average  consumer  is  now  required  to  make 
complex  financial  decisions  between  fixed  and  variable  rate  mortgages,  contract  installment  loans, 
choose from a range of checking accounts and select from any number of savings instruments. 
The  net  result  of  the  rapid  growth  of  the  last  decade  is  that  personal  consumption  has  risen 
substantially, and this is amply reflected in a significant growth in consumer imports. Personal savings 
have not kept pace with the growth in incomes and consumer debt has assumed unsustainable levels. 
One aspect of this general problem, which is becoming very acute, is that with inadequate savings and 
pensions too many of our citizens are ill-prepared for retirement. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as our economy evolves and develops, it is to be expected that our citizens 
would aspire to a quality of life that provides access to opportunity for themselves and their families. 
Making the right decisions on economic and financial matters is critical to pursuing these opportunities. 
And this requires knowledge and training. 
Financial  literacy  plays a  key  role  in  helping  us  recognize  and  taking  advantage  of  these  emerging 
opportunities. 
Financial literacy helps us to improve our financial well-being, and by so doing, improve the overall 
quality of our lives. Financial literacy includes basic numeracy skills, as well as the information and 
knowledge required to function as an active and empowered consumer of financial services. Financial 
literacy provides the foundation for saving and investing wisely and is the basis for the responsible use 
of credit and money. In short, financial literacy is a fundamental tool for each of us, whether we are 
making  choices  as  students,  consumers,  savers,  workers  preparing  for  retirement  or  just  simply 
responsible citizens. 
From  cursory  evidence,  too  many  of  our  citizens  lack  a  functional  level  of  financial  literacy.  The 
problem is all the more acute for lower-income citizens, who are less likely to be receiving advice from 
private sector financial advisors. 
Both  developed  and  developing  countries  are  recognizing  that  changes  in  the  financial  system, 
including the increasing complexity and diversity of financial products, are creating an urgent need for 
financial  literacy.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (the  Regulator  of  the 
financial system) has launched a nationwide campaign to improve the financial skills of the population. 
In the U.S., where personal bankruptcies have been increasing sharply, the Federal Government and 
the Federal Reserve (the nation’s Central Bank) have entered the field of financial education in a big 
way. Previously, it was largely left up to the private sector. In Canada, Australia, New Zealand and 
throughout  Asia,  either  the  Central  Banks  or  specially  created  government  agencies  are  devoting 
considerable resources to financial education programs. 
In Trinidad and Tobago, the case for improving financial education is compelling. Too many workers 
are living from paycheck to paycheck, without putting aside anything for a rainy day. As I noted earlier, 
personal savings, when they exist are uncomfortably low and this is partly due to our adoption of the 
spend/spend culture of the U.S. and Western Europe. This has implications for the high and increasing 
level of personal debt. 
Our low level of financial literacy also shows up in our understanding of financial transactions or our 
rights as consumers. 
The files of our Financial Services Ombudsman are full of complaints from customers who obviously 
did  not  fully  understand  the  nature  of  the  agreements  they  signed.  Clearly,  they  simply  wanted  the 
money and paid no attention to the rate of interest or other terms of the loan, until they found out that 
they  couldn’t  repay.  Of  course,  on  many  occasions, the  officials of  the  bank  or  insurance company 
may not have had the required knowledge or may have forgotten to clearly explain all the associated 
costs and attendant risks. 
We  still  have  people  who  respond  innocently  to  advertisements  for  schemes  that  promise  to  pay 
interest rates of 25 and 36 per cent per month. Not long ago one of these schemes was able to attract 
close  to  $50  million  in  a  period  of  less  than  a  year.  Not  unexpectedly,  many  people  lost  their  life 
savings. 
Currently,  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  financial  education  is  sporadically  provided  by  private  financial 
institutions marketing products and services to consumers. This happens in some work environments, 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2006
and  by  a  few  counseling  and  repair  organizations  helping  people  to  sort  out  their  personal  debt 
situations. But this clearly is insufficient. 
Against this background, as announced in this year’s budget, the Central Bank is about to launch a 
comprehensive  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme  to  provide  unbiased  and  relevant  financial 
education to the broad population. 
Why the Central Bank? 
We think that the Central Bank is in an ideal position to spearhead this initiative because the confusion 
between  information  and  advertising  does  not  arise;  because  we  have  the  credibility  to  provide 
unbiased and impartial information; and because, with our overview of the monetary system, we are in 
the best position to see the gaps and problems in the market. 
In  addition,  our  interest  derives  from  the  fact  that  financial  literacy  can  also  facilitate  the  efficient 
operation  of  the  market  economy,  in  general,  and  of  monetary  policy,  in  particular.  For  example, 
knowledgeable  consumers  promote  competition  among  financial  and  non-financial  firms  which 
benefits the economy as a whole. Experience also shows that astute consumers are less vulnerable to 
fraud and abuse than the financially uneducated. Financial literacy can also help the citizenry to get a 
better  appreciation  of  interest  rate  and  other  market  signals  which  can  contribute  to  increasing  the 
efficiency of monetary policy. 
The programme’s starting point is that financial education is not only for investors but for everyone. 
Early  financial  education  could  begin  to  teach  children  the  value  of  money  and  an  appreciation  for 
managing money. Financial education is also for the average family trying to balance its budget, to 
save  for  the  children’s  education  and  for  the  parents’  retirement.  It  is  particularly  critical  for  young 
people who need to have a minimum level of financial acumen, confidence and knowledge as they 
enter into the world of work. 
For these reasons the Bank believes that the financial literacy programme should start in the schools 
and proceed to focus on important life-skills such as family budgeting, savings, investments, personal 
debt, insurance, pensions and retirement. 
The scope of the programme envisaged underscores the need for broad-based participation and for a 
carefully phased approach. 
The Bank has been doing some preparatory work and has come up with the following plan. 
We have tentatively identified a number of priority groups who, we believe, have an urgent need for 
more financial education to help them make optimal choices. The groups identified so far are: 
• 
Students  and  young  adults:  covering  secondary  and  tertiary  students;  participants  in 
training programmes and youth groups. 
Employees in the workplace: this would target, for instance, a whole range of public sector 
employees  as  well  as  blue-collar  workers  in  industry  and  particularly  the  newly  employed 
and those preparing for retirement. 
Niche  groups:  such  as  new  and  prospective  homeowners  under  the  recent  government 
housing schemes; and small businesses and self-employed, many of whom are under the 
NEDCO and similar programs. 
Community groups: which could serve as a catchment area for a variety of organizations 
and individuals needing this type of assistance. 
   We would want to start with pilot projects with each of these groups and expand as we go along. 
As to how the programme will be organized, while the Central Bank will be responsible for the design 
and  implementation  of  the  programme,  the  idea  is  to  collaborate  with  a  number  of  institutions  who 
would be invited to participate in the programme’s management. 
For  instance,  we  would  hope  to  work  closely  with  the  Ministries  of  Education  and  Community 
Development  (since  the  programme  will  involve  the  schools  and  community  activities);  tertiary 
institutions  (such  as  UWI,  UTT  and  COSTATT);  the  Tobago  House  of  Assembly;  the  Bankers  and 
Insurance Associations; as well as with peoples’ organizations; and NGOs. 
BIS Review 108/2006 
 3
Because we think that an organized financial education programme should be in the interest of the 
economy as a whole, we intend to establish a broader network of stakeholders from whom we will be 
seeking  financial,  technical,  strategic  and  operational  assistance.  This  list  which  is  now  being  put 
together  would  include  business  groups  and  large  companies  (like  the  Employers’  Consultative 
Association, the energy corporations, Trinidad and Tobago Manufacturers Association, Trinidad and 
Tobago Mortgage Finance and the Chambers of Commerce); the Trade Union movement, the credit 
unions, AARP and the Unit Trust Corporation. 
We plan to reach our priority groups through several channels; through wider pathways, meaning the 
media, the web, leaflets, newspaper articles, etc. but principally, through group work - that is by direct 
interaction with the various target groups. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this programme cannot be implemented by the Central Bank alone. The Bank 
will coordinate and supervise the preparation of the material and arrange for the training of trainers to 
bring their knowledge to the various target groups. Examples elsewhere confirm that the message of 
financial literacy is much better received if delivered by peers or associates or from people who could 
speak from personal experience. 
We hope to depend heavily on volunteers, and in this context, we would hope to be able to count on a 
group such as ICATT to help us deliver this critical national service. I can see ICATT helping us to 
prepare material on household budgeting, balancing one’s checkbook and a variety of activities that 
have an accounting dimension. 
Let me summarize what we expect to achieve with this programme. We hope that it will contribute to 
making consumers more financially aware and able to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
This  is  a  tall  order,  but  with  the  support  of  the  various  institutions  that  we  plan  to  enlist,  including 
ICATT, I am confident that we can lay the foundation for a level of financial literacy that would enhance 
the lives of our citizens and make a major contribution to our economic development efforts. 
I thank you. 
make ends meet and avoid unnecessary personal debt; 
keep track of their finances; 
plan ahead, including making provisions for the rainy day and retirement; 
respond appropriately to market signals; and 
attain the confidence and skill needed to handle basic financial transactions. 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2006
