V Leeladhar: Demystifying Basel II   
Special address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FICCI-IBA 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 26 September 2006. 
 Friends,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  share  my  thoughts  on  some  of  the  elements  of  Basel  II 
implementation in India with this august gathering. I firmly believe that periodical sharing of thoughts 
and views by us on issues of topical relevance with bankers - both domestic and foreign; eminent bank 
regulators  and  supervisors  from  abroad;  and  above  all  -  the  users  of  the  banking  system,  is 
fundamental  for  promoting  greater  transparency  and  understanding  of  the  intent  and  purposes  of 
various  regulatory  initiatives.  I,  therefore,  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  giving  me  this 
wonderful opportunity to take this process forward.  
Reserve Bank’s association with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) – the owner of 
the Basel II framework - dates back to 1997 as India was among the 16 non-member countries that 
were consulted in the drafting of the Basel Core Principles. Reserve Bank of India became a member 
of  the  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group  in  1998  and  subsequently  became  a  member  of  the  Core 
Principles Working Group on Capital. Within the Working Group, RBI has been actively participating in 
the deliberations on the Basel II framework and had the privilege to lead a group of six major non-G-10 
supervisors which presented a proposal on a simplified approach for Basel II to the Committee.  
The subject matter  for  our  discussion  today  is  “Demystifying  Basel  II”.  All  of you  will agree  that we 
would be able to demystify something which is a mystery in the first place. I am not sure how many will 
agree  that  Basel  II  is  a  mystery.  Since  I  personally  believe  that  Basel  II  is  not  a  mystery,  my 
assignment  becomes  more  challenging.  At  the  outset  we  may  agree  that  while  Basel  II  -  as  a 
framework - might not be a mystery, some elements of the framework might be a mystery for some 
people. I, therefore, propose to deal with certain specific elements of the Basel II framework, which 
has  been  a  challenge  to  us  -  and  we  might  not  be  alone  in  that  respect.  I  believe  a  better 
understanding of the relevant perspectives among banks, regulators, users of the banking system and 
other market players would be useful for an effective and meaningful implementation of Basel II. 
Approach to reforms 
With  the  commencement  of  the  banking  sector  reforms  in  the  early  1990s,  the  RBI  has  been 
consistently  upgrading  the  Indian  banking  sector  by  adopting  international  best  practices.  The 
approach  to  reforms  is  one  of  having  clarity  about  the  destination,  deciding  on  the  sequence  and 
modulating the pace of reforms to suit Indian conditions. This has helped us in moving ahead with the 
reforms in a purposeful but non-disruptive manner. 
Basel I 
I would like to briefly mention the progress made by the Indian banking system with regard to Basel I 
implementation  before  we  discuss  Basel  II  implementation.  Adopting  our  general  approach  of 
gradualism,  we  implemented  the  Basel  I  framework  with  effect  from  1992-93  which  was,  however, 
spread over 3 years – banks with branches abroad were required to comply fully by end March 1994 
and  the  other  banks  were  required  to  comply  by  end  March  1996.  Further,  India  responded  to  the 
1996 amendment to the Basel I framework which required banks to maintain capital for market risk 
exposures, by initially prescribing various surrogate capital charges for these risks between 2000 and 
2002. These were replaced with the capital charges as required under the Basel I framework in June 
2004, which become fully effective from March 2005. With the successful implementation of banking 
sector reforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system has shown substantial improvement 
on various parameters. It has become robust and displayed significant resilience to shocks. There is 
ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migrate smoothly to Basel II norms. 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 1
Why Basel II? 
I now propose to discuss a fundamental issue which has been raised and addressed in the context of 
Basel II implementation not only in India but elsewhere – “Why implement Basel II?” Many of us who 
are from the financial sector are aware of the main incentives for adoption of Basel II. These are  
- 
- 
it is more risk sensitive;  
it recognizes developments in risk measurement and risk management techniques employed 
in the banking sector and accommodates them within the framework; 
it aligns regulatory capital closer to economic capital. 
- 
These elements of Basel II take the regulatory framework closer to the business models employed in 
banks. Further, the Basel I framework can be seen as a “one size fits all” model which measures risk 
broadly  and  it  is  necessary  for  the  regulator  to  discriminate  among  banks  on the  basis  of  their  risk 
profiles.  While  these  reasons  are  generally  available  from  the  vast  amount  of  literature  available  in 
public domain, I would like to share with you how the Reserve Bank views the Basel II framework and 
this may also be the perspective which other regulators might share.  
In India, we have 88 commercial banks, which account for about 82% (total assets) of the financial 
sector;  over  2000  cooperative  banks,  which  account  for  about  5%;  and  133  Regional  Rural  Banks, 
which account for about 3%. The policy approach to Basel II in India is such that external perception 
about India conforming to best international standards remains positive. Taking into account the size, 
complexity of operations, relevance to the financial sector, need to ensure greater financial inclusion 
and  the  need  for  having  an  efficient  delivery  mechanism,  the  capital  adequacy  norms  applicable  to 
these entities have been maintained at varying levels of stringency. On the first track, the commercial 
banks in India will start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007. They will initially adopt 
the Standardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk. After 
adequate skills are developed, both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks may be 
allowed  to  migrate  to  the  Internal  Rating  Based  (IRBA)  Approach  and  Advanced  Measurement 
Approach  (AMA).  The  cooperative  banks,  on  the  second  track,  are  required  to  maintain  capital  for 
credit risk as per Basel I framework and through surrogates for market risk; the Regional Rural Banks, 
on the third track, have a minimum capital requirement which is, however, not on par with the Basel I 
framework.  Consequently,  we  will  have  a  major  segment  of  systemic  importance  on  a  Basel  II 
framework, a portion of the minor segment partly on Basel I framework, and the smallest segment on a 
non-Basel  framework.  One  might  say  that  we  are  adopting  a  three-track  approach  with  regard  to 
capital adequacy rules. Further, we are approaching Basel II as a means to achieve an end – the goal 
being  vastly  improved  risk  management  systems  in  the  Indian  banking  sector.  Even  though  the 
commercial  banks  will  be  adopting  the  simpler  options  available  under  the  Basel  II  framework,  the 
supervisory  focus  will  be  primarily  on  enhancing  the  quality  of  risk  management  systems  in  these 
banks.  
Notwithstanding the above, in contrast to Basel I, the revised framework is highly complex and makes 
its understanding and implementation a great challenge to not only the regulatory community but also 
to the regulated community. Much of the complexity stems from the variety of available options, the 
likely impact of diversity in exercise of national discretions, lack of clarity on regulatory approach to 
various implementation issues - especially in a cross border situation and the likely unintended scope 
for regulatory arbitrage. In addition to the complexity of Basel II, there have been other issues which 
have been raised at various fora suggesting that the revised framework, as designed, is likely to pose 
other  threats/  challenges  to  some  economies.  Some  of  these  issues  are  procyclicality,  herding 
behaviour, likely adverse impact on emerging market economies.  
Basel II challenges 
I would now like to discuss some of the challenges which we have faced in our journey to Basel II 
implementation and how we have attempted to address these challenges. I am sure the regulators in 
other  jurisdictions  would  also  have  faced  similar  issues  and  they  would  have  devised  their  own 
strategies  for  addressing  them.  As  a  part  of  the  consultative  process  and  with  a  view  to  ensuring 
smooth  migration  to  the  new  framework,  we  have  constituted  a  ‘Steering  Committee’  comprising  of 
representatives from fourteen select private sector banks, public sector banks and foreign banks, the 
Indian  Banks’  Association  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  Steering  Committee  has  examined 
various  issues  of  the  Basel  II  framework  and  made  its  recommendations  to  the  Reserve  Bank  for 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2006
consideration. Hence, we might say that the banks and the Reserve Bank have worked together to 
address the challenges. Some of these are discussed below: 
Which level / approach? 
a)  
When  Basel  II  framework  was  being  finalized  and  even  soon  after  its  finalization  the  general 
indications  were  that  many  banks  in  major  jurisdictions  would  aim  at  implementing  Internal  Ratings 
Based Approach (IRBA) for credit risk and Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for operational 
risk  straightaway.  It  would  be  seen  that  the  main  incentive  for  this  stance  might  have  been  that 
adoption of IRBA / AMA would reduce the capital requirements for banks and thus, enable them to 
achieve better capital efficiency. This stance of the banks / regulators in other jurisdictions seemed to 
put some pressure on banks in India also to adopt IRBA / AMA directly. There were some thoughts in 
some quarters that if the banks in India do not adopt IRBA / AMA, they run the risk of being viewed as 
inferior  banks  and  consequently  the  system  might  be  branded  as  a  secondary  citizen  in  the  global 
financial  markets.  As  mentioned  earlier,  our  approach  to  reforms  has  been  to  align  with  the 
international  best  practices  but  adopt  them  in  a  manner  and  pace  as  suitable  to  our  economy  and 
environment.  Therefore,  we  have  consciously  decided  to  mandate  the  Standardized  Approach  and 
Basic Indicator Approach to all scheduled commercial banks in India as the first step in migration to 
Basel II. We also observe that as compared to the initial indication, the number of international banks 
which are looking to directly adopt IRBA / AMA at the first instance has reduced. Many jurisdictions 
require  only  a  few  banks  to  adopt  IRBA  /  AMA  while  all  the  other  banks  would  be  on  the  simpler 
approaches. We observe that our approach to Basel II implementation has been widely appreciated 
and there is a general element of caution advocated while allowing banks to adopt the IRBA / AMA. 
External ratings  
b)  
Since our banks are required to adopt Standardised Approach for credit risk, it is incumbent upon the 
Reserve  Bank  to  accredit  the  external  rating  agencies  whose  ratings  the  banks  may  rely  upon  for 
capital adequacy purposes. In India, we have 5 domestic agencies – the oldest commenced ratings in 
1987 and youngest one was established last year. We are confronted with a situation where it is likely 
that only about 10% of banks’ corporate exposures are rated by these external rating agencies. One 
might, therefore conclude that the banks in India would be effectively applying the Basel I risk-weight 
(viz.  100  per  cent)  for  most  of their corporate exposures  even  after  adopting Basel  II.  This  may  be 
seen as a major disincentive for banks to migrate to Basel II. Our interactions with the domestic rating 
agencies indicate that they are equipped to scale their resources, in case of need, to cater to a higher 
demand for ratings consequent upon implementation of Basel II. At present, the ratings in India are 
issue specific and not issuer specific. The rating agencies are also putting in place methodologies for 
undertaking issuer ratings, if required by the market. Hence it is expected that, with the implementation 
of Basel II in India, the proportion of rated entities is likely to increase over a period – providing the 
appropriate basis for risk discrimination in the system.  
In  the  light  of  the  level  of  rating  penetration  at  present,  one  of  the  suggestions  was  that  until  a 
significant  proportion  of  corporate  exposure  of  banks  is  covered  by  external  ratings,  banks  may  be 
allowed  to  use  their  internal  ratings  in  respect  of  those  exposures  which  do  not  have  an  external 
rating. While the intent behind the suggestion is clear, it would be necessary to appreciate that banks 
would have to go through a rigorous process under the Basel II framework before they are allowed to 
use  their  internal  ratings  for  capital  adequacy  purposes.  Further,  the  Basel  II  framework  does  not 
envisage  the  use  of  internal  ratings  to  supplement  the  external  ratings  under  the  standardised 
approach. Hence, the suggestion was not accommodated. 
Another issue which keeps coming up at various fora is the issue of assigning a lower risk-weight of 
100 per cent for unrated entities and higher risk-weight of 150 per cent for entities rated below “BB(-)”, 
thereby providing the corporates a perverse incentive to remain unrated. Since it might not be fair to 
assume up-front that all unrated entities are high risk entities, we have decided to presently adopt the 
100 per cent risk weight for unrated exposures – as prescribed in the Basel II framework. However, we 
propose to review the health of unrated exposures in banks through the pillar II process as well as the 
other  onsite  and  offsite  feedback  mechanisms  and  revise  the  risk-weights  for  unrated  exposures,  if 
warranted.  
The  domestic  rating  agencies  are  also  placed  in  a  unique  situation,  which  impacts  their  default 
statistics. Two significant factors in this regard are: (a) they have a small base of rated entities and (b) 
they  lack  the  geographical  diversification  benefits  which  the  international  rating  entities  enjoy. 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 3
Interaction with the rating agencies have indicated that the processes and methodologies adopted by 
them were generally in alignment with those of the international rating agencies and despite the above 
two constraining factors their default statistics may not be out of sync with the Basel trigger ratios.  
 National discretion  
c) 
The  Basel  II  framework  offers  the  national  supervisors  an  element  of  discretion  in  several  areas  to 
enable  them  to  adopt  the  framework  to  suit  their  respective  banking  systems.  It  is  likely  that  the 
discretion available under the framework might induce apprehension / expectation in some quarters 
that national supervisors might adopt the most lenient options – thus diluting the rigour of the Basel II 
framework. In India, we have adopted an objective approach while deciding on the items of national 
discretion. Consequently, we have taken a conservative view on certain areas of national discretion. 
Some of the areas where the discretion exercised by us is on a more conservative level are: 
o 
State Government guaranteed exposures attract a higher risk weight of 20 per cent, though 
the framework allows a zero per cent risk weight. 
Exposures to public sector enterprises are treated on par with corporate exposures though 
the framework allows them to be treated on par with bank or sovereign exposures. 
While, under option 1, we have discretion to apply 20% risk weight for exposures to all banks 
we have decided to extend this concessionary risk-weight only to exposures to scheduled 
banks.  Exposures  to  non-scheduled  banks  will  be  treated  separately  and  assigned  a  risk-
weight of 100%. 
Though the Basel II framework allows lower risk-weight of 35% for residential mortgage and 
75%  for  personal  loans (as  part  of  retail)  we  have  opted  to  assign  a  higher  risk-weight  of 
75% for residential mortgage and 125% for personal loans. 
o 
o 
o 
These are hard decisions which we, as a regulator, have taken with a view to capturing the true level 
of underlying risk knowing fully well that this might cast a burden on the banks in India.  
Internal capital adequacy assessment process 
d) 
The internal capital adequacy assessment process which forms an important element of Pillar II is an 
integral and important part of the Basel II framework. Yet, some doubts are being raised with regard to 
its relevance for banks adopting Standardised Approach and Basic Indicator Approach. I would like to 
mention here that though Pillar II is not a formal part of Basel I framework, the Reserve Bank has been 
discharging  some  of  the  Pillar  II  responsibilities  even  under  the  current  framework.  The  Basel  II 
framework takes this a step forward by making it a formal requirement. The additional element which 
casts some formal responsibility on the banks under the new framework is that banks are required to 
put in place an effective internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) which should not only 
address  the 3  major  risks  (viz.  credit  risk,  market  risk,  and  operational  risk) but  also  other  risks  for 
which  explicit  capital  has  not  been  prescribed  under  Pillar  I.  Further,  banks  are  also  required  to 
address suitably other dimensions of the three Pillar I risks. A professionally managed bank would suo 
moto strive to plan for and achieve most efficient use of capital even if there were no formal regulatory 
requirement. The ICAAP merely attempts to formalise these efforts of bank managements as a part of 
the capital adequacy framework. I am sure this would clarify the relevance of including ICAAP as an 
integral part of Pillar II.  
Stress testing 
e)  
Stress  testing  has  become  an  integral  part  of  banks’  risk  management  systems  and  is  used  to 
evaluate their potential vulnerability to certain unlikely but plausible events or movements in financial 
variables. The supervisory review process under Pillar 2 of Basel II framework is intended not only to 
ensure  that  banks  have  adequate  capital  to  support  all  the  risks  in  their  business,  but  also  to 
encourage banks to develop and use better risk management techniques in monitoring and managing 
their  risks.  Banks  must  demonstrate,  under  the  internal  capital  adequacy  assessment  process 
prescribed  by  Pillar  2,  that  they  have  enough  capital  to  not  only  meet  the  minimum  capital 
requirements but also to withstand a range of severe but plausible shocks. In the above background, 
the need for banks in India to adopt ‘stress tests’ as a risk management tool has been emphasised in 
the  Annual  Policy  Statement  announced  by  the  Governor  in  April  2006.  The draft  guidelines  in  this 
regard were issued and the same are under finalisation on the basis of the feedback received from 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2006
market participants. I would therefore urge banks to approach stress testing as an integral part of the 
Basel II framework. 
Data requirements 
f) 
The general reaction is that ‘Basel II is data intensive and paucity of acceptable data is a challenge to 
meaningful Basel II implementation”. As I understand, the data requirements for banks implementing 
Standardised  Approach  and  Basic  Indicator  Approach  under  Basel  II  are  not  very  significant.  It  is 
largely  similar  to  the  data  captured  under  Basel  I.  However,  banks  need  to  capture  more  granular 
details of their credit risk exposures to enable them to assess the capital requirements accurately. This 
places  a  demand  on  their  MIS,  which  might  require  a  certain  degree  of  fine  tuning,  to  capture 
exposure-wise  details  of  (i)  credit  risk  mitigants,  (ii)  availability  of  external  ratings,  (iii)  specific 
provisions held in the case of non performing assets etc. Many banks have attempted to achieve this 
by  opting  for  core  banking  solutions  while  others  have  attempted  to  achieve  this  through  a  better 
reporting framework. 
Operational risk 
g)  
The  capital  charge  prescribed  for  operational  risk  under  the  Basic  Indicator  Approach  –  viz.  15  per 
cent of the average gross income for the preceding three years – is considered by some as too high, 
especially  because  most  of  the  commercial  banks  are  simple  traditional  banking  entities.  In  some 
quarters the 15 per cent norm is considered to be relevant only for sophisticated, complex, tech-savvy 
global banks in developed economies. Another point put across in support of this argument is that the 
loss on account of frauds in banks in India is only a fraction of the capital requirement specified for 
banks adopting BIA, which is seen to be in the range of 1 to 5 percent of the gross income. Therefore, 
Basel  II  is  considered  as  a  burden  on  banks.  Here,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  it  would  be 
inappropriate  to  assume  that  (a)  operational  risk  losses  manifest  only  in  tech-savvy  and  complex 
banks and (b) that in other banks it manifests only as frauds. Operational risks are assumed by all 
banks and further operational risk losses manifest in other forms, which banks ought to reckon to have 
a wholesome picture of their exposure to operational risk. I would, therefore, urge banks to put in place 
sound and efficient operational risk management framework since this will be a focus under the Pillar 2 
framework.  Further,  we  would  encourage  banks  to  compile  comprehensive  operational  loss  data  – 
over  a  period  –  to  enable  them  to  establish  beyond  doubt  the  actual  level  of  their  operational  risk 
losses.  
Conclusion 
As I mentioned earlier, “flexibility” has been the hallmark of our reform process, which was evident in 
our  Basel  I  implementation.  Taking  into  account  the  concerns  that  may  arise  during  the  course  of 
Basel II implementation, it may be necessary for us regulators, especially in the emerging economies, 
to adopt a flexible approach while implementing Basel II.  
As I mentioned at the outset, I had set out to demystify something which I thought was not a mystery 
in  the  first  place.  I  have  tried  to  share  some  of  my  thoughts  on  certain  elements  of  the  Basel  II 
framework – as we have approached them in our implementation efforts. I am sure this exchange of 
thoughts and views would have added greater clarity to our implementation efforts and placed some of 
the important elements of Basel II in the right perspective.  
While,  I  have  focused  to  a  large  extent  on  the  challenges  that  we,  as  a  system,  face  in  the 
implementation of Basel II, I would like to balance this with the thought that Basel II does not pose just 
challenges,  it  also  offers  considerable  opportunities  to  banks  to  upgrade  their  risk  management 
systems and thus become more efficient and competitive.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 5
