Stanley Fischer: Issues pertaining to the Israeli economy  
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the Sderot Conference for 
Society, Sderot, 7 November 2006. 
 First of all I would like to stress that society and economy are two sides of the same coin. Particularly 
in Israel, because of its uniqueness, it is impossible to waive the good of society for the good of the 
economy, but it is equally clear that it is impossible to forego the good of the economy for the sake of 
society. One complements the other. 
As in economic policies, so too in social policies one must distinguish between short-term and long-
term tools. So it is important to use tools that in the short term will help improve the welfare system for 
the weaker members of society who cannot join the labor force. However we must not forget that the 
most important thing for society - and for the economy, for the state, and for its security too - is the 
long term, and what stands at its center, in the long run, is sustainable growth. So a sensible policy 
should strike the right balance between short-term and long-term tools, as they can be substituted one 
for the other. 
Before I get into these topics, I will begin with an overview of the state of the economy. 
State of the economy 
A.  
The Israeli economy is today in a very good state, even after the war. The economy has enjoyed rapid 
growth  now  for  three  years,  and  the  Bank  of  Israel  forecasts  that  GDP  will  grow  this  year  by  4.6 
percent.  This  is  a  rapid  rate  of  growth  by  international  standards,  and  Israel  is  also  enjoying  an 
increase in investments and exports, a balance of payments surplus, a particularly high rate of foreign 
investments,  rising  productivity  and  an  improvement  in  employment  data.  Inflation  in  Israel  is  low, 
levels of interest rate are similar to elsewhere and the markets demonstrate strength and stability. 
And what led to this extremely good state of the economy? A combination of three factors: the first: 
the  structural  changes  in  the  economy  during  the  past  15  years  -  the  liberalization  of  the  foreign 
exchange  market,  making  it  more  flexible,  privatization,  the  development  of  the  capital  market, 
opening it up to competition from abroad etc; the second: the responsible macroeconomic policies of 
the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Israel; and the third: the background factors which are not 
always  dependent  on  us.  I  am  referring  here  to  world  economic  developments  and  the  security 
situation. 
In this context, we must understand that the success of the economy and its ability to stand up to the 
negative impact of the hostilities is a result of structural changes over the past 15 years, and of the 
macroeconomic policies that the government and the Bank of Israel pursued before, during and after 
the fighting. 
Now I would like to address solving the problem of poverty in the short term, and in order to build the 
correct plan for treating the problem of poverty in the short term, it is important to understand poverty 
and, if needs be, to deal with it at the level of the individual. 
Incentives for joining the labor force 
1.  
First of all, it is important to build tools designed to provide incentives to join the labor force. We know 
that  poverty  among  families  with  no  breadwinner  reached  about  78  percent  in  2005.  In  contrast, 
poverty among families with one wage earner fell to 35 percent and among families with two or more 
breadwinners, to only 4 percent. I am delighted that the topic of Earned Income Tax Credit - which the 
Research Department at the Bank of Israel has worked on for a long time - is gaining momentum. This 
is an approach that will increase the disposable income for poor wage earners and will also provide an 
incentive to join the labor market. 
But as still more than one third of all families with one wage earner are poor, it is important that these 
incentives are accompanied by the removal of obstacles to entering the labor market so that more and 
more  families  will  have  two  or  more  wage  earners.  In  this  context,  we  are  talking  about  removing 
obstacles for women. 
Dealing with those who cannot work 
2.  
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  improve  the  testing  of  earning  capability  and  to  deal  with  this 
individually, through allowances, for those who cannot work. 
Dealing with the elderly who have no source of income 
3.  
Another matter concerns the elderly; poverty among this sector of the population is almost 25 percent. 
Here I note that this subject is dealt with through increasing allowances to the elderly who have no 
sources of income, as is the case in the budget for 2005 and 2006. 
The Arab and ultra-orthodox sectors  
4. 
This  last  matter  concerns the  two  sectors of  the  population  that have  the  highest  concentrations  of 
poor in Israel. Among the Arab population, the level of poverty was higher than 55 percent last year, 
and  among  the  ultra-orthodox  it  was  63  percent.  The  reasons  for  this  are,  for  the  Arab  population, 
connected to education, discrimination in the labor market and the low level of participation of women 
in the labor force. Among the ultra-orthodox, the problem is related to size of families and the low level 
of  participation,  particularly  among  men,  in  the  labor market.  Also  in  these  cases,  it  is  important  to 
build  a  series  of  tailored  tools  to  extricate  these  populations  from  these  extremely  high  rates  of 
poverty. 
B.  
Sustainable growth 
Now I will turn to the long term: 
Today the economy is at a very important crossroads. We are obligated to safeguard the enormous 
achievements of the economy, and the confidence that investors have in us, in order to improve the 
chances that this growth will continue in the long run. 
Clearly what is important for the economy and the state is sustainable growth. The level of GDP per 
capita in Israel is about $ 20,000 and, in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP), closer to $ 25,000. If 
we can grow at a rate of 5.5 percent in the next 10 years, and if the population continues to grow at a 
rate of 1.7 percent, then our income per head will reach $ 29,000; however if we manage to grow by 
only 3 percent, our income per head will reach only $ 22,000. That's a difference of 28 percent, and if 
we consider the situation 20 years down the road, then this gap won't be 28 percent but 63 percent. 
The numbers speak for themselves. 
But rightly we should ask: How will growth affect Israelis' standard of living? 
1. 
The most important thing is that there will be more jobs, more employment and a higher level 
of wages. 
We will have more resources that we can devote to solving problems of society. 
We will have more resources to devote to security. 
We will have a larger population, as a result of more immigration and less emigration. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Therefore  we  must  stress  at  every  opportunity  that  sustainable  growth  determines  the  future  of  the 
economy, of society and of the state. 
And what led to this extremely good state of the economy? A combination of three factors: the first: the 
structural changes in the economy during the past 15 years - the liberalization of the foreign exchange 
market, making it more flexible, privatization, the development of the capital market, opening it up to 
competition from abroad etc; the second: the responsible macroeconomic policies of the Ministry of 
Finance and the Bank of Israel; and the third: the background factors which are not always dependent 
on us. I am referring here to world economic developments and the security situation. 
1. Macroeconomic stability - which is a basic necessity; and here we move on to the subject of the 
next session: I do not want to go into details as we have excellent experts in the next session who will 
present  important  recommendations  -  and  by  the  way,  the  delegation  of  the  International  Monetary 
Fund that presented its annual report to the Minister of Finance and myself yesterday, also stressed 
the need to strengthen our budgetary framework. 
2. But I will go further on one very important aspect of the fiscal situation, and that is the burden of 
debt.  
Regarding  the  burden  of  government  debt,  we  must  remember  our  starting  point.  Thanks  to  the 
responsible budgetary policies of recent years, the government has managed to bring this debt down 
by means of budget deficit and spending targets, so that by mid-2006, the public debt reached around 
90 percent of GDP compared to 102 percent in 2003. This reduction - part of which is technical and 
comes from recent changes in what defines GDP - is one of these achievements of the economy, but 
it is still not enough. Despite this achievement, we have not yet returned to the debt-to-GDP ratio that 
we had in the year 2000 - 87 percent - and in international comparison, we still have a very high debt-
to-GDP ratio. In most OECD countries, this ratio varies between 30 percent and 70 percent. 
But why should the debt-to-GDP ratio concern us so much? Firstly, because this situation will not allow 
the government to pursue an anti-cyclical budgetary policy; secondly, our heavy burden of public debt 
encumbers the government with the heavy costs of interest rate payments - reaching up to 15 percent 
of  the  government  budget,  the  second  largest  single  item  after  defense  spending.  It  would  be 
preferable if some of these monies were redirected to necessities such as education, welfare etc; and 
thirdly, the high burden of debt-to-GDP exposes the economy to possible external shocks. 
And how do we lower this debt-to-GDP ratio? It is very simple. In the denominator, we must create 
growth, and in the numerator, low budget deficits. It is therefore important that in the years after 2007, 
the budget policy allows the budget deficit to return to its path we saw prior to the fighting, which will 
emphasize the government's commitment to long-term budget targets and will demonstrate that the 
deviation in 2007 was an exception. 
C.  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Structural changes 
In  the  financial  sector  -  with  the  aim  of  broadening  the  range  of  financial  instruments  and 
players; 
Incentives for growth - for example, to pursue a path of relatively low taxation; 
Flexibility and efficiency in the public system - with the aim of encouraging economic activity 
in various fields. 
In this context I would like to draw attention to the Doing Business Report (2007) of the World Bank, 
which was published a few months ago. The report ranks countries according to the ease of doing 
business there, that is according to bureaucratic and regulatory processes that one must overcome in 
order to run a business. Each country receives a score of between 1 and 175, with 1 marking the best. 
Overall, Israel was placed 26th, which is not bad. But if we look at the individual components we see 
that we were good at "investor protection" (5th place), "getting credit" (7th place), "international trading" 
(13th  place),  "starting  a  business"  (15th  place),  and  "closing  a  business"  (36th  place);  we  were 
middling in "paying taxes" (ranked 62nd) and "employing workers" (82nd); and we were particularly 
bad  in  terms  of  "dealing  with  licenses"  (101st  place),  "enforcing  contracts"  (110th  place)  and  in 
"registering property" (150th place). So we have much to improve on in many fields and it is important 
that we do this to create a better business environment. 
I said last week that the way rumors and misinformation on suspicions and investigations on this and 
that which are reported as fact harm the business environment, and maybe in this area too we should 
show more responsibility - and it also impacts very negatively on our political situation. 
And now to the last topic, which is by no means less important: 
Education 
D.  
The  need  for  reform  in  education  is  striking  and  so  important,  inter  alia,  in  treating  the  problem  of 
poverty in the long run, that I would like to expound on it here. 
Education is a basic tool in every society for giving the young generation the tools to integrate into the 
labor market, to succeed on a personal level both economically and socially, and to contribute to the 
prosperity  of  the  economy  and  society  as  a  whole.  On  this  subject  our  position  is  excellent  in 
international comparisons. The rates of those with tertiary-level education aged 25-64 is 45 percent in 
Israel  compared  to  25  percent  in  the  OECD  countries  (as  of  2004);  the  rate  of  those  employed  in 
academic  and  technological  professions  stands  at  30  percent  in  Israel  (in  2005)  compared  to  28 
percent in the EU countries. 
Can we therefore sit back and relax knowing this? Certainly not, because there are worrying trends, 
and  I  will  demonstrate  these  with  the  use  of  two  examples  (and  these  are  not  the  only  ones).  The 
number of a children in a class reaches 27 in Israel, compared to 21 schoolchildren per class in the 
OECD  countries.  Another  example  is  our  spending  on  schoolchildren,  which  dropped  by  almost  20 
percent over the past decade, compared to a rise in the OECD countries. This means that the current 
situation in Israel is not bad, but there are some very worrying trends. 
Regarding higher education, we are close to a crisis, and it is a good thing that the government has 
established a committee that will make recommendations on how to solve the serious problems of this 
sector,  and  even  more  importantly,  that  after  the  committee  submits  its  report,  the  government  will 
carry out a reform of the higher education system. 
In conclusion, treating poverty is important and essential - in both the short and long term - without 
growth  we  will  not  be  able  to  cope  with  long  term  poverty,  and  it  is  essential  to  plan  and  pursue 
economic policies that will promote sustainable growth. This is not just essential, it is possible. 
Thank you. 
