Stanley Fischer: Dollarization 
Keynote address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the 75th Anniversary 
Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey "Dollarization: Consequences and Policy 
Options", Istanbul, 13-15 December 2006. 
 It  is  both  a  pleasure  and  an  honor  for  me  to  participate  in  this  conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Turkey. In the first place, it is a pleasure to be at a conference of the Central Bank at a time when it is 
evident  that  monetary  policy  in  Turkey  is  succeeding  in  gradually  bringing  inflation  under  control. 
Inflation is now around the single digit range, and given the experience in other countries – including 
Israel  –  that  struggled  to  subdue  inflation,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  with  a  sustained  and 
consistent monetary policy, and the continuation of the supportive fiscal policy, Turkey will join other 
inflation targeting countries in achieving low single digit inflation. 
All  this  is  a  far  cry  from  the  situation  during  one  of  my  most  memorable  visits  to  your  country,  on 
February 19, 2001, the day of the spectacular foreign exchange crisis that led to the shift to a flexible 
exchange rate regime and the beginnings of the inflation targeting approach to monetary policy. The 
Turkish economy has come a long way since then, and the credit for that belongs both to the Central 
Bank and to successive Turkish governments – both the ministers and the senior civil servants – who 
have  demonstrated  the  ability  to  maintain  fiscal  discipline  and  continue  the  reforms  that  are 
transforming the economy and bringing it closer to its potential. Of course, the IMF too has made an 
important contribution to the success of this process, and I am happy that as a member of the Fund 
and the Fund team, I had the opportunity to work closely with the Turkish authorities. 
Second, it is an honor for me as Governor of the Bank of Israel to be taking part in a conference on the 
important topic of dollarization, a topic of interest not only to the Central Bank of Turkey, but also to us 
in the Bank of Israel, and to many other central banks and economies around the world. 
I will start by discussing the issue of full dollarization of an economy, that is the replacement of the 
national  currency  by  a  foreign  currency,  a  process  that  has  taken  place  in  recent  years  in  both  El 
Salvador and Ecuador. I will then go on to discuss what must be the main topic of this conference – 
partial  dollarization,  with respect  both  to  the  assets  and  liabilities  in  the  economy,  and  with  respect 
also to the medium of exchange and the unit of account in some transactions. 
Full dollarization 
I. 
During the 1990s many economies were struggling to control or stabilize inflation. Many of them had 
used a pegged exchange rate to bring inflation down from triple digit levels. It was then that the power 
of the impossible trinity – of the combination of a pegged exchange rate, free capital movements, and 
a monetary policy dedicated to domestic goals – became clear, and that a series of financial crises 
erupted.  Further,  as  the  financial  crises  of  that  decade  unfolded,  it  also  became  evident  that  the 
impossible  trinity  should  be  amended  to  say  that  the  combination  of  a  pegged  exchange  rate,  free 
capital  movements,  and  macroeconomic  policy  –  not  just  monetary  policy  –  dedicated  to  domestic 
goals was not possible. 
The resultant trilemma pointed in three possible directions: one was to attempt to control international 
capital  flows,  a  solution  that  for  good  reasons  was  rejected  by  most  countries1;  the  second  was  to 
move to a more flexible exchange rate – though not necessarily one that was totally free-floating; and 
the third was to strengthen the exchange rate peg, either by adopting a currency board, or by getting 
rid of the exchange rate entirely, that is by adopting a foreign currency, or full dollarization. 
The major benefit of the third solution as seen at the time – and as emphasized particularly by my 
then-colleague  Michael  Deppler  of  the  IMF  –  was  that  a  country  that  adopted  that  solution  would 
                                                      
1   Among these reasons is that capital controls tend to: cut the development of the financial sector of the country off from the 
global economy; cut the economy off from the benefits of international trade in assets; and are frequently ineffective and a 
source of corruption. However, countries with capital controls, a weak macroeconomic framework, and a vulnerable financial 
system, need to strengthen the macroeconomic system and the financial system before or as they liberalize. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
rapidly see the benefits of the enhanced credibility of monetary policy in lower interest rates. When 
one considers for instance the case of Turkey, where high real interest rates in the late 1990s and in 
the run-up to the crisis created a massive fiscal problem2, the benefits of the lower interest rates were 
obvious.  Those  benefits  had  been  seen  in  the  case  of  Bulgaria  when  it  adopted  a  currency  board 
solution, a step just short of full dollarization, and they were seen also in the full dollarization cases of 
El Salvador and Ecuador in the early years of this decade. They were seen too in the cases of the 
countries joining, or slated to join, the EMU. 
The benefits of instant credibility were expected to be observed also in a rapid decline in the inflation 
rate. That benefit was not immediately obtained in the high inflation countries, with prices continuing to 
rise at double digit rates for nearly three years in the case of Ecuador, a result of the extreme real 
devaluation of the currency during the crisis that preceded dollarization. Evidently, Balassa-Samuelson 
effects would continue to operate – and to operate strongly – even in a country that had adopted the 
currency of another country, an effect that was also visible in the currency board cases of the Baltic 
countries. 
More  generally,  adherence  to  a  currency  board  or  to  full  dollarization  was  expected  to  strengthen 
overall macroeconomic discipline, in the belief that a government committed to such a policy would 
have  no  choice  but  to  maintain  fiscal  discipline.  Part  of  the  reason  for  that  belief  was  that  the 
authorities would understand that the macroeconomic effects of failing to maintain the exchange rate 
peg  –  one  on  which  the  entire  financial  structure  of  the  economy  was  dependent  –  would  be 
disastrous. 
Unfortunately, that theory did not withstand the unfolding of the Argentine crisis. It was true that the 
collapse of a long-established and relatively long believed-in currency peg was extremely expensive 
for Argentina. But it was not clear that there was a better way out of the deep crisis in which Argentina 
found  itself  at  the  end  of  2001.  More  generally,  when  using  game  theory  to  evaluate  the  beneficial 
effects  of  imposing  large  costs  on  policymakers  for  breaking  a  commitment  –  as  in  the  case  of 
Argentina  in  the  1990s  –  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  the  expected  costs  of  breaking  the 
commitment if circumstances arise in which policymakers nonetheless decide that is what they have to 
do. 
The costs of even a fully credible full dollarization policy are also clear: they are that the exchange rate 
is  no  longer  available  as  an  adjustment  mechanism:  adjustments  that  could  otherwise  be  made  by 
allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  change  –  and  that  is  the  most  natural  adjustment  mechanism  to 
macroeconomic shocks, foreign and domestic – then have to be transferred to domestic prices and 
wages. And that generally means a more painful and prolonged adjustment. 
All this raises the question of what are the costs and benefits of membership in a monetary union, an 
issue of great future importance to Turkey, and one with which I will conclude this presentation. 
Partial dollarization 
II.  
In situations with partial dollarization, at least two currencies are being used, to differing extents, to 
perform  the  different  functions  of  money  –  as  unit  of  account,  medium  of  exchange,  and  store  of 
value.3 For instance, it is common that the domestic money be used as legal tender, but that some 
foreign currency  be  used  as  unit  of  account  in  some  transactions,  and  as  a store  of  value  –  either 
directly,  or  via  various  indexation  arrangements.  In  some  countries,  two  or  more  currencies  may 
circulate  and  serve  as  medium  of  exchange  for  different  transactions  –  the  domestic  currency  for 
smaller  transactions,  and  a  foreign  currency  for  large  transactions,  for  instance  for  real  estate.  The 
term "dollarization" generally refers to the assets and liabilities in use within an economy, and not to 
those  either  borrowed  from  or  held  abroad,  although  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  changes  on  the 
domestic economy may be quite similar in the two cases. 
                                                      
2   The emphasis in IMF programs on the primary surplus of the budget – that is, the non-interest surplus – to some extent 
deflected attention from the depth of Turkey's fiscal problem at that time. 
In this section I draw on the papers presented in the book edited by Adriano Armas, Alain Ize, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, 
Financial Dollarization: The Policy Agenda, International Monetary Fund, 2006. 
BIS Review 126/2006
3  
2 
 Typically partial dollarization is the result of a period of economic instability in the past, generally a 
period of high inflation. In such circumstances, economic agents will want to hold safer assets4, and 
the  economic  and  political  systems  will  produce  them.  That  can  be  done  by  allowing  the  banking 
system to offer foreign currency, or exchange-rate-linked, accounts; and the banking system in turn 
will want to lend in a similar form. Dollarization typically has a long life, generally surviving long after 
the period of instability that gave rise to the phenomenon. 
It is useful to distinguish four types of dollarization: (i) asset dollarization; (ii) liability dollarization; (iii) 
medium of exchange dollarization in which a foreign currency is used for some transactions; and (iv) 
unit of account dollarization, in which future payments are indexed to an exchange rate. The last is 
sometimes called "real" dollarization. 
they  sometimes  discovered 
Asset and liability dollarization 
The key questions that arise are whether different types of partial dollarization contribute to financial 
vulnerability and instability, whether and under what circumstances it would be desirable to have less 
dollarization, and if so, how that can be achieved. We start with asset and liability dollarization.  
Consider first the impacts on the banking system of operating in two currencies, on both sides of the 
balance sheet. It was common in the financial crises of the 1990s to discover that banks that thought 
they had hedged their foreign currency liabilities (or their foreign-currency denominated liabilities) by 
lending in dollars, were not in fact hedged, because their non-exporting borrowers were not able to 
repay their dollar-denominated loans. Indeed, even if the banks thought they had a net long position in 
foreign-exchange  denominated  assets, 
that  a  deep  devaluation 
devastated their balance sheets. Thus unless lenders are very cautious in evaluating their borrowers, 
partial  dollarization  can  severely  increase  the  vulnerability  of  the  banking  and  financial  systems  to 
exchange rate changes. These exchange rate changes could be driven by foreign developments, but 
in practice they were more often driven by domestically generated shocks, frequently caused by fiscal 
problems. 
That is to say: asset and liability dollarization makes the financial system, and thus the economy, more 
vulnerable to exchange rate shocks. 
There has been some discussion in the literature of whether dollarization helps create financial depth. 
The empirical answer seems to be uncertain. But when one takes into account that economic agents 
will seek safer assets where they can find them, and that capital controls are never totally watertight, 
the answer must be that dollarization helps preserve a larger domestic financial system than would 
otherwise exist. For otherwise much of the financial system would move offshore. 
Can monetary policy be effective in a heavily dollarized economy? In one writes down the equation of 
exchange,  MV  =  PY,  then  it  seems  that  monetary  policy  can  get  leverage  over  prices  through  the 
normal quantity theory mechanisms. But there are three qualifications to that answer. First, it is not 
clear what the relevant M is, and whether the central bank can fully control that M. If the domestic and 
foreign  currencies  are  close  substitutes  in  terms  of  what  matters  for  the  equation  of  exchange,  the 
central bank may not have effective control over M. Second, in heavily dollarized economies, fiscal 
policy  is  likely  to  be problematic,  and  to  make  it difficult  for  monetary  policy  to  avoid  the  difficulties 
associated with fiscal dominance. Third, there is the question of what determines interest rates in a 
highly  dollarized  economy.  If  the  capital  account  is  open,  rates  of  return  on  dollarized  assets  and 
liabilities in the economy are likely to be significantly affected by foreign interest rates, reducing the 
leverage of monetary policy on aggregate demand. To the extent that the exchange rate is flexible, 
there may be some leeway between foreign and domestic interest rates, giving monetary policy some 
leverage. 
Although I have not so far distinguished between dollarization and exchange-rate linking of assets and 
liabilities, there is a potentially important difference. So long as assets and liabilities are exchange-rate 
linked, and payable only in the domestic currency, the central bank still technically has the capacity to 
serve as lender of last resort in the domestic currency, even without holding massive reserves. But this 
                                                      
4   The  literature  uses  the  concept  of  a  minimum  variance  portfolio  for  the  economy,  which  includes  a  significant  share  of 
foreign-currency or foreign-currency denominated assets. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
does mean that the impact on the exchange rate of a significant financial crisis is likely to be very large 
in an economy with extensive dollarization. 
Empirical work shows that monetary policy in heavily dollarized economies tends to aim to smooth the 
exchange  rate.  This  is  not  surprising  given  that  economic  agents  in  such  an  economy  are  very 
vulnerable  to  exchange  rate  changes,  and  that  monetary-policy  makers  will  typically  also  be 
concerned  about  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  that  regard,  it  is  often  suggested,  and 
correctly,  that  reserve  requirements  against  foreign  currency  liabilities  should  be  larger  than  those 
against domestic currency liabilities, and that especial care needs to be taken in evaluating the risks 
associated with foreign currency assets. However, it is also the case that the more difficult it becomes 
to hold foreign-currency assets in the domestic banking system, the more those assets are likely to be 
held outside the banking system, quite possibly abroad – in other words, actions to limit the extent of 
dollarization may well contribute to capital flight. 
Why not simply fix the exchange rate? We have already discussed that issue, under the heading of full 
dollarization. It can be done, for small economies, and for ones – such as the candidates for entry into 
EMU – that know how they will ultimately exit the fixed exchange rate arrangement. But it is also a 
dangerous course of action for those countries that might one day find themselves having to change 
the exchange rate. 
There is some evidence that the provision of price-indexed financial assets helps reduce the extent of 
dollarization.  That  makes  considerable  sense,  since  the  underlying  issue  for  asset-holders  is 
increasing  the  safety  of  their  portfolios.  Generally  countries  that  suffer  from  high  inflation,  which 
empirically means also unstable inflation, provide a range of assets, including both price- and foreign-
exchange  indexed  assets.  But  extensive  price  level  indexation,  like  dollarization  or  exchange-rate 
indexation, may also complicate the response of the economy to shocks. 
Medium of exchange dollarization 
I will not discuss this issue in detail, except to note that the use of foreign exchange for making large 
payments may be more tax- than medium-of-exchange related. 
"Real" indexation – unit of account dollarization 
Long  after  a  country  has  returned  to  price  stability,  and  even  after  the  disappearance  of  almost  all 
asset  and  liability  dollarization,  a  country  may  still  find  that  some  domestic  prices  are  specified  in 
dollars. This is currently the situation in Israel. During the course of the nineties, financial dollarization 
declined  dramatically  in  Israel.  For  most  of  the  present  decade  the  average  inflation  rate  has  been 
around  two  percent.  Nonetheless,  housing  and  apartment  rentals,  and  the  fees  for  some  services, 
including those of lawyers and accountants, are quoted in dollars. These are all fundamentally non-
traded goods. 
This means that when the exchange rate changes in Israel, not only do the prices of imports change, 
and feed through gradually into the price level, in the way they do in all economies, but also the local-
currency prices of a significant part of the price index react also immediately. Housing accounts for 
over 20 percent of the CPI. Empirical estimates show that an exchange rate change feeds through into 
the  domestic  price  level  within  a  matter  of  months,  with  the  pass-through  coefficient  being  about 
one-third. 
Because the exchange rate is volatile relative to goods prices, month-to-month inflation in Israel also 
relatively volatile. This complicates monetary policy. We are inflation targeters, with the inflation target 
being 1-3 percent. But given the volatility of oil prices and the exchange rate, we have found it difficult 
to stay within the range. Just in the last two months, as a result of the fall in the price of oil and the 
weakening of the dollar, our price level fell by 1.5 percentage points. That will ensure that we will be 
well below our target inflation range this year, with inflation likely to end the year at about zero. That is 
not a major problem given that the economy is growing fast, but we would of course prefer to be within 
the target range. 
As it is, we have adopted a flexible inflation targeting approach, in which we aim to return within the 
inflation range with a horizon of about one year. This approach seems to have gained considerable 
credibility.  Further,  the  rapid  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate  into  inflation  sometimes  makes 
monetary policy easier – for when we change the interest rate and the exchange rate reacts rapidly, 
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is very fast. So the tight exchange rate-inflation link is 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
not only a problem, sometimes it is a benefit. But not on average, for our inflation rate reacts rapidly to 
every  external  shock  that  moves  the  exchange rate.  We  would prefer  a  slower pass-through  of  the 
exchange rate into prices, so that the inflation rate could be more stable. 
And the fact remains that the economy continues to pay a price, in terms of inflation volatility, for a 
period  of  high  inflation  that  was  brought  under  control  over  twenty  years  ago:  inflation  and  its 
consequences, among them dollarization, have very long-lasting effects. 
What to do? 
III.  
Given  that  dollarization  complicates  economic  management,  and  contributes  to  the  uncertainty  that 
ensures  its  continuation,  it  is  natural  to  want  to  get  rid  of  the  phenomenon.  That  is  certainly  a 
worthwhile goal when dollarization is extensive. At the same time, in a fundamentally stable economy, 
there are few good reasons to prevent people from holding the assets they want and from entering 
into the contracts they want. 
The  first  thing  to  do  to  reduce  the  level  of  dollarization  is  to  get  the  macroeconomic  framework  in 
shape.  That  means  in  particular  putting  fiscal  policy  on  a  sustainable  track.  And  it  also  means 
developing a monetary policy framework. For most open economies that framework should be one of 
inflation  targeting,  with  exchange  rate  flexibility.  As  the  macroeconomic  situation  stabilizes,  as  it  is 
doing  in  Turkey,  the  extent  of  dollarization  –  particularly  asset  and  liability  dollarization  –  can  be 
expected to start declining. 
For a long time it seemed that the extent of asset and liability dollarization was impervious to improved 
economic  performance.  That  was  certainly  the  impression  one  had  looking  at  Latin  American 
developments,  where  for  instance  Bolivia  stabilized  from  hyperinflation  in  the  mid-1980s,  but  the 
banking system continued to be over 80 percent dollarized into the present century. Now however we 
have several examples of countries that have dedollarized successfully on the asset and liability sides, 
including  Israel,  Poland,  Mexico,  Egypt,  and  Turkey.  And  some  signs  of  declining  dollarization  are 
evident in Latin American countries where it seemed that dollarization was impossible to reverse. 
Could  legal  restrictions  on  dollarization  speed  up  the  process  of  dedollarization?  Effectively 
implemented, they could. But that route should not be tried until the preconditions for macroeconomic 
stability are in place. And the restrictions are likely to be difficult to enforce. This may be especially the 
case for unit of account dollarization, where people are likely to find ways to contract in their preferred 
units despite the law. 
Over the longer run, once normal conditions have been restored, it should be possible to permit more 
freedom to individuals and institutions to operate in the financial assets and liabilities that they prefer. 
Just  as  in  the  case  of  price  level  indexation,  when  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  been 
stabilized,  indexed  and  foreign  currency  instruments  can  be  introduced  without  destabilizing  the 
macroeconomy. 
Euroization and EMU 
IV.  
If dollarization, including full dollarization, should be avoided, why join EMU? This is a question which 
Turkey will have to ask itself, sooner one hopes, rather than later. The answer is that joining EMU is a 
more  far-reaching  step  than  implementing  a  currency  board,  or  even  deciding  to  use  a  foreign 
currency. For membership in EMU involves signing up to a host of restrictions on policy, not least on 
fiscal policy, which are designed to prevent the types of crisis that make full dollarization potentially 
problematic. 
Further, membership in the EU facilitates some of the adjustment mechanisms – including totally free 
trade, full capital mobility, and considerable labor mobility5 – that are frequently absent when a country 
dollarizes unilaterally. And EMU members do have a say in determining monetary policy. 
There still remains the fundamental fact that a country that joins EMU gives up the exchange rate as 
an adjustment mechanism. Countries that have more flexible wages and prices will adjust better than 
                                                      
5   The extent of labor mobility will be a major issue when Turkey joins the EU, as it is in the cases of Bulgaria and Romania. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 5
those with less flexibility, and on present performance Turkey is likely to have an advantage in that 
regard. 
To set these problems in perspective, we need to remember that the states of the United States also 
gave up the exchange rate as an adjustment mechanism, and that they manage to adjust to shocks 
quite well. 
But at this point we are discussing the topic for the next Central Bank of Turkey conference – how to 
make the best of the benefits of joining the EU and EMU – and I would like to conclude by thanking 
our  hosts  for  their  invitation  and  for  their  hospitality,  and  by  wishing  Turkey  every  success  as  it 
continues its impressive economic development. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2006
