Kazumasa Iwata: The role of money and monetary policy in Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Fourth 
ECB Central Banking Conference, “The role of money: money and monetary policy in the twenty-first 
century”, Frankfurt am Main, 10 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
The role of money in implementing monetary policy is one of the most controversial issues in Japan. 
Although  the  importance  of  the  role  of  money  in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy 
cannot  be  denied,  there  exists  a  wide  divergence  in  views  on  the  impact  of  changes  in  monetary 
aggregates on economic activity and prices among academics and policy makers. This is particularly 
true when faced of the zero bound on nominal interest rates in combating deflation. 
In evaluating the role of money, I would like to take up three episodes in post-war Japan; namely, 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
the oil price hikes from the mid-1970s to early 1980s, 
the emergence and bursting of the asset price bubble from the mid-1980s to early 1990s, 
the experience of persistent deflation under the zero interest rate and the quantitative easing 
policy covering from the mid-1990s to March 2006. 
First episode: oil price hikes and the money supply-oriented monetary policy 
In  the  first  episode,  the  rapid  acceleration  of  money  supply  growth  amid  expansionary  fiscal  policy 
after  1971  induced  rampant  inflation.  In  spring  of  1973,  Japan moved  to  the  flexible  exchange rate 
system  to  mitigate  the  tradeoff  between  the  free  international  capital  flows  and  the  control  of  the 
money  supply.  Yet,  the  first  oil  price  hike  in  late  1973  exacerbated  the  already  strong  inflationary 
pressures. 
The Bank of Japan succeeded in overcoming the rampant inflation and its stagflationary impact arising 
from the two oil price hikes by monitoring the money supply (M2+CDs) carefully. After the mid-1970s, 
the  money  supply  growth  was  held  down  steadily,  while  the  volatility  of  money  supply  changes 
diminished  significantly.  Corresponding  to  the  gradual  deceleration  of  money  supply  growth,  the 
inflation rate subsided remarkably (Chart 1). 
In  1982,  Milton  Friedman  described  Japan’s  monetary  policy  in  the  1970s  as  “less  monetarist  in 
rhetoric, yet far more monetarist in practice than the policies followed by the United States and Great 
Britain.” 
Despite the praise of Friedman, Japan’s money supply-oriented monetary policy cannot be regarded 
as “monetary targeting policy”. In 1975, the Bank of Japan employed monetary aggregates as one of 
the  important  information  variables,  yet  it  eschewed  attaining  the  reference  value  of  the  monetary 
growth target (Bank of Japan (1975)). 
Instead,  from  1978  the  Bank  of  Japan  began  to  announce  a  quarterly  forecast  for  money  supply 
growth,  yet  the  forecast  was  different  from  the  “intermediate  target  growth  rate”  announced  by  the 
Federal Reserve or the M3 reference target rate by the ECB.1 The forecast was close to the actual 
outcome, yet money supply reaccelerated and diverted from the trend nominal GDP growth after the 
mid-1980s in the wake of financial deregulation and innovation. 
To  conclude,  the  first  episode  reconfirms  the  lesson  that  the  control  of  money  supply  (which  was 
restored under the flexible exchange rate system) played an essential role in containing the rampant 
inflation prevailing in the early 1970s. 
                                                      
1   Neuman  (2003)  justified  the  reference  value  of  M3  growth  rate  by  the  ECB  based  on  the  link  from  core  money  to  core 
inflation. Given the means of the range (4.5%) consisting of the potential growth rate (2-2.5%), normative rate of inflation 
(less than 2%) and the trend decline of velocity ranging from 0.5% to 1%, he detected the true normative rate of inflation to 
be equal to 1.5%. 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 1
Second episode: asset price bubbles and the real money gap 
Let me turn to the second episode. Lax monetary policy after the mid-1980s was evidenced by the 
sustained  deviation  of  actual  real  money  stock  from  the  equilibrium  real  money  stock.  Given  the 
positive “real money gap”, asset price bubbles emerged in the equity and real estate markets while 
general price stability was maintained (Chart 2).2 Once land prices started to move up, the augmented 
collateral value of land triggered the rapid expansion of bank credit through the “financial accelerator 
mechanism” or the “credit cycle” on the imperfect financial market.3 On the other hand, price stability 
was  reinforced  by  the  yen  appreciation  after  the  Plaza  Accord  in  1985  in  spite  of  the  accelerating 
money supply.4
Plentiful  market  liquidity  facilitated  the  active  management  of  risk  portfolios  through  relaxing  the 
liquidity constraint and affected the willingness of investors to take more risks, leading to the reduction 
in risk and term premia. 
From  the second episode,  we  can draw  the  lesson  that  a positive  “real  money  gap” can cause  the 
asset price bubbles through the “financial accelerator mechanism” and the reduction in risk and term 
premia, precisely because price stability is maintained. 
Third episode: deflation and the quantitative easing policy 
Turning to the third episode, after the bubble burst in the early 1990s, the required adjustment to the 
balance  sheets  of  both  the  corporate  and  banking  sectors  tended  to  significantly  lower  the  natural 
interest rate and reduce the potential growth rate from about 5% to about 1% in the mid-1990s.5 It is 
not difficult to gauge the consequence from the Wicksellian process perspective: deflation began to 
prevail as the natural interest rate became significantly lower than the real market interest rate. 
After the “zero interest rate policy” from February 1999 to August 2000, the “quantitative easing policy” 
was initiated in March 2001. The quantitative easing policy set bank reserves as an operating target 
and  reconfirmed  the  commitment  to  continue  the  virtual  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  the  core  CPI 
growth rate stands above zero in a stable manner.6
The  perceived  emergence  of  the  “liquidity  trap”  under  the  zero  short-term  interest  rate  seemed  to 
undermine the effectiveness of the quantity-oriented monetary policy, as the interest rate elasticity of 
demand for money became close to infinity at the zero short-term interest rate.7
Moreover, the linkage between monetary aggregates and income or prices has largely disappeared 
since  1997,  mainly  reflecting  the  increase  in  precautionary  demand  for  money  due  to  financial 
instability and nonperforming assets on the banks’ balance sheets.8
                                                      
2   Gerlach and Svensson (2002) compared the usefulness of the “real money gap” (which can be decomposed into the “GDP 
gap”  and  the  “velocity  gap”)  as  an  information  variable  with  the  GDP  gap.  They  thus  noted  that  the  deviation  of  actual 
monetary growth from the “unconditional” monetary growth target is likely to be a misleading indicator of risks to the price 
stability  because  of  the  tradeoff  between  the  price  stability  and  monetary  growth  target  stability:  in  their  view  the 
Bundesbank  actually  gave  priority  to  price  stability  rather  than  monetary  target  stability  when  the  tradeoff  between  the 
“unconditional” money growth target and the inflation target becomes serious. 
3   Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) developed the “credit cycle” theory, on the assumption of the financial constraint to borrow on the 
imperfect financial market. Regarding the emergence of the asset price bubble, the explanation based on the “Pigou cycle” 
of  boom–bust  of  industrial  fluctuation  is  plausible:  the  expectation  on  the  strong  technological  progress  stimulates  the 
investment boom, although the expectation is not realized ultimately (Pigou (1926), Christiano and Fujiwara (2006)). 
4   Aside from the well-maintained price stability, we can mention factors which might work to delay the timing of tightening of 
monetary policy as follows: the need for international cooperation at the time of the October crash in 1987 with Japan as the 
largest creditor country as well as tax reforms to introduce the consumption tax in 1988-89, in addition to the apprehension 
of  the  consequences  of  the  rapid  yen  appreciation  on  economic  activity.  Ikeo  (2006)  put  emphasis  on  the  absence  of 
corporate  governance  due  to  the  joy  ride  of  “developmentalism”  and  the  eroded  role  of  the  “main  bank”  as  delegated 
monitor in explaining the excessive credit provision by banks. 
5   On the cause of lower potential growth in the 1990s, Prescott and Hayashi (2002) focused on the importance of the negative 
supply shock arising from the shortening of labor hours. 
6   Yet, this did not imply that “nominal income targeting” by using the monetary base as an operating instrument was adopted. 
7   The “vector-error-corrections model” confirmed the breakdown of the long-run cointegrating relation between money supply 
and income or prices, although the cointegration linkage still exists with respect to the total fundraising by moneyholders and 
economic  activity  (Bank  of  Japan  (2003)).  Miyao  (2005)  also  confirmed  the  disappearance  of  the  predictive  content  of 
M2+CDs in the late 1990s by carrying out cointegration analysis. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2006
Yet the unstable demand for money as well as the zero bound on policy interest rate do not imply that 
money has no role to play in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
Citing the experience of Japan’s quantitative easing policy, Governor Mervyn King (2002) questioned 
whether the excess supply of money under the zero interest rate policy would lead to the potency or 
impotency of monetary policy.9
At the panel discussion of the Jackson Hall Conference in 2005, I gave my answer to this question: 
under the quantitative easing policy the extent of the zero interest rate was widened to cover the one-
year maturity in tandem with the increasing amount of reserve target from 5 trillion yen to 30-35 trillion 
yen. 
I  argued  that  ample  provision  of  liquidity  contributed  to  preventing  the  economy  from  falling  into  a 
deflationary  spiral.  Besides,  the  additional  injection  of  liquidity  into  the  market  complemented  the 
commitment about the future path of the policy interest rate, thereby strengthening the “policy duration 
effect”. 
Furthermore, at the satiation level of money holdings, a fiscal policy aimed at achieving a zero primary 
balance by FY2011, combined with the positive rate of increase in the monetary base, contradicts the 
existence of the “deflation trap”, due to the violation of the transversality condition (Iwata (2005)). 
The effect of liquidity injection can be interpreted in two ways. First, I recall that Fisher Black (1995) 
reformulated the role of interest rates as an option, assuming that the equilibrium shadow interest rate, 
or the natural interest rate, can become negative. Yet, individual investors can safely avoid negative 
interest rates by holding currency at zero interest rate. Thus, the observed zero interest rate can be 
regarded as a call option on the equilibrium shadow interest rate. 
Black  argued  that  the  long-term  interest  rate  will  remain  positive  under  the  “liquidity  trap”  in  the 
presence of a zero bound on nominal short rates, because of the more-than-usual term premiums and 
the expectation of future development of the short-term interest rate at zero embedded in the long-
term interest rate. 
The commitment on the duration of the zero interest rate policy suggests that the shadow interest rate 
will be negative, as long as deflation is expected to persist into the future; the longer the duration of 
the zero nominal interest rate, the larger the size of negative interest rate.10
Accordingly, while the additional liquidity injection strengthened the commitment on the duration of the 
zero interest rate policy, it was supposed to result in more currency holdings (Chart 3). 
Secondly, we can add a new insight into the role of money; money provides a liquidity service which is 
not identical to the service provided by government bonds. 
If  we  reformulate  the  utility  function  to  include  not  only  money  but  also  bonds  of  various  maturities 
(money  and  bonds  in  utility  function),  the  zero  short-term  interest  rate  is  not  equivalent  to  the  zero 
marginal utility of money, because there remains the arbitrage relationships with the longer maturity 
bonds  with  positive  interest  rates  (Iwamura,  Shiratsuka  and  Watanabe  (2006)).  As  long  as  the 
marginal  utility  of  money  remains  positive,  the  “satiation  of  money  holdings”  will  not  emerge  even 
though the zero bound on short-term interest rates appears in the economy. 
In this case, the increase of real money balance can affect the market interest rates, pushing down the 
forward rate relative to the future rate. As a result, the spread between the forward and the future rate 
has never closed under the quantitative easing policy (Chart 4, 5).11
9  
                                                                                                                                                                      
8   Actually  Kimura,  Kobayashi,  Muranaga  and  Ugai  (2002)  confirmed  the  possibility  of  the  infinite  interest  rate  elasticity  of 
money demand in the vicinity of the zero short-term interest rate. 
In other words the question is whether the excess supply of money at the zero marginal utility of money or at the satiation 
level  of  money  holdings  will  lead  to  massive  substitution  for  risky  financial  and  real  assets  or  the  accumulation  of  “idle 
money balance”. Notably, critics on the quantitative easing policy pointed to the useless and harmful accumulation of idle 
money balance by the banking sector. Yet it may be noted that the effect on the risk premium or the credit spread through 
ortfolio rebalancing under the zero short-term interest rate is not excluded, though the effect seems to be small (Kimura and 
Small (2006)). 
10   The empirically estimated shadow price reflected the policy duration effect linked to the persistence of deflation under the 
quantitative easing policy; it reached the bottom (the negative value of 6%) in early 2003, when the deflationary expectation 
reached the peak. It became close to zero, when the quantitative easing policy was expected to be abandoned (Ichiue and 
Ueno (2006)). 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 3
From the third episode, we can draw the following two lessons. 
First,  the  large  option-like  value  of  nominal  interest  rates  at  zero,  or  close  to  zero  under  persistent 
deflationary expectations stimulates the incentive to hold currency. At the same time, the injection of 
liquidity complemented and reinforced the policy duration effect of the zero interest rate policy, serving 
to flatten the yield curve (Ichiue and Ueno (2006)). 
Secondly,  in  contrast,  if  money  provides  better  liquidity  services  than  government  bonds,  then  the 
increase  in  real  money  balance  affects  the  market  interest  rates,  independently  of  the  expectation 
channel arising from the commitment on the duration of expansionary monetary policy. 
New framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
In  early  March  2006  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  a  “new  framework  for  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy” when it ended five years of quantitative easing policy. The “understanding of medium- to long-
term price stability” provided “common knowledge” to the market participants.12
Further, the new framework introduced two perspectives on examining economic activity and prices; 
the  first  perspective  is  examining,  as  regards  economic  activity  and  prices  one  to  two  years  in  the 
future, whether the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank follows a path of sustainable growth under 
price stability. In the second perspective, we identify the potential risks beyond the forecast period. For 
instance, excessive investment induced by sustained expansionary monetary policy may give rise to 
undesirable wide fluctuations of economic activity. 
The second perspective is designed to cope with the situation where the probability of the event is low, 
yet  the  damage  to  the  economy  could  be  quite  large  if  it  materializes.  This  second  perspective 
corresponds  to  the  risk  management  approach  to  monetary  policy  of  Greenspan  or  the  “mini-max 
approach to monetary policy management under Knightian uncertainty”. 
We have observed the upward revision of the potential growth rate under the circumstances of low 
real  long-term  interest  rates  on  the  global  market.  Recent  developments  in  monetary  aggregates 
suggest  a  return  to  the  equilibrium  trend,  after  the  sustained  upward  deviation  from  the  equilibrium 
trend under the zero interest rate and the quantitative easing policy. 
Given the lessons from the second episode, we should cautiously watch the developments in money 
and credit, and examine the policy implications of changes in monetary and credit aggregates, as the 
role  of  money  is  more  subtle  and  far-reaching  as  suggested  by  the  option-like  value  of  currency 
holdings and liquidity effect under the quantitative easing policy. 
References 
[1] Black, F. (1995) “Interest Rates as Options,” Journal of Finance, 50. 
[2] Bank of Japan (1975) “On the Importance of Money Supply in Japan” (in Japanese), Bank of Japan 
Research Papers, July 1975. 
[3]  Bank  of  Japan  (2003)  “The  Role  of  the  Money  Stock  in  Conducting  Monetary  Policy,”  Bank  of 
Japan Quarterly Bulletin, May 2003. 
[4] Christiano, L., and Fujiwara, I. (2006) “Bubble, Excess Investment, Shorter Work Hours and the 
Lost Decade” (in Japanese), Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No. 06-J-08. 
[5] Friedman, M. (1985) “Monetarist in Rhetoric and in Practice,” in Monetary Policy in Our Times, eds. 
Ando, A., Eguchi, E., Farmer, R., and Suzuki, Y., MIT Press. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
11   Iwamura, Shiratsuka and Watanabe (2006) argued that this fact is difficult to explain in the absence of differentiated liquidity 
services  provided  by  money  and  government  bonds.  Yet,  there  arises  a  further  question  as  to  why  money  can  provide 
liquidity  services  superior  to  bonds.  The  technological  function  of  money  as  memory  on  record-keeping  on  market 
transactions may be a partial answer (Kocherlakota (2005)). 
12   The public information shared commonly by Board Members and market participants is likely facilitate coordinated action 
toward returning to the normal state of the economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2006
[6]  Gerlach,  S.,  and  Svensson,  E.O.  (2002)  “Money  and  Inflation  in  the  Euro  Area:  A  Case  for 
Monetary Indicators?” CEFP Discussion Paper, No. 3392. 
[7] Hayashi, F., and Prescott, E.C. (2002) “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade,” Review of Economic 
Dynamics, Vol. 5, 1. 
[8]  Ichiue,  H.,  and  Ueno,  Y.  (2006)  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Yield  Curve  at  the  Zero  Interest:  The 
Macro-Finance  Model  of  Interest  Rates  as  Options,”  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper  Series, 
No. 06-E-16. 
[9] Ikeo, K. (2006) “The Joy Ride and Self-protection of Developmentalism: Financial System and the 
Heisei Economy” (in Japanese), NTT Publication. 
[10] Iwamura, M., Shiratsuka, S., and Watanabe, T. (2006) “Massive Money Injection in an Economy 
with Broad Liquidity Services: The Japanese Experience 2001-2006,” paper presented at the Japan 
Project Meeting organized by the NBER conference in Tokyo. 
[11] Iwata, K. (2005) “The Role of Price Stability Anchor in Extricating Japan from Deflation,” speech at 
the Jackson Hall Conference, August 2005. 
[12] Kimura, T., Kobayashi, H., Muranaga, J., and Ugai, H. (2002) “The Effect of Quantitative Monetary 
Easing at Zero Interest Rates,” IMES Discussion Paper Series, No. 2002-E-22. 
[13]  Kimura,  T.,  and  Small,  D.  (2006)  “Quantitative  Monetary  Easing  and  Risk  in  Financial  Asset 
Market,” The B.E. Journals in Macroeconomics, Vol. 16, Issue 1. 
[14]  King,  M.  (2002)  “No,  Money,  No  Inflation:  the  Role  of  Money  in  the  Economy,”  The  Quarterly 
Bulletin of the Bank of England, Summer 2002. 
[15] Kiyotaki, N., and Moore, J. (1997) “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 2. 
[16] Kocherlakota, N. (1998) “Money is Memory,” Journal of Economic Theory, 81. 
 [17]  Miyao,  R.  (2005)  “Use  of  the  Money  Supply  in  the  Conduct  of  Japan’s  Monetary  Policy: 
Reexamining the Time-Series Evidence,” The Japanese Economic Review, Vol. 56, No. 2. 
[18] Neuman, M.J.M. (2003) “The European Central Bank’s First Pillar Reassessed.” 
[19] Pigou, A. (1926) “Industrial Fluctuations.”  
BIS Review 112/2006 
  5
  6 
 BIS Review 112/2006
  7
 BIS Review 112/2006 
 