T T Mboweni: Joining hands in support of development 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Variety Club, Water 
Relief Campaign Launch Banquet, Johannesburg, 14 November 2006.  
Honoured guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
I am pleased and honoured that you have accepted our invitation to this banquet whose purpose is to 
launch the Variety Water Relief Campaign. As has been explained by the organisers, this campaign is 
an initiative to support the Government’s efforts in reaching out to some of the poorest schools in our 
country. It is a worthwhile campaign which I am glad that you have decided to join in. The needs out 
there  are  many  and  thanks  to  your  support,  the  Variety  Club  can  make  some  contribution  towards 
improving the lives of school children or learners. 
Our campaign is the Variety Water Relief Campaign. As we all know, water is absolutely essential for 
the  sustenance  of  human  life  and  maintenance  of  basic  human  dignity  and  should,  therefore,  be  a 
fundamental human right. Also, there could easily be enough water for everyone if the resource was 
shared equitably  while ensuring  the sustainability  of  natural  ecosystems.  Yet,  globally  over  a  billion 
people  do  not  have  access  to  clean  water  supplies  and  over  two  billion  lack  access  to  adequate 
sanitation, the primary cause of water-borne diseases. 
As many of you might know, I grew up in the province of Limpopo in a village just outside the little town 
of Tzaneen. There was no clean water system there. In fact we depended on water drawn from the 
nearest Nwaveti River. This task was more often than not assigned to women and young girls. The 
conditions were not conducive for a healthy life. As a matter of historic fact, in 1969 or thereabout, my 
two siblings and I fell ill from typhoid and spent three to four weeks in hospital. The environment was 
just ripe for disease. Boys would be swimming upstream whilst girls and women would be collecting 
water downstream! I regret to say this evening that many of the people in that area and others still do 
not have access to clean water. My former cabinet colleagues know of my Mrs Mboweni water story 
that I told in 1994. Up to today, Mrs Mboweni is still struggling for clean water. 
Water and the Millennium Development Goals 
2.  
It was against this backdrop that, at the United Nations (UN) Millennium Summit, in September 2000, 
the  leaders  of  the  world  adopted  the  eight  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs).  The  MDGs 
constitute a developmental framework with time-bound goals and targets for measuring progress, and 
have since been embraced by all development institutions across the globe. By 2015, the MDGs seek 
to,  among  a  range  of  other  things,  halve  poverty,  halt  the  spread  of  HIV/AIDS,  provide  universal 
primary education, reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking 
water and the proportion of people who do not have access to basic sanitation. 
The  UN’s  Millennium  Development  Goals  Report  (2006)  shows  significant  progress  towards  the 
attainment of the MDGs. It also shows that we still have a long way to go. Unfortunately, with half of 
developing country populations still lacking basic sanitation, the world is unlikely to reach its target. 
Nevertheless, according to the report, between 1990 and 2004, sanitation coverage in the developing 
world increased from 35 to 50 per cent. This meant that 1, 2 billion people gained access to sanitation 
during this period – 300 million less than the requirement to meet the target. 
The report sees the world as being on track to reach the drinking water target with as many as 81 per 
cent of people in the developing world having access to improved sources of drinking water in 2004. 
This can be compared to 71 per cent in 1990. However, issues such as population growth and the 
urban-rural divide pose challenges going forward. In parts of sub-Saharan Africa, for example, urban 
dwellers are twice as likely to have safe water as those in the countryside. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
South Africa and the MDGs 
3.  
And how does South Africa compare? According to the triennial World Water Development Report 
(2006)  of  the  United  Nations,  19  per  cent  of  the  South  African  population  still  lack  access  to  safe 
water,  and  33  per  cent  lack  basic  sanitation  services.  Public  institutions  also  suffer  from  a  lack  of 
access to safe water and sanitation services: 59 per cent of all schools (over 16 000) and clinics (over 
2 500) lack access to acceptable sanitation facilities, while 27 per cent of all schools (over 7 500) and 
48 per cent of all clinics (over 2 000) lack access to safe water supplies. 
The  report  also  cites  the  occurrence  of  water-related  epidemics  and  diseases  such  as  diarrhoea, 
cholera,  dysentery,  hepatitis  and  bilharzia.  In  2004,  there  were  2  780  cholera  infections  with  35 
fatalities  and  9  503  hepatitis  A  infections  with  49  fatalities.  These  diseases  significantly  affect  the 
economic productivity and social activities of affected households. 
I  should,  however,  hasten  to  add  that  it  is  not  all  doom  and  gloom.  South  Africa  is  one  of  a  few 
countries  that  have  made  formal  legal  commitments  to  acknowledge  a  right  to  water  and,  by  one 
account, is the only country where the right to access to water is embodied in a Constitution. Section 
27(1) (b) of the Constitution states that everyone has the right to have access to sufficient water, while 
Section 27(2) requires the State to take reasonable legislative and other measures, within its available 
resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of this right.  
According  to  South  Africa:  Millennium  Development  Goals  Country  Report  (2005),  the  country 
has already met some of the MDGs. Since 1994 South Africa has reduced the proportion of people 
lacking access to safe water from 40 per cent to 19 per cent. This, however, may be related to the fact 
that in 1994, following the birth of the new dispensation, the government set itself many targets similar 
to those articulated in the Millennium Declaration. The Five Year Strategic Plan (2006/07 – 2010/11) of 
the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  seeks  to  reduce  the  backlog  by  a  further  1,5  million 
people in 2006/07, 1,7 million in 2007/08, and 1,8 million per annum in the subsequent three years to 
2010/11. 
These achievements are definitely laudable. But whilst many of us gathered here tonight take clean, 
safe drinking water for granted and even have a choice between bottled and tap water, there is a child 
out there who has to wait beyond 2011 to have access to a functioning basic water supply facility. But 
the children should not wait. One child having to wait one more day is one child too many, and one 
day too long. 
The role of the South African Reserve Bank 
4.  
And what is the role of the South African Reserve Bank towards the attainment of the MDGs? The 
attainment  of  the  MDGs  requires  high  and  sustainable  rates  of  economic  growth.  The  International 
Monetary  Fund  projects  real  GDP  growth  rates  of  4,  8  per  cent  and  5,  9  per  cent  for  sub-Saharan 
Africa in 2006 and 2007, respectively. However, to attain the poverty MDG to halve the population of 
people living on less than US$1 a day, the subcontinent will need to accelerate annual GDP growth to 
at least 7 per cent.  
The primary mandate of the South African Reserve Bank is the achievement and maintenance of price 
stability. Indeed, we are of the firm view that the best contribution that the Bank (through monetary 
policy)  can  make  towards  the  attainment  of  high  and  sustainable  rates  of  economic  growth  and 
employment  creation  is  keeping  inflation  at  low  levels  thus  contributing  to  the  achievement  and 
maintenance  of  overall  macroeconomic  stability.  We  target  the  inflation  rate  and  not  any  other 
economic variable and currently our key task is to maintain CPIX inflation – that is headline inflation 
less mortgage interest costs – within a range of between 6 to 3 per cent. Since September 2003, CPIX 
inflation has been contained within this range and has averaged 4, 0 per cent for the past two years.  
Going  forward,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  remains  resolute  in  the  implementation  of  our 
mandate and we are keeping a close eye on inflation developments. If, in the view of the Monetary 
Policy Committee, the inflation target is being threatened by inflationary pressures, then the MPC will 
have  the  courage  of  its  conviction  to  do  the  correct  thing  even  as  we  enter  the  festive  period.  It  is 
worth stating here that there is no rule that we are aware of which prohibits changes to the monetary 
policy stance just before Christmas. As the case might be, the MPC will discharge its responsibilities in 
the  event  that  inflationary  pressures  persist.  Once  again  our  message  is  that  we  should  all  try  to 
tighten our belts no matter how wide or narrow our waistlines might be. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
Conclusion 
5.  
Let  me  conclude  by  posing  a  rhetorical  question:  In  the  face  of  these  enormous  socio-economic 
challenges, should the private sector stay in its comfort zone and focus only on growing shareholder 
value?  Most  certainly  not.  Many  South  African  companies  are  already  involved  in  large  community 
social investment programmes. These could be expanded and become more focussed, as some do, 
on facing up to the challenge of improving the lives of ordinary people. 
According to a recent study1 for every US$1 invested in water supply and sanitation, the direct and 
indirect  benefits  range  from  US$1  to  US$34,  depending  on  the  region  and  level  of  intervention. 
Indeed, investments targeting the poor have the highest marginal benefit. 
Investing in water, we would suggest, is therefore good business. Your support today will go a long 
way towards contributing to meeting the MDGs, particularly the reduction of poverty. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                      
1   Making Water a Part of Economic Development – The Economic Benefits of Improved Water Management and Services: A 
report commissioned by the Governments of Norway and Sweden as input to the Commission on Sustainable Development 
(CSD) and its 2004-2005 focus on water, sanitation and related issues. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 3
