Lucas Papademos: The science of monetary policy – past advances and 
future challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference on “Monetary Policy over 50 years” marking the 50th anniversary of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 21 September 2007. 
 Introduction  
I. 
The  subject  of  this  session  requires  addressing  a  number  of  core  issues  pertaining  to  the 
effective conduct and successful performance of monetary policy. It is a subject not only of 
academic interest but also with important policy implications. The choice of this topic is very 
appropriate  for  a  conference  organised  to  mark  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  a  great  institution,  which  has  been  very  successful  and  influential  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy aimed at preserving price stability. I am delighted to participate in 
this celebration and thank you for the invitation. 
So, will monetary policy become more of a science? The way the question has been posed 
may  implicitly  reflect  two  presumptions,  namely  that,  first,  monetary  policy  does  not  rely 
sufficiently on scientific principles and methods at present, and, second, that there is some 
doubt or scepticism on whether monetary policy will acquire more elements of a science in 
the  future  which  would  be  desirable.  I  would  not  agree  with  such  implicit  presumptions, 
although  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  will  always  require 
judgement  given  our  imperfect  knowledge  and  the  inevitable  uncertainty  about  the 
functioning of the economy and the impact of monetary policy actions. 
Frederic  Mishkin  provided  us  with  an  excellent  and  comprehensive  review  of  the  progress 
made  by  monetary  policy  in  becoming  more  of  a  science  over  the  past  fifty  years  and  an 
assessment  of  the  limitations  to  the  science  of  monetary  policy.  He  also  highlighted  two 
recent episodes in the United States that demonstrated how “judgement” was informed by 
“science” and resulted in appropriate monetary policy decisions in a changing and uncertain 
economic environment; and he discussed some of the gaps in the science of monetary policy 
that are likely to be filled in the future. I broadly agree with his review of the advances made 
in recent decades towards making monetary policy more of a science. These advances have 
allowed  monetary  policy  to  be  based  on  a  set  of  “scientific  principles  and  to  rely  more  on 
concrete  econometric  models  –  of  increasing  sophistication  and  policy  relevance  –  when 
making decisions on the appropriate monetary policy stance. His review and assessment of 
scientific principles and econometric models that can respectively, guide and provide a useful 
basis  for  decision-making,  reflect  his  knowledge  and  contribution  as  an  academic  and  his 
experience  as  a  central  banker.  And  I  fully  share  the  view  about  the  need  to  continue 
pursuing  research  and  analysis  that  can  provide  a  stronger  scientific  basis  for  monetary 
policy, while, of course, recognising that monetary policy-making will never be transformed 
into a routine process of mechanical application of principles and rules. Nevertheless, there 
are several issues I would like to elaborate further pertaining to (i) the role and importance of 
the  core  scientific  principles  that  should  guide  monetary  policy;  (ii)  the  current  state  and 
limitations of the scientific aspects of monetary policy-making; and (iii) the orientation of our 
future efforts towards enhancing the science and effectiveness of monetary policy. 
The science of monetary policy: the role and significance of core principles 
II.  
In order to assess whether and to which degree monetary policy can be characterised as a 
science  or  has  features  of  a  science,  it  is  useful  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  two  concepts 
“science” and “policy” are rather distinct and to explain what precisely we mean when we ask 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 1
whether monetary policy will become more of a science. After all, the science of a specific 
subject is the systematic and organised body of knowledge on that subject, knowledge which 
is founded on objective principles involving the observation of, and experiment with, certain 
phenomena. The subject we have in mind is not monetary economics, but monetary policy, 
that is a course of action adopted by an authority to achieve certain objectives. All this may 
sound  a  bit  too  philosophical  or  abstract,  but  we  need  some  precision  and  a  systematic 
approach  to  address  the  issue  in  a  meaningful  way.  To  this  end,  it  is  necessary  to  define 
monetary policy in greater detail. 
In trying to identify the “systematic knowledge” and “core principles” of monetary policy, and 
how  these  in  turn  derive  from  theoretical  propositions  and  are  supported  by  the  empirical 
evidence,  I  find  it  useful  to  think  of  monetary  policy  as  comprising  three  essential 
components: 
• 
• 
the institutional setting 
the  policy  framework,  which  includes  the  policy  objective  and  the  analytical 
foundations – theoretical and empirical – linking objectives and instruments 
the communication and the actual conduct of policy. 
• 
Monetary policy has become more of a science over the past fifty years because all its main 
components  are  now  based  on  core  principles  derived  from  theoretical  propositions  or 
arguments that have been scrutinised and tested, to different degrees, on the basis of the 
available  empirical  evidence,  that  is  by  observing  reality:  the  practice  and  performance  of 
monetary policy. 
Let me elaborate on the nine principles presented by Mishkin also in relation to the ECB’s 
monetary  policy  framework.  The  first  three  principles  that  (i)  inflation  is  fundamentally  a 
monetary  phenomenon,  (ii)  that  price  stability  has  important  welfare  benefits,  including  its 
contribution to sustained growth and reduced output volatility, and (iii) that there is no long-
term trade-off between unemployment and inflation are widely accepted and clearly underpin 
and  are  reflected  in  the  ECB’s  mandate  and  primary  policy  objective.  The  first  and  third 
principles  are  also 
they  are 
overwhelmingly  supported  by  the  empirical  evidence.  These  first  three  principles  and  the 
eighth principle about the importance of central bank commitment to a nominal anchor imply 
that  price  stability  (or  an  inflation  target)  should  be  the  primary,  overriding  objective  of 
monetary  policy.  This  can  be  considered  as  a  separate  or  derived  principle,  which  is 
integrated into the mandate of the ECB.  
The  fourth  principle  concerning  the  crucial  role  of  expectations  in  the  determination  of 
inflation dynamics and in the transmission of monetary policy is also universally recognised 
and constitutes one of the key advances in the analytical foundations of monetary policy. The 
role  of  inflation  expectations  as  a  main  channel  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism motivates the focus placed by central banks on the analysis and use of several 
indicators of inflation expectations and explains the importance attached in the anchoring of 
expectations  to  price  stability  also  in  the  ECB’s  communication  policy.  This  is  an  area, 
however,  where  more  progress  is  necessary,  as  I  will  discuss  later  on,  in  order  to  better 
measure, model and favourably influence the inflation expectations of the public at large.  
Two other principles, (i) the importance of central bank independence in order to improve the 
effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  monetary  policy  and  (ii)  the  need  to  ensure  consistent 
implementation of monetary policy over time, are reflected in the institutional set-up of most 
central banks, including the ECB. Political authorities, however, occasionally seem to ignore 
or forget the significance of central bank independence, which they themselves enshrined in 
the EU Treaty, precisely on the basis of past experience and the worldwide evidence which 
clearly demonstrate its contribution to effective decision-making that preserves price stability 
and helps minimise output volatility. Central bank independence is also crucial for ensuring 
that another principle – the commitment to a strong nominal anchor – is credible and thus 
the  ECB’s  analytical 
framework  and 
incorporated 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2007
effective  in  ensuring  price  stability.  For  the  ECB,  the  unambiguous  commitment  to  price 
stability  is  reflected  in  the  quantification  of  its  policy  objective  and  its  communication,  but 
most importantly in its determination and consistency in pursuing price stability (the nominal 
anchor). 
So far, I have fully agreed with the role and significance of seven, out of the nine, principles 
proposed by Frederic for providing the scientific underpinning of monetary policy. There are 
two principles, however, that I do not consider as having been fully and widely accepted and 
reflected in the practice of monetary policy: the principle concerning the role and usefulness 
of monetary policy rules and the one pertaining to the role of financial frictions in business 
cycles.  These  two  principles  do  not  belong,  at  least  not  yet,  to  the  core  propositions 
underlying the science of central banking not because their content is not important but for 
other reasons. In the case of the policy rules, the simple reason is that they are not used – by 
most central banks – in the actual conduct of monetary policy, although they may be used for 
analytical  purposes  and  as  benchmarks  for  comparison  of  the  policies  implemented  in 
practice. There are several reasons why such rules are not used in the practice of monetary 
policy.  One  such  reason,  which  I will  highlight  later  on,  is  related  to  the  imperfect  inflation 
available for estimating reliably key variables included in these rules, in real time.  
In the case of the role of financial frictions – which I consider to be especially important – I 
am somewhat sceptical of its inclusion in the core principles at this stage because we have 
not yet reached the state of knowledge to incorporate financial frictions fully in the monetary 
policy framework in a generally acceptable manner. This principle is likely to be included in 
the core principles in the future, but only after further analysis and empirical support for its 
validity and robustness. 
There is, however, a notable omission in the list of the key principles to guide the thinking at 
central  banks  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy:  the  role  of  money,  or  more  precisely 
monetary and credit aggregates, in the monetary policy transmission mechanism and in the 
assessment  of  the  medium  and  long-term  risks  to  price  stability  as  well  as  to  financial 
stability. This principle provides one of the foundations in the ECB’s analytical framework. I 
recognise  that  in  recent  years  its  role  and  significance  has  been  deemphasised  by  some 
economists and at some central banks, but as I have argued before, the fundamental role of 
money in the conduct of monetary policy should not be ignored, but rather emphasised and 
further explored. And this should be part of the research agenda that will help us to further 
advance the science of monetary policy. 
Knowledge gaps and challenges in the science of monetary policy 
III.  
Despite the progress made over the past decades, there are still important knowledge gaps 
in  our  understanding  and  modelling  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism;  and 
there are also a number of analytical and statistical (measurement) challenges that must be 
addressed in order to further advance the science of monetary policy. I had prepared a list of 
such gaps and challenges before reading Frederic Mishkin’s paper. A comparison with his 
list of further likely advances in the science of monetary policy showed a very large overlap 
both with regard to the areas for further research and the reasons given to justify the need 
for, or likelihood of, further progress. What I would like to do is to highlight a number of the 
commonly identified knowledge gaps and analytical issues, define priorities and raise some 
additional issues that deserve further analysis. 
The role of money, credit and the financial system  
III. 1. 
In order to enhance our analysis and assessment of the impact of monetary policy on price 
developments,  as  well  as  on  output  fluctuations  and  asset  price  dynamics,  in  a  modern 
economy  with  a  sophisticated  financial  sector,  priority  must  be  given  to  the  further 
development  of  structural  models  that  incorporate  a  banking  sector,  other  financial 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 3
intermediaries and a richer specification of the structure and functioning of financial markets. 
The integration of the financial system, and of the banking sector in particular, in a state-of-
the-art dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model that is empirically estimated, 
would  provide  a  theoretically  consistent  framework  –  based  on  sound  microfoundations  – 
that  would  allow  an  analysis  of  the  role  of  money  and  credit  –  of  liquidity  and  financing 
conditions  –  in  the  transmission  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  economy.  Such 
models have been or are being developed at the ECB, other central banks and universities, 
but there is scope for further extensions and improvements. 
Although  the  task  is  challenging  because  of  the  complexities  involved  in  incorporating  a 
realistic specification of the financial sector – with financial market frictions (or imperfections) 
–  into  such  models,  it  is  important  from  a  policy  point  of  view  that  we  deepen  our 
understanding of this transmission channel of monetary policy and its implications for price 
and output dynamics. Moreover, as Bernanke, Mishkin, Gertler and others have shown, and 
as recent experience has vividly demonstrated, information asymmetries and other financial 
market  imperfections  play  a  crucial  role  in  determining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system 
and business cycle fluctuations. 
The analysis of the role of money and credit (i) in the transmission of the effects of monetary 
policy and (ii) as information variables that can provide useful signals for the assessment of 
risks to price stability and financial stability need not be confined to the further development 
of DSGE models. These models have great merits but also limitations. They may not be able 
to  capture  (adequately  or  realistically)  important  features  of  markets  such  as  financial 
innovations  and  other  structural  changes  as  well  as  the  behaviour  of  different  groups  of 
agents characterised by fundamental differences in preferences, asymmetric information and 
alternative approaches to forming expectations. For example, in recent years, the supply of 
credit by banks has been affected by financial innovations – the securitisation of bank assets 
and  the  development  of  the  credit  risk  transfer  market  –  which  resulted  in  the  so-called 
“originate  and  distribute”  business  model  pursued  by  banks.  And  we  have  all  witnessed 
recently some of the consequences of this bank business model and certain other features of 
financial markets. Moreover, capital requirements, the processes of financial integration and 
consolidation (both within Europe and more generally on the global level) and the increasing 
role of non-bank financial institutions have also been influencing the expansion of credit and 
the creation of (monetary) liquidity. Consequently, a better understanding and modelling of 
these innovations and processes, as well as of the determinants of asset prices and of the 
sectoral demand for money and credit, is necessary in order to improve both our economic 
and monetary analysis and our assessment of the likely impact of a change in the monetary 
policy  stance  on  financial  market  conditions  and  price  developments.  To  this  end,  various 
avenues  of  analytical  work  are  being  pursued  at  the  ECB,  and  more  generally  at  the 
Eurosystem  central  banks,  which  draw  on  a  wide  range  of  complementary  models  and 
analytical tools and involve the development of new such models and tools.  
The broader aim of this research on the role of money, credit and the financial system in the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism  is  to  enhance  the  scientific  basis  –  to  strengthen  the 
analytical framework – of our policy deliberations. And I am confident that the outcome of this 
research  will  provide  further  theoretical  and  empirical support  to  two  of  the  core  principles 
that  should  guide  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy:  (i)  the  principle  I  added  on  “the  role  of 
money  and  credit  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and  the  assessment  of 
medium to longer term risks to price stability” and (ii) a generalisation of the principle on “the 
role of financial frictions for the business cycle” and, I would add, “for financial stability”.  
Events in recent weeks have amply manifested the importance of financial stability for the 
functioning  of  the  economy.  What  is  less  manifestly  obvious  is  the  precise  relationship 
between financial stability considerations and monetary policy. Two aspects require, in my 
view, further analysis and research. First, our monitoring and assessment of financial stability 
so far mainly relies on qualitative evaluations and judgements. Further progress is necessary 
towards methods to quantify risks and vulnerabilities identified in the various segments of the 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2007
financial sector and to relate them, in a theoretically sound and empirically robust manner, to 
our overall assessment of financial stability. Second, and even more challenging, we need to 
understand  in  more  detailed  and  verifiable  manner  the  precise  relationship  between  the 
causes and implications of financial instability and monetary policy.  
Expectations  
III.2.  
Another  priority  in  our  research  agenda  is  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  way 
expectations are formed by different agents in the economy, and how they can be managed 
successfully  so  as  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Inflation  expectations 
play  a  crucial  role  in  determining  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  the  economy  and  in 
shaping  the  dynamic  response  of  prices  and  output  to  shocks.  Forecasts  of  future  price 
developments and policy simulations based on macroeconometric models depend critically 
on the modelling of expectations. 
By now it is widely accepted that expectations should, by and large, be formed “rationally” in 
the sense that they should take into account all relevant available information concerning the 
structure  and  functioning  of  the  economy  and  the  factors  and  policies  –  notably  monetary 
policy – that may affect future price developments. This broad formulation about the nature 
and  formation  of  expectations  is  perfectly  reasonable,  appropriate  and  superior  to  any 
mechanical  backward-looking  specification  of  expectations  formation.  In  practice, however, 
there  are  crucial  issues  that  must  be  addressed  on  how  exactly  “all  available  relevant 
information concerning the economy’s structure and functioning” is obtained and processed 
by  economic  agents.  Often  the  hypothesis  of  “rational  expectations”  in  incorporated  in 
theoretical and econometric models by making simplifying and rather unrealistic assumptions 
about  the  available  information  to  agents  on  the  basis  of  which  they  can  make  “optimal 
forecasts”  about  the  future.  And  these  assumptions,  which  essentially  relate  to  the  nature 
and  modalities  of  the  associated  learning  and  information  extracting  processes  and  the 
homogeneity of agents, play a crucial role in determining the dynamics of the economy and 
the magnitude of, and time lags in, the effects of a change in the monetary policy stance on 
the price level an output over time. 
An  important  implication  of  the  central  role  of  expectations  in  the  monetary  policy 
transmission process and of the “rationality” of expectations – in a broad sense – is that the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  depends  on  the  expectations  of  the  markets  and  of  the 
public about future policy actions. And this is the fundamental reason why the adoption and 
public announcement of a quantitative definition of price stability (or an operational inflation 
objective),  the  credible  commitment  of  the  central  bank  to  this  objective,  and  the  effective 
communication  of  its  policy  decisions  aimed  at  achieving  this  goal  are  crucial  for  the 
anchoring of inflation expectations to price stability. 
Our own experience and the track record of the ECB since 1999 have been very positive in 
this respect: despite the fact that the ECB, as a newly created central bank, did not have a 
previous track record of successful policy-making, financial markets immediately understood 
the ECB’s commitment to price stability as credible and factored it in their expectations. Ever 
since  1999,  all  financial  market  indicators  and  private  sector  forecasts  suggest  that 
expectations  of  future  inflation  have  remained  remarkably  well  anchored  to  the  ECB’s 
definition of price stability. For example, expectations derived from the prices of nominal and 
indexed-linked bonds provide compelling evidence that long-term inflation expectations are 
well anchored in the euro area.  
However, while market expectations appear to be “rational” in that they are in line with the 
ECB’s  commitment  and  demonstrated  ability  to  preserve  price  stability,  the  process  of 
expectation formation among the general public appears to be rather more complex. Survey 
evidence suggests that in a number of euro area countries, a portion of the general public 
perceives inflation to deviate sometimes significantly from actual inflation or expects inflation 
to  remain  at  elevated  levels  which  bear  little  resemblance  to  actually  recorded  inflation  or 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 5
market  expectations  of  future  inflation.  More  analysis  is  needed  to  understand  this 
discrepancy – and some promising work has already been done at the ECB in this respect. 
More  generally,  research  aiming  at 
theories  of 
expectations  formation  into  our  models  is  of  particular  relevance.  This  will  require  the 
introduction  and  testing  of  hypotheses  of  how  economic  agents  learn  about  the  evolving 
structure and functioning of the economy it and may lead to a relaxation of the assumption of 
the representative agent which is characteristic of most of our models, including the dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models,  and  thus  to  allow  for  the  heterogeneity  of 
agents and expectations.  
incorporating  empirically  plausible 
 Some modelling and methodological challenges 
III.3.  
This  brings  me  to  some  key  modelling  and  methodological  challenges  that  deserve  more 
attention in order to enhance the analytical tools for monetary policy:  
• 
first, how to develop models that overcome the restrictions that are inherent in the 
stylised assumption of the representative agent; 
second, how to cope with statistical uncertainty and data revisions, and their impact, 
in particular, on our estimates of important economic concepts that are relevant for 
policy  formulation  but  which  are  not  directly  observable,  like  the  potential  output 
growth  and  the  equilibrium  values  of  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  real  interest 
rate; and,  
third, how to deal with possible non-linearities in economic relationships.  
• 
Today’s  dynamic  macroeconomic  (DSGE)  models,  with  their  sound  microfoundations  and 
ability to ensure internal consistency and invariance of the reduced form parameters to policy 
changes,  have  many  merits,  as  I  said.  But  also  limitations,  and  one  of  them  is  that  they 
model aggregate economic variables by using one “representative” optimising agent whose 
choices  coincide  with  the  aggregate  choices  of  the  underlying  group  of  heterogeneous 
individuals. Clearly, this assumption is made for analytical convenience. Yet, the conclusions 
drawn from these models may have far-reaching implications. In real economies, agents are 
organised into groups and firms, each pursuing their own economic interest. These distinct 
individual activities are more or less coordinated and some kind of order emerges – this is 
what  Adam  Smith  called  the  “invisible  hand”.  However,  the  pursuit  of  individual  optimising 
behaviour  does  not  necessarily  imply,  a  priori,  optimal  outcomes  at  an  aggregate  level. 
Indeed, many interactions in the economy that require coordination among economic agents 
may result in suboptimal aggregate outcomes, even if all agents pursue the same interests. 
In  addition 
involving  representative  agents  appear 
particularly ill-suited to address distributional issues, for example those involving employed 
and unemployed workers. Developing richer multiple-agent models is unquestionably difficult 
but should nevertheless be part of longer-term research agenda, as the potential benefits for 
policy-making are significant. 
We live – and have to make decisions – in a world of pervasive uncertainty. However, while 
the  academic  profession  has  made  tremendous  progress  in  analysing  risk  in  well-defined 
stochastic  economies,  the  “Knightian”  uncertainty  that  confronts  central  bankers  is  of  an 
altogether different dimension. Among the various forms of uncertainty that central bankers 
face, the uncertainty about how the policy instrument affects inflation and economic activity – 
the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  –  and  the  uncertainty  about  the  (statistical) 
measurement of the current state of the economy – the data – appear to weigh particularly 
heavily. Central bankers need to have a good understanding of the timing and the ultimate 
effects of changes in the monetary policy instruments on inflation and economic activity. For 
this purpose, monetary policy-making requires more than just the qualitative information that 
theory provides. They must have quantitative information about magnitudes and lags, even if 
that  information  is  imperfect.  At  the  same  time,  caution  and  circumspection  in  the  face  of 
failures,  models 
to  coordination 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2007
such model and data uncertainty is clearly warranted. Model uncertainty suggests that further 
analysis  of  the  robustness  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  actions  across  a  variety  of 
models would be valuable.  
Recent research has shown that central banks should moderate the responsiveness of their 
policy  decisions  to  real  activity  when  underlying  data  are  known  to  be  subject  to 
measurement  error.  After  all,  a  strong  policy  response  to  mismeasured  data  will  induce 
unnecessary fluctuations in the economy. In view of this, the weight given to the individual 
information variables should depend on how precisely those variables are measured. This is 
especially applicable to variables that are not directly observable, but which are relevant for 
policy formulation, such as the potential output growth and the equilibrium values of the real 
unemployment rate and the real interest rate. It would therefore be not advisable for central 
banks  to  heavily  rely  in  their  policy  decisions  –  and  in  the respective  communication  –  on 
models  or  policy  rules  that  place  an  inordinate  weight  on  such  unobservable  parameters, 
which  are  difficult  to  measure  in  real  time,  and  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty  of  the 
underlying data. 
My  final  remark  on  model  and  methodological  challenges  concerns  the  fact  that  most 
macroeconomic models today are solved and estimated in linear form, essentially relying on 
the linear stochastic difference approach used in macroeconomics since the 1950s. Again, 
this feature has merits and limitations: linear modelling techniques are powerful and easy to 
handle and can be scaled to larger and more complete models. But there are a number of 
essential policy questions that simply cannot be addressed within linear frameworks. 
One  prominent  question  relates  to  the  emergence  of  time-varying  risk  premia  that  are 
apparently influencing the behaviour of the long-end of the yield curve. Research carried out 
at the ECB has shown that such time-variation appears to be important for understanding the 
behaviour  of  long  yields  and  that  these  premia  are  systematically  related  to  economic 
fundamentals. Modelling them, however, requires nonlinear economic frameworks. Similarly, 
we might possibly need nonlinear techniques to answer the question how policy should deal 
with  really  large  shocks.  Linear  models  may  give  sufficiently  accurate  answers  for  dealing 
with small to medium-sized shocks, but if economic relationships are essentially non-linear, 
then such models may make considerable prediction errors in a situation where large shocks 
carry the economy far away from a state characterised by “average behaviour”. For all these 
reasons,  it  seems  important  from  a  policy  perspective  to  develop  and  employ  non-linear 
modelling and estimation techniques. 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
To sum up, over the past decades, tremendous progress has been made towards making 
monetary  policy  more  of  a  science.  Undoubtedly,  this  has  contributed  to  enhancing  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. At the same time, there is still room – and indeed a need – 
to further advance the scientific elements of monetary policy-making by addressing a number 
of  conceptual,  methodological  and  empirical  challenges.  Some  of  these  challenges  are  a 
consequence  of  the  nature  of  the  economic  system  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  its 
evolution over time. The economic environment is continuously changing and at fast pace as 
a  result  of  the  actions  of  economic  agents.  Technological  advances,  financial  innovations, 
the  process  of  globalisation,  even  changing  preferences,  are  influencing  the  structure  and 
functioning of  markets  and  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  Monetary  policy-
makers have to take decisions against the background of the evolving economic environment 
and then face a host of uncertainties. This makes our task challenging – but admittedly also 
more  exciting.  Moreover,  these  observations  have  two  important  implications  for  monetary 
policy. First, the ability to combine “science and art” in a well-structured, balanced, prudent 
and  effective  way  will  always  remain  a  key  feature  of  the  successful  performance  of 
monetary  policy.  Second,  in  an  environment  of  continuous  change  and  considerable 
uncertainty,  it  is  essential  that  central  banks  provide  an  anchor  of  stability  and  certainty: 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 7
through their commitment to and delivery of price stability. This conclusion is directly linked to 
the  purpose  of  this  conference,  to  celebrate  the  Bundesbank’s  50-year-long  unwavering 
dedication to its task of “safeguarding the currency” (“die Wähung zu sichern”) as it is stated 
in the Bundesbank Act. I am confident that 50 years from now, on the occasion of the 100th 
anniversary  of the Bundesbank, a conference can be again be organised to celebrate this 
great achievement: “Stable money for Germany and Europe”.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 103/2007
