Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – an investment friendly destination  
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Pakistan Investment 
Conference organised by Euromoney, Islamabad, 22 February 2007. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Pakistan  has  undergone  significant  economic  and  political  transformation.  Sound  macroeconomic 
management,  backed  by  market  oriented  policies  and  a  conducive  incentive  regime,  together  with 
political stability and effective regulatory framework have enabled Pakistan to emerge as a viable and 
investment friendly destination.  
Today, I propose to (i) review recent developments and their implications on macroeconomic stability, 
which has been the subject of much debate with the rising fiscal and current account imbalances; (ii) 
share the story of Pakistan’s economic turnaround and transformation and the factors driving it – this 
turnaround  has  helped  the  country  achieve  a  higher  sustainable  economic  growth  that  has  raised 
income levels while making some inroads into poverty reduction and employment generation; and (iii) 
finally offer a perspective on what lends confidence in sustainability of high economic growth, while 
underscoring that this is possible only if key challenges are effectively addressed to unleash the full 
economic potential of the country that offers lucrative opportunities for foreign investment.  
Macroeconomic management  
II.  
Macroeconomic stability is here to stay. After a period of low fiscal deficits which scaled down to its 
lowest level (2.4 percent of GDP) in FY04 and emergence of a surplus on external current account, of 
4.9 percent of GDP, in FY03 Pakistan opted to concentrate on stimulating broad based growth and 
dealing  with  its  increasing  infrastructure  and  social  constraints  that,  unless  dealt  with  immediately, 
threatened growth prospects. To achieve these goals, Pakistan has had to offer fiscal and monetary 
stimulus over FY02-FY04, which did complicate macroeconomic management. Indeed, a widening of 
macroeconomic  imbalances  relative  to  the  FY04  period  was  inevitable  as  the  country  had  to  break 
away from the past to put the economy on a more robust and sustainable path.  
To set the economy on this course, the Government launched an all time high and aggressive public 
investment program of $7.3 billion (allowing it to grow by 32.2% in real terms) that constituted 28% of 
total expenditures. A significant part of these development expenditures was devoted to completing 
ongoing and launching new development initiatives for physical and social infrastructure. At the same 
time, liberal and diversified availability of private sector credit stimulated growth across the board in a 
number  of  sectors.  The  growing  investment  and  consumption  demands  and  requirements  have 
widened  trade  deficit  as  imports  grew  by  over  35%  in  the  preceding  two  years  (FY05-06).  While 
macroeconomic imbalances enhanced demand pressures, they have stimulated economic growth to 
7.4% on average over FY05-07.  
Macroeconomic stability was managed by a combination of policies and availability of foreign inflows 
supported by enhanced investor confidence and presence of global liquidity. Firstly, the central bank 
has  adopted  a  hawkish  monetary  stance  for  almost  two  years  which  has  now  paid  dividends  as 
inflationary pressures emerging from rising aggregate demand have been mitigated – CPI and core 
inflation  on  a  year-on-year  basis  is  down  from  11.1%  and  7.8%  in  FY05  to  6.6%  and  5.3%, 
respectively  effective  January  2007  –  an  all  time  low  relative  to  June  2004.  Secondly,  higher 
remittances inflows (rising from $1.1 billion in FY01 to $5.5 billion in FY07) have helped finance, on an 
average, 98% of trade deficit. Thirdly, the privatization program was pursued effectively along with a 
drive  to  attract  foreign  direct  investment  –  both  of  which  mobilized  cumulatively  $10.0  billion  and 
helped finance 75% of the country’s external current account deficit during FY05-FY07. Fourthly, the 
reduction  in  debt/GDP  ratio  in  line  with  the  dictates  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Act  has  helped 
enhance  the  sustainability  of  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Finally,  due  to  strong  foreign  inflows 
coupled  with  effective  reserve  management  Pakistan  has,  over  6  years,  built  up  its  SBP  reserves, 
which  are  set  to  reach  over  $14  billion  by  end  June  2007  thereby  offering  more  than  6  months  of 
import coverage. Positive economic developments over the past few years have facilitated Pakistan’s 
return to international credit markets and all the sovereign issues have been over subscribed with tight 
spreads – enabling establishment of a yield curve in a remarkably short time.  
BIS Review 22/2007 
 1
Together, these developments have jolted up the investment/GDP levels, which are expected to grow 
to 21% in FY07, after stagnating at the level of 17% over the previous five years. These achievements 
appear more significant if viewed in context of Pakistan’s proven economic exogenous shocks such as 
the rising international oil prices which accounted for 1.9% of GDP (and 20% of the trade deficit), and 
expenditure demands for earthquake related relief and rehabilitation efforts that accounted for another 
0.8% GDP. Continued economic vigilance on emerging trends is however critical to strike a balance 
between growth and macroeconomic sustainability.  
Economic turnaround and transformation 
III.  
High economic growth is accompanied by structural changes. Compared to the rest of Emerging 
Asia,  recent  economic  growth  track  record  puts  Pakistan’s  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  top  half  of  the 
region’s  fast-growing  economies.  Underlying  this  has  been  a  significant,  albeit  slow,  structural 
transformation. The main features of this transformation have been: 
(i) 
The emergence of a vibrant and buoyant services sector, which grew by 8.8% in FY2006 
and now accounts for 52.3% of GDP – this has been led by developments in the finance & 
insurance, wholesale & retail trade, transport, storage and communication sub-sectors. 
Growth  in  large  scale  manufacturing  sector  (over  14%  on  average  over  past  three  years 
compared  to  average  growth  of  3.5%  in  the  1990’s)  led  by  textile  sector,  which  benefited 
from opportunities emerging from post MFA regime, 36.8% growth in automobiles, 45.5% in 
electrical goods, 19.6% in cement, and 32.1% in fertilizer etc. in the last three years. Besides 
new capacity additions, this growth was stimulated by rising real consumption expenditure 
and  construction  demand.  Capacity  enhancement  and  utilization  is  at  an  all  time  peak. 
Industrial growth is accompanied by a degree of industrial diversification and emergence of 
new entrepreneurial class, though more effort is warranted to move Pakistani industry away 
from its traditional dependence on resource-based and low technology based processes. 
Having achieved self-sufficiency in major crops well in 1980’s, Pakistan’s agriculture sector 
has benefited from improvements in pricing regime for major crops, deregulation of inputs 
and  trade  liberalization.  Excluding  crop  failures  due  to  bad  weather,  agriculture  grew  on 
average in last 3 years by over 3.8%. According to Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
Pakistan is ranked 4th in cotton, 5th in sugar, 9th in wheat and 12th in rice production in the 
world. In addition, Pakistan is ranked among the top ten producers in several of the minor 
crops,  which  are  mostly  fruits  and  vegetables.  The  remaining  half  of  the  agriculture  value 
addition is contributed by non-crop sector mainly livestock, which has helped Pakistan rank 
as the 5th largest producer of milk. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Factors contributing to economic turnaround 
IV. 
Enhanced  market  orientation  and  openness.  Opening  its  markets  in  late  1980s,  Pakistan  has 
amplified  and  deepened  its  structural  reforms  over  the  last  5  years.  Keeping  aside  ideological  or 
philosophical  consideration  and  the  Government’s  fiscal  compulsions,  industrial,  trade  and  price 
liberalization has infused high degree of competition which is auguring well for efficient allocation and 
use of resources. Private sector is allowed in all strategic sectors such as oil, gas, telecommunication 
and other services sector on a competitive basis which are supported by sound sector policies. 
Service  providers  in  telecom  are  emerging  as  large  giants  and  have  enhanced  country’s  wireless 
penetration to reach 29% in November 2006 with the total cellular subscribers at 46 million. Moreover, 
the  intense  competition  has  also  reduced  call  costs,  increased  outreach  and  offered  increased 
services to the customers. The increasing penetration will invariably play a part towards increasing the 
market  potential  of  a  host  of  other  activities  conducted  through  cell  phones  such  as  banking, 
remittances etc. 
Since early 1990s, Privatization Commissions has processed 161 privatization transactions resulting in 
sell off of public assets of Rs. 378 billion. All manufacturing sector, 80% of the banking assets and 
strategic  stakes  of  utility  companies  have  been  sold  off  to  private  sector.  With  scaling  back  of 
government’s role, the share of private sector in investment has risen steadily from merely 7.8% of 
GDP in 1980’s to over 13% of GDP in FY 2006. At the same time the share of public consumption 
expenditure  has  reduced  over  time  to  less  than  10%  and  now  private  consumption  expenditure 
accounts for more than 90%.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2007
Banking  sector  is  catalyzing  real  sector  development.  Banking  sector  reforms  are  far  reaching. 
Aside from their impact on depth and efficiency of financial intermediation, the profitability of banks has 
allowed  them  to  earn  high  returns,  which  has  attracted  foreign  interest  and  encouraged  existing 
owners  to  expand  and/or  strengthen  their  businesses.  Banks  have  not  only  cleaned  up  their  own 
balance sheets but have impacted real sector development in a number of ways. The private credit 
growth  in  last  few  years  has  been  significant  reaching  over  30%  in  FY06.  Private  credit  grew  from 
insignificant  levels  to  over  Rs.  400  billion  in  FY06.  The  credit  expansion  fuelled  economic  activity, 
while reviving and enhancing industrial and other capacities. Credit diversification has helped achieve 
a degree of economic diversification too. While the corporate sector accounts for almost half, within it 
all segments of industry received higher credit. Of the total outstanding, agriculture credit constituted 
6.4% but more phenomenally, it grew by almost 4-5 times. Credit was also made available to non-crop 
sector by laying down guidelines for promoting credit access to livestock, fisheries and dairy sector. 
Improved  access  to  SMEs  was  also  possible  and  its  share  in  total  outstanding  grew  to  16.1%. 
Consumer  financing,  which  was  not  available  in  the  past,  rose  to  14.3%  of  the  total  outstanding. 
Companies’ access to required level of financing, foreign loans, swaps and derivatives etc. have all 
been accommodated to allow market to innovate and expand. There is considerable scope for banks 
to enhance their business through extending financial penetration and outreach both across country 
and sectors.  
Banking  sector  has  grown  both  in  size  and  strength  and  is  positioned  well  to  meet  economy’s 
requirements  as  it  grows.  Ownership  and  structural  changes  in  banking  system  will  facilitate  this 
process. Foreign interest and presence has grown and at present foreign stake comes to 47% of total 
paid-up capital of all the financial institutions regulated by State Bank of Pakistan. Structural changes 
have been significant. Besides higher standards of corporate governance at management and board 
level, the banks are adhering to SBP prudential regulations which are consistent with BIS standards. 
Technology  is  being  fast  adopted  and  over  45%  of  bank  branches  are  connected  with  head  office, 
along side growth in ATMs, debit and credit cards.  
Foreign  investment  is  flowing  in.  Economic  activity  has  and  will  be  further  boosted  by  efficiency 
gains once the full impact of foreign investment is realized after the completion of projects financed by 
FDI. During FY04-06, Pakistan has cumulatively attracted $8 billion foreign investment flows – 26.5% 
was sale proceeds of public assets and 49.2% from FDI, with remaining coming from foreign portfolio 
investment. These foreign inflows have come into banking, telecom and oil and gas sectors primarily. 
Prospects are that Pakistan will attract about US$6.0 billion in FY07 – an all time high annual flow. 
Going  forward,  foreign  investment  is  expected  to  be  more  diversified  and  will  support  infrastructure 
development,  manufacturing,  tourism  and  hotel  industry  etc.  The  strong  interest  in  Pakistan  stems 
from  (i)  growing  investor  confidence  in  the  economy,  (ii)  comfort  to  foreign  investors  that  they  are 
treated  at  par  with  domestic  investors  (and  in  some  respects  even  better),  (iii)  high  returns  on 
investments  as  evident  from  exceptional  corporate  and  banking  profitability  and  (iv)  supportive  and 
stable policies. 
Besides full foreign ownership, investors can repatriate their capital, dividends and profits and there is 
no  restriction  on  the  level  of  royalty  payments.  Foreign  investors  are  eligible  for  low  import  duties 
between 5 and 10% on plant and equipment and a first year tax allowance on profits of between 50 
and  90%  of  the  cost  of  plant  and  equipment.  Measures  have  also  been  taken  to  introduce  an 
Intellectual  Property  Rights  regime  compatible  with  the  WTO.  Rules  governing  FDI  have  been 
significantly  liberalized.  Furthermore,  the  investment  climate  has  improved  as  a  result  of  policy 
initiatives such as the streamlining of procedures required to start a business and the measures taken 
to minimize the time that businesses spend dealing with government inspections. To facilitate foreign 
portfolio  investment,  Special  Rupee  Convertible  Account  (SCRA)  has  been  established  to  allow 
remittances and non-residents to bring money in and out of Pakistan. The amount accumulated in this 
account can be used for purchasing as well as trading shares quoted in the stock exchange as well as 
other approved securities. Foreign exchange regime has also been liberalized and exchange controls 
have been lifted.  
Business  processes  are  being  rationalized  and  simplified.  Reforms,  both  of  incentive  and 
administrative  regime,  have  helped  Pakistan  to  improve  its  ranking  in  the  Survey  conducted  by  the 
World  Bank  on  ‘Doing  Business  in  2007.’  Pakistan  now  ranks  51  in  the  time  to  import  (which  has 
reduced from 39 days to 19 days) as trade logistics and customs procedures were streamlined and 
scores well on the indicators related to starting a business (54th out of 175) and protecting investors 
(19th out of 175). 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 3
Growth sustainability and prospects  
V. 
Pakistan’s  real  GDP  growth  rate  has  risen  in  recent  years,  averaging  7.4%  in  the  preceding  three 
years. This is well above the long-term (50 years) average growth rate of 5 percent. The strong growth 
momentum  has  stressed  the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy  as  evident  in  macroeconomic 
indicators such as rising inflationary pressures and a widening external current account deficit. These 
developments naturally raise questions regarding economy’s potential to sustain this momentum.  
The current growth momentum in the range of 7% can indeed be maintained, though this requires: 
careful calibration of macroeconomic management and removing bottlenecks that are impeding growth 
and economic diversification. With declining poverty1 and growing employment opportunities, viability 
of  Pakistani  market  is  further  enhanced  as  domestic  private  consumption  has  been  supported  by 
improved incomes and remittances. 
To  ensure  sustainable  economic  growth,  Pakistan  will  need  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  by 
gradually  reducing  the  twin  deficits.  Besides  prudent  expenditure  management,  this  will  require 
broadening  of  the  tax  base  to  effectively  finance  growing  expenditure  obligations.  Sustainability  of 
external  current  account  deficit  calls  for  raising  exports  earnings  to  finance  the  increasing  imports 
requirement. Imports will remain strong as the economy’s requirements for capital and intermediate 
goods for industry grow. Balance of payment position will benefit from industrial diversification which is 
critical  for  export  diversification  as  well  as  for  encouraging  import  substitution  (particularly  in  food 
commodities)  where  Pakistan  has  competitive  advantages.  Any  pressures  on  aggregate  demand 
because of slippages will need monetary tightening as central bank would remain committed to the 
objective of price stability.  
To realize these goals, Pakistan needs to now direct investment flows, both domestic and foreign, to 
areas which can help stimulate industry and its diversification, and help remove gaps and bottlenecks 
in the infrastructure. Pakistan offers opportunities to exploit gas and coal reserves suitable for power 
generation and hydroelectricity generation. The geographical proximity to energy rich regions, Iran and 
Central Asia, position Pakistan to emerge as a regional hub for energy. The investment requirements 
for the development of energy sector are in the range of $20 billion in medium term to around US $150 
billion by 2030. National Trade Corridor Plan (NTCP) equally offers opportunities to connect all major 
physical infrastructures such as ports, roads, railways, aviation etc. Besides connecting Pakistan with 
its neighbors it will enhance trade and improve market access, while saving fuel and transport costs. 
Pakistan  has  set  up  an  infrastructure  Project  Development  Facility  to  facilitate  initiation  of  these 
projects  through  credit  enhancement  and  financing  institutions  are  geared  up  to  adopt  different 
approaches and modalities to leverage and intermediate financing flows for infrastructure. 
Opportunities  also  exist  to  enhance  production  by  enhancing  productivity,  efficiency  and  economic 
diversification. To diversify, Pakistan has to make inroads into the medium and high-end technology 
products  such  as  electronic  goods,  automobiles,  engineering  goods  etc.  and  to  look  for  newer 
markets.  In  agriculture,  implementation  of  mega  water  resources  projects  will  enhance  crop  yields. 
Besides  increasing  value-addition,  market-based  pricing  (e.g.  as  done  for  rice  and  wheat), 
improvements in transmission of pricing signals to farmers (e.g. through introduction of a commodity 
futures  market),  development  of  crop  insurance  (particularly  to  encourage  the  raising  of  new  cash 
crops such as oilseeds) and improvement in transportation and storage infrastructure will contribute to 
enhancing  agricultural  productivity.  Development  of  agro-based  industry  and  processing  and 
packaging  of  products  would  further  stimulate  export  of  these  products  to  the  neighboring  Middle 
Eastern markets.  
With  a  strong  base  of  economically  active  population,  Pakistan  has  an  edge  as  it  is  a  low  wage 
economy – average wage is close to $75-$100 a month for unskilled workers, $100-$200 for skilled 
and  for  managerial  workers,  it  ranges  from  $200-$500  a  month.  To  enhance  skills,  an  aggressive 
technical  education  and  skill  development  program  exists  under  the  Medium  Term  Development 
Framework. Investment climate will benefit further from the ongoing efforts and strong commitment to 
rule  of  law,  developing  a  competent  and  efficient  government  sector,  less  cumbersome  regulations 
and control of corruption.  
                                                      
1   The overall poverty has reduced from 34.46% in 2001 to 23.90% in 2005. The percentage of population living below the 
poverty line in rural areas has declined from 39.2% to 28.1% while that in urban areas has declined from 22.7 percent 14.9 
percent.  In  other  words,  rural  poverty  has  declined  by  11.2  percentage  points  and  urban  poverty  has  reduced  by  7.8 
percentage points. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2007
Finally,  besides banking  sector,  the  large  financing requirements  of  infrastructure and  of  agriculture 
sector  (ranging  above  Rs130  b)  can  be  met  but  require  financial  diversification.  The  long-term 
domestic debt market is still under-developed and corporate debt issues account for less than 1% of 
GDP.  Similarly,  Pakistan  boasts  an  extremely  liquid  equity  market  but  it  remains  dogged  by  high 
degree of speculative transactions that have led to periodic bouts of instability and claims of market 
manipulation.  Given  the  importance  of  long-term  debt  markets  to  support  investment,  particularly  in 
infrastructure projects, to increase domestic savings, and improve the risk profile of commercial banks 
(which  currently  face  mismatches  in  lending  and  deposit  profiles),  Pakistan  needs  to  foster 
development  of  long-term  institutional  savings  industry  (pension  and  provident  funds,  mutual  funds, 
etc.), implement capital market reforms aimed at encouraging investment rather than speculation, and 
improve risk management in the financial sector to ensure financial sector stability. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, Pakistan offers endless possibilities with its vast untapped resources. The country is set 
to  grow  at  a  rate  of  7%  per  annum  which  should  help  to  further  raise  its  per  capita  income  from 
US$847 per annum to US$ 1557 by 2015. Demand is expected to get stronger as incomes rise further 
and assuming current population growth trends persist. Pakistan’s strategic geopolitical position, due 
to its proximity to India and China as well as to the oil rich Middle East and untouched central Asia with 
vast  natural  resources,  potentially  carries  opportunities  which  to  date  have  not  been  properly 
exploited. Promising for private sector would be the large infrastructure projects which would offer high 
return in long term but would help enhance access and efficiency in movement of goods within and 
outside Pakistan. 
If  done right,  Pakistan  can  easily  integrate  itself  into  the export value  added chain  of  the region  as 
there  is  adequate  room  for  further  growth;  investment  in  these  sectors  is  thus  highly  feasible.  For 
example, Pakistan still stands relatively low in terms of motorization when compared globally and even 
within the region. Automakers need to take this into account as the demand clearly exceeds supply. 
Likewise the supply of electronic goods is still short of the potential demand and any increases will be 
absorbed by the population which is growing and expected to double over the next 25 years.  
In future, the demand for energy, cement, fertilizer, and leather products is expected to increase. The 
energy demand over the next five years is expected to grow at a rate of 7.4 percent per annum and 
over the next 25 years it is expected to be 7 times the present demand.2 Thus the sectors, particularly 
those  discussed  above,  remain  attractive  for  foreign  investors  due  to  strong  consumer  spending 
patterns  and  rising  industrial  activity  depicted  by  past  trends  and  strong  future  demand.  Likewise, 
banking sector has to position itself to extend its outreach, which will play a key role in sustainability 
and in diversifying risks. For long term sustainability and to maximize the development impact, small 
and  medium  enterprises  should  be  encouraged  and  further  developed  as  they  will  be  able  to  fast 
restructure  themselves  as  and  when  warranted  and  will  play  a  more  critical  role  in  employment 
generation. 
Besides  bringing  in  much  needed  capital,  increased  foreign  presence  is  expected  to  help  Pakistan 
integrate  better  globally  and  regionally,  enhance  skills  and  techniques  and  transfer  and  increase 
usage of technology. It is our belief – so far reinforced by experience – that private sector participation 
and foreign investment are going to be the cornerstone of our future economic strategy.  
                                                      
2   According to Planning Commission, presently the energy demand measured in MTOE was around 50 MTOE in 2004 which 
will increase to 79 MTOE by 2010 and 361 MTOE by 2030.  
BIS Review 22/2007 
 5
