Martín Redrado: Financial intermediation through institutions or markets? 
Opening address by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at Session I on 
Financial  Intermediaton  through  Institutions  or  Markets?  of  the  Sixth  Annual  Conference  2007 
“Financial System and Macroeconomic Resilience”, Brunnen, 18 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The significance of the financial system development for long-term economic growth has been deeply 
emphasized  by  the  literature  over  the  past  fifteen  years.  This  has  found  strong  theoretical  and 
empirical evidence, based on the ability of financial  intermediaries to: (i) select the most productive 
projects, (ii) monitor and control the debtors during the project lifespan, (iii) diversify the risks and (iv) 
minimize the costs of mobilizing savings. 
Bank  credit  and  to  a  lesser  extent  corporate  bonds  exceed  equity  financing  all  over  the  world. 
However, during the past 35 years banks have lost share in capturing family financial wealth in favor of 
equity  and  bond  markets.  The  trend  is  stronger  in  industrial  countries,  but  is  also  seen  in  many 
emerging markets. Regardless, firms still finance most of their investments with retained earnings (a 
recent  paper  from  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina  shows  that  self-financing  is  still  the  preferred 
approach by firms worldwide). 
This fact – also known as pecking order where firms choose own funds first, then debt, and equity last 
of  all  –  reflects  the  existence  of  asymmetric  information  problems  and  intermediation  costs,  which 
make own funds more economical than third-party funds. 
This  paper  aims  at  analyzing  how  financial  innovation  brings  for  complementarities  between 
institutions  and  markets  and  its  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Rather  than  the  advantages 
associated to each type of channel, it is stressed that the total financial depth is what really matters, 
especially 
for  emerging  markets.  Recent 
relationship  with 
macroeconomic stability is also briefly explored. 
financial  development  and 
its 
Banks or capital markets? 
2.  
Financial  instruments,  markets  and  institutions  appear  with  the  purpose  of  mitigating  informational 
asymmetries and  transaction  costs,  including  the costs  of  acquiring  information,  enforcing contracts 
and exchanging goods and financial claims. In so doing, the financial infrastructure contributes in the 
diversification  of  risk,  capital  allocation,  monitoring  of  borrowers,  and  a  smooth  running  of  the 
payments system. 
Recent  studies  highlight  the  skills  that  markets  have  to  broaden  access  to  finance  by,  providing 
funding for economic agents beyond the banking system, and to mobilize large scale capital flows, to 
become a significant factor in economic growth. In this manner, in recent years the dominant position 
in the above debate shifted from “pro-bank” to “promarket”. This vision gained even more strength due 
to the setbacks suffered by Japanese banks during the nineties and to the spectacular performance of 
the world capital markets as from the second half of that decade. 
While banks extract information about firms more efficiently, when a firm joins the public debt market it 
reduces the information asymmetries permanently, diminishing the intervention costs and sidestepping 
the  comparative  advantages  of  the banks  regarding  the  extraction  of  information.  That  is why  once 
they  are  part  of  the  capital  market  corporations  tend  to  remain  there  rather  than  resorting  to  the 
banking system. 
The supporters of the market-based financial systems also assert that the markets reduce the inherent 
inefficiencies associated with banks, to promote a higher economic growth. Their position is based on 
the fact that large banks might block innovation by taking advantage of the information to which they 
have access and protect the incumbent firms with which they have a close relationship from possible 
competition.  Large  banks  with  few  regulatory  restrictions  on  their  activities  might  also  collude  with 
firms against other creditors and block efficient corporate governance. 
From what we have seen so far, the literature could not resolve which of the two systems is better 
prepared to stimulate long term growth. In order to settle the debate, Ross Levine gathers information 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
from 48 countries over the 1980-1995 period and carries out several regressions in order to explain 
the average per capita growth rate in terms of different measurements of the relative importance of 
markets  compared  to  banks,  and  controlling  for  the  usual  variables  in  this  kind  of  tests.  As  a 
measurement  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  markets,  he  uses  variables  like  the  ratio  of  market 
capitalization to private sector credit and the ratio of trading turnover to loans. 
In all cases the results were not significant, indicating that the financial system structure seem to be 
irrelevant towards growth. Actually, the addition of market capitalization to bank loans is positive and 
highly significant. Levine’s conclusion, what he calls the “financial services view”, is that what matters 
is the total financial depth, irrespective of the division between banks and markets, which seems to 
provide settlement to the discussion. 
Towards complete financial markets: the importance of complementarities  
3.  
Then the arguments in favor and against each system ultimately aim at their contribution to economic 
growth. In this sense, the empirical evidence reveals that both the capital markets and the banking 
system promote long term economic growth, because both have a positive impact on the growth rate 
of the economy, capital accumulation and productivity improvements. 
From the empirical evidence it is evident that banks supply services that differ from those the capital 
markets provide. As a result, both are important and necessary in an economy. In fact, the firms in 
countries with developed banking systems and capital markets grow faster and are more prosperous 
than  those  where  either  both  or  one  of  the  two  kinds  of  intermediary  are  undeveloped  or  are  not 
operating correctly. 
Banks  and  in  general  holders  of  non-tradable  claims  like  venture  capitalists,  provide  an  advisory 
service that markets cannot. However, the opportunity cost of capital on the latter is lower. Therefore, 
each intermediary dominates a different niche: a large and established corporation will resort directly 
to  the  market  in  order  to  obtain  funds,  because  it  has  a  good  rating  and  is  unwilling  to  pay 
intermediation  costs;  on  the  other  hand,  a  company  that  lacks  a  strong  reputation  is  more  likely  to 
require  the  advisory  skills  of  the  bank  (or  venture  capitalist)  and  probably  can  even  get  cheaper 
funding from them, at the cost of providing more information on technology and operations, with the 
understanding that its financier will not have incentives to make that information public. 
The process of choosing the appropriate creditor also changes noticeably during the business cycle. 
When the risk-free rate and/or bank profits decline, corporations with the requisite conditions resort to 
the debt market to find finance, rather than going to the financial system. In fact, a fall in the tax-free 
rate reduces the cost of incurring debt on the debt market, which makes it more attractive. Conversely, 
falling bank profits lead to frictions among depositors and increases the opportunity cost of banking 
capital, which is reflected by increases in the cost of banking finance. In fact, capital markets usually 
acts as a back-up tool to keep financing going in recession periods, where banking credit (procyclical) 
becomes scarce. 
Banks  usually  provide  savings  and  credit  instruments  in  early  stages  of  development,  while  capital 
market instruments emerge as the financial depth increases, new corporate or investor requirements 
arise and the degree of sophistication of both investors and financial agents grows. Capital markets 
facilitate  the  banking  business  by  increasing  the  available  options  for  risk  management  (e.g.  allow 
them to hedge risks more effectively) while, at the same time, the banking activity provides for deeper 
capital markets. In Allen and Gale words the relationship is “symbiotic”. 
As  a  consequence,  the  ability  to  replace  and  complement  each other  provides  the  economy  with  a 
powerful tool to deal with both real and external shocks and contributes to achieve financial stability. 
In this sense, instead of posing an alternative between banks and capital markets, it appears to be 
more reasonable to highlight the convenience of achieving complementarities between both forms of 
intermediation, with each of them concentrating on the market segments for which they are fittest. In 
the emerging countries case, in particular, for long term growth it may be more relevant to search for a 
way to increase financial depth, rather than catering for the possible choice between banks and capital 
markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
Implications for monetary policy 
4.  
Differing  degrees  of  capital  markets  participation  relative  to  the  banking  system  in  the  financial 
intermediation  of  an  economy  alter  the  significance  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channels. 
Specifically, a heavier weighting of the capital markets will increase the relevance of the asset prices 
channel compared with the credit channel. 
In this context, as a central banker it is worthwhile to reflect: What should a central bank do about the 
variations  in  asset  prices  in  order  to  develop  monetary  policy  and  implement  it?  The  first  aspect  is 
whether the monetary authority should bear in mind the asset prices directly (per se), do so indirectly 
due to the potential impacts on goods inflation or financial stability, or ignore them. 
Until  now,  stylized  facts  show  that  the  sharp  increases  in  asset  prices  combined  with  a  rapid  and 
sustained growth of credit precede the financial crisis, with their subsequent disruptive impacts on real 
output, so that ignoring them does not seem to be a sound strategy. 
However, financial innovation should not be ignored when defining the monetary policy design, which 
implies  extremely  complex  analytical  and  practical  issues:  a)  the  central  bank  capacity  to  identify 
bubbles; b) whether it is capable of identifying if an event is temporary or permanent; c) uncertainty 
regarding the impact of asset prices on aggregate demand and inflation; d) the efficacy and relevance 
of  the  impact  of  the  monetary  policy  on  the  asset  markets;  c)  the  asymmetries  in  the  central  bank 
responses (predicament to halt falls than to discourage rises). 
There  is  thus  some  agreement  that  it  is  not  recommendable  for  the  monetary  authority  to  have  an 
explicit target for asset inflation and to react systematically towards it. However, it has to cater for its 
development  because  the  large  oscillations  in  these  markets  have  been  associated  with  crises.  In 
other words, an emphasis on risk management with stress testing is needed. 
My view is that we need to bear in mind the volatility of asset prices to design policies, but doing so in 
an informal and indirect way so as not to include it in the reaction function in a systematic manner. In 
this  context  some  relevant  questions  appear:  If  the  weighting  of  the  asset  price  channel  is  raised, 
should  its  relevance  in  the  monetary  authority’s  reaction  function  increase?;  If  the  capital  markets 
become  more  important  in  intermediating  savings,  is  the  degree  of  supervision  of  agents  on  that 
market adequate for the financial stability purpose? Is this degree of regulation comparable to that of 
the banking system? 
In  recent  years  innovations  in  technology,  the  creation  of  new  financial  instruments  and  the 
subsequent appearance of new markets, as well as the abundant liquidity that there is in the world 
economy, have eroded the banking system’s role as a financial intermediary, in favor of the financial 
markets. 
Banks continue to serve as financial intermediaries, transferring capital and managing risks between 
debtors  and  depositors,  but  their  share  of  the  financial  market  grows  is  ever  smaller.  Regulatory 
restrictions, the growth of commercial securities, the development of markets for derivatives and for 
high-yield  bonds,  and  the  expansion  of  asset  securitization  were  the  main  factors  behind  the 
displacement  of  the  banking  system.  Likewise,  improvements  in  information  technologies  made  it 
easier for agents to assess the quality of the securities that are offered on the capital markets, favoring 
direct  corporate  finance  by  the  public.  In  this  sense,  the  information  technology  eroded  the 
comparative  advantage  of  banks  by  reducing  the  transaction  costs  and  allowing  other  non-bank 
financial intermediaries to assess credit risk efficiently with statistical methods. 
While banks declined there was a parallel rise of financial markets, which have become steadily more 
complete. The greater “completeness” of markets, regarded as the expansion of the set of different 
kinds  of  available  instruments  and  the  reduction  of  transaction  costs,  brings  with  it  a  number  of 
benefits that cannot be disregarded. In the first place, it enables the economic agents to insure for a 
broad range of risks, which is significant to reduce volatility. Moreover, it makes it easier for investors 
to fine tune their portfolios, which moderates the risk premium required on them and reduces the cost 
of  capital  for  all  agents.  Finally,  it  enables  the  transformation  of  risks  into  negotiable  instruments, 
which allows for their atomization. 
In fact, financial innovation has blurred the borders between typical commercial banking, investment 
banking, insurance and asset management. The whole system has become more interdependent, and 
old  actors  whose  roles  were  eroded  by  new  and  upcoming  stars  have  found  new  niches.  Thus, 
commercial  banks  make  loans  that  they  repackage  and  sell  to  hedge  funds,  mutual  funds  and 
insurance  companies  (frequently  bypassing  investment  banks),  but  hedge  funds  also  do  a  lot  of 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
trading that improve the revenues of investment banks. Many companies bypass commercial banks 
completely and rely for funding in their initial stages on venture capitalists, that eventually resource to 
investment banks to float the companies in the stock market. All this in a framework where it is ever 
more  common  to  observe  financial  institutions  that  diversify  risks  by  transforming  into  massive 
financial  supermarkets  that  provide  services  usually  associated  with  commercial  banks,  investment 
banks and asset management. 
This state of affairs certainly means a huge challenge on central bankers and financial regulators. For 
us these developments might mean the sudden vanishing of a good part of what we knew about the 
transmission mechanisms by which monetary policy affects the real side of the economy and inflation, 
and  especially  its  lags.  The  global  financial  imbalances,  the  lack  of  response  of  long  term  rates  to 
tightening, the tame response of prices to the dollar devaluation against the euro, are all events hard 
to reconcile with the traditional knowledge. For regulators, the actual diversification of risks, and the 
resilience of the system to large shocks are questions of utmost interest that, however, do not have a 
proper answer at the moment. In the first case because its hard to know who owns what in terms of 
risk nowadays, and the other case because we can tell for sure if the shocks we have seen so far 
were really large enough. The collapse of LTCM in 1998, the dotcom bust in 2000, the Amaranth crash 
were  very  large  shocks  indeed,  and  the  fact  that  we  are  wondering  today  whether  they  were  large 
enough is, in itself, reason for satisfaction, if not complacency. 
Impact of intermediation on emerging economies 
5.  
In  this  context,  emerging  economies  exhibit  better  macroeconomic  management,  which  has 
significantly  contributed  to  improving  their  financial  position,  as  reflected  by  narrower  spreads. 
However,  the  reasons  for  today’s  narrow  spreads  in  emerging  markets  are,  in  my  opinion,  beyond 
market changes resulting from structured products or credit default swaps or the emerging countries’ 
mostly sound fundamentals. 
In my view, many of the reasons lie in the gradual adjustment of global imbalances. An expectation 
that  the  US  dollar  will  depreciate  is  leading  investors  to  seek  assets  in  other  currencies.  This  is 
reflected in a clear trend towards developing local assets (mainly Asia but also Latin America) and, 
consequently, in narrower spreads and stock markets hitting record highs – in short, it results in higher 
funding opportunities for the emerging world. 
Such  a  process  –  which  takes  place  gradually  and  is  coupled  with  a  transition  towards  a  more 
diversified  asset  portfolio  for  central  banks  –  offers  great  opportunities  but  also  poses  significant 
challenges for our countries, where financial development is incipient. 
Although  they  exhibit  advances,  Latin  American  countries  appear  to  be  lagging  behind  in  terms  of 
financial  depth,  not  only  compared  to  the  developed  countries  but  also  when  compared  with  other 
emerging economies like those in Eastern Asia. 
Latin American countries exhibit a lesser relative degree of banking penetration. This situation reflects 
both supply issues and problems inherent to the demand side. These demand difficulties relate to a 
large  degree  of  informality  in  corporate  operations,  or  cultural  issues  which  mean  that  at  times  the 
economic agents exclude themselves from this market on their own free will. 
Bank loans to the private sector in Latin America is typically below 30% as fraction of GDP, while it is 
175% in UK, 167 in Spain, and fluctuates closely to 100% in France, Japan, Italy, Canada, Australia 
and Germany. In emerging Asia, where contract enforcement is probably better than in Latin America, 
Thailand´s ratio is 88% and Korea´s 100. 
The development of capital markets appears to be even more incipient. These markets are relatively 
illiquid, fragmented and incomplete, because the instruments that enable them to diversify (or transfer) 
risks are scarce, and, in particular, the capital markets are concentrated on government securities. 
Indicators for 2004 show that while the turnover traded on the domestic capital markets was 6.1% of 
the GDP in Latin America, it accounted for 92.2% in the G-7 markets and for 104.5% in East Asia. On 
the other hand, during that year equity financing was 0.5% of the GDP in the region, compared with 
1.5% in the G-7 countries and 5.9% in Asia. Between the years 1990 and 2004 Latin America suffered 
a decline in the number of listed corporations which contrasts with the growth trend observed in the 
G-7 countries and East Asia. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2007
The domestic corporate bond markets exhibited a similar situation, as the amount of the bonds issued 
in 2004 was equivalent to 10.7% of the GDP in the Latin American countries, compared with averages 
of  47.7%  in  the  G-7  countries  and  of  36.3%  in  the  emerging  Asian  countries.  Capitalization  as  a 
fraction of GDP is again lower than 30% in Latin America, while typically ranges from 80 to 140% of 
GDP in developed countries. In emerging Asia, Thailand´s market capitalization is 68% of GDP, 60% 
in India and 73% in Korea. 
In addition, the transactions carried out on the secondary market with government bonds are scarce 
when they are compared to those carried out on developed markets. Although the sovereign bonds 
are the assets with most liquidity, their level is not comparable to the mature markets. 
These characteristics are reflected in higher costs to issue and trade in these economies than in the 
developed economies, which feeds back to the shortage of products on domestic markets, because 
the  greater  integration  of  the  capital  markets  leads  the  domestic  agents  to  place  funds  on  the 
international markets. 
How should financial depth be increased in emerging economies? 
6.  
Emerging economies, on top of dealing with a potential adjustment in global economic conditions have 
to confront our own uncertainties both at the micro and macro levels as the financial markets are being 
developed. 
In terms of building a regulatory and supervisory framework, it is key to develop common risk-focused 
approaches  with  a  robust  stress  testing  and  a  sounder  market  infrastructure,  which  allows  for 
intermediaries to properly identify, transfer, transform and redistribute risk, enabling them to adjust to 
any financial or real shock. 
The  main  challenge  to  deepen  the  financial  system  is  focused  on  generating  a  long-term  domestic 
currency market, for which the fundamental requirement is to reduce the macroeconomic volatility so 
typical of the region. This development could be the most important buffer to cover against the new 
risks that emerge from financial innovation. 
For this purpose, the key consists in strengthening the pillars of what we might call the new economic 
paradigm, with several anti-cyclical components: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Any policy design must have the flexibility necessary to be capable of responding to the appearance of 
new risks, bearing in mind the propagation that they might have on the rest of the economic sectors. 
Specifically, one of the major tasks in our countries is to foster bank penetration and to deepen credit 
in  domestic  currency.  In  general,  our  countries  exhibit  low  levels  of  financial  services  usage  when 
compared  to  other  regions.  For  this  purpose  transparency  and  information  dissemination  is  very 
relevant. 
It is necessary to design a regulatory framework which on one hand enables finance to be granted to 
non-traditional sectors, but which does not disregard the risks that the financial institutions incur. In 
this  sense,  supervision  plays  a  fundamental  role,  as  does  the  possibility  of  allowing  for  the 
requirements  of  a  prudential  nature  that  are  imposed  on  financial  institutions not  to be uniform,  but 
instead consider the particular characteristics of each institution. 
Because  it  has  been  shown  that  advances  in  technology  have  enabled  both  the  inclusion  of  new 
products  and  lower costs mechanisms must  be  generated  in  order  to stimulate  the  incorporation of 
technological progress. For example, a debtor’s risk assessment with mathematical methods (credit 
scoring) allows for a more efficient credit allocation. 
Fiscal solvency (primary surplus and improved liability management). 
Monetary prudence and consistency (inflation at low and controlled levels). 
Accumulation of international reserves (insurance against external shocks). 
More flexible foreign exchange regimes 
Reduction of net foreign debt 
Trade dynamism (diversifying destinations and products). 
Diminishing currency mismatches. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 5
On the other hand, communication and policy coordination should be fostered between the different 
agencies with a role in direct or indirect regulation of financial markets. This coordination is necessary 
for the development of certain financial instruments that improve risk allocation. 
Central banks also have a specific interest in the improvement of domestic bond markets, in particular 
for  public  sector  debt.  One  reason  for  this  is  that  more  complete  markets  reflect  the  relationship 
between  borrowing  costs  and  terms.  Making  an  explicit  yield  curve  reveals  information  about  the 
expectations that the economic agents have, which is essential for business decisions. 
Recent experience has shown that the development of bond markets must be based on placing funds 
in domestic currency, which is not only relevant for the transmission of the monetary policy but also as 
a mechanism to reduce external vulnerability. 
Associated  with  this,  the  recent  de-dollarization  process  should  also  be  highlighted.  In  the  past 
financial dollarization enabled the generation of a long term currency in a context of much distrust in 
the domestic currency as a result of long periods with high inflation. Although this allowed for a greater 
financial  development  (as  long  term  instruments  reappeared  and  by  generating  more  liquidity)  it 
proved to be vulnerable to the reversals of capital flows, in particular when accompanied by exchange 
rate rigidity. Although the balance sheets of the financial intermediaries did not exhibit a mismatch in 
the asset and liability denominations, there was another concrete mismatch: the revenues of debtors 
in  dollars  were  not  always  denominated  in  that  currency.  This  example  shows  that  there  are  no 
shortcuts for deepening the financial markets. The de-dollarization should act in this direction, while 
the  prudential  regulation  bears  in  mind  possible  mismatches  that  exceed  the  denomination  of  the 
financial instruments (for instance: limiting loans in foreign currency to export activities only or to those 
who generate foreign currency revenues). 
Carrying out the policies mentioned above does not mean blindly following certain recipes that must 
be applied always and under any circumstances. This acknowledges that there are different ways of 
putting into practice the adequate policies to achieve a stable and deep financial market. Moreover, it 
is  not  only  necessary  to  identify  the  adequate  economic  policies  for  a  country  under  specific 
circumstances, but correct timing is also crucial when implementing the measures. The pace at which 
policies are implemented cannot be independent from the structural characteristics, nor the economic 
and  social  environment  in  any  particular  country.  Therefore,  the  pace  selected  should  allow  for 
maximizing the chances that the process undertaken will be successful. In summary, in several cases 
the choices of adequate policies to attain a predictable economic environment calls for an adequate 
combination of credibility and flexibility. 
References 
Allen, Franklin and Gale, Douglas (2004) “Financial intermediaries and markets”, Econometrica, Vol. 
72, N° 4, pp. 1023-1061, July 2004. 
Allen,  F.  y  Gale,  D.  (1999);  “Diversity  of  Opinion  and  Financing  of  New  Technologies”,  Journal  of 
Financial Intermediation, vol. 8(1-2), pages 68-89, January. 
Bebczuk, Ricardo, Garegnani, Lorena (2006) “Self-financing and Economic Growth” Central Bank of 
Argentina- WP 7. Buenos Aires. 
Cantillo,  Miguel  and  Wright,  Julian  (2000).  “How  do  firms  choose  their  lenders?  An  empirical 
investigation”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 13, N°1, pp. 155-189. 
Cecchetti,  Stephen  G.  (1999).  “The  future  of  financial  intermediation  and  regulation:  An  overview”, 
Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 5, N°8, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
De  la  Torre  A.,  J.C.  Gozzi  y  S.  L.  Schmukler  (2007);  “Capital  Market  Development:  Whither  Latin 
America?”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4156, March. 
Diamond, Douglas W.. (1991) “Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and directly 
placed debt”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, N°4, pp. 689-721. 
Diamond, Douglas W.. “Liquidity, banks, and markets” (1997), The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 
105, N°5, pp. 928-956. 
Dow, James and Gorton, Gary (1997). “Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a 
connection?”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, N°3, pp. 1087-1129. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2007
Edwards, Franklin R. and Mishkin, Frederic S. (1995). “The decline of traditional banking: Implications 
for financial stability and regulatory policy”, Economic Policy Review, Vol. 1, N°2, pp. 27-45, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. 
Hellwig,  Martin  F..  (1991)  “Banking,  financial  intermediation  and  corporate  finance”,  European 
Financial Integration, Cambridge, England, pp. 35-63. 
Hellwig,  Martin  F.  (2000).  “Financial  intermediation  with  risk  aversion”,  The  Review  of  Economic 
Studies, Vol. 67, N°4, pp. 719-742. 
Hellwig,  Martin  F.  (2005).  “Market  discipline,  information  processing,  and  corporate  governance”, 
Corporate Governance in Context: Corporations, States and Markets in Europe, Japan, and the US, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, pp. 379-402. 
Jeanneau, S. y Tovar, Camilo E. (2006); “Domestic bond markets in Latin America: achievements and 
challenges”, BIS Quarterly Review; June. 
Levine,  Ross  (1997).  “Financial  development  and  economic  growth:  Views  and  agenda”,  Journal  of 
Economic Literature, Vol. 35, N°2, pp. 688-726. 
Levine, Ross and Zervos, Sara (1998). “Stock markets, banks, and economic growth”, The American 
Economic Review, vol. 88, N°3, pp. 537-558. 
Levine, Ross (2001). “Bank-based or market-based financial systems: Which is better?”, University of 
Minnesota, mimeo. 
Yanelle,  Marie-Odile  (1997).  “Banking  competition  and  market  efficiency”,  The  Review  of  Economic 
Studies, Vol. 64, N°2, pp. 215-239. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 7
