Zdeněk Tůma: The exchange rate forecast 
Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Forecasting Dinner 2007, 
Czech National Bank, Prague, 22 February 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Over the last few years when I had the opportunity to open the Forecasting Dinner I tried to discuss 
several  issues  connected  with  forecasting  at  central  banks.  Three  years  ago  I  discussed  the 
forecasting process at the Czech National Bank in general. A year later I went through uncertainty and 
the  role  market  forecasts  can  play  as  an  information  source  in  central  bank  decision  making.  And 
finally,  last  year  I  talked  in  more  detail  about  the  inevitable  uncertainty  surrounding  any  attempt  to 
forecast and about the observation that this specific feature of any forecast quite often seems to be 
forgotten. Following this nice tradition, tonight I shall talk in more detail about one of the critical issues 
in forecasting: the exchange rate forecast. 
There is little doubt that the exchange rate plays a critical role in any attempt to forecast the business 
cycle in a small open economy. Consequently, an exchange rate block is of primary importance in any 
tool the central bank may use for forecasting. If you look at central banks’ models, however, you will 
find that the exchange rate equation is in fact always governed by a very simple relationship called – in 
economic jargon – the “uncovered interest rate parity”. 
If there is no risk premium, the uncovered interest rate parity relates interest income in the domestic 
economy with interest income in the foreign economy via the expected change in the exchange rate. 
For a better understanding we may use the example of our current situation. The one-year interest 
rate in the Eurozone is slightly above 4%, while the Czech one-year interest rate is less than 3%. In 
spite  of  this  negative  interest  rate  differential  we  still  see  many  investors  holding  Czech  crown-
denominated assets. Why? Simply because financial market participants expect the Czech crown to 
appreciate in the future and thus compensate for the negative interest rate differential. 
Although  the  uncovered  interest  rate  parity  has  been  heavily  criticised  and  disapproved  as  being 
practically non-functioning, it is used in macroeconomic models. Well, as an economic modeller you 
simply do not have any other option. The uncovered interest rate parity is directly implied by the profit-
maximising behaviour of financial market participants. 
We probably all agree that the behaviour of financial market participants is led by profit maximisation 
(given the level of risk). At the same time, however, surely at least a few of you here in the audience 
would seriously argue that a relationship such as the uncovered interest rate parity does not hold in 
reality  and  that  it  is  a  purely  theoretical  concept.  The  uncovered  interest  rate  parity  is,  however, 
implied  by  the  profit-seeking  mechanism.  Indeed,  it  says  no  more  than  those  profits  must  be  equal 
across similar economies and that it is the deliberate search for the highest profit that makes them 
equal. 
Of  course,  the  criticism  is  more  sophisticated  than  just  saying  that  something  is  not  working.  The 
critics argue that the empirical evidence on the non-performance of the uncovered interest parity is 
overwhelming.  Yes,  it  is  right  that  over  recent  decades  much  empirical  testing  has  been  done  on 
historical data, most of it showing the poor ability of the uncovered interest rate parity to predict future 
exchange  rate  movements.  It  has  even  been  shown  that  purely  statistical  models  such  as  random 
walk outperform the uncovered interest parity in the short run. 
The question, however, is to what extent the tests were done correctly and more importantly to what 
extent is it at all possible to estimate a relationship that works with expectations using econometric 
techniques and historical data. 
Fortunately for the proponents of economic modelling based on microfounded economic relationships 
such as the uncovered interest rate parity, the history of monetary policy provides many examples of 
exchange  rate  crises  and  speculative  attacks  that  clearly  support  the  functioning  of  the  uncovered 
interest  rate  parity.  However  surprising  it  may  be,  the  majority  of  currency  crises  and  speculative 
attacks  were  in  fact  caused  by  central  banks  overlooking  the  uncovered  interest  rate  parity 
relationship. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 1
Usually  it  starts  with  a  central  bank  deciding  to  boost  its  credibility  by  fixing  its  currency  to  a 
respectable one. The Deutsche Bundesbank and the rest of today’s Eurozone members (the former 
Exchange Rate Mechanism members) may serve as a useful example. By imposing the uncovered 
interest rate parity predicts that the pegging central bank either follows the interest rate policy of the 
leading central bank or faces significant pressure on its exchange rate. 
Well, this is exactly what happened, for instance, in the 1980s when the Banque de France tried to 
lower its interest rate below that of the Deutsche Bundesbank, and again at the beginning of the 1990s 
when  the  Bank  of  England  and  Banca  d’Italia  did  not  want  to  follow  the  policy  tightening  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank.  In  both  cases  the  opening  of  a  negative  interest  rate  differential  created 
depreciation pressures on the exchange rate. As you may well know, the British pound and Italia lira 
were  subsequently  forced  to  abandon  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism.  The  existence  of  exchange 
rate crises and speculative attacks thus serves as clear empirical evidence in favour of the uncovered 
interest rate parity. 
In addition, recent empirical studies based on advanced econometric techniques and using intraday 
data have shown that when the historical data are used properly the result may support the uncovered 
interest rate parity concept. 
The exchange rate plays a crucial role for the Czech economy as well and is therefore an important 
part of our forecasting devices. And yes, the core forecasting model we use relies on the uncovered 
interest rate parity equation. It is also true that the movements of the exchange rate observed recently 
have surprised us to a certain extent. These surprises, however, should be taken as economic shocks 
that no economic relationship could have predicted. 
We central bankers are not very interested in short-term volatilities, but we should not miss breaks in 
the business cycle. For this task we need a relationship that has an economic grounding in the profit-
maximising  behaviour  of  the  financial  markets.  And  this  is  what  the  uncovered  interest  rate  parity 
certainly has, and what the statistical models lack. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  wish  to  all  of  us  fewer  exchange  rate  surprises  and  the  best 
possible forecasts! 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2007
