Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – banking sector reforms: performance and 
challenges  
Lecture by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Graduate Institute of 
International Studies, Geneva, 1 February 2007. 
 Introduction 
A. 
In  recent  years,  growth  and  turnaround  in  Pakistan’s  banking  sector  has  been  remarkable  and 
unprecedented. Classified as Pakistan’s and region’s best performing sector, the banking industry’s 
assets  have  risen  to  over  $60  billion,  its  profitability  is  exceptional  and  at  an  all-time  high,  non-
performing loans (NPLs) are at an all-time low, credit is fairly diversified and bank-wide system risks 
are well-contained. Almost 81% of banking assets are in private hands. Likewise, the present foreign 
stake comes to 47% of total paid-up capital of all the financial institutions regulated by State Bank.  
Given its achievements, Pakistan’s banking sector reforms offer a useful insight into design-specific 
lessons  for  countries  venturing  to  restructure  and  reform  their  banking  sectors.  Dwelling  on  these 
lessons, I propose to further outline the significant impact and benefits of banking sector reforms of 
Pakistan on its population and economy. While a lot has been done and achieved, sustainability of 
banking system requires the banking industry to position itself to address the emerging challenges and 
complications, commonly observed in the post-banking liberalization era. Recognizing this, the State 
Bank of Pakistan (SBP), in partnership with the industry, plans to implement the outstanding reforms 
agenda, while also taking new initiatives, to broaden and deepen the banking system. 
Banking sector design-specific lessons 
B.  
The first lesson learnt from Pakistan’s banking sector reforms is that the reform strategy needs 
to be broad based and well sequenced. The reforms must be all-encompassing; resultantly the 
process is arduous, complex and continuous.  
Pakistan’s banking sector reforms have been launched and implemented over 1990s. The pace and 
sequencing of these reforms were aligned and sharpened to provide a major impetus towards the end 
of 1990s.  
Deregulation  and  restructuring  took  a  strong  foothold  in  Pakistan  as  the  Government  decided  to 
privatize banks and allow liberal entry of new banks. Simultaneously, SBP removed all restrictions and 
barriers on banks’ conduct of business by 1997/98 which included: (i) removal of floor and caps on 
interest  rate  structure  by  1997-98;  (ii)  abolishment  of  concessional  lending  schemes  (except  for 
Locally  Manufacturing  Machine  and  Export  Finance  scheme);  and  (iii)  lifting  the  cap  for  project 
financing.  Accordingly,  banks  and  NBFIs  were  able  to  set  their  lending  rates  in  relation  to  the 
demand/supply conditions in the market. 
While  promoting  banking  sector 
comprehensive  regulation,  consistent  with 
implemented institutional restructuring and strengthening.  
Carrying forward the bank restructuring process in 2007, the Government is planning to float Global 
Depository Receipts (GDRS) of few large banks by offering a proportion of their shares in international 
markets. This should help to further dilute government holdings in large banks. Taking cue from the 
minimum capital requirements (MCR) imposed by SBP, market led mergers and acquisitions (M&A) 
are helping consolidate and, as such, develop stronger and robust banking sector.  
The  second  lesson  is  that  effective  monetary  policy  and  conducive  economic  environment 
facilitate transition and augment impact of reform. The dismantling of credit ceiling, both at sector 
and bank level, and the switch to market based indirect monetary instruments improved the quality of 
monetary management. These measures, along with the move of the Government to market based 
pricing  of  central  bank  borrowing,  helped  reduce 
fiscal  subservience  of  monetary  policy. 
Macroeconomic  stability  (following  the  lowering  of  fiscal  deficit  and  external  current  account  deficit 
introduction  of  effective  and 
international  standards  and  best  practices,  and 
liberalization,  SBP  ensured 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 1
over  FY2002-03)  provided  an  environment  for  central  bank  to  ease  monetary  policy,  which  helped 
bring down interest rates to historical low of 5.05%1 by June 2004.  
The  third  lesson  that  emerges  from  the  banking  sector  reforms  is  for  the  regulator  to  have 
effective  powers  and  capacity  to  lead  and  implement  reforms.  Prior  to  the  reforms,  SBP’s 
autonomy was limited and its supervisory domain was undermined by the Pakistan Banking Council 
(PBC), a body formed to oversee the affairs of the nationalized commercial banks (NCBs). Moreover, 
the  supervisory  framework  lacked  proper  risk  mitigation  elements  and  supervisors  lacked  requisite 
supervisory  skills  in  this  regard.  In  addition,  the  regulatory  capacity  was  inadequate  to  regulate  a 
market  oriented  financial  system.  In  1997,  SBP  legislation  was  amended  to  enhance  SBP’s 
independence  and  to  empower  its  Board  more  effectively  in  monetary  management  matters. 
Furthermore, PBC was abolished and central bank staff was trained in relevant areas to build capacity 
at  all  levels.  There  has  been  considerable  accomplishment  in  terms  of  central  bank  obtaining  the 
necessary  understanding  and  leadership  for  steering  the  process  of  bank  reforms.  SBP  is  now 
equipped to deal with numerous transition challenges that are commonly observed, given the state of 
economic development, governance and political economy, in developing countries.  
Another  lesson  learnt  from  Pakistan’s  banking  sector  reforms  is  that  bank  privatization 
succeeds  if  accompanied  with  appropriate  debt  and  labor  restructuring.  In  early  1990s,  the 
Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974 was amended to empower the Government to sell all or any part of 
the share capital of NCBs and to allow entry of new banks. The Privatization Commission Ordinance 
laid  down  the  legal  framework  for  privatization  and  provided  for  the  establishment  of  Privatization 
Commission,  which  facilitated  banking  sector  privatization.  The  process  was  led  by  competent 
transaction teams who conducted valuation and structured deals in a transparent manner.  
Pursuant  to  nationalization,  weaker  banks  were  merged  with  relatively  bigger  banks  involving  re-
grouping  of  11  banks  into  five  large  banks.  Of  these,  four  banks  were  subsequently  privatized  and 
strategic shareholding of two large banks is now with foreign parties. In addition, the Government has 
offloaded  26%  stake  of  the  largest  bank,  National  Bank  of  Pakistan  through  the  stock  market. 
Presently,  the  top  five  banks  cumulatively  account  for  52.6%  of  banking  assets.  In  parallel  to 
privatization  of  NCBs,  SBP  over  the  last  16  years  or  so  licensed  28  new  banks,  of  which  six  are 
microfinance banks and five Islamic banks.  
Success  of  Pakistan’s  privatization  program  emerged  from  a  well  coordinated  effort  to  recognize 
upfront need for change of management, debt and labour resolution. The Government facilitated bank 
restructuring process by recapitalization of banks through (i) equity injection of Rs46 billion in some of 
the  public  sector  banks  and  write  offs  equivalent  to  Rs51  billion,  (ii)  lay  off  of  close  to  35,000 
employees in two phases2 from public sector banks and (iii) closing of over 2000 unbanked branches. 
To  reduce  the  level of NPLs,  the  Government  and SBP  coordinated  to  establish  the Committee  for 
Revival of Sick Industrial Units (CRSIU) and the Corporate and Industrial Restructuring Corporation 
(CIRC) which together have enabled debt recovery of Rs15.1 billion, while settling write offs to acquire 
the NPLs of public sector banks. Creation of a National Accountability Bureau (NAB) Cell at SBP to 
expeditiously process the cases of wilful defaulters has further facilitated debt resolution. Moreover a 
special  law,  the  Financial  Institutions  (Recovery  of  Finances)  Ordinance,  2001  was  enacted  with  a 
view to facilitate speedy recovery of loans. SBP also introduced a special scheme to speed up the 
recovery of NPLs. Under this scheme, borrowers were allowed to settle their obligations on the basis 
of Forced Sale Value vis-à-vis outstanding amount, whichever is lower. Borrowers were required to 
deposit  10%  down  payment  at  the  time  of  signing  of  settlement  agreement  and  repay  remaining 
amount in 12 quarterly instalments. The scheme encouraged a lot of defaulters to come forward and 
settle their long outstanding liabilities.  
Finally, it is important to recognise that quality of ownership and professional management are 
key to success of privatization. While launching privatization of state owned banks, in early 1990s, 
the Government eased entry requirement and allowed issuance of a number of bank licenses. Under 
the  criteria,  Guidelines  for  Setting  up  Commercial  Banks,  Pakistan  has  for  long  allowed  and  had 
foreign  banks  in  the  country.  Banks  are  encouraged  to  be  set  up  as  local  subsidiary  along  with 
strategic holding of up to 49% or they can conduct banking business in branch mode or as a wholly 
owned,  locally  incorporated  subsidiary  provided  these  are:  (i)  banks  from  countries  belonging  to 
                                                      
1   Weighted average marginal lending rate 
2  
In the first phase (1997) 24,000 employees were laid off and in the second phase around 11,700 employees were relieved. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2007
regional groups and associations of which Pakistan is a member and (ii) foreign banks with global tier-
1 paid-up capital of US$5 billion or more. Moreover, on a case to case basis foreign banks may be 
allowed to open a wholly owned subsidiary. Aside from change of ownership to private sector, central 
bank through its fit and proper criteria has encouraged appointment of professional management and 
Boards at the banks so that those charged with the responsibility of management and oversight have 
due competence, integrity and qualifications.  
Trends, impact and benefits of reforms 
C. 
The sustainability of transformation in banking sector, in any environment, is critically dependent on 
reforms’  success  in  (i)  promoting  higher  degree  of  depth  and  efficiency  in  financial  intermediation 
process  by  effective  resource  (deposit)  mobilization  and  channelling  these  resources  to  productive 
sectors  at  competitive  pricing,  thus  playing  a  critical  role  in  promoting  economic  growth;  (ii) 
strengthening the financial performance and soundness of banks; and (iii) extending the outreach of 
financial services to under-served/un-banked segments of the society.  
Depth and efficiency of financial intermediation in Pakistan has improved. This is captured by the 
rise in: M2/GDP ratio from 36.6% in FY00 to 44.2% in FY06; bank assets to GDP ratio from 49.1% in 
1997 to 55.6% in 2005 and deposit to GDP ratio – an indicator of the level of financial savings – from 
38.7%  in  1997  to  43.1%  in  2005.  More  significantly,  equity  market  capitalization  grew  from  merely 
10.3% of GDP in 2000 to 37.1% of GDP in 2006. Equity markets benefited from sizeable growth in 
banks  and  their  performance.  Now  banks  constitute  almost  25%  of  market  cap  at  Karachi  Stock 
Exchange and valuation of their shares is quite high with commercial banks’ P/E ratio of around 10x in 
December 2006.  
Despite significant improvement in financial indicators, relative to its regional comparators, Pakistan’s 
financial  market  has  a  relatively  lower  depth  and  penetration  (see  para.  24  below).  Moreover, 
Pakistan’s financial system continues to be predominantly bank based with the bond markets barely 
constituting 5-7% of GDP and the low pension and insurance coverage.  
Profitability  and  financial  soundness  of  banks  is  impressive  and  Pakistan’s  performance 
indicators  in  this  area  are  amongst  the  best  in  its  regional  peers.  The  profits  of  commercial  banks 
crossed over $1 billion for the first three quarters of calendar year (CY)2006. Over CY2000-September 
2006, return on assets of banks rose from negative 0.2 to 2.1 and return on equity from negative 3.5% 
to 26.1%. Banks’ profitability has been driven by a combination of factors. These include (i) a rise in 
earning assets of commercial banks to 85% in September 2006 which is significantly above the pre-
reform period and a rise in advances to total assets from 49.1% (CY2000) to 55.1% (Sep 2006), (ii) a 
decline in the total and operating expense to income with latter being half the pre-reform period, (iii) a 
rise in the SME, consumer finance and agriculture sector lending which constitutes over one third of 
total  outstanding  advances  and  typically  is  priced  above  the  average  lending  rates  and  those 
prevailing for larger corporate clients, (iv) a high share of non interest bearing or low yield deposits, 
while share of fixed term (above 6 months maturity) deposits declined and (v) a substantial growth in 
service charges which are emerging as a new source of revenue as electronic banking is taking hold. 
A SBP study has highlighted that privatization has had distinct impact on profitability of the banking 
sector,  though  its  impact on  efficiency is  relatively weak.3  This  is  largely as older  and  larger banks 
need more lead time to enhance their capacities and develop their internal control systems to improve 
efficiency. It is expected that over the period there will be more progress in these areas.  
Industry  wide  capital  adequacy  ratios  (CARs)  are  high  while  NPLs  have  scaled  down.  Risk 
weighted  CAR  for  banks  has  increased  from  11.3%  in  December  2005  to  12.7%  by  30  September 
2006: Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets rose from 8.3% to 9.8% and capital to total assets from 
7.9%  to  8.8%.  Aside  from  recapitalization,  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  have  benefited  from  new 
capital injections and/or re-ploughing of profits as banks are required to raise their capital base. Debt 
settlement  and  recovery  (see  para.  12  above)  coupled  with  introduction  of  sound  prudential 
regulations, vigilant supervision and stricter enforcement of these regulations have facilitated a sharp 
fall  in  NPLs  to  total  loans  and  net  NPLs  to  net  loans  ratios  to  7.7%  and  1.8%,  respectively  over 
CY2000-September 2006. 
                                                      
3 
State Bank of Pakistan: Financial Sector Assessment (FSA), 2005: See Annex A.  
BIS Review 22/2007 
 3
Growth  in  private  sector  credit  and  underlying  sector  diversification  has  improved.  Set  to 
expand  businesses,  in  the  last  three  years,  banks  have  recorded  a  record  growth  in  private  sector 
credit which reached close to Rs402 billion ($6.7 billion) in FY06. This has helped serve the economy 
well in a number of ways. It has fuelled economic activity, revived and enhanced industrial capacities, 
met  crop  and  non-crop  requirements  and  has  supported  steady  growth  in  services  sector  whose 
contribution to GDP has grown to 52.3%. Presently, the corporate sector accounts for almost half of 
the  total  credit  outstanding,  credit  to  agriculture  sector  now  accounts  for  6.4%,  SME-financing 
accounts for 16.1%, and consumer financing accounts for 14.3% of the total credit outstanding.  
To  enhance  the  reach  of  the  banking  system  and  serve  the  society’s  credit  requirements,  SBP 
encouraged  systematic  development  of  microfinance  sector  as  well  as  Islamic  financial  institutions. 
Primarily  in  informal  sector,  the  microfinance  industry  is  now  being  nurtured  in  formal  sector.  The 
Microfinance  Ordinance,  2001,  supported  by  SBP’s  dedicated  prudential  regulations,  provides  the 
legal and regulatory framework for microfinance banks, which is consistent with the best practices. To 
date, SBP has approved licenses for six microfinance banks4 but these banks have only recently been 
operationalized so their impact has yet to emerge. Islamic banking is gaining a foothold in Pakistan as 
SBP has issued licenses to six Islamic banks and allowed a number of conventional banks to offer 
Islamic  window.  SBP  is  working  with  the  industry  to  promote  Shariah  compliance  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. While still at a nascent stage, constituting only about 2.3% of industry assets, 
the growth in Islamic banks has far exceeded the growth observed in larger Asian markets. 
Consolidation  of  banking  sector  helps  develop  a  stronger  and  robust  banking  system  but  it 
requires  regulator’s  determination  and  industry’s  dynamism  to  launch  effective  mergers.  To 
encourage  a  consolidated  banking  sector,  SBP  called  for  a  phased  increase,  over  a  period  of  five 
years, in the MCR of commercial banks to eventually reach at least Rs6 billion ($100 million) by the 
year  2009.  Domestic  private  banks  have  either  injected  own  capital  or  sought  alliances  and 
partnerships to  augment  capital;  alternatively  domestic  or  foreign banks  have stepped  in  to  acquire 
mid-  or  small-sized  banks  to  expand  their  capital  and  outreach.  Excluding  specialized  financial 
institutions (such as microfinance and Islamic banks who have been allowed new licenses) SBP has 
imposed an embargo on new conventional bank licenses. The process of capital enhancement and 
consolidation has progressed well. Of the total 39 commercial banks (excluding microfinance banks 
that  enjoy  lower  capital  requirements),  eight  banks  have  complied  with  2009  stipulated  capital 
requirements and 16 banks have raised capital to meet 2006 MCR, while other 11 banks are well on 
their course to meet the prescribed MCR. There remain four banks that are either in the process of 
being privatized, such as SME Bank, or those with specific mission/objective, such as the First Women 
Bank, who remain below the stipulated requirements. While capital injections have been spurred by 
the  possibility  of  recourse  to  capital  markets  or  foreign  interest  in  banking  system,  the  impetus  to 
consolidation emerges from the wave of M&A, which in turn is driven by foreign interest in Pakistani 
banks triggered by their profitability.  
There has been a growing foreign interest. Existing foreign banks have by and large enhanced their 
presence and stake in Pakistan and some new foreign banks have entered for the first time. Since the 
year 2000, 30 M&A have taken place. At present foreign stake comes to 47% of total paid-up capital of 
all the financial institutions regulated by State Bank. The most sizeable deal of $513 million was struck 
by the Standard Chartered Bank which acquired a mid-size strong local bank (Union Bank). This is 
being  followed  by  others  such  as  ABN-Amro,  NIB  and  Citibank  etc.  that  are  contemplating 
acquisitions. This M&A wave will help further consolidate the banking sector. Principally driven by high 
investor confidence and economic prospects, the current M&A wave is also triggered by the need for 
banks  to  meet  higher  capital  requirements  and  also  growing  competition  which  will  make  it 
increasingly difficult for small banks to survive. Together the growing trend of M&A and recent issue of 
GDR  of  MCB  Bank  at  the  London  Stock  Exchange  have  attracted  close  to  $1  billion  inflows  and 
another equivalent amount is yet to flow in.  
                                                      
4  
Four microfinance banks (Khushali Microfinance Bank Limited, First Microfinance Bank Limited, Tameer Microfinance 
Bank Limited and Pak Oman Microfinance Bank Limited) are working at national level while two (Rozgar & Network) 
are operational at district level.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2007
Sustainability of banking sector reforms 
D. 
Prospects  for  the  continued  and  sustainable  banking  sector  growth  are  promising.  What  lends 
confidence to bankers that are fast expanding their stakes and interest in Pakistan is the  
(i) 
high  and  sustainable  economic  growth  that  the  country  is  set  on;  real  GDP  in  the  past  2 
years grew by 8.6% and 6.6% and is now set to register another 7% growth;  
real  consumption  expenditure  is  on  the  rise  and  leading  the  demand  growth,  boosted  by 
doubling of per capita incomes to $850, a fourfold increase in remittances over few years, 
rising  industrial  capacities  for  consumer  durables,  automobiles,  etc.  and  growing  role  of 
consumer financing and personal loans in meeting the demand for consumer goods;  
in  recent  years,  investment  spending  has  gained substantial  momentum  and will  be rising 
further  as  the  Government  and  private  sector  launch  and  implement  large  infrastructure 
projects. The Government has plans to add 5000 MW new power capacities in private sector 
along with a number of hydel projects, highways and port infrastructure, while catering for 
the development of large urban infrastructure to upgrade large cities; and  
foreign direct and portfolio flows is at an all time high and is expected to further grow given 
the economic potential and high returns on equity in both corporate and banking sectors.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  scope  for  enhancement  of  banking  business  is  phenomenal  as  the  level  of  financial 
exclusion is exceptionally high despite the growth in banking. Today, penetration ratio of financial 
services  is  low  judged  by  any  measure.  Thus  far  less  than  20%  of  the  population  has  access  to 
financial services given Pakistan’s low depositor base and number of borrowers are under 5 million 
(3%  of  population).  More  graphically,  there  are  only  171  deposit  accounts  per  1000  people  and  30 
loan accounts per 1000 people. Like wise, only 30% of the adults have bank accounts. Credit/GDP 
ratio at 27% is low judged by country and sector financing requirements or judged by levels prevailing 
in  emerging  markets.  Consumer  financing  penetration  ratio  is  3.9%;  steps  are  being  taken  to  relax 
exposure  limits  for  consumer  financing  selectively  for  banks  based  on  a  uniform  criteria  whereby 
banks with experience, stronger risk management controls and track record will be able to expand this 
business.  Commercial  banks  barely  provided  $1  billion  for  mortgage  markets.  The  microfinance 
industry  reaches  only  770  households  and  agriculture  and  SME  financing  reaches  to  300,000 
borrowers each.  
A number of development initiatives are underway to support banking sector to enhance its outreach. 
A  strategy  for  microfinance  industry  is  in  the  offing  which  advocates  up  scaling  the  outreach  to  3 
million people or more over next five or so years by allowing flexibility to microfinance institutions to 
commercialize  their  business  and  remove  any  distortions  that  stand  in  the  way,  while  looking  for 
partnership  with  well  experienced  international  microfinance  institutions  to  transfer  the  requisite 
approaches and modalities that have worked well in other environments. At the same time, work is 
underway to promote mobile banking which ought to help expand outreach of financial services.  
In the SME sector, banks are now allowed cash flow based lending and several business development 
initiatives are underway. In agriculture, pilot programs are underway at federal and provincial levels to 
develop  land  records  and  titling  to  ensure  that  an  effective  collateral  registry  system  evolves.  In 
housing,  banks  are  being  encouraged  to  provide  housing  finance;  however,  banks  fund  long  term 
housing  loans  through  short  term  demand  and  time  liabilities  that  in  turn  pose  an  asset  liability 
mismatch on their books. Therefore, in order to mitigate asset liability mismatches, besides provision 
of fixed rate mortgages, deliberations are underway for establishment of mortgage refinance company 
in Pakistan. 
Work is also underway to privatize outstanding financial institutions engaged in development financing 
business such as the SME Bank, Industrial Development Bank of Pakistan, House Building Finance 
Corporation and Zarai Tarakiati Bank Limited.  
SBP  has  established  a  dedicated  Development  Finance  Group  to  help  improve  the  enabling 
environment  for  development  financing  and  coordinate  intervention  and  initiatives  which  could 
enhance outreach, while developing capacities across the board in banking sector and also providing 
specialized training in some sector areas.  
Given the financial sector’s dependence on the banking sector, as evident from the low bond market to 
GDP ratio, efforts are underway to enable the development of alternate sources of long term funding. 
Among  others,  an  Infrastructure  Finance  Taskforce  is  now  deliberating  the  possibility  of  supporting 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 5
establishment  of  long  term  infrastructure  lending  institutions  and  equipping  them  with  the  desired 
project appraisal and risk management capacities.  
There is scope for enhancement of efficiency in financial intermediation which should augur 
well  for  deepening  and  sustainability  of  financial  sector.  Trends  of  over  16  years  reveal  that 
Pakistan’s interest rate structure has been quite volatile and unstable. After a period of exceptionally 
high interest rates, which were a manifestation of the public sector banks’ inefficiencies, misallocation 
of credit and reckless lending accompanied by large defaults, Pakistan’s lending rate fell but the real 
lending rate was kept so low that, despite low inflation over 2000-2004, it virtually turned negative.  
Aside from volatility in interest rate, Pakistan’s banking system over 1990s maintained high spreads. 
Subsequently, low interest rates pursued by central bank coupled with enhanced competition helped 
narrow spreads to 5.39% by December 2004. However, a reversal in trends was notable as spreads 
rose again to 7.4% by the end of November 2006 with commercial banks re-pricing their loans in line 
with the upward adjustment in SBP repo rate (policy rate) from 7.5% in April 05 to 9.5% in July 06 in 
the wake of growing inflationary pressures, without a concomitant rise in deposit rates. 
Banking spread will eventually be aligned as competition deepens both for deposit and loan products. 
Fall in cost/income ratios coupled with sizeable balances in savings or short term deposit accounts 
(with  less  than  6-months  maturity)  or  transactional  accounts  –  which  offer  low  returns  below  the 
inflation  rate  –  should  facilitate  decline  in  spreads.  However,  a  factor  to  consider  here  is  the  high 
administrative expense to total expense ratio because of rising remuneration of banking professionals 
and high operating costs.  
SBP is keen to evolve a more stable and positive real interest environment over longer run and as a 
starting  point  has  incentivized  banks,  through  a  combination  of  measures,  to  change  the  maturity 
mismatches on their balance sheets. On one hand, SBP has used differential and concessional 
cash  reserve  requirement  (half  of  the  level  applicable  to  deposits  below  6  months)  for  term 
deposits above 6 months. On the other hand, SBP is using moral suasion to encourage banks 
to  offer  different  products  which  offer  better  returns  to  depositors.  Improved  efficiency  in 
financial intermediation process and a shift to long dated deposits will augur well for sustainability of 
banking  system.  The  latter  should  also  help  reduce  the  inherent  asset-liability  mismatches  as  the 
proportion of longer maturity deposits rises and encourages banks to lend long.  
Efforts  to  strengthen  risk  management  through  effective  implementation  of  prudential 
regulations,  financial  infrastructure  and  technology  and  internal  controls  within  commercial 
banks should further augment sustainability of banking system. To consolidate and strengthen 
the risk management capacities of banking sector, SBP and banks have taken a number of initiatives. 
In line with the MCR, banks are to fully comply with the enhanced requirements by 2009. Banks are 
maintaining high CAR ratios (see para. 18). Moreover, improved credit risk management and strong 
vigilance has helped keep NPLs at manageable levels.  
Over the last few years, about half of all bank branches are online with their respective head offices, 
providing  management  with  real-time  information.  Besides  overall  improved  service  delivery,  banks 
have actively pursued Debit and Credit Cards business in urban centres. E-banking is mandatory for 
banks  to enhance  interconnectivity  of  ATM  switches in  order  to  fully  exploit  ATM  network  of  all  the 
banks.  SBP  issued  Guidelines  on  IT  Security  and  started  on-site  IT  inspections  to  ensure  whether 
banks  were  adequately  managing  the  risks  associated  with  online  banking.  In  SBP’s  on-site 
inspection, the quality of internal controls play a prominent role in determining the over all rating of the 
bank. The Internal Control Guidelines issued by SBP provide a minimum set of standards banks have 
to adhere to in this regard. While the level of sophistication varies from bank to bank, internal control 
systems have yet to be fully in place.  
In  coming  years,  commercial  banks  would  continue  to  develop  their  infrastructure,  technology  and 
human resource capacities to adopt and implement Basel-II in a phased manner. Banks are required 
to  adopt  Standardized  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  Basic  Indicator/Standardized  Approach  for 
operational risk from 1st January 2008. Subject to development of their in house systems, they would 
switch over to advanced approaches from 1st January 2010. In line with the Pillar 3 (Market Discipline) 
of Basel Accord II framework, SBP has revised the format of annual accounts to improve disclosure 
requirements. Further development of online management information system would enable banks to 
maximize benefit of eCIB (Credit Information Bureau), operationalized in 2006.  
6 
 BIS Review 22/2007
SBP  is  now  in  the  process  of  introducing  a  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system5  for  large 
value payments in the inter-bank market. Banks holding accounts at SBP would be able to operate 
their  accounts  in  real  time  from  their  own  premises.  RTGS  will  help  overcome  the  liquidity  and 
settlement  risks  as  banks would  be  able  to  settle  their  transactions  affecting  their  accounts  at  SBP 
(e.g. inter-bank lending/borrowing) immediately after the terms of the transaction have been agreed 
and executed between the banks. A Payment Systems and Electronic Funds Transfer Act 2006 after 
its passage by the Parliament will lay down legal framework for online banking.  
With  81%  of  banking  assets  now  in  private  hands,  the  government  guarantee  or  backing  of  the 
deposits of NCBs has been withdrawn. The implied government policy of rescuing the failing banks at 
the  expense  of  taxpayers’  funds  has  now  given  way  to  a  banking  supervision  approach  based  on 
international  best  practices.  SBP  has  instituted  an  all-embracing  framework  viz.  Institutional  Risk 
Assessment Framework to further strengthen the existing supervisory mechanism and to mitigate the 
variety  of  risks  banks  are  exposed  to.  The  framework  envisages  a  collaborative  and  seamless 
supervisory  focus  amongst  various  supervisory  departments  within  SBP  to  ensure  cohesive  and 
proactive monitoring of risks within banks and DFIs. The framework, being highly technology driven, 
provides  for  the  timely  flow  of  information  and  enables  SBP  to  institute  more  efficient  and  effective 
banking supervision and continuous  monitoring both on  the  part  of SBP  and  institution  themselves, 
integrating off-site surveillance, on-site examination and current market information. 
The new dynamics, however, pose a challenge and SBP will need to work on developing appropriate 
safety net for depositors, especially small depositors, without creating the problem of moral hazard.  
Concurrently, the Board of Directors as well as top management of a bank should be held liable for 
their mismanagement and poor decisions. In this connection, SBP has now for sometime enhanced 
banking  surveillance  which,  among  others,  involves  conducting  regular  stress  testing  to  measure 
system  wide  sensitivity  to  different  risks  including  credit  risks,  market  risks,  liquidity  risks  and 
operational risks. Now banks are to be encouraged to estimate their risks to capital, liquidity crisis at 
the  earliest  stage,  execute  prompt  corrective  action  in  order  to  curb  the  problem  at  the  onset,  and 
settle  depositors’  claims  in  a  timely  manner,  in  cases  where  the  corrective  actions  result  in 
liquidation/restructuring of the banks. 
Regulatory  measures  are  now  in  place  to  curb  practices  of  anti-money  laundering  as  well  as 
terrorist financing. These measures make SBP compliant with the recommendations of international 
bodies to prevent these high risk activities. There exists a comprehensive set of regulations on Know-
Your-Customer 
(KYC),  Customer  due  Diligence,  Suspicious  Transactions  Reporting  and 
correspondent banking has been put in place in line with the recommendations of the Financial Action 
Task  Force.  All  financial  institutions  (FIs)  have  to  confirm  the  true  identity  of  every  prospective 
customer  and  verify  the  documents  obtained  from  new  customers/account  holders.  All  suspicious 
transactions are to be reported by banks to SBP and, after due analysis, such cases are handed over 
to NAB or other relevant authorities for further action. The capital base of exchange companies has 
been  strengthened  and  they  are  subject  to  KYC  and  record  keeping  requirements  with  appropriate 
reporting  to SBP.  All  such  companies  are now  subject  to  both  off-  and  on-site  inspections  and  any 
violations by banks or exchange companies make them liable to penalties. 
Lastly, but most importantly, effective implementation of corporate governance is the key for 
sustainability of banking sector. Pakistan has an elaborate corporate governance framework. The 
key  objective  of  the  framework  is  to  ensure  that  the  owners  and  managers  of  a  bank  are  fully 
committed  and  have  sufficient  capacity  to  operate  the  bank  prudently.  The  Banking  Companies 
Ordinance  1962, 
lays  down  several  governance 
requirements.  It  includes  the  rules  for  appointment/dismissal  of  directors,  disclosure  of  share 
ownership, dividend policy, appointment of external auditors etc. Further instructions in these areas 
are  provided  through  Prudential  Regulations  issued  by  SBP.  Most  critical  in  this  context  are  the 
exposure limits (see Box below), guidance provided on the role and responsibilities of the Board of 
directors,  and  fit  and  proper  test  criteria  for  Chief  Executive  Officers,  Board  members  and  key 
executives. This criteria is in addition to the minimum qualification requirements. 
legislation  governing  banks, 
the  primary 
                                                      
5  
To  facilitate  this  process  a  complete  on-line,  real  time  banking  solution  Globus  is  under  implementation  which  will 
provide a strong back end system for SBP’s banking operations. 
BIS Review 22/2007 
 7
SBP has maintained a fairly elaborate prudential regulatory framework consistent with BIS 
standards.  Regulations  define  instructions  for  all  types  of  financing  and  prescribe  specific 
exposure  limits  depending  on  the  nature  of  risks  involved.  Most  critical  for  containing  the 
risks are the following requirements:  
 
(i) 
Bar on stock brokers, money changers, etc. from becoming part of the management 
and Boards of banks; 
For individual single borrower, exposure cannot exceed 30% of FIs’ equity (subject 
to a maximum 20% fund exposure) and exposure to a group cannot exceed 50% of 
FIs’ equity (subject to 35% fund exposure). FIs’ exposure shall not exceed 10 times 
the  borrower’s  equity,  fund  based  exposure  shall  not  exceed  4  times  the  equity, 
current  ratio of  borrower shall  not  be  lower  than  1:1  and subordinated  loans have 
been allowed to count towards equity of borrowers; 
Unsecured/clean exposure against single facility has been restricted to Rs500,000 
but aggregate exposure of clean lending is limited to equity base of FIs;  
Investment in shares of a company cannot exceed 5% of the FI’s paid up capital or 
10%  of  capital  of  investee  company,  whichever  is  lower.  Furthermore,  total 
investments in shares shall not exceed 20% of banks’ equity – strategic investment 
is excluded from the 20% aggregate exposure limit and there is a holding period of 5 
years;  
Contingent liabilities cannot exceed 10 times the equity of FIs; 
FIs  have  been  barred  from  taking  exposure  in  their  own  shares/other  financial 
instruments  or  the  shares/instruments  issued  by  borrowing  entity  or  its  subsidiary. 
Banks  cannot  take  exposure  on  any  person  against  the  security  of  shares  of  any 
commercial bank/FI in excess of 5% of paid up capital of the share issuing bank/FI. 
Banks cannot hold shares in any company whether for pledge or as a mortgagee or 
an absolute owner, exceeding 30% of the paid up capital of the company or of their 
capital, whichever is less; 
Guidelines on internal controls are an integral part of guidelines for risk management 
systems and underscore transparency and disclosure requirements to minimize the 
hazards of asymmetrical information and adverse selection; and 
Standard provisioning requirements are in place. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
 
  
 
Listed FIs  are  also  required  to comply  with  the Securities  and  Exchange Commission of Pakistan’s 
(SECP’s) Code of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies; although the banking law and SBP’s 
directives  override  it  wherever  there  is  a  discrepant  stipulation.  SBP  has  issued  a  Handbook  on 
Corporate  Governance  for  Banks/DFIs  containing  international  best  practices  and  is  involved  in 
awareness  building  through  conferences  and  regular  interaction  with  the  banking  professionals, 
including partnership with the Pakistan Institute of Corporate Governance, which was established with 
SBP as a founding member.  
The efforts of SBP and banking industry have yielded results in bringing about a positive change in the 
corporate  governance  practices  of  banks.  Banks  are  now  managed  and  run  by  better  cadre  of 
professionals and stakeholders now play an active role and take a keen interest in the affairs of banks. 
The Boards meet regularly and participate in both setting strategic direction for their institutions and 
providing  desired  oversight.  Managements  at  majority  of  banks  are  equipped  with  professional 
competence  and  high  degree  of  integrity.  The  increasingly  intense  competition  among  banks  has 
resulted  in  improved  and  swift  decision-making  processes.  The  outside  pressures  have  been 
marginalized. Financial reporting standards mirror international best practices, resulting in enhanced 
disclosure and transparency. In compliance with the elaborate corporate governance framework of the 
regulators, banks have displayed high level of eagerness to up-grade their systems.  
 
8 
 BIS Review 22/2007
A quick glance at the corporate governance practices adopted by banks brings to fore the 
following major areas where banks have shown increased, albeit slow, compliance with the 
existing codes and standards: 
 •  Banks seek prior clearance from SBP for the appointment of directors and CEOs; 
•  Banks follow the fit & proper test criteria for the appointment of key executives who should 
not be holding an office in another financial institution; 
•  The scope of the Board’s policies has been enhanced to cover a broad range of areas 
such as internal audit and control, risk management, human resources, credit, 
investments, etc.; 
•  Boards now include experienced non-executive directors; 
•  Boards meet more frequently; 
•  Banks record detailed minutes of the Board meetings; 
•  Boards constitute specialized committees with well-defined objectives, authorities and 
tenure, comprising of non-executive directors to review different critical functions; 
•  Banks ensure that executive directors are not more than 25% of the total directors on the 
•  Banks ensure that their cross shareholding in other financial institutions does not exceed 
•  Directors of the same family do not get representation of more than 25% of the total 
•  Auditors are appointed from the SBP’s approved panel and they are rotated at an 
Board; 
more than 5%; 
directors on the Board; 
appropriate interval; and 
•  Banks publish and circulate on quarterly basis unaudited financial statements of the banks 
along with the directors’ review. 
 
Improvement  in  corporate  governance  has  helped  impart  a  high  degree  of  financial  stability.  The 
balance  sheet  of  the  banking  system  has  expanded  at  a  fast  pace.  Since  December  31,  2002  till 
December 31, 2005, the balance sheet has recorded a growth of 64.5%, which in all respect is quite 
significant.  Deposits  of  the  banking  system  registered  unprecedented  growth  of  69%  since  2002. 
Profits of the banking system scaled new heights. Return on assets (after tax) increased to 1.9% in 
2005  (and  further  increased  to  2.1%  by  Sep  2006)  from  0.1%  in  2002.  Credit  activities  got  a 
tremendous boost as banks responded zealously to meet the sharp rise in demand for credit. Loan 
portfolio of the banking system got doubled in the last three years. Unlike the past trends, the credit 
growth was fairly diversified. This led to substantial increase in the exposure of the banking system to 
new emerging sectors like consumer, agriculture and SMEs sectors. 
Greater compliance with the corporate governance standards has helped keep NPLs to low levels and 
improve  the  management  performance.  As  of  December  2005,  the  key  management  performance 
indicators of the banking system confirm the impact of strengthened corporate governance and risk 
management practices within banks. For example: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Intermediation cost has fallen to 2.7% as compared with 3.4% in 2000. 
Average earnings per share have increased to Rs5.7 from Rs3.2 in 2003.  
Deposits per employee rose to Rs30.2 million from Rs14.2 million in 2000. 
Assets per employee increased to Rs39 million from Rs19.1 million in 2000.  
Conclusion 
Pakistan, like the rest of Asia, is growing fast and the rise in per capita income, emergence of middle 
income group and relative wealth increases are together bringing with them new demands for retail 
banking industry. The transformation of Pakistan’s banking sector, given the success in developing a 
stronger  and  robust  system,  offers  some  interesting  perspectives  and  lessons  for  banking  sector 
reform.  The  sector  now  faces  interesting  emerging  challenges  and  risks  that  are  not  uncommon  in 
financial systems in post reform period.  
BIS Review 22/2007 
 9
Going  forward,  Pakistan’s  financial sector strategy  for next  decade  or so  will aim  at addressing  the 
emerging challenges while laying the foundation for a deeper and efficient financial system which is 
competitive and financially inclusive. Banks are now aggressive and recognize that having cleaned up 
their loan portfolios and balance sheets, they need to re-position themselves to take advantage of the 
boosting  economy.  Over  the  next  few  years,  commercial  banks  will  have  to  focus  on  product 
innovations  and  diversifying  their  reach  to  infrastructure,  housing,  SME  and  microfinance  industry 
while exploring and reaching out to new and under-banked regions. The investors and the industry are 
seeking better investment and financing alternatives and solutions, with demand for private debt, asset 
based and mortgage based securities, credit derivatives and hedge products etc. now emerging from 
different segments of  economy  and  population.  Banks  will need  to  poise  themselves  to  meet  these 
demands for continued growth. 
10 
 BIS Review 22/2007
