Nils Bernstein: The Danish economy in an international perspective  
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual  General 
Meeting of the Association of DLR Kredit, Copenhagen, 25 April 2007. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today.  
My subject today is the Danish economy in an international perspective. I will first present some views 
on globalisation, and then turn to the internationalisation of the financial markets. Finally, I will consider 
some  of  the  financial  products  that  have  come  to  us  from  abroad  and  today  are  offered  to  private 
Danish investors.  
The Danish economy has traditionally been internationally oriented, with considerable external trade. 
Agriculture became globalised more than 100 years ago. Much of our prosperity is a consequence of 
the international division of labour. The current development has made this international perspective 
even  more  relevant.  Globally,  there  is  an  ever-increasing  international  exchange  of  goods  and 
services, investments, information, people, culinary habits, culture, etc. The economic changes have 
been extensive and help to explain why globalisation is currently a major topic of debate.  
 Globalisation  has  developed  in  waves  of  shorter  or  longer  duration  over  the  last  few  centuries. 
Especially  in  the  golden  eras,  there  was  major  technological  progress  within  transport  and 
communication.  These  eras  were  also  characterised  by  an  international  political  environment  that 
stimulated free trade and the unrestricted mobility of capital and people.  
In current years, globalisation seems to have even more wind in its sails. Populous nations such as 
China and India have become part of the global market economy. Technological progress in e.g. the 
IT  area  has  fundamentally  changed  how  companies  organise  their  production  set-ups.  The  free 
movement of capital has probably never enjoyed better conditions than those prevailing today.  
These  changes  have  increased  the  benefits  from  the  international  division  of  labour.  Low-
technological production has moved to the countries whose labour-intensive production gives them a 
comparative  advantage.  Production  in  more  developed  countries  has  become  further  concentrated 
around  high-tech  products.  At  the  same  time,  the  outsourcing  of  services,  rather  than  just  the 
production of goods, has been increasing rapidly. Today, cross-border trade in services accounts for 
20 per cent of world trade.  
One  indicator  of  the  growing  economic  integration  between  different  countries  is  that world  trade  is 
expanding faster than global output measured by GDP (slide 2). This has been the case without any 
interruption since the Second World War.  
Compared to other industrial countries, the Danish economy has enjoyed double globalisation gains. 
Denmark's  export-oriented  economy  has  profited  from  the  general  expansion  of  international  trade, 
 BIS Review 44/2007 
 1
and  Denmark  has  also  benefited  from  its  improved  terms  of  trade.  Many  Danish  companies  have 
succeeded in selling their products at ever-higher prices, while import prices have stagnated.  
Denmark's terms of trade have been improving for the past 15 years, even when energy is excluded 
(slide 3). On the other hand, the terms of trade of the EU taken as one have been unchanged since 
1990. Sweden and Finland's terms of trade have deteriorated over the period, while the two countries' 
economic  development  has  been  characterised  by  high  growth.  One  contributing  factor  is  a  strong 
productivity  improvement  for  some  of  the  products  for  which  these  countries  have  a  comparative 
advantage, in areas such as telecommunications.  
 Denmark's  terms  of  trade  have  improved  in  view  of  such  factors  as  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  its 
business structure. Since there is considerable readiness for change in Denmark, the Danish economy 
has  managed  to  stay  competitive.  Readiness  for  change  will  also  be  a  key  economic  factor  in  the 
future since, even more than today, we may be challenged on the production of high-technology and 
other "knowledge-intensive" products.  
There are several factors behind the flexibility of the Danish economy. It has been important not to 
take  political  measures  to  keep  struggling  sectors  and  individual  business  enterprises  alive. 
Furthermore,  Denmark's  flexible  labour  market  and  opportunities  for  supplementary  training  have 
made it possible to redeploy labour resources. In Denmark, the average length of employment in one 
job  is  approximately  4.8  years,  which  is  low  in  a  European  context  (slide  4).  With  a  labour  force 
totalling around 2.9 million, this corresponds to approximately 600,000 job changes in Denmark per 
year.  
One  particular  aspect  of  globalisation  is  financial  integration  across  national  borders.  Not  only  the 
international  trade  in  goods  and  services  has  expanded  strongly.  There  has  also  been  exponential 
  2 
 BIS Review 44/2007
development  in  international  capital  flows.  For  example,  the  volume  of  trading  in  US  securities 
between the USA and the rest of the world increased by a factor of 200 in the period from 1980 to 
2006. In that same period, US foreign trade increased by a factor of 11, and nominal US GDP by a 
factor of 5 (slide 5).  
 The increasing liberalisation of global capital flows has been decisive to this expansion. This has been 
a gradual process that picked up momentum especially in the 1980s. Within the framework of the EU 
much  has  been  done  to  promote  the  free  movement  of  capital.  The  elimination  of  exchange-rate 
uncertainty on the introduction of the euro has contributed further to the increasing financial integration 
of  the  euro  area  member  states.  In  recent  years,  new  joint  framework  conditions  for  the  European 
securities markets have also been drawn up.  
The  globalisation  of  the  financial  markets  provides  for  more  efficient  use  of  capital,  with  potential 
substantial gains for the global economy. For investors, the greater integration of the financial markets 
augments opportunities for investment. Capital can seek out new markets yielding higher returns, and 
a larger financial market increases opportunities to spread risk. In addition, borrowers gain access to 
raise capital from a wider and deeper pool of investors. The overall effect is the more efficient use of 
capital, such that the capital is utilised where it has the greatest effect.  
But financial integration has also brought new risks. Substantial financial imbalances across countries 
can be financed for as long as the financial markets have confidence in developments, but once this 
confidence has gone, things can change very quickly. Since 2002, and without interruption, the USA 
has been able to finance a current-account deficit of around 4-7 per cent of GDP (Slide 6). During this 
period the USA's consumption and investment demand has persistently and significantly exceeded its 
income.  Considerable  capital  inflows  from  abroad  have  made  this  possible.  But  what  will  happen  if 
these  capital  inflows  suddenly  cease?  This  will  push  up  US  interest  rates  and  weaken  the  dollar 
significantly. In this scenario there is a risk that the necessary adjustment will be very cost-intensive for 
large  parts  of  the  global  economy.  The  prices  of  a  number  of  financial  assets  will  adjust  rapidly, 
leading  to  economic  adjustments.  Fortunately,  it  is  widely  believed  that  the  risk  of  an  abrupt 
adjustment is diminishing, but it still exists.  
BIS Review 44/2007 
 3
 Denmark has also been part of the global financial integration. Danish companies frequently acquire 
companies  abroad,  and  foreign  companies  buy  Danish  companies.  Even  in  international  terms,  the 
sale of TDC to an international capital fund in 2006 was one of the largest ever transactions of its kind.  
The development in the Danish securities markets reflects increasing financial integration, especially 
with the euro area. Statistical analyses show that yield changes in Danish 10-year government bonds 
closely  follow  equivalent  German  yield  changes  (slide  7).  There  is  also  relatively  close  covariation 
between Danish, German, British and Japanese interest-rate changes and interest-rate changes in the 
world's  most  important  bond  market  –  the  market  for  US  government  bonds  (slide  8).  The 
convergence has increased significantly in recent years. Investors apparently increasingly consider the 
world's large bond markets as one single market.  
 4 
 BIS Review 44/2007
Compared  to  bonds,  equities  are  more  heterogeneously  structured,  and  the  integration  of  equities 
markets across countries is less far advanced. It is clear, however, that share indices in the USA, the 
euro area and in Denmark are influenced by the same factors (slide 9).  
 Denmark's  integration  into  the  global  financial  markets  is  indisputable.  And  this  development  is  of 
great benefit to us. However, it is also obvious that we cannot isolate ourselves from external events to 
the same extent as before. I have already mentioned the risk that it suddenly becomes more difficult to 
finance the US current-account deficit. An abrupt adjustment of this nature would naturally also have 
certain consequences in Denmark, e.g. via a decline in exports.  
  The yen carry trade is another example of a global financial phenomenon that some consider a threat 
to global financial stability. The yen carry trade is an investment strategy whereby an investor borrows 
in  Japanese  yen  at  a  low  interest  rate  and  then  places  the  funds  in  e.g.  US  securities  at  a  higher 
interest rate. Even though it is impossible to precisely assess the scale of the yen carry trade strategy, 
it  undoubtedly  attracts  many  investors.  This  is  due  to  a  significant  yield  spread,  in  the  range  of  3 
percentage points, between yen- and dollar-denominated instruments (slide 10).  
BIS Review 44/2007 
 5
 The yen carry strategy is pursued by a diverse group of investors ranging from Japanese housewives 
investing  in  mutual  funds  with  placements  in  New  Zealand  and  Australian  dollar  bonds,  to  hedge 
funds, and to farmers in eastern Europe who raise capital denominated in yen.  
Whether the yen carry strategy presents a global risk is highly dependent on the strategy's popularity. 
If  there  are  sudden  changes  in  the  basis  for  the  strategy,  causing  investors  to  rush  to get  out,  this 
could  lead  to  strong  fluctuations  in  interest  and  exchange  rates,  if  the  figures  involved  are  large 
enough. These fluctuations would reverberate through the global financial system and ultimately also 
require economic adjustments.  
According to economic theory, the yen trade ought not to pay off over longer periods. Adjustments of 
the economies entail that over time interest-rate spreads are set off by exchange-rate changes – in 
this case by a strengthening of the yen. 
However, the fact is that for long periods the yen carry strategy has actually paid off. Exchange rates 
that  are  not  anchored  in  fixed-exchange-rate  regimes  are  notoriously  difficult  to  predict.  This  also 
applies to the yen, which for long periods has continuously weakened against the dollar, perhaps for 
the  very  reason  that  more  and  more  investors  have  been  attracted  by  the  yen  carry  trade,  which 
requires yen to be sold on an ongoing basis.  
However,  there  is  much  to  indicate  that  one  should  be  careful  with  this  type  of  speculation,  even 
though for long periods the strategy has paid off. The yen carry strategy is risky. The problem arises 
when/if  the  yen  suddenly  strengthens  considerably,  so  that  investors  sustain  substantial  losses. 
Attempts by a large number of investors to extricate themselves from the same type of position will 
only cause the yen to appreciate more, leading to further losses. This was the case in 1998, when the 
yield spread between the yen and the dollar also attracted many investors to the yen carry trade. So in 
the  course  of  just  3  days  the  yen  strengthened  by  13  per  cent.  This  among  other  things  imposed 
heavy losses on a number of hedge funds (slide 11). Compared to the yen's normal price fluctuations, 
its  strengthening  in  this  period  was  virtually  impossible  according  to  the  probability  distributions 
normally  applied.  This  is  what  can  happen,  however,  and  this  is  why  the  strategy  is  compared  to 
picking up nickels in front of a steam roller (slide 12).  
6 
 BIS Review 44/2007
   Economists use a concept called "fat tails” to describe the statistical phenomenon that extreme events 
occur  more  frequently  than  the  most  used  probability  distribution  would  indicate.  Fat  tails  can  sting 
investors when they strike. 
 Financial  integration  has  not  only  led  to  global  systemic  changes  and  new  opportunities  for 
professional  investors.  It  has  also  instigated  rapid  financial  innovation,  with  completely  new 
opportunities for private investors. 
I am sure that a number of those present here today will be familiar with the principles of the carry 
investment strategy I have just described. We have our own little version of this strategy. In our case, 
the strategy is pursued by private borrowers, often farmers it is said, who raise loans in Swiss francs 
rather  than  in  Danish  kroner.  A  lower  level  of  interest  rates  for  Swiss  than  for  Danish  instruments 
makes this advantageous, at any rate for as long as the Swiss franc does not strengthen excessively 
against the krone (slide 13).  
BIS Review 44/2007 
 7
The  banks’  lending  to  households  in  Swiss  francs  has  risen  steadily  since  2001  and  today  totals 
almost kr. 20 billion (slide 14). During 2006 the increase in Swiss franc lending flattened out, however, 
and by the end of the year the net lending was negative (slide 15). At the same time, the Swiss franc 
had weakened to its lowest level against the Danish krone for 8-9 years. The decline in net lending 
may be due to expectations that the Swiss franc would rally. This is confirmed by statistical analyses 
of data for a large number of years. The analyses find significant correlation between a weaker Swiss 
franc and diminishing net lending.  
    8 
 BIS Review 44/2007
It  is  interesting  that  the  Danish  carry  speculators show  a  different  reaction  pattern  to  the  yen  carry 
speculators.  The  yen  carry  speculators  leave  their  positions  when  the  yen  strengthens,  apparently 
fearing that the strengthening forewarns an imminent stronger adjustment of the exchange rate. Our 
domestic  Swiss  franc  speculators  increase  their  positions  when  the  franc  strengthens,  apparently 
believing the strengthening to be temporary.  
The  Danish  Swiss  franc  carry  loan  strategy  is  naturally  far  too  small  and  insignificant  to  present  a 
threat  to  the  global  financial  system.  The  risk  is  rather  related  to  the  economic  situation  of  the 
individual borrowers if the Swiss franc strengthens against the krone. In this case too, the fat tails will 
sting investors if they strike.  
Another new type of financial product that has appeared in Denmark in recent years is indexed bonds. 
The  banks'  sales  of  this  type  of  bonds  have  increased  strongly  since  the  start  in  1998.  At  the 
beginning of April 2007 the outstanding volume listed on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange was kr. 52 
billion  (slide  16).  In  the  next  Monetary  Review  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank  we  will  present  an 
analysis of this product. I can already describe some of the results here.  
 The product comprises both a relatively safe investment in bonds and an investment in options. The 
option investment is pegged to the development in e.g. equities, exchange rates or commodities. The 
product has expanded the investment universe open to private investors. We can now all speculate in 
whether the price of copper or of Australian dollars is on its way up.  
One  positive  characteristic  of  indexed  bonds  is  that  any  loss  is  often  limited  to  a  relatively  small 
proportion  of  the  invested  amount.  However,  this  is  not  sufficient  to  make  the  investment  sound. 
Indexed bonds are illiquid instruments and often have a complex structure that many can find hard to 
grasp.  
So what is the pay-off from this complexity? A high yield? Not necessarily. At Danmarks Nationalbank 
we have reviewed 67 indexed bonds for a nominal value of approximately kr. 18 billion. The bonds 
were  all  listed  on  the  Copenhagen  Stock  Exchange,  but  have  now  been  redeemed.  The  average 
annual yield on these bonds was around 2.5 per cent, weighted in relation to the maturity of the bonds 
and the nominal outstanding volume. Almost half of the bonds yielded a negative return, or no return 
at  all,  while  approximately  15  per  cent  of  the  bonds  gave  an  annual  yield  of  10  per  cent  or  more 
(slide 17).  
BIS Review 44/2007 
 9
 The  67  indexed  bonds  have  given  an  average  additional  annual  yield,  when  compared  to  Danish 
government bonds with the same duration, of around 0.1 percentage point. An investor in a Danish 
government bond acquires a liquid, risk-free and very uncomplicated bond, of which the nominal yield 
is furthermore known at the time of purchase. In comparison, the indexed bonds have a little  more 
credit risk, much less liquidity, and a lot more fluctuation in yields. Compared to the risks assumed, a 
historical average additional annual yield of 0.1 percentage point must be considered small.  
Like most other investment decisions, borrowing in Swiss francs and investing in indexed bonds entail 
financial risk. I would like to stress that investment decisions should be based on careful consideration 
of the risks involved.  
Globalisation is a positive phenomenon, especially for Denmark, because we have been able to adjust 
rapidly.  The  financial  markets  are  an  area  where  the  consequences  of  globalisation  are  most 
apparent. Today, the financial markets react like dominoes. It is important to remember that can also 
have detrimental consequences for any private investor or borrower who ventures into these markets.  
10 
 BIS Review 44/2007
