Paul A Acquah: Fifty years of central banking in Ghana 
Welcome  address  by  Dr  Paul  A  Acquah,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the  Bank  of 
Ghana’s 50th Anniversary Celebrations Launch, Accra, 31 July 2007. 
 Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Ghana, 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Board of Directors 
Colleagues and Staff  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  deem  it  a  great  pleasure  and  honour  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  important  ceremony  to 
launch the 50th anniversary celebration of the Bank of Ghana. Fifty years of central banking 
is a significant milestone in the history of any institution and more significant as it coincides 
with the 50th anniversary of the nation. And we are privileged to have H.E President John 
Agyekum  Kufour,  with  us  here  today  to  launch  the  programme  of  celebrations.  The  first 
President  of  the  Republic  of  Ghana,  Dr.  Kwame  Nkrumah,  inaugurated  the  Bank  at  its 
inception, and it is now for this President, His Excellency, to grace this occasion, to usher us 
in the next 50 years. Your Excellency, we very much appreciate that you have taken this time 
to come.  
Let me also recognize the presence of the former Governors and Deputy Governors of the 
Bank who have helped steer this institution and in various ways shaped its history.  
To mark the Bank’s 50th Anniversary, we have put together a week long programme which 
attempts to capture the historical and organic life of the Bank. Exhibition of old currencies, 
documentation, and pictures would be mounted to outline how the functions of the Bank have 
evolved over time. In the rich tradition of oral history, public interaction and presentations by 
past Governors would amount to a guided tour of the history of the Bank. We are crowning 
the  celebrations  with  a  high  level  International  Symposium  on  the  theme  “Central  Banking 
and the Millennium Development Goals”, which in a sense should frame the Bank’s role in 
advancing to the middle income status and towards a fully industrialized economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, on occasions like this, it is in order to recount some of the history of 
the Bank. And, we have prepared for us a commemorative history book of the bank, which 
will be launched by His Excellency the President today.  
The Bank’s policies and activities have been shaped by changing conditions over the years. 
The Bank of Ghana Ordinance (No. 34) of 1957 clearly defined the role of the Bank to suit 
the  circumstances  at  that  time.  From  the  optimism  that  characterized  the  country’s 
independence and aspirations, the Bank of Ghana pursued proactive  policies to foster the 
credit system, creating financial institutions as growth-promoting vehicles, while exercising its 
fundamental  responsibilities  of  currency  management  and  acting  as  the  Government’s 
banker.  The  Bank  has  been  driven  by  the  power  of  ideas;  by  the  influence  of  men  and 
women in public roles and those privileged to serve the Bank; and by the twist and turns on 
the path of social and economic progress of the nation. 
Monetary policy geared to supporting fiscal expansion for rapid growth under fixed exchange 
rate  regime  in  a  rapidly  changing  economic  environment  brought  on  balance  of  payments 
difficulties prompting Parliament to arm the Bank with the Exchange Control Act to manage 
trade and foreign exchange transactions. 
The  exchange  controls  and  their  administration  came  with  its  own  problems,  in  terms  of 
waste of resources and perverse incentives associated with distorted pricing, low growth and 
unemployment. The system over-extended the powers the Bank was  able to exercise and 
the  economy  became  caught  in  monetary  and  fiscal  instability.  A  prominent  feature  of  the 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 1
economic history is the gradual process of dismantling these controls and liberalization of the 
economy culminating in the passage of the Foreign Exchange Act last year on the heels of 
stabilization of the economy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  has  been  fifty  years  and  the  Bank  is  operating  in  a  different 
statutory  and  macroeconomic  context.  To  respond  to  changing  domestic  conditions  and 
developments  in  central  banking  and  monetary  policy  worldwide,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  Act 
(2002) was passed which bestowed independence on the central bank, leaving it free to re-
focus  its  policies  on  price  and  financial  stability  as  a  principal  mandate.  This  marked  the 
beginning of a new paradigm in defining what the Bank of Ghana represents and its role in 
monetary and financial management.  
The Bank has taken seriously its mandate to focus on price stability as its primary goal, and 
as a guiding operational principle. We take it as demand by the public for price stability, and 
aversion  to  high  inflation  and  currency  volatility.  The  mandate  is  in  a  sense  a  search  to 
entrench  macroeconomic  stability.  That  is  a  situation  in  which  price  and  exchange  rate 
movements  are  not  a  source  of  public  anxiety,  but  rather  a  situation on  which  businesses 
and consumers can stretch their horizon and plan based on stable expectations with regard 
to investments, savings, productivity and value for their money. This is the best contribution 
that  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  can  make  to  accelerated  growth  on  sustained 
basis.  
So,  under  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  framework,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  work 
really turns on promoting disciplined macroeconomic policies, with the budget and monetary 
policy playing complementary roles to promote growth with stability. Monetary policy is most 
effective when the public is willing to hold and use the currencies introduced by the Bank as 
legal tender and as a store of their wealth because of confidence that the value will be stable 
over time – the value is the same – and by implication prices will remain fairly stable as well. 
But the key here is the credibility of macroeconomic policies. 
At the time of independence, the banking industry consisted of 3 banks. This has grown over 
the years to 23 banks with a network of some 600 branches, 123 rural banks, 13 savings and 
loans companies, as we celebrate this Golden Jubilee. These operate alongside an array of 
non-bank financial institutions, insurance companies, and other micro-credit institutions. We 
now have a banking industry that is reasonably competitive and well capitalized, sound and 
liquid, having withstood the pressures of rapid disinflation over the past years.  
Your Excellency, as we look forward, the Bank of Ghana has a responsibility to promote the 
development  of  a  financial  system  that  is  effectively  integrated  and  in  tune  with  the  global 
financial market; and that is capable of providing a diversified range of financial instruments 
and services to support a dynamic growing economy.  
The Bank is building the nucleus of a payments system infrastructure and a financial system 
that can develop over time into a vibrant segment of the international financial industry in the 
West  African  Region,  a  financial  centre  of  global  standards  in  terms  of  the  quality  and 
incentives  built  into  the  regulatory  environment,  financial  institutions  and  the  services  they 
can deliver. This positioning of the industry is even more important in the context where the 
entire  ECOWAS  regional  market  may  well  come  under  a  common  currency  regime,  and 
become  a  single  economic  space;  with  free  mobility  of  capital,  goods  and  services,  and 
labour. 
The future of the financial sector should be one that is vibrant and well anchored in price and 
financial  stability,  better  to  serve  as  a  pillar  for  economic  growth  towards  achieving  the 
Millennium  Development  Goals  and  middle  income  status.  This  is  the  theme  of  the 
symposium organised as part of these celebrations.  
Your Excellency, the quality of public institutions, and for that matter the public service, is an 
important determinant of the financial sophistication of the state; and the central bank – the 
Bank  of  Ghana  –  has  a  pivotal  role  in  pioneering  the  process.  Ghana  @50  –  the  nation’s 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2007
Golden Jubilee – had the theme “Championing African Excellence”. We see in this occasion, 
an imperative for the Bank of Ghana to strive to be a Champion Institution in the community 
of central banks. 
To conclude, I should say that I consider it a privilege and an honour to be here and be part 
of this important milestone of the nation’s central bank.  
I would like to welcome you all to this ceremony and we look forward to your participation in 
the activities lined up for the Jubilee celebrations. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 3
