Mario Draghi: Monetary policy and the banking system 
Address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Italian Banking Association, Rome, 11 July 2007. 
 I  wish  to  thank  the  Italian  Banking  Association  for  extending  its  traditional  invitation  to  the 
Governor of the Bank of Italy to take the floor on the occasion of your Annual Meeting. And I 
should like to convey my special greetings to President Corrado Faissola, who is presiding 
over the gathering for the first time. 
Economic and monetary developments 
The  euro-area  economy  will  continue  to  expand  in  line  with  its  potential  growth  rate.  The 
rapid  increase  in  exports  should  be  accompanied  by  lively  internal  demand.  Industrial 
production  is  now  at  a  five-year  peak,  as  is  the  indicator  of  business  confidence,  and 
consumer confidence continues to improve. In the second quarter of 2007 GDP growth was 
about 2 per cent on an annual basis. The EuroCOIN coincident indicator calculated by the 
Bank of Italy has declined slightly since the start of the year but remains at a high level. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  clearly  perceiving  the  signs  of 
expanding  economic  activity,  has  been  making  its  monetary  policy  progressively  less 
accommodating  since  the  end  of  2005.  This  prompt  intervention,  in  advance  of  actual 
pressure on prices, has kept inflation expectations anchored to a stable scenario. 
Lending conditions for households and firms remain favourable. 
The money supply and credit in the euro area are still expanding rapidly. M3 growth remains 
near  the  highest  rates  recorded  since  the  start  of  monetary  union.  The  most  liquid 
components, cash and current accounts, have decelerated. Bank credit to firms is growing at 
a strong pace, while lending to households has slowed slightly. The deceleration in mortgage 
lending for house purchase reflects the slackening of property prices and rising interest rates. 
Since January the rate of inflation has been just under 2 per cent. It may exceed that value 
temporarily in the months to come as a result of the recent rise in energy prices. 
The euro has contributed substantially to Italian and European economic growth. Since its 
introduction,  thanks  to  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy,  inflation  expectations  have 
remained low and stable, even in the face of sharply rising energy prices. The credibility of 
the  monetary  policy  stance  has  kept  interest  rates  significantly  lower  than  in  previous 
decades  in  every  phase  of  the  economic  cycle,  not  just  in  Italy  but  in  the  other  euro-area 
countries.  The  predictability  of  monetary  policy  has  helped  reduce  the  volatility  of  the 
financial markets. 
At the launch of the monetary union there were fears that certain structural features would 
make  the  Italian  economy  more  vulnerable  than  others  to  variations  in  the  official  rates. 
Monetary  policy  produces  its  effects  on  the  economy  above  all  by  influencing  the  cost 
differential between firms’ external and internal finance. Its impact is therefore amplified by 
information asymmetry concerning the state of the borrower, or by the impossibility for firms 
of  replacing  bank  loans  with  market  instruments  such  as  bond  issues.  A  situation  that  is 
especially common in Italy, where small firms depending on bank credit are prevalent and 
where  private  capital  markets  are  still  less  highly  developed  than  in  other  large  industrial 
countries. The effect is heightened if the loan market consists mainly of short-term, variable-
rate loans. 
Studies conducted by the Eurosystem using a broad range of econometric techniques have 
nevertheless found that, albeit with modest differences, the economies of all the euro-area 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 1
countries  have  so  far  responded  in  similar  fashion  to  changes  in  interest  rates.  In  recent 
years  the  exceptionally  low  level  of  risk  premiums  and  of  interest  rates,  the  abundance  of 
finance  in  the  form  of  both  loans  and  other  financial  instruments,  and  the  large  volume  of 
firms’ internally generated funds may have softened the effects of structural disparities, which 
could re-emerge in the presence of less favourable economic and financial conditions. 
At the same time, however, the structure of the Italian economy is becoming more robust. 
The consolidation of the credit system has given birth to large banks capable of operating on 
a  range  of  markets.  The  improved  efficiency  of  intermediaries  and  the  considerable 
lengthening  of  corporate  debt  maturities  have  removed  earlier  weaknesses.  The 
extraordinary  development  of  the  euro  bond  market  and  the  recent  opening  of  the  Italian 
stock exchange to international alliances will also help a system that had lost the market for 
corporate  bonds  and  where  firms’  recourse  to  the  equity  market  is  still  limited.  Further 
progress on these fronts is essential if we are to fully exploit the advantages of participating 
in the Monetary Union. 
Financial innovation and monetary policy 
The diffusion of financial innovations, the creation of new products and new intermediaries, 
and  the  changing  structure  of  the  financial  markets  alter  the  importance  of  the  various 
channels  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  affect  the  analysis  of  money  and  credit 
aggregates and their role in monetary management. 
The  role  of  the  banking  system  in  transmitting  monetary  policy  impulses  has  been 
diminishing  in  importance.  If  the  recent  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  financial  markets 
prove  to  be  permanent,  banks  will  increasingly  be  agents  that  originate  loan  assets  which 
they then combine and transfer in part to the market. Loan securitizations are booming. In 
2006 they were equal to more than one fifth of the increase in lending in the euro area and in 
Italy. Credit derivatives, though still small in volume, are growing explosively. The transfer of 
assets  to  non-bank  investors  such  as  pension  funds  and  hedge  funds  gives  banks  an 
alternative  channel  for  procuring  liquidity.  The  transfer  of  risk  by  means  of  derivative 
instruments can reduce the supervisory capital requirement for a given volume of lending. A 
study by the Bank of Italy and the ECB on eight years of data from 3,000 intermediaries in 
the  euro  area  has  shown  that  the  banks  that  make  the  greatest  use  of  securitization 
decrease their lending less than others in response to rises in the official interest rates. 
Other  transmission  channels  are  gaining  in  importance.  Innovation  has  made  financial 
markets more liquid, efficient and complete. The speed with which official rate changes are 
reflected  on  a  broad  range  of  financial  instruments,  and  hence  on  saving  and  investment 
decisions, has increased. The markets respond to expected moves by the central bank even 
before its actual moves. 
The promptness with which markets react to new information increases the risks of instability 
inherent in unclear communication by central banks. Monetary policy decisions that diverge 
from  the  expectations  of  the  market  already  embodied  in  financial  asset  prices  can  have 
devastating  effects  on  liquidity  and  prices  in extreme  cases.  In  recent years  central  banks 
have augmented the predictability of monetary policy, making objectives and strategies clear 
and explicit. 
Central banks take expectations into account, but they do not lose sight of the fundamentals. 
To avoid surprising the markets is preferable but not always possible. It remains essential for 
price stability that the authorities’ actions orient the market, not the other way around. 
The  changes  in  financial  structure  also  affect  the  information  content  of  the  monetary 
aggregates.  Until  not  many  years  ago  virtually  all  euro-area  M3  consisted  of  transaction 
instruments  of  households  and  firms,  whose  behaviour  as  holders  of  money  was  stable 
enough. In recent years there has been considerable growth both of the portion held by non-
bank intermediaries, including investment funds and loan securitization vehicles, and of the 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2007
portion  consisting  of  negotiable  instruments,  holdings  of  which  are  largely  determined  by 
portfolio choices rather than consumer spending. 
Nevertheless, the money supply is still an essential element in central banks’ assessment of 
price  stability.  To  extract  the  full  information  content,  a  broad  set  of  aggregates  and 
indicators should be analyzed. The analytical tools need to be adapted, an objective shared 
by all the central banks of the Eurosystem. The Bank of Italy is developing techniques for the 
analysis of a set of monetary indicators that includes all the components of money and credit. 
it 
is 
to 
The transformation of the banking system 
In the year since your Association’s last annual meeting, three major bank mergers, two of 
them  involving  cooperative  banks,  have  been  concluded  with  approval  by  shareholder 
meetings.  A  fourth,  passed  by  the  boards  of  the  banks  involved,  awaits  shareholder 
approval. 
The  Italian  banking  system  has  become  more  robust  in  terms  of  the  size  of  institutions. 
Today the two largest groups both have a significant presence abroad; the conditions exist 
for competing on a European scale. The other mergers have created banks that are among 
the largest in Italy. 
The consolidation of banks is just the starting point. Reorganization can only be said to have 
been  successfully  carried  through  when  the  gains  in  efficiency  envisaged  by  the  business 
plans  are  achieved.  The  market  expects  savings  from  the  unification  of  technological 
platforms, the integration of distribution channels, the increase in labour productivity. Having 
a  greater  number  of  national-scale  banks  will  increase  competition.  In  order  for  increased 
size  to  engender  greater  competitiveness,  integration  synergies  must  be  exploited  in  full. 
Past  experience  shows  how  complicated 
integrate  different  organizations, 
technologies, networks and corporate cultures. There is a serious risk of heel-dragging and 
slowness  to  adapt.  A  high  degree  of  unity  on  the  part  of  management  and  the  greatest 
possible reserve in external communication are of the essence. There is no time to lose. 
The quality of corporate governance is crucial to the success of integration. Choices must be 
guided  by  clear  objectives  and  a  rational  division  of  responsibilities.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is 
active, attentive. We shall continue to examine the solutions adopted and the way corporate 
bodies  operate,  ensuring  their  proper  functioning  for  purposes  of  sound  and  prudent 
management  and  intervening  whenever  necessary.  Specific  rules  on  the  governance  of 
banks will be issued. 
It is essential that the new groups organize their system of internal controls as a matter of 
urgency.  The  complexity  of  integration  and  the  rapid  expansion  of  innovative  products 
heighten operational, legal and reputational risks. Clear accountability and the ability of top 
management to keep control of the key processes are prerequisites for stability even more 
than efficiency. 
All  the  banks  involved  in  the  mergers  had  developed  advanced  methods  of  risk 
measurement  to  be  submitted  for  supervisory  approval  as  an  instrument  for  calculating 
capital requirements. In some cases the project will have to be revised to take account of the 
new situation. In no case is a deterioration of risk control, even a transitory one, permissible. 
The  consolidation  of  the  banking  industry  will  facilitate  the  reorganization  of  the  asset 
management  industry  and  the  realization  of  the  scale  economies  that  could  result  if 
integration  synergies  are  exploited  in  this  field  too.  Consideration  should  be  given  to 
measures  to  guarantee  the  complete  independence  of  the  directors  of  asset  management 
companies.  It  is  commendable  that  the  majorities  of  the  boards  of  the  two  largest  bank-
owned asset management companies consist of independent directors. 
Italian banks have large market shares in the countries of eastern Europe, where lending is 
expanding rapidly. The loans go above all to households for the purchase of houses, whose 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 3
prices  have  risen  rapidly.  In  Slovakia,  Poland,  Bulgaria  and  Hungary,  where  Italian  banks’ 
market share is around one fifth, lending is increasing by more than 20 per cent per year on 
average.  These  countries’  external  current  account  deficits  are  large  and  persistent.  Last 
year Bulgaria ran a deficit of 16 per cent of GDP. Bank loans, which are mostly indexed to 
the  euro  or  other  foreign  currencies,  carry  lower  interest  rates  than  those  in  domestic 
currencies.  In  the  short  run  they  are  attractive  to  borrowers  but  expose  them  to  a  severe 
exchange rate risk, with potential financial and reputational repercussions on the banks. 
I have repeatedly called attention to the need to complete the reform of the governance of 
Italy’s  cooperative  banks.  The  aim,  which  I  believe  is  generally  shared,  is  to  release  the 
extraordinary  potential  of 
their  corporate  bodies  are 
satisfactorily representative, not to question their cooperative mission. To those who want to 
maintain  the  present  equilibria,  I  shall  not  cease  to  recall  the  benefits  –  especially  for  the 
largest  cooperative  banks  listed  on  the  stock  exchange  –  of  a  reform  that  removes  the 
anomalies of a legal framework tailored to small, local banks. We must ask whether decision-
making mechanisms in which small minorities have a decisive voice in strategic choices are 
consistent with the rules of the market. 
institutions,  make  sure 
these 
Banking supervision in Europe 
The  concentration  of  banking  systems,  the  removal  of  barriers  between  markets  and  the 
transnational  nature  of  the  largest  groups  have  given  banking  supervision  a  European 
dimension.  These  developments  have  demanded  a  rethinking  of  the  instruments  of 
supervision that has already had important consequences but is still under way. 
Harmonization of the rules on banking supervision has reached an advanced stage. There is 
agreement  on  the  fundamental  choices  and  extensive  cooperation  among  the  supervisory 
authorities,  in  the  first  place  within  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors.  For 
transnational  groups  supervisory  panels  are  at  work,  formed  by  the  authorities  of  all  the 
countries  in  which  a  group  is  present  and  coordinated  by  the  authority  responsible  for 
consolidated  supervision.  The  Bank  of  Italy  chairs  the  panels  for  UniCredit  and  Intesa 
Sanpaolo and participates in many others. The exchange of information and experience is 
continual, the climate of cooperation excellent. 
It  is  necessary  to  extend  harmonization  gradually  from  supervisory  rules  to  supervisory 
practices: more effective action, equal conditions of competition, a lighter burden on banks, 
especially those present in different countries, are the objectives. Further harmonization of 
the rules on own funds and risk concentration appears urgent. It will also be necessary to 
design  common  criteria  for  stress  tests  and  work  for  the  adoption  of  a  homogeneous 
prudential statistical reporting format. 
In the coordination fora the authorities have conducted simulations to prepare for the crisis of 
a large bank. One learns a great deal from these exercises, and it would be a good thing if 
they  were  held  more  often.  Principles  and  procedures  for  the  allocation  of  tasks  and 
responsibilities are being defined; the process must be completed rapidly. A strengthening of 
the  role  of  the  CEBS  will  speed  up  convergence  of  supervisory  practices  and  simplify 
cooperation  between  authorities.  Thought  also  needs  to  be  given  to  the  possibility  of 
emphasizing the position of the coordinating authority in supervisory panels by giving it the 
role  of  lead  supervisor,  with  greater  powers  on  the  group’s  subsidiaries  for  purposes  of 
preventing and managing crises. 
However,  the  remaining  differences  between  countries  in  deposit  insurance,  insolvency 
procedures and the rules on the transfer of assets between units of the same group could 
seriously complicate the management of a crisis. Eliminating or attenuating these differences 
must be placed on the legislative agenda at national and European level. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2007
Banks, firms and innovative products 
Bank’s  dealings  with  firms  now  embrace  not  only  the  provision  of  loans  and  payment 
services,  but  also  the  supply  of  innovative  financial  services,  including  risk  management 
products. These can increase the efficiency of the system and be a growth opportunity for 
banks, provided the customer is given complete information, the seller fully understands the 
product and the bank’s top management, whose duty it is to appreciate these products in all 
their complexity, is clearly aware. 
Banks provide an important service to firms if they assist them in selecting instruments suited 
to  their  characteristics.  The  purpose  must  be  the  hedging  of  risk,  not  anything  else.  To 
encourage  customers  to  assume  financial  risks  rather  than  hedge  them  increases 
counterparty risk, with large possible losses; it creates legal and reputational risks that can 
undermine the bank’s prospects for growth and even call its stability into question. 
This  is  before  our  eyes  in  a  case now  being  clarified.  An  inspection that  the  Bank  of  Italy 
began at a bank in January of this year found that it had sold business customers complex 
derivative  products,  highly  exposed  to  an  increase  in  interest  rates.  Owing  to  market 
developments,  these  derivatives  have  caused  a  sudden  surge  in  the  indebtedness  of  the 
customers  who  had  bought  them.  The  result  was  an  increase  in  the  bank’s  exposure  to 
counterparty risk as well as to legal and reputational risks. The Bank of Italy intervened; it is 
following the case with the utmost attention. 
Proper  conduct,  transparency  and  adequate  organization  are  essential  to  every  bank  that 
alongside its traditional credit operations sells complex products. There must be a clear line 
of  decision-making  connecting  top  management  to  operating  decisions  and  to  customers’ 
demands. 
Transparency, proper conduct and the protection of bank customers 
The  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  provisions  on  compliance  have  been  approved  and  will 
shortly be published. They lay down general principles, granting banks discretion in selecting 
the most effective organizational arrangements. Banks’ governing bodies decide the overall 
design of the compliance function and monitor its actual operation. 
In all customer relations, transparent and correct information increases the public’s range of 
choices,  fosters  competition  and  prevents  legal  disputes.  Lawmakers  and  regulators  have 
become  more  responsive  than  in  the  past  to  the  need  to  ensure  correct  relations;  banks 
themselves are rapidly becoming aware that the point is not only to defend and enhance the 
reputation of the industry, but also to gain an important tool of competition. 
As  I  have  said  on  other  occasions,  it  is  appropriate  for  regulators  to  intervene  where 
economic agents and the market are unable by themselves to ensure adequate standards. 
Self-regulation, if based on agents’ clear determination to pursue its underlying objectives, 
can  be  more  effective  than  mandatory  rules  in  many  cases.  The  most  powerful  tool  for 
pursuing the interest of consumers remains competition, which can function well, however, 
only if transparent terms and conditions are ensured and the obstacles to customer mobility 
eliminated.  This  requires  rules  at  various  levels;  statutory  provisions,  administrative 
regulations, self-regulation and competition are complementary instruments. 
I therefore take note with favour of the action plan ABI has just adopted to improve relations 
with customers. The intent to capitalize on cooperation with consumer associations and the 
authorities 
the 
transparency and simplicity of relations with customers, to assist customers before and after 
the sale of financial products, to strengthen their confidence, to eliminate residual barriers to 
mobility. It is in the system’s interest that customers see concrete progress soon. 
Self-regulation must benefit competition. The cooperative relationship between the banking 
system and the Antitrust Authority is positive. 
the  declared  objectives  endorsable: 
is  commendable, 
to  enhance 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 5
In  recent  times  Parliament  has  intervened  on  various  aspects  of  the  bank-customer 
relationship, in particular by ordering the abolition of costs for closing current accounts and 
introducing the customer’s right to extinguish a mortgage loan without a penalty. The Bank of 
Italy looks with favour on the purposes of these measures, even if it has raised doubts on 
certain  technical  aspects  and  suggested  leaving  room  for  secondary  legislation  and  self-
regulation. For current accounts, the new rules have given rise to problems of interpretation, 
and progress has been insufficient: complete portability of accounts is not yet guaranteed. 
For fixed-rate mortgages, the ban on penalties for early repayment may lead to banks setting 
higher  rates:  early  repayment  is  an  implicit  option  in  favour  of  the  debtor  and  thus  has  a 
financial cost. 
Parliament  is  examining  a  bill  that  will  prohibit  the  maximum  overdraft  fee,  a  practice  not 
easily  defensible  and  in  fact  one  that  some  banks  have  already  dropped  in  a  logic  of 
competition.  An  amendment  approved  during  the  bill’s  passage  through  Parliament  will,  in 
line with views expressed by the Bank of Italy, allow banks to apply fees for open credit lines, 
a common practice in other banking systems. 
The  MiFID  Directive  on  Markets  in  Financial  Instruments,  which  will  enter  into  force  in 
November, will also affect relations between customers and intermediaries. Its more precise 
description  of  information  requirements,  differentiated  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
customer  and  the  service,  will  enhance  the  transparency  of  the  instruments  offered. 
Customers  will  be  in  a  position  to  benefit  from  a  larger  dataset  and  make  more  informed 
decisions.  Fulfilment  of  the  obligation  to  offer  best  execution,  extended  to  include  factors 
other  than  the  price,  will  be  entrusted  to  suitable  organizational  solutions  identified  by 
intermediaries. The Bank of Italy, with the other authorities, is engaged in defining a flexible 
regulatory arrangement consistent with the need to limit the costs for intermediaries and with 
the objective of enhancing the attractiveness of the Italian financial marketplace. We have 
organized training courses for the staff of some of our branches to assist banks in adapting 
to the new rules. 
Protection  of  the  parties  to  bank  contracts  requires  swift-acting,  effective  and  economical 
dispute resolution instruments. The law now asks intermediaries to subscribe to non-judicial 
mechanisms. The Bank of Italy, which will have to submit a proposal to the Credit Committee 
for  the  regulation  of  the  matter,  is  about  to  begin  a  consultation  with  intermediaries  and 
customers. The proposal will be based on the experience gained in Italy and elsewhere and 
on a specific European recommendation; it will ensure that the adjudicating bodies are not 
only  independent  but  also  clearly  perceived  to  be  so.  The  Bank  is  ready  to  contribute  by 
taking  part  in  the  appointment  of  disputes  resolution  panels  and  providing  technical 
secretariat  services.  The  success  of  the  initiative  requires  both  involvement  of  the 
associations  of  consumers  of  financial  services  and  convinced  participation  by  the 
associations of intermediaries, which will also make it possible to draw on the experience of 
the Banking Ombudsman. 
No  rule  on  transparency  and  protection  is  truly  effective  if  customers  lack  the  means  for 
making  informed  decisions.  With  the  growing  complexity  of  supply,  ensuring  the  financial 
education of consumers of banking services has become a matter of crucial importance. The 
Bank of Italy cooperates with other institutions in projects of financial education, has begun to 
develop  a  dedicated  section  of  its  own  website  and,  with  the  Ministry  of  Education,  has 
launched initiatives targeted at schools. But much remains to be done. 
The Bank of Italy is committed to preventing and combating money laundering. The planned 
incorporation of the Italian Foreign Exchange Office into the Bank and the transposition of 
the  new  European  Anti-Money-Laundering  Directive  will  create  the  conditions  for  further 
progress. The independence of the Financial Intelligence Unit will be  confirmed. The rules 
will be made more incisive, controls increased and new forms of intervention introduced. 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2007
Loans to households 
Household debt has risen from 31 to 48 per cent of disposable income since the end of the 
1990s. Compared with the situation in the other main industrial countries, both the amount of 
household  debt  and  the  burden  of  instalments  and  interest  payments  are  still  limited.  The 
debt is largely concentrated with high-income households, which normally are better able to 
absorb additional costs due to rising interest rates, but its rapid expansion is involving ever-
broader strata of the population. 
Financial  innovation,  more  flexible  rules  and  increasing  competitive  pressures  have 
multiplied the forms of financing available, especially for house purchases. Until not long ago 
mortgages rarely exceeded 15 years in duration or 50 per cent of the purchase price. Today 
more than one third of mortgages last more than 25 years and the cover ratio is considerably 
higher.  Access  to  consumer  credit  has  also  become  easier.  The  market  in  lending  to 
households has expanded and matured. 
Further  progress  must  be  made,  however.  Both  for  home  mortgages  and  for  consumer 
credit, the interest rates charged by banks in Italy are higher than the euro-area averages for 
similar  transactions.  The  recent  change  in  monetary  conditions  has  led  to  a  shift  in  the 
demand for mortgages from variable to fixed rate loans; for the latter, the increase in interest 
rates  has  exceeded  the  European  average.  The  new  rules  on  covered  bonds  will  enable 
banks  to  expand  the  range  of  funding  instruments  to  finance  long-term  loans  and  reduce 
their costs; this will have to be reflected in more favourable conditions for customers. 
Data  harmonized  at  European  level  show  that  Italian  banks’  annual  percentage  rate  of 
charge  on  consumer  credit  is  still  about  one  percentage  point  higher  than  the  euro-area 
average, even though the gap has narrowed in the last few months. Not all of the difference 
is due to risk factors or to the still limited development of the consumer credit market in Italy. 
Not even the entry of foreign intermediaries, which now account for more than one third of 
such  lending,  has  proved  a  sufficient  stimulus  to  competition.  This  must  be  strengthened, 
especially in distribution channels. 
According  to  data  gathered  pursuant  to  the  law  on  usury,  the  interest  rates  charged  by 
financial  companies  are  higher  still.  Furthermore,  especially  where  small  amounts  are 
involved, rates vary widely even for transactions of the same type, such as personal loans, 
loans  secured  by  wages  and  instalment  purchases  of  consumer  goods.  This  probably 
indicates insufficiently transparent contractual conditions and a pronounced segmentation of 
the market. 
The  attention  banks  pay  to  customers  and  to  their  own  reputation  must  be  greatest  when 
their  contact  with  the  customer  is  made  through  outside  collaborators.  It  is  necessary  to 
check that each link in the chain leading to bank products charges commensurate fees, to 
assist  in  the  fight  against  usury,  and  to  act  promptly  in  cases  of  suspected  unauthorized 
banking or financial activity. 
The instruments are not lacking. Brokers’ terms and conditions are subject to transparency 
requirements. A bank employee who steers someone to an unauthorized person for banking 
or financial transactions commits a specific crime. Certain characteristics of current account 
transactions  that  suggest  usury  have  been  made  known  by  the  Italian  Foreign  Exchange 
Office. 
The Council of the European Union has reached agreement on a new directive on consumer 
credit, which will be examined by the European Parliament in the autumn. If approved, the 
directive  will  enhance  consumer  protection  by  providing  for  forms  of  transparency  and 
assistance and new rights. It is in the nature of “maximum harmonization” and will therefore 
facilitate intermediaries that want to operate in more than  one country, thereby stimulating 
competition. The Government has the commendable intention of anticipating the main points 
of the directive with ad hoc legislation and introducing, for loan and financial brokers, more 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 7
detailed  regulation  and  more  effective  controls,  to  be  entrusted  in  part  to  organizations 
created by trade associations. 
Payments: lowering costs, improving quality 
Competition between banks will also be based increasingly on their ability to offer efficient 
payment  services.  There  is  room  for  improvement  in  payment  completion  time,  costs  and 
security. Completing a payment by cheque still takes an average of seven days; a legislative 
amendment facilitating digital transmission of the images would make a significant reduction 
possible.  The  creation  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  will  provide  the  occasion  for 
modernizing instruments and infrastructure at national level as well and will be conducive to 
the specialization of intermediaries and to innovation. 
The  Payment  Services  Directive  has  harmonized 
framework, 
strengthened the protection of users and opened the market to new agents competing with 
banks. But Italy is still considerably behind in the use of electronic payments. Although the 
diffusion  of  POS  terminals  and  payment  cards  is  not  less  than  in  the  rest  of  Europe,  the 
number  of  transactions  per  capita  with  these  instruments  is  far  below  the  average.  The 
excessive use of cash lowers the efficiency and security of transactions, increases the cost 
per  transaction  and  hinders  the  reduction  of  the  prices  of  payment  services.  ABI’s 
commitment in favour of a rapid development of electronic payments is commendable. 
The results of the survey on the costs of bank current accounts that the Bank of Italy has 
already begun will be available in the autumn. 
the  European 
legal 
The stock exchange 
I  cannot  conclude  these  remarks  without  mentioning  the  developments  involving  the  stock 
exchange. 
A year ago on this occasion, I recalled at some length the essential role that the stock market 
plays in fostering the growth of the economy. I noted the strong boost to efficiency deriving 
from  the  integration  of  European  and  world  exchanges  and  the  drive  to  consolidate  stock 
exchanges,  including  on  a  federal  basis.  Just  a  month  has  passed  since  my  Concluding 
Remarks to the annual meeting of the Bank of Italy where I again underscored the growth 
opportunities that are emerging for exchanges that open to international cooperation and the 
risks for those that stay on the sidelines. 
Borsa  Italiana  has  taken  steps  to  capitalize  on  its  strengths  –  operational  efficiency,  local 
roots and its strong presence in some markets – and to reap the benefits of integration in a 
market of global dimensions. This opening is definitely a positive development. As in other 
fields,  the  Bank  of  Italy  points  to  what  it  considers  the  right  route.  It  does  not  seek  to 
determine any institution’s traveling companions. It notes that the road ahead is still very long 
and urges that it be traveled resolutely. 
8 
 BIS Review 84/2007
