Donald L Kohn: Industrial loan companies 
Testimony by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 
25 April 2007. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to appear 
today to provide the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on industrial loan 
companies  (ILCs)  and  H.R.  698,  the  Industrial  Bank  Holding  Company  Act  of  2007.  The  Board 
commends  the  Committee  for  holding  this  hearing  and  for  considering  ways  of  addressing  the 
important public policy implications raised by the special exception for ILCs in federal law. ILCs are 
state-chartered banks that have virtually all of the powers and privileges of other insured commercial 
banks,  including  the  protections  of  the  federal  safety  net  –  deposit  insurance  and  access  to  the 
Federal Reserve's discount window and payments system. Nonetheless, ILCs operate under a special 
exception to the federal Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This special exception allows any type 
of firm, including a commercial firm or foreign bank, to acquire and operate an ILC chartered in one of 
a  handful  of  states  without  complying  with  the  standards  that  Congress  has  established  for  bank 
holding companies to maintain the separation of banking and commerce and to protect insured banks, 
the federal safety net and, ultimately, the taxpayer.  
We believe it is critical for Congress to consider and address the important public policy implications 
raised  by  the  ILC  exception,  particularly  in  light  of  the  dramatic  recent  growth  and  potential  future 
expansion of banks operating under this special exception. If left unchecked, this recent and potential 
future  growth  of  firms  operating  under  the  exception  threatens  to  undermine  the  decisions  that 
Congress has made concerning the separation of banking and commerce in the American economy 
and  the  proper  supervisory  framework  for  companies  that  own  a  federally  insured  bank.  The  ILC 
exception also creates an unlevel competitive playing field by allowing both financial and commercial 
firms  to  own  an  insured  bank  but  avoid  the  prudential  limitations,  supervisory  framework  and 
restrictions on affiliations that apply to corporate owners of other insured banks. 
The Board appreciates the steps that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) recently has 
taken regarding ILCs. These include extending the temporary moratorium on the acquisition of ILCs by 
commercial  firms  and  seeking  ways  to  help  address  the  supervisory  gaps  caused  by  the  ILC 
exception. However, only Congress can craft a solution that addresses the full range of issues created 
by  the  ILC  exception  in  current  law  in  a  permanent,  comprehensive  and  equitable  manner.  Your 
decisions on these matters, whether by action or inaction, also will influence the structure, soundness 
and resiliency of our financial system and economy. As I will discuss, the Board believes the best way 
to prevent this exception from further undermining the general policies that Congress has established 
and further promoting competitive and regulatory imbalances within the banking system is to close the 
loophole  in  current  law  going  forward.  This  is  precisely  the  approach  that  Congress  has  taken  on 
previous occasions when earlier loopholes began to be used in unintended and potentially damaging 
ways. H.R. 698 would narrow, but not close, this loophole. 
The ILC exception and its origins 
The  BHC  Act,  originally  enacted  in  1956,  provides  a  federal  framework  for  the  supervision  and 
regulation of companies that own or control a bank and their affiliates. This comprehensive framework 
is intended to help protect the safety and soundness of corporately controlled banks that have access 
to  the  federal  safety  net  and  to  maintain  the  general  separation  of  banking  and  commerce  in  the 
United States. It does so principally in two ways. First, the act provides for all bank holding companies, 
including  financial  holding  companies  formed  under  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  (GLB  Act),  to  be 
supervised  on  a  consolidated  or  group-wide  basis  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  And  second,  the  act 
prevents  bank  holding  companies  from  engaging  in  general  commercial  activities  and  allows  bank 
holding companies that qualify as financial holding companies to engage only in those activities that 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
Congress  or  the  Board  (in  consultation  with  the  Treasury  Department,  in  certain  cases)  has 
determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to a financial activity.1  
The  ILC  exception  allows  a  company  to  acquire  an  insured  bank  chartered  in  one  of  a  handful  of 
states – principally Utah and California – without becoming a bank holding company under the BHC 
Act  and  without  abiding  by  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  established  under  that  act. 
Ironically, the special exception for ILCs was enacted in 1987 as part of a broader legislative package 
designed to close an earlier loophole – the so-called nonbank bank loophole – that increasingly was 
being  exploited  by  large  commercial  and  financial  firms  to  evade  the  nonbanking  restrictions  and 
consolidated supervisory requirements of the BHC Act. In 1987, Congress acted affirmatively to close 
this  loophole  by  passing  the  Competitive  Equality  Banking  Act  (CEBA).  That  act  expanded  the 
definition  of  "bank"  in  the BHC  Act  to  include  any  FDIC-insured bank  (regardless  of  the  activities  it 
conducts)  and  any  banking  institution  that  both  offers  transaction  accounts  and  makes  commercial 
loans  (regardless  of  whether  it  is  FDIC-insured).  Importantly,  the  act  also  provided  that,  subject  to 
certain limited exceptions, any company that acquired an institution meeting this expanded definition 
of "bank" would be subject to the same activity restrictions and supervisory and regulatory framework 
as other bank holding companies, including the prohibition on engaging in commercial activities. 
One of the exceptions adopted in CEBA was for ILCs chartered in those few states that, as of March 
5, 1987, had in effect or under legislative consideration a law requiring ILCs to have FDIC insurance. 
At the time, the size, nature and powers of ILCs were quite restricted. ILCs were first established in the 
early  1900s  to  make  small  loans  to  industrial  workers.  For  many  years,  they  were  not  generally 
permitted to accept deposits or obtain FDIC insurance. In fact, at the time CEBA was enacted, most 
ILCs  were  small,  locally  owned  institutions  that  had  only  limited  deposit-taking  and  lending  powers 
under state law. As of year-end 1987, the largest ILC had assets of approximately $410 million and the 
average asset size of all ILCs was less than $45 million. The relevant states also were not actively 
chartering  new  ILCs.  At  the  time  CEBA  was  enacted,  for  example,  Utah  had  only  eleven  state-
chartered  ILCs  and  had  a  moratorium  on  the  chartering  of  new  ILCs.  Moreover,  interstate  banking 
restrictions and technological limitations made it difficult for institutions chartered in a grandfathered 
state to operate a retail banking business regionally or nationally. 
Changing character and nature of ILCs 
What was once an exception with limited and local reach has now become the avenue through which 
large national and international financial and commercial firms have acquired a federally insured bank 
and  gained  access  to  the  federal  safety  net.  Indeed,  dramatic  changes  have  occurred  with  ILCs  in 
recent  years  that  have  made  ILCs  virtually  indistinguishable  from  other  commercial  banks.  For 
example,  in  1997,  Utah  lifted  its  moratorium  on  the  chartering  of  new  ILCs,  allowed  ILCs  to  call 
themselves  banks,  and  authorized  ILCs  to  exercise  virtually  all  of  the  powers  of  state-chartered 
commercial banks. Since that time, Utah also has begun to charter new ILCs and to promote them as 
a method for companies to acquire a federally insured bank while avoiding the requirements of federal 
supervision and regulation under the BHC Act. 
As a result of these and other changes, the aggregate amount of assets and deposits held by all ILCs 
operating under this exception increased substantially just in the nine years between 1997 and 2006, 
with  assets  increasing  by  more  than  750  percent  (from  $25.1  billion  to  $212.8  billion)  and  deposits 
increasing by more than 1000 percent (from $11.7 billion to $146.7 billion). In fact, in 2006 alone, the 
assets and deposits of ILCs increased by $62.7 billion and $38.8 billion, respectively. The number of 
Utah-chartered ILCs also has doubled since 1997, while declining in the few other states permitted to 
charter exempt ILCs. 
The nature and size of individual ILCs and their parent companies also has changed dramatically in 
recent years. While the largest ILC in 1987 had assets of approximately $410 million, the largest ILC 
today has more than $67 billion in assets and more than $54 billion in deposits, making it among the 
twenty largest insured banks in the United States in terms of deposits. An additional twelve ILCs each 
have more than $1 billion in deposits. And, far from being locally owned and focused on small-dollar 
                                                      
1   Bank holding companies that do not qualify to be a financial holding company under the GLB Act are permitted to engage in 
a smaller range of activities that have been found to be "closely related to banking." 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2007
consumer loans, many today are controlled by large, internationally active companies and are used to 
support various aspects of these organizations' complex business plans and operations. 
While the growth of ILCs and diversity of ownership in recent years are impressive, it also is important 
to  keep  in  mind  that  the  exception  currently  is  open-ended  and  subject  to  very  few  statutory 
restrictions. Although only a handful of states have the ability to charter exempt ILCs, there is no limit 
on  the  number  of  exempt  ILCs  that  these  states  may  charter,  and  the  FDIC  currently  has  several 
applications pending to establish new ILCs or to acquire existing ones.  
Moreover, federal law places no limit on how large an ILC may become and only limited restrictions on 
the types of activities that an ILC may conduct. For example, ILCs may operate under the exception so 
long  as  they  do  not  accept  demand  deposits  that  the  depositor  may  withdraw  by  check  or  similar 
means  for  payment  to  third  parties.  Nevertheless,  some  ILCs  engage  in  retail  banking  activities  by 
offering retail customers negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts – transaction accounts that 
are functionally indistinguishable from demand deposit accounts. In addition, federal law allows new or 
existing ILCs of any size to collect FDIC-insured savings or time deposits from institutional or retail 
customers and offer the full range of other banking services, including commercial, mortgage, credit 
card, and consumer loans; cash management services; trust services; and payment-related services, 
such as Fedwire, automated clearinghouse (ACH) and check-clearing services. Moreover, federal law 
permits ILCs to branch across state lines to the same extent as other types of insured banks. And, due 
to  advances  in  telecommunications  and  information  technology,  some  ILCs  now  conduct  their 
activities throughout the United States – without physical branches – through the Internet or through 
arrangements with affiliated or unaffiliated entities.  
Public policy implications of the exception 
Without  action,  further  expansion  of  banks  operating  under  this  exception  threatens  to  undermine 
several  fundamental  policies  that Congress  has established  and  reaffirmed  governing  the structure, 
supervision  and  regulation  of  the  financial  system.  The  ILC  exception  also  fosters  an  unfair  and 
unlevel  competitive  and  regulatory  playing  field  by  allowing  firms  that  acquire  an  insured  ILC  in  a 
handful of states to operate outside the activity restrictions, consolidated supervision and regulatory 
framework  that  apply  to  other  community-based,  regional  and  diversified  organizations  that  own  a 
bank. Addressing these matters will only become more difficult if additional companies are permitted to 
acquire ILCs and operate under a different supervisory and regulatory regime than the owners of other 
insured banks. Let me discuss these points in more detail and comment on how these matters would 
be addressed under H.R. 698, the Industrial Bank Holding Company Act of 2007, as introduced.  
Bank affiliations with commercial entities 
For many years, Congress has sought to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce in 
the United States and has acted affirmatively to close loopholes that create significant breaches in the 
wall between banking and commerce. For example, one of the primary reasons for enactment of the 
BHC Act in 1956, and its expansion in 1970 to cover companies that control only a single bank, was to 
help  prevent  and  restrain  combinations  of  banking  and  commercial  firms  under  the  auspices  of  a 
single  holding  company.  And,  as  noted  earlier,  when  the  nonbank  bank  loophole  threatened  to 
undermine the separation of banking and commerce, Congress acted in 1987 to close that loophole.  
In doing so, Congress was motivated by several concerns. One concern was that allowing the mixing 
of banking and commerce might, in effect, lead to an extension of the federal safety net to commercial 
affiliates  and  make  insured  banks  susceptible  to  the  reputational,  operational  and  financial  risks  of 
their  commercial  affiliates.  Congress  also  expressed  concern  that  banks  affiliated  with  commercial 
firms  may  be  less  willing  to  provide  credit  to  the  competitors  of  their  commercial  affiliates  or  may 
provide  credit  to  their  commercial  affiliates  at  preferential  rates  or  on  favorable  terms.  Moreover, 
Congress  expressed  concern  that  allowing  banks  and  commercial  firms  to  affiliate  with  each  other 
could  lead  to  the  concentration  of  economic  power  in  a  few  very  large  conglomerates.2  Congress 
reaffirmed its desire to maintain the general separation of banking and commerce as recently as 1999, 
when  it  passed  the  GLB  Act.  That  act  closed  the  unitary-thrift  loophole,  which  previously  allowed 
                                                      
2   See S. Rep. No. 100-19 (1987); S. Rep. No. 91-1084 (1970); H.R. Rep. No. 84-609 (1955). 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 3
commercial  firms  to  acquire  a  federally  insured  savings  association.  At  the  same  time  and  after 
lengthy  debate,  Congress  decided  to  allow  financial  holding  companies  to  engage  in  only  those 
activities determined to be financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities.  
The ILC exception, however, has allowed several large commercial firms to acquire an insured ILC 
and  additional  commercial  firms  currently  have  ILC  acquisition  proposals  pending  before  the  FDIC. 
H.R. 698 would narrow, but not eliminate, the potential for further mixing of banking and commerce 
through the ILC exception. Importantly, the bill would allow any firm to acquire or establish an ILC in 
the future and derive up to 15 percent of its consolidated annual revenues from commercial activities. 
This 15 percent commercial "basket" is quite sizable and potentially would allow new firms that acquire 
an ILC to have significant commercial holdings. A large U.S. financial firm potentially could meet the 
15 percent test in H.R. 698 even if it owned a commercial company the size of, for example, Kohl's, 
U.S. Steel, Waste Management, Office Depot or Nike. 
No  similar  commercial  "basket"  exists  for  bank  or  financial  holding  companies,  which  generally  are 
prohibited from engaging in commercial activities under the GLB Act. In fact, in passing the GLB Act, 
Congress rejected earlier proposals that would have allowed financial holding companies to engage 
generally in a "basket" of commercial activities or that would have allowed commercial firms to acquire 
a small bank without becoming subject to the BHC Act.3  
It also is unclear what activities would be considered "commercial" or "financial" for ILC owners under 
H.R. 698. The bill does not define "financial" activities by reference to the GLB Act and, thus, would 
allow the development of a different definition of "financial" activities than the definition established for 
financial holding companies in the GLB Act. This potentially would allow the owners of ILCs to engage 
in activities that would be "financial" under H.R. 698, but that would be considered commercial under 
the GLB Act.  
The question of whether to allow firms engaged in commercial activities to own or acquire an insured 
ILC  is  one  that  has  potentially  far-reaching  implications  for  the  structure  and  soundness  of  the 
American economy and financial system. This is especially true because pressures likely will build to 
expand to banking organizations more generally any new policy applied to the owners of ILCs. Once 
permitted, any general mixing of banking and commerce also is likely to be difficult to disentangle. We 
believe it is important that Congress, as it has in the past, set the nation's policies with respect to the 
proper mixing of banking and commerce and consider carefully and deliberately whether any changes 
to the nation's policies on this important issue should be made. Once these decisions are made, we 
see  no  reason  to  generally  exempt  the  owners  of  insured  ILCs  from  the  policies  established  by 
Congress: these policies should be applied to all owners of full-service insured banks.  
Bank affiliations with financial firms 
Besides restricting the mixing of banking and commerce, Congress also has placed preconditions on 
the ability of banks to affiliate with firms that are purely financial. The GLB Act allows a bank holding 
company to engage in a broad range of financial activities, including securities underwriting, various 
insurance  activities  and  merchant  banking,  only  if  the  holding  company  keeps  all  of  its  subsidiary 
depository  institutions  well  capitalized  and  well  managed  and  achieves  and  maintains  at  least  a 
satisfactory  Community  Reinvestment  Act  (CRA)  record  at  all  of  the  company's  subsidiary  insured 
depository  institutions.  These  requirements  help  ensure  that  banks  operating  within  a  diversified 
financial company remain financially and managerially strong and help meet the credit needs of their 
entire communities, including low and moderate-income families and communities. 
The ILC exception undermines these requirements by allowing financial firms to own and operate an 
FDIC-insured bank without abiding by the capital, managerial, and CRA standards established in the 
GLB Act. H.R. 698 does not address this significant regulatory disparity. 
                                                      
3   The GLB Act did provide certain nonbanking firms that became a financial holding company after November 1999, up to ten 
years  to  divest  their  impermissible  commercial  holdings  if  the  firm  was  and  remained  "predominantly  financial."  See  12 
U.S.C. § 1843(n). All commercial investments held under this authority must be divested no later than November 12, 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2007
Consolidated supervision 
The ILC exception also undermines the supervisory framework that Congress has established for the 
corporate  owners  of  insured  banks.  ILCs  are  regulated  and  supervised  by  the  FDIC  and  their 
chartering state in the same manner as other types of state-chartered, nonmember insured banks and 
the  Board  has  no  concerns  about  the  adequacy  of  this  existing  supervisory  framework  for  ILCs 
themselves. 
However, due to the special exception in current law, the parent company of an ILC is not considered 
a bank holding company. This creates special supervisory risks because the ILC's parent company 
and nonbank affiliates may not be subject to supervision on a consolidated basis by a federal agency. 
History  demonstrates  that  financial  trouble  in  one  part  of  a  business  organization  can  spread,  and 
spread rapidly, to other parts of the organization. Large organizations also increasingly operate and 
manage  their  businesses  on  an  integrated  basis  with  little  regard  for  the  corporate  boundaries  that 
typically define the jurisdictions of supervisors. Risks that cross legal entities and that are managed on 
a consolidated basis cannot be monitored properly through supervision directed at any one, or even 
several, of the legal entity subdivisions within the overall organization.  
It  was  precisely  to  deal  with  these  risks  to  safety  and  soundness  that  Congress  established  a 
consolidated supervisory framework for bank holding companies that includes the Federal Reserve as 
supervisor of the parent holding company and its nonbank subsidiaries in addition to having a federal 
supervisor for the insured depository institution itself. This framework allows the Federal Reserve to 
understand the financial and managerial strengths and risks within the consolidated organization as a 
whole  and  gives  the  supervisor  the  authority  and  ability  to  identify  and  resolve  significant 
management, operational, capital or other deficiencies within the overall organization before they pose 
a  danger  to  the  organization's  subsidiary  insured  banks.  These  benefits  help  explain  why  many 
developed countries, including those of the European Union, have adopted consolidated supervision 
frameworks and why it is becoming the preferred approach to supervision worldwide. 
In the United States, the BHC Act has long provided the Federal Reserve broad authority to examine a 
bank holding company (including a financial holding company) and its nonbank subsidiaries, whether 
or  not  the  company  or  nonbank  subsidiary  engages  in  transactions,  or  has  relationships,  with  a 
depository institution subsidiary.4 Pursuant to this authority, the Federal Reserve routinely conducts 
examinations of all large, complex bank holding companies and maintains inspection teams on-site at 
the largest bank holding companies on an ongoing basis. These examinations, which are conducted 
using  well-established  procedures,  manuals  and  systems,  allow  the  Federal  Reserve  to  review  the 
organization's systems for identifying and managing risk across the organization and its various legal 
entities  and  to  evaluate  the  overall  financial  strength  of  the  organization.  By  contrast,  the  primary 
federal  supervisor  of  a  bank,  including  an  ILC,  is  authorized  to  examine  the  parent  company  and 
affiliates (other than subsidiaries) of the bank only to the extent necessary to disclose the relationship 
between the bank and the parent or affiliate and the effect of the relationship on the bank.  
Using its authority under federal law, the Federal Reserve also has established consolidated capital 
requirements for bank holding companies. These capital requirements help ensure that a bank holding 
company maintains adequate capital to support its group-wide activities, does not become excessively 
leveraged, and is able to serve as a source of strength, not weakness, for its subsidiary insured banks. 
The  parent  companies  of  exempt  ILCs,  however,  are  not  subject  to  the  consolidated  capital 
requirements  established  for  bank  holding  companies  and,  as  the  FDIC  has  noted,  may  have  no 
expectation that they should serve as a source of strength to their subsidiary ILC. Indeed, among the 
factors contributing to the failure of a federally insured ILC in 1999 were the unregulated borrowing 
and  weakened  capital  position  of  the  corporate  owner  of  the  ILC  and  the  inability  of  any  federal 
supervisor to ensure that the parent holding company remained financially strong. 
Federal law also gives the Federal Reserve broad enforcement authority over bank holding companies 
and their nonbank subsidiaries. This authority includes the ability to stop or prevent a bank holding 
                                                      
4  
In the case of certain functionally regulated subsidiaries of bank holding companies, the BHC Act directs the Board to rely to 
the fullest extent possible on examinations of the subsidiary conducted by the functional regulator for the subsidiary, and 
requires  the  Board  to  make  certain  findings  before  conducting  an  independent  examination  of  the  functionally  regulated 
subsidiary. 12 U.S.C. §1844(c)(2)(B). These limitations also apply to the FDIC and other federal banking agencies in the 
exercise of their more limited examination authority over the nonbank affiliates of an insured bank, such as an ILC. See 12 
U.S.C. § 1831v. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 5
company or nonbank subsidiary from engaging in an unsafe or unsound practice in connection with its 
own  business  operations,  even  if  those  operations  are  not  directly  connected  with  the  company's 
subsidiary  banks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  primary  federal  bank  supervisor  for  an  ILC  may  take 
enforcement action against the parent company or a nonbank affiliate of an ILC to address an unsafe 
or unsound practice only if the practice occurs in the conduct of the ILC's business. Thus, unsafe and 
unsound practices that weaken the parent firm of an ILC, such as significant reductions in its capital, 
increases  in  its  debt  or  its  failure  to  monitor  and  address  the  risks  in  its  nonbanking  affiliates,  are 
generally beyond the scope of the enforcement authority of the ILC's primary federal bank supervisor.  
Consolidated supervisory authority is especially helpful in understanding and, if appropriate, requiring 
mitigation of the risks to the federal safety net when a subsidiary bank is closely integrated with, or 
heavily  reliant  on,  its  parent  organization.  In  these  situations,  the  subsidiary  bank  may  have  no 
business independent of the bank's affiliates, and the bank's loans and deposits may be derived or 
solicited  largely  through  or  from  affiliates.  In  addition,  the  subsidiary  bank  may  be  substantially  or 
entirely  dependent  on  the  parent  or  its  affiliates  for  critical  services,  such  as  computer  support, 
treasury operations, accounting, personnel, management, and even premises. This appears to be the 
case at a number of ILCs. For example, the FDIC noted in its recent rulemaking that some of the large 
corporate owners of ILCs tend to use these banks in ways that involve "unusual, affiliate-dependent" 
business plans and data show that seven of the ten largest ILCs each have more than $3 billion in 
assets but fewer than seventy-five full-time employees. 
H.R. 698 takes an important step by recognizing that the potential lack of consolidated supervision of 
the parent and nonbank affiliates of an ILC creates special risks that should be addressed. The bill 
currently seeks to address these risks by granting the FDIC new supervisory authority for the existing 
and  future  corporate  owners  of  ILCs  (other  than  those  that  are  already  subject  to  consolidated 
supervision by a federal banking agency) that is similar to the authority that the Federal Reserve has 
with  respect  to  bank  holding  companies.  The  Board  strongly  supports  efforts  to  ensure  that  the 
existing corporate owners of ILCs are subject to consolidated supervision by a federal agency that has 
the same tools as the Federal Reserve to help protect the safety and soundness of insured banks and 
the  federal  safety  net  that  supports  those  banks.  These  tools  include  the  ability  to  ensure  that  the 
holding company for an industrial bank acts as a source of strength for the bank. As I will discuss later, 
however, the Board also strongly believes that the ILC exception should be closed to new owners of 
ILCs.  
Foreign banks 
In addition to constructing a consolidated supervisory framework for domestic banking organizations, 
Congress  has  made  this  type  of  supervisory  framework  a  prerequisite  for  foreign  banks  seeking  to 
acquire  a  bank  in  the  United  States.  Following  the  collapse  of  the  Bank  of  Credit  and  Commerce 
International (BCCI) – a foreign bank that lacked a single supervisor capable of monitoring its global 
activities – Congress amended the BHC Act to require that foreign banks demonstrate that they are 
subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in their home country before acquiring a 
U.S. bank or establishing a branch, agency or commercial lending company subsidiary in the United 
States. 
The ILC exception, however, allows a foreign bank that is not subject to consolidated supervision in its 
home country to evade this requirement and acquire an FDIC-insured bank with broad deposit-taking 
and lending powers. This gap in current law needs to be addressed.  
Fair competition and other issues 
The differences I have just discussed not only have safety and soundness consequences, they also 
have  important  competitive  and  structural  consequences.  The  exception  in  current  law  creates  an 
unlevel playing field among organizations that control a bank because it allows the corporate owners 
of ILCs to operate under a substantially different framework than the owners of other insured banks. 
H.R. 698 would perpetuate these competitive imbalances by continuing to grant firms that acquire an 
ILC significant advantages not available to the owners of other insured banks, such as the authority to 
engage  in  commercial  activities  and  the  ability  to  escape  the  CRA,  capital  and  managerial 
requirements that apply to financial holding companies. These advantages will provide incentives for 
firms to continue to exploit the exception. These differences also create the opportunity for firms to 
engage in "regulatory arbitrage" and, over time, may lead to shifts in the structure and supervision of 
the financial system and the Federal Reserve's ability to prevent or respond quickly to financial crisis.  
6 
 BIS Review 40/2007
Moving forward 
The Board believes the best way to address the important current and potential future public policy 
issues raised by the ILC exception is to close – and not just narrow – the loophole going forward. This 
approach recognizes  the simple  fact  that  ILCs  are insured  banks.  Accordingly,  it  would require  any 
company that acquires an ILC after a specified date to operate subject to the same activity restrictions, 
regulatory  requirements  and  supervisory  framework  that  apply  to  the  corporate  owners  of  other 
insured banks. This approach builds on and utilizes the existing regulatory and supervisory framework 
that  Congress  has  established,  and  repeatedly  reaffirmed,  for  the  corporate  owners  of  banks  and 
creates a level playing field for all firms that acquire an insured bank in the future.  
For  reasons  of  fairness,  the  Board  also  supports  "grandfathering"  the  limited  number  of  firms  that 
currently  own  an  ILC  and  are  not  otherwise  subject  to  the  BHC  Act.  Such  a  grandfather  provision 
would allow these firms to continue to engage in activities not permissible for bank holding companies. 
However, to protect the federal safety net and limit the potential for grandfathered ILCs to operate in 
ways clearly at odds with the original exception, the Board believes that any grandfathered firm should 
be subject to consolidated supervision by a federal agency and appropriate restrictions. We would be 
pleased to work with the Committee and its members in developing the appropriate restrictions that 
would apply to the limited set of grandfathered firms.  
This  type  of  coordinated  solution  –  closing  the  loophole  and  "grandfathering"  existing  owners  –  is 
precisely  the  type  of  approach  that  Congress  took  in  1970,  1987  and  1999  in  closing  previous 
exceptions in the banking laws that were undermining the separation of banking and commerce and 
other important public policy objectives. It also is the right approach to fix the ILC loophole. 
Conclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Board's views on H.R. 698 and on the many important 
issues  presented  by  ILCs.  The  Board  and  its  staff  would  be  pleased  to  continue  to  work  with  the 
Committee  in  developing  and  improving  legislative  language  that  appropriately  addresses  the  core 
public policy issues raised by the ILC exception.  
BIS Review 40/2007 
 7
