Peter Pang: Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation retail bond issue  
Opening remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and 
Executive Director of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation Limited, at the Signing Ceremony for the 
Retail Bond Issue under the HKMC's Retail Bond Issuance Programme, Hong Kong, 5 March 2007. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen,  
On behalf of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation, I welcome you all to this signing ceremony for the 
new retail bond to be offered to the public tomorrow.  
This  is  a  particularly  significant  occasion  for  the  HKMC  as  we  are  just  two  days  into  the  tenth 
anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  the  Corporation  on  3  March  1997.  Last  year,  the  Board  of 
Directors commissioned a comprehensive review of the Corporation’s business strategy. The review 
concluded  that  the  HKMC  will  continue  to  play  a  crucial  role  in  providing  liquidity  to  banks,  helping 
people to own their own homes, and promoting the development of the local debt market. The HKMC 
will  continue  to  focus  on  these  important  missions  and  augment  that  with  a  prudent  overseas 
expansion with a view to replicating its successful operations in the region. 
As far as debt market development is concerned, on the retail front, the HKMC has so far issued nine 
retail  bonds  totalling  about  HK$12  billion.  The  bonds  have  been  well  received  as  they  provide  the 
general public an additional, safe investment choice. 
In  fact,  today’s  issue  is  the  first  retail  bond  issue  since  Moody’s  upgraded  the  HKMC’s  rating  in 
October last year – Aaa for domestic currency debt and Aa1 for foreign currency debt. The top credit 
rating  puts  the  Corporation  in  a  very  strong  position  to  play  a  more  active  and  strategic  role  in 
promoting the development of the debt and securitisation markets in Hong Kong. 
Today,  apart  from  issuing  two-year  notes  in  Hong  Kong  Dollar  and  in  US  Dollar,  we  are  launching 
HIBOR-linked  notes  and  6-year  US  Dollar  zero  coupon  bonds  under  the  HKMC  Retail  Bond 
Programme as part of our product innovation efforts. 
The HIBOR-linked notes are principal-protected instruments with returns related to the movement of 
the HIBOR. These notes are quite popular among the professional and private banking markets, and 
we are making them available to retail investors as well. The notes cater mainly for investors who can 
accept higher interest rate volatility in return for a higher investment yield. With the fast development of 
wealth  management  services  and  investor  education,  the  more  sophisticated  retail  investors  may 
choose to invest in this tranche for yield enhancement and portfolio diversification. 
The  HKMC  is  also  bringing  the  first  6-year  US  Dollar  zero  coupon  bond  to  the  retail  bond  market, 
following the successful issue of the debut 10-year Hong Kong Dollar zero coupon bond in September 
last year. The six-year tenor presents opportunities for investors who prefer medium-term savings for 
children’s education or future retirement. 
Apart  from  these  two  new  initiatives,  the  HKMC  is  also  issuing  2-year  retail  bonds  denominated  in 
Hong Kong Dollars and in US Dollars for investors who prefer safety and certainty. 
I believe the four tranches of retail bonds we are offering today will meet the needs of a wide range of 
investors. I trust that the HKMC’s steadfast efforts to promote development of the retail bond market 
will create yet another win-win situation for the investors, the placing banks and the Corporation. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  banking  community  for  their  strong  support.  In  particular,  Bank  of 
China (Hong Kong), HSBC and Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) are co-underwriting a portion 
of the bond issue as well as placing the notes. I would also like to thank the other 14 placing banks, 
namely, Bank of Communications, Bank of East Asia, China Construction Bank (Asia), Chiyu Bank, 
Chong Hing Bank, CITIC Ka Wah Bank, Dah Sing Bank, DBS Bank (Hong Kong), Hang Seng Bank, 
ICBC  (Asia),  Nanyang  Commercial  Bank,  Shanghai  Commercial  Bank,  Wing  Hang  Bank  and  Wing 
Lung Bank. 
I look forward to your continuing support of the HKMC and our debt issuance activities. 
Finally, may I wish you all a healthy and prosperous Year of the Golden Pig. Thank you. 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 1
