Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The global Islamic financial services industry  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of Kuwait 
Finance House Research, Dubai, 14 May 2007. 
 Let  me  first  of  all  congratulate  Kuwait  Finance  House  on  the  establishment  of  the  Kuwait  Finance 
House Research. It is my great pleasure and honour to officiate its launch. The establishment of this 
research  entity  is  timely  to  meet  the  more  intense  demands  of  operating  in  a  dynamic  and  highly 
competitive  environment  where new  challenges  and  opportunities  are continuously  emerging  in  this 
era of globalisation and change.  
In the recent five years, there has been a rapid evolution and expansion of the global Islamic financial 
services  industry.  Islamic  finance  has  now  been  accepted  as  a  viable  and  competitive  mode  of 
financial intermediation, not only in Muslim countries but also beyond the Muslim world, which offers a 
wide range of financial products and services to meet the highly differentiated demands of the new 
economy. The continued progression in the economic and financial landscape has presented many 
opportunities for new products, services and innovations.  
With the accelerating pace of financial integration, financial institutions are presented with prospects to 
expand  beyond  domestic  borders  to  capture  opportunities  from  regional  and  global  markets. 
Nevertheless, these opportunities cannot be fully realised without sound research and development 
efforts.  Successful  financial  services  players  must  leverage  on  expertise  and  knowledge  to  deliver 
superior products and services. The challenge is to enhance efficiency and reduce costs, respond to 
market  and  regulatory  demands  and,  most  of  all,  gain  competitive  advantage  through  innovative 
products and services.  
The  overall  Islamic  financial  system,  comprising  financial  institutions,  markets  and  the  financial 
infrastructure, has demonstrated its viability and robustness as a form of financial intermediation. Its 
growing  role  in  mobilising  and  channelling  funds  to  productive  investment  activities  across  borders 
brings  significant  benefits  to  global  economy.  Building  stronger  financial  markets  and  greater 
intermediation  through  knowledge  sharing  especially,  forms  an  important  part  of  this  process  to 
facilitate greater international and investment flows. Much in the same way that national strategies are 
developed to remain competitive in the new, knowledge-based economy in a globalised environment, 
institutions in the public, private or non-profit sectors, have come to recognise that "knowledge" can 
play an important role in enhancing the effectiveness of their operations. In addition to investments in 
human  capital  and  leveraging  on  the  role  information  technology,  considerable  attention  has  been 
devoted to harnessing the explicit and tacit knowledge they posses. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have previously made two references to the New Silk Road. The first was made at the 2nd World 
Islamic  Economic  Forum  (WIEF)  on  "Unleashing  the  Potential  of  Emerging  Markets"  in  Islamabad, 
Pakistan in November 2006, while the second reference was during a special address at the Global 
Islamic Finance Forum - Investors and Issuers Forum in March 2007. 
Like the 14th century Silk Road, the current emergence of Islamic financial products and services has 
brought  together  financial  services  providers  across  continents  to  trade  on  this  new  route.  The 
emergence  of  the  New  Silk  Road  reflects  the  increasing  and  evolving  economic  and  financial 
relationships and interlinkages, with Islamic finance well positioned to further facilitate these linkages 
to offer mutually-reinforcing benefits to those who participate in it. The economic and financial linkages 
between  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  are  growing  through  a  significant  expansion  in  trade  and 
investment between the two regions and opportunities to leverage on the high level of savings and 
resources  both  these  regions  have  been  endowed  with.  Indeed,  the  New  Silk  Road  opens  up  the 
prospect of exciting opportunities for greater economic progress and prosperity for us.  
The New Silk Road has created linkages that build on the comparative advantages between Asia and 
the Middle East. For example, Middle East domestic infrastructure requirements are estimated to total 
USD500 billion for the next 5 years, and Asian companies have demonstrated the capacity to provide 
the technology, expertise and human capital to meet these infrastructure demands. Indeed, the New 
Silk  Road  has  facilitated  the  development  and  effective  use  of  talent  and  expertise  across  the  two 
BIS Review 48/2007 
 1
regions. In addition, the New Silk Road has reinforced the rapidly evolving Islamic financial industry 
and the growing significance of Islamic financial markets and institutions.  
To meet the escalating demand for new products and services, top-tier financial institutions are known 
for their commitment in research and development to enhance innovation, especially in process and 
product innovation in order to remain competitive. In the process, such financial players will be able to 
better position themselves to be part of the global financial community. As such, human intellectual 
capital  has  become  an  important  factor  in  sustaining  the  performance  and  competitiveness  of  the 
Islamic financial industry. Indeed, the fast pace of innovation in global financial services in general and 
in the Islamic financial services sector in particular, demands new expertise and skills. 
Since research and development remains at the forefront of any well-acclaimed international financial 
framework,  the  same  is  true  for  any  player  in  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  At  a  time  when  global 
economic development plays a decisive role in determining how markets perform, the accessibility to 
accurate and concise market information is crucial. Kuwait Finance House's initiative, in this regard, as 
the first Islamic Bank worldwide to possess an Economics & Investment Banking Research arm based 
in Malaysia, is a major advancement on this front. 
The establishment of the Research Unit will facilitate information sharing amongst the Islamic financial 
institutions and other key stakeholders. The setting up of the Research Unit provides vital information 
which  can  be  shared.  The  promotion  of  information  sharing  and  exchange  of  knowledge  will 
encourage better understanding and spur global collaboration among the financial players. Through 
in-depth  market  knowledge  of  the  financial  services  industry,  it  will  without  doubt  spur  greater 
innovation in Islamic financial services, leading to cutting-edge products and services.  
Equally important, it is also expected to enhance linkages between the Middle East and Asian regions, 
acting as a conduit to promote greater economic integration and encourage deeper intermediation of 
Islamic markets. This further underscores the economic integration of both the Middle East and Asian 
regions  and  further  enhances  linkages  in  the  New  Silk  Road,  a  manifestation  of  the  thriving  global 
Islamic finance market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On this occasion of the official launch of Kuwait Finance House Research, it is with pleasure that I 
congratulate Kuwait Finance House for its forward-looking outlook and commitment to contribute to the 
success of Islamic finance by allocating resources in having a dedicated research entity to drive its 
Islamic  banking  business  forward.  It  is  my  hope  that  Kuwait  Finance  House  will  continue  to  play  a 
major  role  in  the  initiatives  to  further  develop  Islamic  banking  both  here  and  in  Asia.  I  wish  Kuwait 
Finance House Research every success in its endeavours. 
In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful, it now gives me great pleasure in officiating the 
launch of Kuwait Finance House Research. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2007
