Krzysztof Rybiński: The role of the EURO for the future of Poland 
Speech  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the 
International Conference “The role of the EURO for the future of Poland”, Warsaw, 15 June 2007. 
 Only a few months ago the eurozone was enlarged for the second time. Slovenia became the first of 
the twelve new member states of the EU and the thirteenth country to adopt the common European 
currency. Now two other countries, i.e. Malta and Cyprus, are knocking on the euro’s door, and others 
are lining up for the “monetary club membership”. This seems to be a good occasion to return to the, 
once lively, discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of joining the monetary union.  
Indeed, there are still more reasons to come back periodically to the euro cost & benefit debate, since 
we  have  more  and  more  data,  the  world  changes  rapidly  and  even  economic  theory  is  subject  to 
evolution.  Let  me  illustrate  this  with  one  example.  It  has  long  been  a  widely  accepted  view  that 
asymmetric shocks are the biggest threat to currency unions. Nowadays some respected economists 
think it may not be the case. And thus, Willem Buiter and Erik Nielsen in their recent paper (2007): 
“Mundell on His Head: Asymmetric shocks are good for you, thanks to Economic and Monetary Union 
in  Europe”,  argue  that  home  bias  has  been  receding  in  the  Eurozone,  so  an  increasing  number  of 
households  and  companies  now  hold  a  Euro-wide  portfolio.  In  finance  it  is  good  when  returns  on 
particular assets are negatively correlated, because it helps you to diversify risk and achieve the better 
risk-return  tradeoff.  Therefore,  if  asymmetric  shocks  hit  monetary  union,  it  will  result  in  negatively 
correlated  returns  on  euro-zone  assets  portfolio,  so  such  portfolio  holders  will  be  better  off  in 
comparison with a scenario of a symmetric negative shock. Of course this train of thought may seem 
too narrow, since it boils down merely to the capital income analysis and loses sight of other effects of 
asymmetric shocks, such as those on the labor market situation. Nevertheless, this example provides 
a clear evidence that our cost and benefit analysis may change every so often in tandem with new 
ideas that smart people come up with. 
However, before I proceed, I would like to make two important points. First, I would like to note that 
views presented here are my own and they do not represent the official position of the National Bank 
of  Poland.  Second,  my  economic  background  allows  me  to  speak  in  terms  of  standard  economic 
variables: output, consumption, prices etc. On the other hand, I do not feel competent to speak about 
highly immeasurable values like national pride. Notwithstanding the fact that people might derive utility 
from the pure fact of having in their wallets banknotes with Polish kings instead of European bridges, I 
have  no  idea  how  to  measure  this  utility  and  how  to  compare  it  to  the  utility  derived  from  more 
standard arguments of preference functions like consumption. For this reason I will speak in terms of 
standard macroeconomic variables, bearing in mind that this is certainly not the whole story. 
If  economists  speak  about  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  joining  a  common  currency  area, 
they ultimately end up comparing the costs and benefits of accession. This is also the way I would like 
to  proceed.  However,  bearing  in  mind  that  many  issues  have  already  been  described  in  several 
voluminous reports (NBP 2004 for Poland, Csajbok, Csemerly 2002 for Hungary, HM Treasury 2003 
for  the  UK),  I  will  try  to  focus  on  issues  which  are  less  familiar  to  the  general  public  or  which  are 
potential risk factors. The nature of these issues is that they are mainly concentrated on the cost side 
of the analysis. Thus, it might seem from my lecture, that I mainly care about the costs or that costs 
outweigh benefits. Let me, in the very beginning, stress that this is by no means the case. As stated by 
the President of the National Bank of Poland, Mr Sławomir Skrzypek, an in-depth assessment of the 
costs and benefits of the euro adoption in Poland needs to be periodically repeated in order to make 
sure that we take into account all important factors of the fast changing global economy. The National 
Bank  of  Poland  is  willing  to  play  a  key  role  in  stimulating  the  public  debate  about  the  costs  and 
benefits of the euro adoption. Today’s conference is a good moment to contribute to this debate, and I 
would like to thank the organizers for offering this opportunity. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  benefit  side.  Economists  typically  concentrate  on  the  following  sources  of 
economic benefits related to monetary union. These are: 
• 
• 
• 
lower transaction costs, 
lower interest rates, 
financial integration, 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 1
trade creation. 
• 
Elimination of transaction costs incurred by companies and households in relation to the zloty/euro 
exchange rate is among the most obvious benefits of the single currency. These costs include, inter 
alia, the bid-ask spreads, fees accompanying exchange rate operations and costs of hedging against 
exchange  rate  risk.  Any  company  could  possibly  calculate  how  much  it  would  save  on  transaction 
costs if there were no exchange rates. This is also relatively unsophisticated for the whole economy, 
and has been estimated to be approximately 0.2% of GDP in Poland (NBP 2004). Not much, but worth 
saving. 
Lower interest rates induce investment, thus strengthening the productive capacity of the economy 
and making higher output and consumption possible. We expect that in the case of Poland the interest 
rate adjustment after eurozone accession will reduce long-term rates by more than one percentage 
point. Any estimation of the exact impact on investment, output and consumption is subject to several 
assumptions. Nevertheless the NBP’s analyses show that an interest rate reduction will be the main 
source of benefits from joining the euro (Borowski 2003). 
Research  shows  that  the  elimination  of  the  exchange  rate  fluctuations  and  the  coordination  of 
monetary  policy  within  the  euro  zone  have  been  the  main  driving  forces  behind  the  financial 
integration in Europe (Fratzscher 2001; Galati and Tsatsaronis 2001; European Commission 2002; 
ECB  2006).  Integration,  in  turn,  promotes  competition  in  financial  markets,  leading  to  an  improved 
efficiency  in  financial  intermediaries  and  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of  their  services.  A  single  currency 
provides domestic companies with an access to more liquid and deeper financial markets, which not 
only drives down the cost of capital, but also allows better risk diversification. Therefore, apart from 
stimulating economic growth, development of financial market also reduces output fluctuations. Since 
empirical research indicates that countries with relatively less developed financial markets benefit the 
most from financial integration (Giannetti et al. 2002), we believe that Poland should be among the 
largest beneficiaries of this process (NBP 2004). 
The  benefit  we  know  the  least  about  is  related  to  trade  creation.  In  a  groundbreaking  study  Rose 
(2000)  estimated  that  joining  a  currency  union  may  boost  cross-country  trade  by  over  200%.  Most 
economists  have  agreed  with  the  direction  and  mechanism  behind  this  –  the  single  currency 
eliminates the uncertainty related to exchange rate movements and thus diminishes the risk related to 
foreign trade. However, the estimated scale seems to be much exaggerated. One problematic issue is 
related to the fact that before the eurozone, we did not have examples of currency unions between 
developed countries. So the Rose study was based on data on currency unions involving poor and/ or 
small countries. As noted by Micco, Stein and Ordonez (2003), “one does not need to be a eurosceptic 
to wonder whether such findings are directly applicable to Europe’s single currency”. 
Follow-up  studies  (e.g.  Rose  and  Wincoop  (2001),  Kenen  (2002),  Persson  (2001))  attempted  to 
correct the Rose’s estimates but arrived, rather inconclusively, at anything between a 50% and 150% 
growth of  bilateral  trade. Recently,  the  first studies based on euro  area  data have  emerged.  These 
show that the trade creation effect of the euro has been substantial, although (until now) by an order of 
magnitude  smaller  that  the  original  Rose’s  estimate  (e.g.  Micco,  Stein  and  Ordonez  (2003)).  Our 
knowledge about trade creation effects of the euro is still far from complete and we will probably have 
to wait another 10+ years to have enough data to draw firm conclusions about its magnitude in the 
eurozone. 
Now let me move to the cost side. As already noted in contrast to the benefits, some costs have a 
contingent  character.  They  are  tail-events  –  rather  unlikely  but  with  a  possibly  high  impact  if  they 
occur. Let me focus on two issues: 
• 
• 
Shocks are by definition something we cannot foresee. Asymmetric shocks are shocks that affect 
only selected member(s) of a monetary union. Such events are considered the biggest threat to unions 
(Mundell 1961), because joining a common currency area substantially reduces the set of policy tools 
which could be used to mitigate the impact of the shock. Let us assume that a negative demand shock 
affects  the  Polish  economy  (e.g.  consumers  decide  to  buy  less  Polish  goods  and  services).  In  the 
short and medium run, this brings about a reduction in output and higher unemployment. As long as 
Poland  has  its  own  currency,  it  can  use  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  to  stimulate  demand  and 
reduce the impact of the shock on output and employment. Moreover, the exchange rate might adjust 
(depreciate) and thus make our exports more price-competitive. Once in the eurozone, two of these 
asymmetric shocks, 
arising micro- and macroeconomic imbalances. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2007
channels  are  closed.  First,  there  is  no  independent  domestic  monetary  policy  which  could  lower 
interest rates, and one should not expect the ECB to react to a local shock. Second, after joining the 
monetary union, the Polish currency will be replaced with the euro, so the zloty/euro exchange rate 
adjustments will no longer be available. 
Accordingly, the only policy tool left after euro area accession is fiscal policy. For this reason it is of 
crucial importance to run a balanced budget in the medium run, so that in case of negative shocks, 
there is room for increasing the deficit, and thus buffer the shock. Additionally, there are also economic 
forces which can bring the economy back to equilibrium. The most prominent is wage adjustment – 
after a negative shock, falling wages can help reduce the cost of production and – as a consequence 
– prices. This will increase demand and help the economy return to equilibrium. A crucial prerequisite 
for this channel to operate smoothly is a flexible labor market – only if wages adjust immediately, can 
an  increasing  unemployment  and  an economic  slowdown  be  avoided.  We know,  however, that  this 
downward wage flexibility is rarely seen in real life. 
Regarding  asymmetric  shocks,  one  thing  seems  certain.  We  are  not  able  to  foresee  if  serious 
asymmetric shocks are going to affect the Polish economy after joining the euro or not. We can only 
speak  in  terms  of  probabilities  and,  given  the  data,  it  seems  that  the  probability  of  huge  shocks 
occurrence  seems  limited.  The  Polish  economy  is  strongly  integrated  with  the  eurozone,  with  a 
majority  of  exports  going  to  the  common  currency  area.  Moreover,  most  studies  (e.g.  Fidrmuc, 
Korhonen  2003,  Eickmeier,  Breitung  2005)  show  a  relatively  high  correlation  of  business  cycles 
between Poland and the eurozone. This substantially reduces, though does not eliminate, the risk of 
asymmetric  shocks.  Looking  ahead,  one  can  see  potential  risk  factors.  One  of  them  is  production 
clustering.  If  the  recently  observed  trend  for  country  specialization  (e.g.  Slovakia  specializes  in 
producing  cars,  India  in  business  process  outsourcing)  holds  on,  it  may  increase  the  risk  of 
asymmetric  shocks  in  the  future  (De  Grauwe  2003).  Another  example  of  a  possibly  distant  future 
asymmetric “shock” is global warming. A recent report cited by Financial Times (FT, 6 January 2007) 
shows that the Northern members of the eurozone are likely to profit and the Southern members to 
suffer from the climate change. Nevertheless, whatever the likelihood of shocks, it remains of crucial 
importance  to  maintain  a  balanced  fiscal  perspective  and  flexible  labor  market  which  can  absorb 
shocks, should they arise. 
Now let me move to the possibility of rising micro- and macroeconomic imbalances. They can take 
the  form  of  lending  booms,  current  account  deficits  or  increasing  inflation  pressure.  Such  a  set  of 
symptoms in a monetary union member country reveals in most cases one common cause – too low a 
level  of  real  interest  rates.  Economists  have  for  a  long  time  argued  that  each  economy  has  an 
appropriate, long-run level of the real interest rate called the natural rate of interest (Wicksell 1898). 
Keeping interest rates at this (unfortunately unobserved) level should guarantee that the economy will 
remain  in  equilibrium  –  output  will  not  exceed  production  capacity  and  inflation  will  remain  stable 
(Woodford 2003). This is what implicitly or explicitly most inflation targeting central banks are trying to 
achieve. 
One of the problems with joining a common currency area might be that real interest rates in this area 
will be lower than the natural rate of the new member. Recent research shows that this might be the 
case for Poland, where the natural rate has remained in the past above the euro area level (Brzoza-
Brzezina 2006). For Poland, entering the eurozone means lower nominal interest rates (the spread on 
long-term  rates  still  exceeds  100  basis  points)  and  higher  inflation  (due  to  appreciation  of  the  real 
exchange  rate  related  to  the  catching  up  process,  with  no  longer  available  nominal  exchange  rate 
channel). Together this means a drop in real interest rates, which could induce people and enterprises 
to substantially increase borrowing, and spend the loans on consumption and investment goods. What 
could be the consequences of this? 
First, if borrowing accelerates massively, banks may start extending loans without properly checking 
their  customers’  creditworthiness  –  this  could  result  in  bad  debt  problems.  It  is  a  well  known 
phenomenon (e.g. Demirgüç-Kunt, Detragiache 1998, Gourinchas et al. 2001) that lending booms are 
often  followed  by  banking  sector  crises.  Fortunately,  recent  research  on  the  potential  for  lending 
booms in Poland after euro area accession forecasts a rather moderate increase in lending (Schadler 
et al. 2005, Brzoza-Brzezina 2005), and shows that the expected credit growth is rather an equilibrium 
phenomenon – a structural adjustment that should not have negative consequences (Kiss at al. 2006). 
Nevertheless,  even  if  a  serious  lending  boom  during  euro  area  accession  seems  unlikely, 
policymakers  should  remain  vigilant  and  prudent  banking  sector  supervision  should  be  the  right 
answer to protect oneself against the risk of such developments. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 3
Second, higher domestic demand can fuel inflation pressure and increase imports, thus leading to a 
higher  current  account  deficit.  As  for  the  latter,  it  seems  that  while  outside  a  monetary  union  deep 
current  account  deficits  worry  investors  and  can,  in  extreme  situations,  lead  to  currency  crises,  for 
countries that have already joined the common currency such developments do not matter much. An 
example  of  the  three  Baltic  States  (Estonia,  Latvia  and  Lithuania),  whose  currency  board 
arrangements  are  close  equivalents  of  a  monetary  union,  shows  that  enormous  current  account 
deficits (9-16% of GDP in 2006) have no apparent negative consequences for the economy, as yet. 
The case is, however, different with inflation pressure. In theory, the margin for local demand-driven 
price increases in small member states of monetary unions is very narrow. This is guaranteed by the 
so  called  law  of  one  price  –  the  expectation  that  the  same  product  should  have  the  same  price  in 
various countries of a monetary union. In practice, however, there are several obstacles for this law to 
hold perfectly – some goods cannot be traded, most goods do not have perfect substitutes, there are 
transportation costs and tax differentials – so local demand pressures can play a role in driving prices 
in  monetary  union  member  states.  As  a  consequence,  products  manufactured  in  these  countries 
become more expensive and such countries loose competitiveness (e.g. Estrada, Lopez-Salido 2001). 
It is relatively difficult to foresee how the Polish economy will react to demand pressures once in the 
euro area. However, as in the case of asymmetric shocks, labor market flexibility is probably the best 
answer  to  the  described  phenomena.  It  allows  a  smooth  and  relatively  painless  adjustment  if  the 
economy looses competitiveness. 
Summing up, I have discussed selected aspects of the cost-benefit analysis of Poland’s adoption of 
the  euro,  with  a  special  focus  on  issues  which  are  less  familiar  to  the  general  public.  As  I  argued, 
some  costs  will  materialize  if  asymmetric  shocks  hit  the  enlarged  eurozone.  We  do  not  know  the 
likelihood of such shocks though, so it is impossible to calculate the expected value of costs related to 
these  events.  We  know,  however,  that  the  probability  of  asymmetric  shocks  declines  with  rising 
similarity or progressing real convergence of the EU economies. Let me also stress that the magnitude 
of  costs  depends  crucially  on  domestic  policy  –  prudent  banking  sector  supervision,  labor  market 
reforms and sound fiscal policies to name a few. Adoption of proper policies reduces future potential 
costs related to euro-zone membership and, at the same time, enhances future benefits. In my view, 
given the evidence that reforms have been halted in many countries after entering the eurozone, these 
measures should be taken before the euro area accession.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References: 
1. Borowski J. 2003. “Potential Benefits of Poland’s EMU Accession”, Focus on Transition No. 1. 
2.  Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.  2005.  “Lending  Booms  in  the  New  EU  Member  States:  Will  Euro  Adoption 
Matter?”, ECB Working Paper No 543, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. 
3. Brzoza-Brzezina, M. 2006. “The Information Content of the Neutral Rate of Interest: The Case of 
Poland”, Economics of Transition 14(2), s. 391-412. 
4.  Buiter,  W.H.,  Nielsen,  E.  (2007),  “Mundell  on  His  Head:  Asymmetric  shocks  are  good  for  you, 
thanks  to  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  Europe”,  paper  presented  at  The  Brussels  Economic 
Forum 2007, Global Adjustments and EMU, 31 May 2007-1 June 2007 
5. Csajbók, A., Csermely, A. (ed.) 2002. “Adopting the euro in Hungary: expected benefits, costs and 
timing”, MNB Occasional Paper 24, National Bank of Hungary 
6. DeGrauwe, P. 2003. “The Enlarged Eurozone: Can it Survive?”, Jelle Zijlstra Lecture, NIAS. 
7. Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Detragiache, E. 1998. “The Determinants of Banking Crises in Developing and 
Developed Countries”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 45, No. 1, Washington, D.C. 
8. ECB (2006), “Indicators of Financial Integration in the Euro Area”, ECB, September 2006 
9. Eickmeier, S., Breitung, J. 2005. “How synchronized are central and east European economies with 
the  euro  area?  Evidence  from  a  structural  factor  model”,  Discussion  Paper  20/2005,  Deutsche 
Bundesbank 
10.  Estrada,  A.,  López-Salido,  D.  2001.  “Understanding  Spanish  Dual  Inflation”,  Documento  de 
Trabajo n.º 0205 Banco de España 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2007
11.  European  Commission  (2002),  Report  by  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  on  EU 
integration,  European  Economy,  Economic  Papers  No  171,  May  2002,  European 
financial 
Commission, Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs 
12. Fidrmuc J., Korhonen I. 2001 “Similarity of Supply and Demand Shocks between the Euro Area 
and the CEECs”, BOFIT Discussion Paper No. 14. 
13. Financial Times “EU’s grim climate change”, 6 January 2007. 
14.  Fratzscher,  M.  (2001),  “Financial  market  integration  in  Europe:  on  the  effects  of  EMU  on  stock 
markets”, ECB Working Paper No. 48 
15.  Galati,  G.,  Tsatsaronis,  K.  (2001),  “The  impact  of  the  euro  on  Europe’s  financial  markets”,  BIS 
Working Papers No 100, July 
16. Giannetti, M., Guiso, L., Iappelli, T., Pagano, M. (2002), “Financial market integration, corporate 
financing and economic growth”, European Economy, Economic Papers no 179. 
17.  Gourinchas,  P.O.,  Valdes,  R.,  Landerretche,  O.  2001.  “Lending  Booms:  Latin  America  and  the 
World”, NBER Working Paper 8249. 
18. Kenen, Peter B. (2002) “Currency Unions and Trade: Variations on Themes by Rose and Persson” 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper 2002/08. 
19. Kiss, G., Nagy, M., Vonnák, B. 2006. “Credit Growth in Central and Eastern Europe: Convergence 
or Boom?”, WP 2006/10, Magyar Nemzeti Bank. 
20.  Micco,  A.,  Stein,  E.,  Ordonez,  O.  2003.  “The  Currency  Union  Effect  on  Trade:  Early  Evidence 
From EMU”, Economic Policy, 316-356. 
21. NBP 2004. “A Report on the Costs and Benefits of Poland’s Adoption of the Euro”, ed. J.Borowski, 
National Bank of Poland 
22.  Persson,  Torsten  (2001)  “Currency  Unions  and  Trade:  How  Large  is  the  Treatment  Effect?”, 
Economic Policy 33, 435-448. 
23. Rose A.K. (2000): One Money, One Market? The Effect of Common Currencies on International 
Trade, „Economic Policy” No. 30, pp. 449-461. 
24. Rose A.K., van Wincoop E. (2001): National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: the Real 
Case for Currency Union, „American Economic Review” Vol. 91, No. 2, s. 386-390. 
25. Mundell R. (1961): A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas, „American Economic Review” Vol. 51, 
No. 4, s. 657-665. 
26. Schadler, S., Drummond, P.F.N., Kuijs, L., Murgasova, Z., Elkan van, R. 2005. “Adopting the euro 
in Central Europe: Challenges of the Next Step in European Integration”, Occasional Paper No. 234, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington. 
27. Wicksell, K. 1898. “Interest and Prices”, tłum. R.F.Kahn, MacMillan, New York, 1936. 
28. Woodford, M. 2003. “Interest and Prices”, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 5
