Donald L Kohn: Comments on “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process” 
by Cecchetti, Hooper, Kasman, Schoenholtz, and Watson 
Remarks by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, DC, 9 March 2007. 
 This  was  an  interesting  paper  with  an  important  objective  –  to  contribute  to  our  understanding  of 
inflation dynamics, with a particular focus on the so-called Great Inflation of the 1970s.1 The better we 
understand history, the less likely we are to repeat it, even on a reduced scale. Of course, the basic 
problem in tackling the inflation of the 1970s is that we have one observation and many competing 
theories.  The  authors’  approach  is  to  consider  the  experiences  of  other  major  industrial  countries 
during  that  period  with  the  hope  that  cross-country  differences  will  provide  a  way  to  discriminate 
among the potential causes.  
The authors’ principal empirical finding is that the onset and, to a lesser degree, the end of the Great 
Inflation were closely synchronized across a number of countries. On the basis of this timing and other 
findings, they reject many of the theories about why inflation rose in the period from the late 1960s 
through the end of the 1970s. According to the authors, the Great Inflation did not stem solely from 
adverse structural changes to the economy, or from policymaker misunderstandings about the nature 
of  the  inflation  process,  or  from  errors  in  gauging  aggregate  resource  utilization.  Instead,  they  say, 
changes in monetary policy preferences, perhaps accentuated by political influences, are the key part 
of the story.  
I certainly agree with the authors that high inflation could not have emerged and then persisted without 
an  accommodative  policy  regime  and  that  a  period  of  tight  policy  was  required  to  produce  the 
sustained  moderation  in  inflation  that  followed.  However,  their  conclusions  do  not  fit  easily  with  my 
premise, which is that policymakers did not seek the result they obtained. In thinking about the story 
told by the paper, I also wonder why political forces and central-banker preferences would necessarily 
shift at the same time in so many countries. So I am left with the question of why policy was conducted 
the way it was.  
My impulse when it comes to selecting from the list of causative factors in the paper is to say “all of the 
above.” Policymakers in the 1970s – the Federal Reserve among them – were dealt a very bad hand 
that,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  they  played  poorly.  The  second  half  of  the  1960s  saw  rising  inflation 
driven by excess demand – a situation not countered sufficiently by a Federal Reserve that perhaps 
was more subject to political pressures than it should have been. By the early 1970s, politicians as 
well  as  the  Federal Reserve  recognized  that  inflation  was excessive  but seemed worried about  the 
cost of reducing it. Those concerns gave rise to the Nixon wage and price controls (which ran from 
1971 to 1974). 
Into  this  mix  were  added  some  very  adverse  supply  shocks  that  elevated  the  costs  of  disinflation. 
Productivity  growth  slowed  appreciably  in  the  early  1970s;  labor  force  developments  raised  the 
nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU); and oil prices spiked. Moreover, as inflation 
remained elevated, inflation expectations rose and institutions adapted – for example through cost-of-
living adjustments in labor contracts – thus further escalating the presumed cost of disinflation.  
Not only were the output costs of disinflation seen to be high but also the monetary policy needed to 
bring  inflation  down  was  consistently  miscalculated  –  economists  during  the  1970s  persistently 
overestimated both the speed and magnitude of the slowdown in real activity and inflation that would 
result from a given rise in the federal funds rate. Part of this miscalculation reflected a judgment that 
the economy and financial markets were fragile and that small changes in market interest rates would 
have major effects on aggregate spending (for example, as a result of disintermediation induced by 
ceilings on the interest rates that banks and thrifts could pay). 
But, in addition, the size of the output gap was not correctly perceived. I agree with the authors that 
this misperception could not have been the whole story; surely consistent surprises on inflation should 
                                                      
1   Alan Kackmeister and Jeremy Rudd, of the staff at the Board of Governors, assisted in the preparation of these comments. 
The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of the Board of Governors or its staff. 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 1
have been a strong clue that something was amiss. But I was not entirely persuaded by the authors’ 
arguments seeking to minimize this factor, especially those that rely on “new estimates of real-time 
output gaps,” a bit of an oxymoron given that you cannot really produce a new real-time estimate of a 
constructed series like the output gap. Perhaps the gap series produced by the Council of Economic 
Advisers  was  viewed  skeptically  by  some  contemporary  observers,  but  it  was  the  “official”  series 
published  by  the  Commerce  Department,  and  it  was  referred  to  by  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  in  its  policy  deliberations.  It  does  not  surprise  me  that  forecasters  took  several 
years to catch up to the adverse developments in trend productivity and the demographic factors that 
boosted the NAIRU; in the 1990s, we took a while to realize the implications of favorable movements 
in both variables even though we were aware from the experience of the 1970s that such changes 
were possible. Moreover, the oil price shocks, analysis of which was not part of the standard tool kit of 
economists forty years ago, complicated matters considerably. 
For  a  variety  of  reasons,  then,  forecasters  consistently  underpredicted  the  future  level  of  inflation, 
seeing  considerably  more  disinflation  from  a  particular  policy  stance  than  in  fact  occurred.  This 
underprediction  was  true  for  the  Board  staff’s  outlook  prepared  for  each  meeting  of  the  FOMC,  in 
which inflation forecast errors persisted for some time, and it was also true for the bond market, as 
realized real interest rates, even at longer maturities, were very low or negative. 
These  experiences  formed  the  backdrop  for  the  FOMC’s  October  6,  1979,  adoption  of  a  policy 
targeting  the  monetary  aggregates,  a  policy  whose  particular  characteristics  can  be  seen  as 
originating from three observations about the 1970s. First, inflation was far too high; it was corroding 
the  economic  system;  and  it  was  the central  bank’s  responsibility  to  bring  it under control.  Second, 
under the circumstances, economic forecasts had proved to be essentially worthless as a basis for 
setting monetary policy, so the central bank had to try a different approach for re-establishing price 
stability – namely, targeting the medium-term growth of the money supply. The third observation was 
that  part  of  the  problem  with  policy  had  been  its  excessive  gradualism,  possibly  to  some  degree  a 
reaction to political and public pressure. Because interest rates would probably have to move quite a 
bit to bring inflation down and no one at the time knew by how much, rate movements needed to be 
less  discretionary;  one  way  to  achieve  this  was  by  changing  the  focus  of  policy  to  rates  of  money 
growth. 
The memory of the 1970s and the subsequent disinflation are very much alive at the Federal Reserve 
and, I suspect, at every other central bank. What major lessons have we drawn from that era? First, 
low and stable inflation – effective price stability – is a necessary condition for the economy to realize 
its full potential for sustained increases in living standards. I doubt that high inflation was the proximate 
cause of the 1973 productivity slowdown, which persisted for a decade after 1983 to 1986, the period 
the authors give for the end of the Great Inflation. And I agree with them that low inflation was not the 
only cause of the Great Moderation, but I am confident that we would not have experienced more than 
two decades of nearly uninterrupted growth if the Federal Reserve had not brought inflation down in 
the  early  1980s  and  kept  it  low  thereafter.  Low  inflation  reduces  distortions  from  signals  in  market 
prices and facilitates longer-term planning. Low and stable inflation also anchors inflation expectations; 
in  turn,  anchored  expectations  make  it  easier  for  the  central  bank  to  control  inflation  with  smaller 
variations in real activity. 
That brings me to my second major lesson: Expectations are critical to policy success. Expectations 
about future policy help to determine the financial conditions that affect spending and inflation. In most 
situations, policy will need to be conducted so that expected real interest rates are positive; a policy 
that pushes expected real rates below zero would be appropriate only in special circumstances, such 
as  when  real  activity  is  expected  to  be  persistently  weak  and  inflation  undesirably  low.  Likewise, 
inflation expectations are critical: Increases in expectations of inflation elevate the cost of returning to 
price stability, and unanchored expectations make it very difficult to understand where the economy is 
and where it is going. 
As  a  consequence,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  authors’  assertion  that  central  banks  pay  too  much 
attention to inflation expectations. Those expectations may not be as much of a leading indicator of 
the inflation trend as I would like – although I am not sure that I find the paper’s conclusion, that the 
trend leads expectations, all that persuasive. Indeed, if I accept the authors’ assertion that post-1984 
expectations  have  been  a  lagging  indicator  of  the  trend,  then,  when  expectations  rise  and  stay 
elevated, I should weight that observation heavily, not lightly. Policy cannot be conducted based solely 
on such a lagging or coincident indicator of inflation, but, of course, it is not. We pay close attention to 
those  factors  that  are  influencing  the  outlook  for  inflation,  as  for  example,  the  level  of  resource 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2007
utilization highlighted in our recent announcements. But a clear lesson of the 1970s is that a central 
bank must keep a very close eye on sustained movements in inflation expectations. 
I  think  a  third  lesson  is  humility  –  we  should  always  keep  in  mind  how  little  we  know  about  the 
economy. Monetary policy operates in an environment of pervasive uncertainty – about the nature of 
the  shocks  hitting  the  economy,  about  the  economy’s  structure,  and  about  agents’  reactions.  The 
1970s provide a sobering lesson in the difficulty of estimating the level and rate of change of potential 
output; these are quantities we can never observe directly but can only infer from the behavior of other 
variables.  We  cannot  effectively  implement  policy  without  some  reference  to  the  likely  level  of 
potential,  given  that  demand-supply  pressures  are  an  integral  part  of  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism. But we must be realistic about the accuracy of our estimates of potential while always 
doing our best to improve them.  
Even  today,  we  face  a  number  of  sources  of  uncertainty  about  the  nature  of  the  inflation  process. 
Interestingly,  we  can  draw  several  examples  from  the  paper.  First,  any  estimate  of  the  persistent 
component  of  inflation  is  inherently  uncertain.  Comparing  the  trend  inflation  estimates  for  the  gross 
domestic product of the United States in the current study with related estimates based on Stock and 
Watson’s  recent  paper  on  the  topic  reveals  an  important  difference:  In  the  latter,  the  standard 
deviation to the innovation of the permanent component of inflation from 1997 onward is not zero but 
rather  permits  a  small  but  significant  amount  of  drift  in  the  trend  from  its  late-1990s  trough.2  Other 
trend-extraction  exercises  imply  either  a  stable  trend  or  a  trend  that  has  drifted  up  over  the  past 
several years; likewise, the behavior of estimated trend inflation over this period differs according to 
the inflation concept used. Although these differences are small relative to the overall variation in the 
trend over the past forty years, they are assuredly large enough to be meaningful to a monetary policy 
maker. 
In addition, we do not yet have a consensus structural model of inflation dynamics that satisfactorily 
explains  all  the  important  aspects  of  the  empirical  data.  As  the  paper  demonstrates,  a  standard 
workhorse  model  –  a  sticky-price  business  cycle  model  with  a  drifting  inflation  target  and  a  New 
Keynesian Phillips curve – cannot mimic one important feature of the inflation process. I will leave it to 
the  modelers  to  debate  the  seriousness  of  this  deficiency  and  to  propose how  it  might  be  rectified. 
However, it is clear to me that our understanding of the inflation process still has far to go. 
The issue of expectations illustrates our ignorance. As I have already indicated, inflation expectations 
are  among  the  most  important  variables  policymakers  monitor,  but  we  do  not  have  answers  to  our 
most  basic  questions  about  them:  Are  available  measures  suitable  indicators  of  true  inflation 
expectations by households and businesses? How are expectations formed – and in particular what 
are the respective roles of central bank talk, central bank actions, and actual inflation outcomes? And 
how  do  expectations  influence  price  and  wage  setting?  In  short,  although  I  believe  that  inflation 
expectations are critical to assessing the inflation outlook, I cannot be sure (particularly in real time) 
that our expectational measures are accurate and so cannot know what precise role expectations play 
in wage and price dynamics. 
In sum, then, I found reading the paper to be useful and instructive because it reminded me not only of 
what we have learned but also of what we still do not know.  
                                                      
2   James  H.  Stock  and  Mark  W.  Watson  (2007),  "Why  Has  U.S.  Inflation  Become  Harder  to  Forecast?"  Journal  of  Money, 
Credit, and Banking, supplement to vol. 39 (February), pp. 3-33. 
BIS Review 23/2007 
 3
