Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The Malaysian banking industry reinvention and 
transformation 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
11th  Malaysian  Banking  Summit  "The  Malaysian  Banking  Industry  Reinvention  and 
Transformation", Kuala Lumpur, 19 July 2007. 
 In this recent decade, the Malaysian banking sector has been significantly transformed and 
reinvented. The restructuring, consolidation and rationalisation efforts that were undertaken 
in the banking sector have placed the financial sector on a stronger foundation. This decade 
has also been a period of favourable performance and increased resilience. This has been 
achieved  with  the  successful  integration  of  business  processes  and  the  redeployment  of 
resources  to  support  new  areas  of  growth.  Financial  reforms  have  also  changed  the 
environment.  Progressive  deregulation  and  liberalization  have  increased  the  flexibility  to 
financial  institutions,  while  also  resulting  in  new  business  opportunities  and  increased 
competition. These developments have also further strengthened the incentives for improved 
performance.  Significant  structural  changes  during  this  period  have  also  reshaped  the 
landscape.  The  introduction  of  capital  market  intermediaries,  investment  banks,  an 
increasing presence of new international players in Islamic finance, and a significantly more 
developed bond market, has resulted in a significantly more diversified financial system. 
The resulting payoffs for the financial system, and the economy generally, have clearly been 
positive. Today, the financial sector has evolved from being an enabler of growth to become 
an  important  source  of  growth  in  its  own  right.  The  sector,  in  the  banking  and  insurance 
industries, now provides employment to more than 123,000 Malaysians. Despite conditions 
that have remained challenging for a large part of the decade, the banking system remained 
consistently on solid financial ground with a risk-weighted capital ratio of over 13%, low NPL 
ratios, and continued profitability for eight consecutive years. Substantial progress has been 
made  towards  consumer  retail  finance  and  access  to  banking  services.  Such  consumer 
lending  has  increased  from  RM134  billion  to  RM343  billion  while  loans  disbursed  to  small 
and medium enterprises have increased from RM71 billion in 2000 to RM108 billion in 2007. 
Domestic  banking  institutions  are  also  building  on  their  strong  domestic  performance  to 
expand  beyond  Malaysian  borders.  Today,  six  domestic  banks  have  presence  in  10 
countries around the region. 
The  current  encouraging  state  of  the  banking  system,  however,  should  not  make  us 
complacent on the need to continually transform and reinvent. The road in front of us is likely 
to  be  significantly  different  from  the  one  we  have  traveled  on.  As  our  previous  experience 
has  shown,  we  need  to  constantly  recognize  that  strategies  that  serve  well  in  today's 
environment would not necessarily be a formula for success in tomorrow's environment. 
In looking at the future terrain of the financial sector in Malaysia, six trends are particularly 
important  –  first,  the  changing  configuration  of  the  global  economy  and  global  financial 
markets;  second,  regional  economic  and  financial  integration;  third,  financial  sector 
development  amidst  increased  liberalisation  in  the  Asian  region;  fourth,  increased  role  of 
domestic  demand  in  the  Asian  economies; fifth,  growing  significance  of  Islamic  finance  in 
the international financial system; and finally, developments in the regulatory structures and 
approaches. It can be expected that all these trends will have a significant bearing on the 
future of the banking industry. 
First, the global economic configuration has been altered by the emergence of several large 
emerging economies into the global economy. This is especially evident in Asia, where the 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
rise of China , India and the South East Asian economies have increased Asia's global role. 
As a result, Asia today features four1 of the world's twelve largest economies and several of 
the fastest-growing economies. Collectively as a region, Asia contributes about 40% of global 
output2 and one-fourth of world trade. The region is also a significant net exporter of capital, 
holding two-thirds of the world's foreign exchange reserves and is the largest holder of the 
developed economies' sovereign bonds. One-quarter of Fortune's top 500 global companies 
are Asian corporations. This opens up tremendous business opportunities for Malaysia as a 
part of this dynamic growth region. 
Accompanying  these  changes  has  been  the  prevalence  of  abundant  liquidity  in  the  global 
financial  markets,  resulting  in  an  intensified  search  for  higher  yields.  These  trends  are 
encouraging  flows  into  the  capital  markets  of  emerging  economies,  presenting  new 
opportunities  for  wholesale  banking  and  capital  market  related  financial  services.  These 
flows,  however,  also  pose  potential  risks  of  reversals  in  financial  market  conditions.  This 
increases  the  need  to  ensure  that  we  have  the  capacity  to  absorb  or  adjust  to  changing 
financial flows. 
A  second  significant  trend  shaping  the  future  financial  landscape  is  the  intensification  of 
regional  economic  and  financial  integration.  Economic  integration  through  trade  is  already 
well-advanced  in  Asia,  with  the  share  of  intra-regional  trade  already  more  than  half  of  the 
total trade in Asia . More recently, however, greater financial integration at the regional level 
has  been  an  important  development,  bringing  complementary  and  mutually-reinforcing 
benefits  to  the  economies  in  the  region.  Intra-regional  investments  among  the  Asian 
economies  have  increased  with  an  accompanying  rise  in  cross-border  financing  activities. 
There has already been an increase in cross-border mergers and acquisition activity among 
Asian financial institutions in order to reap emerging opportunities. The transformation in the 
financial landscape in the current environment has not been confined to the Asian region but 
has also involved growing ties with other emerging regions. Of significance is the rising trend 
of  trade  and  financial  linkages  between  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  and  other  parts  of  the 
world. Malaysian banks now have the capacity to take advantage of these trends. 
The trends towards regional financial integration also present significant opportunities to tap 
into the enlarged pool of savings in Asia . Besides institutional pools of wealth, the rapidly 
expanding middle class has been a key factor sustaining the high savings rate. In Asia alone, 
we  now  have  more  than  2.6  million  high  net  worth  individuals  who  collectively  control  an 
estimated USD8.4 trillion in financial assets. These trends underpin the increasing demand 
for  more  sophisticated  consumer  finance  and  wealth  management  products.  There  is  also 
potential  to  tap  the  appetite  for  growing  international  diversification  among  the  more 
developed  economies  in  Asia  ,  to  meet  the  rising  demand  for  regional  financial  assets. 
Furthermore,  the  continued  growth  momentum  in  the  region  has  created  demand  for 
infrastructure. It is estimated that Asia needs USD 1 trillion worth of infrastructure investment 
over the next 5 years, offering huge potential for financing opportunities. 
Third,  reinforcing  the  move  towards  regional  financial  integration,  authorities  across  the 
region have encouraged greater financial sector development and progressively liberalised 
their capital accounts. Many regional countries are moving beyond financial restructuring to 
promote  more  diversified  and  vibrant  financial  systems  that  embrace  a  broad  range  of 
service  providers  and  asset  classes,  including  private  equity,  hedge  funds,  structured 
products and Islamic finance. 
In  Malaysia,  the  gradual  but  progressive  liberalization  of  foreign  exchange  administration 
rules undertaken since 2003 has led to significant benefits in terms of providing enhanced 
                                                 
1   Refers to Japan (rank: 2), China (4), India (10) and Korea (12) based on 2005 nominal GDP in USD terms. 
2   GDP based on purchasing power parity (PPP). 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
flexibility of the financial sector, contributing to reducing the cost of doing business as well as 
expanding  the  scope  of  activities  of  the  financial  sector.  In  April  this  year,  several 
liberalization  measures  were  implemented  to  further  increase  international  investors' 
participation in the Malaysian capital market, provide greater flexibility for resident investors 
to  diversify  into  non-ringgit  investments  in  Malaysia  and  overseas,  and  to  facilitate  the 
expansion of the domestic banks' foreign currency business. 
Fourth, the trend for the growing significance of domestic demand has also become more 
pronounced  and  is  expected  to  continue  going  forward.  Supported  by  rising  incomes,  firm 
labour market conditions and a young demographic profile, private consumption activity has 
moved  towards  income-sensitive  goods  and  lifestyle  services  for  which  the  retail  banking 
sector should be well-positioned to offer a wider range of innovative products and services to 
meet the requirements of increasingly more sophisticated consumers. 
The change in demographic structure of the population will also have an indirect impact on 
the  domestic  financial  landscape.  While  Malaysia's  population  is  still  relatively  young,  an 
increasing segment of the population is in the group aged 64 and above. This development 
will  have  implications  for  human  capital,  business  and  product  strategies  of  banking 
institutions in terms of savings behaviour and demand for different types of products. 
Fifth,  a  new  area  of  growing  significance  in  the  international  financial  system  is  Islamic 
Finance  as  a  viable  and  competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation.  The  Malaysia 
International  Islamic  Financial  Centre,  or  MIFC,  initiative,  launched  in  August  2006,  has 
taken Malaysia's liberalisation strategies to a new level with the aim of positioning Malaysia 
strategically in this new growth area. Islamic banking institutions are allowed to undertake a 
broader  array  of  Islamic  financial  activities  that  include  commercial  banking,  consumer 
banking,  investment  banking  as  well  as  international  currency  business  under  the  MIFC 
initiative. Financial institutions need to consider their own competitive positioning in this area 
and to have the appropriate strategies to participate in this dynamic growth sector. 
Finally,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  paradigm  will  also  continue  to  evolve.  Indeed,  we 
have  over  the  recent  decade  witnessed  significant  global  shifts  in  the  approaches  to 
regulation  and  supervision  across  many  countries.  These  have  ranged  from  radical  policy 
responses  in  some  countries  that  led  to  the  introduction  of  costly  regulatory  systems  to 
address  the  problems  have  emerged,  to  bold  deregulatory  measures  pursued  in  other 
countries,  especially  during 
times  of  exuberance  and  strong  market  conditions.  A 
convergence  towards  the  middle  ground  between  these  two  extremes  now  seems  to  be 
emerging. 
Two dimensions of regulatory change will be relevant to the context of the new environment. 
First,  the  emphasis  on  creating  a  strong  risk  management  culture  that  is  fundamental  to 
sound  banking  operations  will  become  significantly  more  pronounced.  T  he  transition  to 
Basel II and the implementation of the risk-based supervisory regime are important elements 
of this change. 
Second,  regulations  will  continue  to  focus  more  on  facilitating  market-led  adjustments  that 
will  allow  the  industry  to  evolve  in  response  to  market  developments,  while  maintaining  a 
sufficient degree of regulatory oversight to maintain financial stability and public confidence. 
This  includes  the  adoption  of  principles-based  regulations  and  an  increased  focus  on 
harnessing market forces and discipline, as well as internal oversight functions, to reinforce 
prudential regulation and supervision. The aim is to promote a more efficient and responsive 
financial system. 
In this connection, Bank Negara will soon introduce a more facilitative process for product 
innovations with revisions to the new product approval framework. The changes are aimed at 
improving time to market for the introduction of new products by financial institutions, while 
ensuring that institutions put in place a sound product management programme within their 
respective  institutions.  The  new  framework  will  provide  for  more  simplified  regulatory 
processes and allow greater flexibility for well- managed banks and insurers to introduce new 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 3
products more quickly in the market. Qualifying banks and insurers are expected to exercise 
this flexibility responsibly and in particular, with due regard to the interests of consumers. 
The  realignment  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  structures  within  the  Central  Bank  in 
November  2006  has  marked  a  significant  turning  point  in  consolidating  these  regulatory 
changes. As a result of the realignment, the Bank is better positioned to conduct effective 
surveillance of the financial system; to address regulatory overlaps and duplication within the 
system; to deal more strategically with the weight of multiple objectives and range of issues 
confronting  the  financial  system,  and  more  importantly,  to  preserve  regulatory  neutrality  in 
the management of similar risks between different financial service providers. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
These emerging trends in the international and regional environment will have an important 
bearing  on  the  changing  climate  shaping  the  banking  sector.  While  it  brings  new 
opportunities, it will also bring challenges. Let me return to the theme of this summit – the 
continued reinvention and transformation that needs to be considered for the industry going 
forward. I would like to focus on three main areas. 
The  first  concerns  human  capital  development.  This  is  vitally  important  for  the  future 
development  and  growth  of  the  financial  sector.  Going  forward  into  the  future  this  will 
become  the  pivotal  factor  determining  the  capacity  to  reinvent  and  transform.  Financial 
institutions  have  two  broad  options.  One  would  be  to  “buy  talent”.  This  remains  a  viable 
option as long as productivity growth remains aligned with wage increases. Banks, however, 
need  to  be  wary  of  bidding  up  wages  without  commensurate  efficiency  improvements  or 
increases in value-add. This would not be sustainable and given the prevailing competitive 
market conditions, such a strategy will eventually erode the banks' competitiveness resulting 
from the additional costs. 
The other option is to “build talent”. This can be achieved through strategic partnerships with 
training providers, actively contributing towards industry-wide efforts to support the training 
agenda and continuous improvements to internal learning programmes. 
This is also the option that is by far more challenging, but ultimately the one that provides the 
optimal  payoff  for  individual  institutions,  for  our  financial  sector,  and  the  economy.  The 
magnitude of the task, however, demands our collective efforts to secure a sustainable pool 
of talent that will serve both the present as well as future needs of the industry. The industry 
also  needs  to  participate  in  the  formal  learning  programmes  by  the  institutions  of  higher 
learning. It is encouraging to note that several have volunteered following the recent dialogue 
earlier this year organised by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Ministry of Higher Education . 
By  contributing  towards  positive  reforms  in  the  academic  curriculum  and  providing  other 
forms of practical support, the industry is making an important investment in its own future. 
To  take  this  effort  further  forward,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  initiating  an  extensive 
programme  to  train  and  prepare  at  least  1,000  deserving  graduates  for  immediate 
placements  in  banking  and  insurance  institutions.  This  effort  will  be  undertaken  in 
collaboration with the industry and training institutes and is aimed at boosting the supply of 
well-trained  and  competent  personnel  for  the  financial  services  industry.  The  selection 
process will be rigorous, and the training programme will be designed to produce first grade 
candidates  for  employment  at  the  management  trainee  level.  It  is  also  hoped  that  foreign 
financial institutions will draw on their extensive global network to support the programme. I 
urge the industry to lend its full support to this effort which will ultimately benefit the industry. 
Collectively, these efforts will go a long way towards preparing students well for productive 
careers  in  the  financial  services  industry  and  to  provide  a  strong  foundation  for  the 
development of the future generation of leaders and captains of industry. 
The second area relates to financial inclusion. Strategies that are aimed towards consumer 
outreach and promoting financial inclusion will serve to increase access to financial services 
for all segments of society, promote more balanced growth, while at the same time, providing 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2007
new  sources  of  revenue  for  the  financial  industry.  Significant  efforts  have  been  taken  to 
strengthen  the  elements  that  support  financial  inclusion.  This  includes  various  outreach 
initiatives, including the consumer education programme, development of small and medium 
enterprises,  increased  public  accessibility  to  financial  information  and  greater  access  to 
advice and assistance. 
Part of this effort is the development of a sustainable and commercially-driven microfinance 
industry in Malaysia . In Malaysia, there are at least 435,000 micro enterprises, but only 13% 
rely  on  financial  institutions  for  funding.  Of  importance  is  promoting  commercially  viable 
microfinance  ventures.  In  this  connection,  greater  flexibility  has  been  provided  for  foreign 
banks  to  enhance  their  presence  in  non-urban  areas.  Given  the  objectives  of  financial 
inclusion, it is hoped that foreign banks support this initiative given the flexibility that is being 
accorded  to  widen  the  outreach  to  segments  of  the  economy  which  are  currently 
underserved. Also embedded within the financial inclusion agenda is the responsibility that 
banking institutions have towards their customers, and to ensure that adequate information is 
provided to consumers and investors to make informed judgments. 
In the area of product development, both the interest of consumers and businesses will be 
taken into account. Financial institutions that demonstrate their ability to act responsibly can 
look forward to greater business flexibility to innovate. Financial institutions that uphold the 
necessary  principles  in  their  business  strategies  stand  to  reap  long-term  gains  from 
enhanced  franchise  value,  a  strong  reputation  and  positive  association  with  socially 
responsible values that will engender public trust and confidence. 
The third area relates to the need for banking institutions to enlarge their sphere of influence 
going  forward  given  the  changing  environment.  Banks  will  increasingly  be  exposed  to 
external developments and the forces of market discipline. There are several particular areas 
in  which  banking  institutions  can  take  strategic  positions  to  influence  such  developments. 
First  is  to  leverage  on  the  “network  economy”  through  strategic  alliances.  With  global 
integration deepening further at the same time that competitive forces are exerting pressures 
on margins, the way forward would be to build on strategic alliances to increase capacity and 
expand reach, while containing costs. Strategic alliances with third parties, including those 
within and outside Malaysia, provides efficient opportunities to capitalize on the strengths of 
each partner and in the process promote development, the transfer of skills and improvement 
of best practices and pave the way for successful cross-border ventures. 
The second relates to the area of international standard setting. With the gaining momentum 
of international standards in such important and pervasive areas such as capital adequacy 
standards,  financial  reporting  and  cross-border  activities,  it  is  important  for  financial 
institutions to participate more constructively in the standard setting process together with the 
regulatory  community  in  order  for  such  developments  to  take  into  account  domestic 
circumstances and risks. 
The  third  is  in  the  area  of  ongoing  negotiations  on  trade  agreements.  Banking  institutions 
need to follow these developments and negotiations closely to consider implications it would 
have to their organisations and future business strategies. 
The  last  area  of  influence  relates  to  communication  strategies.  With  increasing  market 
discipline,  effective  communications  has  become  more  critical.  Institutions  will  need  to  be 
more active in responding to consumer and business expectations and the building of long 
term customer relationships in order to be able to implement longer term business strategies. 
This  is  a  significant  challenge  which  demands  deliberate,  planned  and  well-designed 
communication strategies and resources dedicated for this effort. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 5
This decade has demonstrated the capacity of the banking sector to reinvent and transform. 
Going forward, the changes in the global economy and international financial landscape will 
continue  to  accelerate  beyond  expectations.  The  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  remain 
relevant  in  the  future  will  depend  on  the  actions  that  are  taken  now  in  the  current 
environment. The leadership of the industry will be instrumental in charting the future growth 
path  and  cultivating  a  performance  culture  that  will  steer  financial  institutions  towards 
continued success. 
There therefore needs to be an awareness of the emerging cyclical and structural forces that 
will impact the economy as well as their linkages with the banking industry , to anticipate new 
developments and opportunities, and most importantly, to be equipped to respond to the new 
opportunities and to remain competitive and relevant. The challenge for banking institutions 
is  in  being  able  to  balance  between  demands  of  the  immediate  term  with  a  longer  term 
outlook  and  how 
the  organisation's  continuous  renewal  and 
transformation process. 
On that note, I wish you a successful Seminar. 
this  would 
feed 
into 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2007
