Xiang Junbo: Enhancing the social responsibility of the banking system 
in China 
Remarks  by  Mr  Xiang  Junbo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the 
Inauguration Ceremony of National Student Loans Extended to Students in Gansu Province, 
Gansu, 22 May 2007. 
 It is of great significance to hold the inauguration ceremony of National Student Loans (NSL) 
today at Huining county which has glorious revolutionary tradition in Gansu province. I would 
like  to  express  my  warm  congratulations  on  the  inauguration  of  the  program  in  Gansu 
province on behalf of the headquarters of the People’s Bank of China (PBC). I would also like 
to take this opportunity to extend our sincere greetings to all the staff working in the banking 
sector  of  Gansu  province  and  all  those  who  have  made  great  contributions  to  the  work  of 
student loans.  
NSL  policy  is  a  great  measure  to  enhance  the  support  to  students  who  have  financial 
difficulties, an important content of building socialist harmonious society and a new attempt 
of  supporting  education  by  the  financial  sector  under  the  socialist  market  economy  to 
improve financial support to students in universities. The work of NSL relates to the benefit of 
many students and their parents, to the overall situation of state talent cultivation and to the 
stability  of  universities  and  society.  Good  performance  of  NSL  is  the  requirement  of  the 
Communist  Party  of  China  (CPC)  Central  Committee  and  State  Council,  and  is  the  social 
responsibility of banking system as well.  
From 1999, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee 
and  State  Council,  the  PBC  has  studied  and  designed  NSL  policy  with  relevant  agencies, 
improved  its  system  constantly  in  practice,  and  positively  pushed  forward  the  work  of  it. 
Particularly in 2004, we made some adjustment and improvement of NSL policy, including 
the establishment of risk compensation and market operation regimes to enable risk sharing 
among the fiscal sector, universities and the banks; the establishment of NSL management 
centers  both  at  the  state  and  provincial  (autonomous  regions  and  municipalities  directly 
under  the  Central  Government)  levels  to  increase  the  administration  responsibilities  of 
education authority and reduce the loan-post cost and risk of the banks; the adjustment of 
interest subsidy and repayment policies, and extension of loan repayment period. All these 
adjustment  and  improvement  have  sufficiently  showed  great  importance  attached  to  the 
education and the work of NSL from the government, and sufficiently respected the principle 
of  reciprocity  between  duties  and  rights.  It  is  beneficial  to  the  healthy  and  sustainable 
development of NSL. Under the joint efforts of the financial sector and relevant agencies, the 
business of NSL has made much progress. The balance of NSL reached 15.37 billion yuan 
by the end of March 2007, compared to only above 4 million at the end of 1999. Almost 2 
million students have benefited from the program.  
At the same time, in order to further carry out key policies of promoting the construction of 
New  Socialist  Countryside  and  Harmonious  Society,  the  PBC  actively  guided  financial 
institutions  to  study  further  the  business  of  student  loans,  increased  financial  product 
innovation,  and  actively  explored  and  developed  new  pattern  and  types  of  student  loans 
consistent with financial business practice with easier access to students from poor families. 
On 30 August 2006, the PBC issued Notice on Further Strengthening the Work of Student 
Loan Business, to guide the financial sector to actively extend loans to local students while 
carrying  out  the  work  of  NSL.  By  March  of  2007,  24  provinces  (cities)  nationwide  have 
carried out the student loan business for local students, 13 provinces and cities have issued 
regulations on loan extended to local students, 11 provinces have provided interest subsidy 
by local fiscal agencies, and 6 provinces have put forward measures of risk compensation. 
All in all, the business of local student loans has developed from nowhere to grow steadily. 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
By the end of March 2007, the balance of student loans, which include the loans extended to 
local  students,  a  valuable  supplement  to  NSL  and  an  important  component  of  financial 
support  from  the  banking  system  to  students  with  financial  difficulties,  has  reached  3.43 
billion yuan.  
This time, Gansu province has studied and established the Provisional Measures on National 
Student  Loans  for  Students  from  Gansu  Province,  combining  the  policy  measures  of  NSL 
together  with  the  loan  business  for  local  students.  These  measures  have  positive 
implications in terms of project design, enabling adequate financing for fiscal interest subsidy 
and  risk  compensation  of  student  loans  under  difficult  fiscal  situation,  thus  providing 
incentives for financial institutions to engage in local student loan business, a breakthrough 
in the building of a long lasting mechanism of local student loans. This sufficiently shows the 
great importance and determination attached by provincial Party Committee and government 
to the work of local student loan business. The pattern of combining NSL policy with local 
student loan business by Gansu Province is a pioneering innovation and valuable attempt to 
the  expansion  of  student  loan  business.  It  is  beneficial  to  the  healthy  development  and 
effective  enforcement  of  student  loan  business,  helpful  to  address  the  issue  of  supporting 
students  from  poor  families  to  attend  school,  and  it  can  provoke  more  thoughts  and  even 
serve as a reference for further enforcement and improvement of the NSL policy.  
To enforce and further improve the NSL policy is a target clearly specified at the sixth plenary 
session of the 16th CPC Central Committee and in this year’s government work report. In the 
light  of  NSL  policies  and  measures,  further  development  of  local  student  loans  is  an 
important  step  for  the  enforcement  and  improvement  of  NSL,  an  important  component  to 
establish and strengthen financial support system to students with financial difficulties, and 
also reflects the trend and future path for development of student loan business. I hope the 
PBC Lanzhou sub-branch can take it as a good opportunity to carry out the work of student 
loans,  further  strengthen  communication  and  coordination  with  the  educational  and  fiscal 
authorities,  enhance  research  and  investigation,  sum  up  experience  and  lessons  in  time, 
improve  continuously  institutional  building  and  risk  prevention  mechanisms,  so  as  to 
establish step by step a systematic and complete policy system of local student loans, and 
explore a long-lasting system of local student loans, for the benefits of students and families 
with  financial  difficulties  in  Gansu  province.  Valuable  theoretical  explorations  and  practical 
experiences should be studied to help relevant government agencies design relevant policies 
aimed to promote local student loans in the whole country.  
As a final note, I wish a healthy development of the financial sector in Gansu province and 
greater achievement of student loan work! 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2007
