Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Central Bank of the Philippines’ initiatives to 
strengthen risk management practices in banks 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at 
the  Quarterly  Risk  Management  Forum,  Makati  City, 
6 December 2006. 
 Good  afternoon,  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  in  this  quarter’s  risk  management  forum 
organized  by  the  Gov.  Jose  B.  Fernandez,  Jr.  Center  for  Banking  and  Finance  (JBF  Center),  in 
cooperation with the Professional Risk Managers’ International Association (PRMIA). 
My remarks this afternoon will focus on BSP’s initiatives to strengthen risk management practices in 
banks  under  our  supervision.  Since  banks  still  dominate  the  financial  landscape  in  our  country,  the 
BSP  as  the  banking  supervisor  has  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  the  development  of  better  risk 
management practices in the country. Although this is a very challenging role to play given the pace of 
development in the field of risk management, I do believe that the BSP is up to the challenge and has 
been proactive judging by the number of initiatives we have put in place starting in the mid-90s.  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  share  with  you  our  experience  on  the  implementation  of  these  initiatives,  but 
before  that  let  me  highlight  the  risk  profile  of  the  Philippine  banking  system,  which  dictated  the 
direction and pace of these regulatory actions. 
Risk profile of the Philippine banking system 
As of end-June 2006, total on-balance sheet assets of the banking industry amounted to P4.5 trillion, 
of  which  about  89  percent  are  accounted  for  by  the  dominant  commercial  banking  segment. 
Additionally,  off-balance  sheet  notional  accounts  –  consisting  of  derivatives,  trust  and  trade-related 
contingent exposures – amounted to P2.3 trillion. In terms of risk-weighted assets or RWA – which is a 
supervisory measure of banks’ risk exposures to credit risk and market risk only – commercial banks’ 
exposures  are  made  up  of  90  percent  credit  risk  and  10  percent  market  risk.  With  the  addition  of 
operational  risk  in  the  risk-based  capital  adequacy  framework  of  the  BSP  on  1  July  2007,  our 
simulations show that commercial banks’ RWA will be made up of 77 percent credit risk, 8 percent 
market risk, and 15 percent operational risk.  
As  primary  buffer  against  these  risk  exposures,  Tier  1  capitalization  of  the  banking  system,  which 
includes hybrid Tier 1 capital stood at P433 billion as of end-March 2006. Our banks have also issued 
P79 billion in Tier 2 capital as allowed under our regulations consistent with international practices. 
CAR  (capital  adequacy  ratio)  stood  at  19.4  percent  as  of  end-March  20061  while  loss  provisions, 
which serve as cushion for expected losses have been significantly boosted from just 1.44 percent of 
total assets in end-December 1997, to 2.72 percent as of end-June 2006.  
BSP’s risk management initiatives 
Now, let me guide you through the important historical highlights of BSP’s risk management initiatives.  
In  1995,  the  BSP  recognized  the  greater  risk  exposure  in  the  system  brought  about  by  derivatives 
activities. To mitigate this, the BSP issued Circular No. 102 prescribing the minimum standards for risk 
management  of  derivatives.  This  was  probably  the  first  BSP  regulation  that  specifically  focused  on 
banks’  market  risk  taking  activities  and  risk  management  practices.  Prior  to  this,  risk  management 
regulations were largely confined to basic credit risk management and to internal control issues. 
In 1997, the thrust of bank supervision started to shift its focus towards a more forward-looking view of 
risk management and whether a bank has the infrastructure to manage its own risks, instead of just 
mainly performing financial audit and compliance review. The objective was to address weaknesses in 
management and internal controls before financial performance suffers rather than being satisfied with 
identifying what went wrong after the fact. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
The BSP’s effort to focus on risk management is ultimately intended to give banks greater flexibility to 
respond  to  changing  opportunities  and  challenges  in  the  face  of  global  competition  under  a  more 
deregulated environment and at a time of rapid technological advances. 
Traditional bank supervision tended to micromanage banks to avoid risks that seem too high. The new 
approach to supervision is now more focused on the assessment of the quality of risk-management 
practices and generally allows banks to take on greater risks so long as the banks demonstrate the 
ability to identify, measure, manage and price for those risks.  
This more liberal approach to supervision, which allows banks more opportunities for success, entails 
that the BSP emphasize the responsibility of the banks’ board of directors and senior management to 
ensure  the  soundness  and  stability  of  their  respective  banks.  The  regulators’  role  is  primarily  to 
evaluate the quality of oversight and management provided by these critical actors – that is, the quality 
of corporate governance.  
Strengthening banks’ corporate governance has thus been the theme of a number of BSP regulations. 
In June 1997, Circular No. 130 requiring the board of directors of banks to, among others, adopt and 
maintain adequate risk management policy was issued. A few months after, or in October 1997, the 
BSP also issued Circular No. 145 requiring banks to develop and implement a compliance system and 
to appoint/designate a compliance officer to oversee its implementation. In September 2001, the BSP 
issued Circular No. 296 which implemented the fit and proper standards for directors and officers of 
banks and non-banks as mandated by the General Banking Law (GBL) of 2000. The same Circular 
also  prescribed  a  mandatory  orientation  program  on  corporate  governance  for  banks’  board  of 
directors.  Moreover,  the  BSP  issued  in  October  2003  Circular  No.  410  which  provided  the 
accreditation guidelines for banks’ external auditors.  
In 2004, the BSP continued to issue a number of guidelines that aimed to further enhance governance 
practices  in  banks.  Earlier  that  year,  the  BSP  issued  the  guidelines  for  the  management  of  banks’ 
large  exposures  (Circular  No.  414).  This  was  followed  by  the  strengthening  of  rules  on  connected 
party  transactions  or  DOSRI  by  expanding  both  the  coverage  of  transactions  and  the  definition  of 
related interests (Circular No. 423). The BSP also issued Circular No. 429 that year which aimed to 
further strengthen banks’ compliance function. The BSP also issued that year the guidelines for the 
development  and  implementation  of  banks’  internal  credit  risk  rating  systems  (Circular  No.  439)  in 
anticipation  of  Basel  II.  The  guidelines  strongly  emphasize  the  oversight  function  of  the  board  of 
directors  over  these  systems.  Before  2004  ended,  BSP  issued  Circular  No.  456  amending  the 
provisions  on  the  specific  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  board  of  directors  in  the  Manual  of 
Regulations  for  Banks.  The  said  Circular  created  three  board-of-director-level  committees,  namely; 
audit committee, corporate governance committee, and risk management committee.  
This year, the BSP pushed forward with its shift to risk-based supervision by issuing the guidelines on 
the supervision by risk, setting forth the expectations of the BSP with respect to the conduct of risk 
management by financial institutions under its jurisdiction. This was followed closely by the issuance of 
the guidelines on technology risk management, which is aimed at ensuring effective management of 
technology-related  risks  by  financial  institutions.  Just  recently,  the  BSP  issued  broad  guidelines  on 
market  risk  management  and  liquidity  risk  management,  which  set  forth  BSP’s  expectations  on  the 
management of these risks by banks. 
BSP’s risk-based capital initiatives 
While the BSP has been trying to enhance banks’ risk management practices, it is also simultaneously 
working  on  improving  the  risk-based  capital  adequacy  framework  as  empowered  under  the  GBL  of 
2000.  We  responded  swiftly  once  the  legal  framework  was  put  in  place.  In  March  2001,  the  BSP 
adopted Basel I-type framework through Circular No. 280. This Circular provided the guidelines for the 
computation  of  risk-based  capital  for  credit  risk.  The  BSP’s  risk-based  capital  adequacy  framework 
was  further  enhanced  with  the  issuance  of  Circular  No.  360  in  December  2002.  Circular  No.  360 
incorporated market risk into the framework. 
In 2005, the focus was on preparing the implementing regulations for the eventual implementation of 
Basel II in the Philippines. At the time, preparatory works on Basel II implementation were already at 
an advanced stage globally. The discussions during international fora had already become complex 
and rather extended. For our part, the approach to implementation has been more calculated. Certain 
elements of the Basel II approaches such as those pertaining to risk weights for corporates and NPLs, 
were gradually incorporated in existing regulations to pave the way for a smoother implementation of 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
the  whole  new  framework  in  2007.  Meanwhile,  in  response  to  heightened  appetite  and  growing 
exposure of banks to structured products and in preparation for the envisaged take-off of the domestic 
securitization market following the approval of the Securitization Act of 2004, the BSP pre-emptively 
issued  in  2005  the  risk-based  capital  treatment  of  banks’  exposures  to  structured  products  and 
securitization  structures.  In  support  of  major  policy  objectives  of  enhancing  credit  access  and 
expediting the clean-up of bad assets from the system, the BSP likewise advanced lower credit risk 
weightings  for  high  grade  corporate  debt  exposures  and  micro  and  SME  exposures,  but  also 
increased the risk weighting on non-performing loans. 
This year, the BSP has issued the much-awaited Basel II implementing guidelines for the Philippines. 
The BSP’s Task Force on the Implementation of Basel II has just concluded their series of briefings 
both within and outside of the BSP in preparation for the parallel run that will be conducted starting 
end this year until mid next year. Unlike the existing BSP risk-based capital adequacy framework, the 
new  Basel  II-based  framework  does  not  only  focus  on  the  computation  of  the  appropriate  level  of 
capital  given  a  certain  level  of  risk  exposure,  but  it  also  highlights  the  need  for  more  market 
disclosures by banks on their risk management exposures and practices. This is fully consistent with 
Basel II Pillar 3 recommendations, as well as the new International Financial Reporting Standards or 
IFRS which we fully adopted since 2005. The rationale is that the market itself contains disciplinary 
mechanisms  that  can  reinforce  the  efforts  of  supervisors  by  rewarding  banks  that  manage  risk 
effectively and penalizing those whose risk management is inept or imprudent through their patronage 
or non-patronage.  
Basel II and risk management 
As we move into implementation of Basel II, industry reaction is both revealing and interesting. On one 
hand, the commotion it is causing with banks doubling their efforts in improving their risk management 
systems to meet the requirements of the advanced approaches is a very positive development as far 
as the BSP is concerned. On the other hand, it is rather disappointing that it takes regulatory pressure 
for many banks to finally start investing in a sound risk management system.  
I understand that there are certain problems that now face banks as they aim to improve their own risk 
management systems. . A survey of emerging market central banks conducted by the BIS reveals the 
three  main  difficulties  faced  not  just  by  you,  but  by  banks  in  emerging  markets  in  general,  in 
implementing more sophisticated risk assessment techniques. These are: 
1. 
Data  problems.  Modern  techniques  of  risk  assessment  in  Basle  II  involve  estimation  of 
probabilities  of  default  on  the  lenders’  portfolio,  as  well  as  of  loss-given-default.  Foreign 
banks get around by relying on data from their home country operations, but these data may 
not  be  applicable  in  the  emerging  markets  they  operate  in.  Many  emerging  markets  are 
however taking steps to improve data availability. For example, Malaysia and Thailand have 
respectively  established  centralized  credit  registry  for  households  and  corporations  and  a 
credit information bureau.  
Lack  of  suitable  techniques  for  designing  and  calibrating  models  to  evaluate  alternative 
scenarios.  
Large  human  resources  and  infrastructure  (IT  and  other)  costs  of  implementing  advanced 
techniques for risk assessment.  
2. 
3. 
But improvements in risk management have inherent value to banks by avoiding major costs, including 
potentially  catastrophic  costs  that  can  break  a  bank.  Thus  they  should  be  pursued  with  or  without 
regulatory requirements. Those of you who are sports fans can relate to this. As you know, success in 
many sports today relies on a solid defense that is always there whether the breaks are with you or 
not.  
Sophisticated risk management systems should be put in place because the bank sees the need to, 
and not just to impress, or perhaps intimidate the supervisors. The latter I guarantee is highly unlikely 
to happen because our supervisory personnel have also been doing their homework. Indeed, we have 
not just strengthened the regulatory framework. No less important, the BSP has invested heavily in the 
last few years in enhancing our supervisory capacity in line with the new demands. These efforts have 
ranged from individual skills enhancement through world class in-house structured training program to 
acquisition  of  relevant  international  certification,  to  creation  of  highly  trained  special  teams,  and 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 3
currently  a  wholesale  re-engineering  and  reorganization  of  the  whole  supervision  and  examination 
set-up. I assure you, we will be up to the task. We practice what we preach. 
Wrong motivations for improving banks’ risk management systems may obscure the ultimate aim for 
such actions – i.e., to make banks’ shareholders and other stakeholders, NOT the regulators, happy 
by  safeguarding  and  enhancing  the  value  of  their  investments.  On  our  part,  BSP’s  interest  in 
promoting better risk management is motivated more by macro considerations – that is, a safe and 
sound banking system is crucial to economic growth and to the stability of financial markets.  
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  now  sum  up.  If  you  notice,  the  BSP  initiatives  I  have  mentioned  are  geared  towards 
simultaneously  promoting  sound  risk  management  practices  in  banks,  and  strengthening  the  risk-
based capital adequacy framework. This is because both robust risk management and strong capital 
positions are critical in ensuring that individual banks operate in a safe and sound manner, which in 
turn  enhances  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  strong  capital  helps  banks  absorb 
unexpected shocks and reduces moral hazard associated with the regulatory safety nets.  
Finally, let me reiterate BSP’s commitment to the identification, assessment, and promotion of sound 
risk  management  practices  in  the  financial  system,  which  it  considers  as  central  elements  of  good 
supervisory practice. But of course the BSP can only do this with the invaluable help of our allies from 
the academe and the industry, such as the JBF Center and PRMIA.  
Before I end, let me just quote Captain James Kirk of the Star Trek Enterprise: “Risk is our business. 
That’s what this starship is all about. That’s why we’re aboard her.” Indeed, the same can be said of 
banking. 
Thank you very much and good day to all of you.  
4 
 BIS Review 3/2007
