Ben S Bernanke: The importance of financial education  
Welcoming remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Greater  Washington  Jump$tart  Coalition  financial  education  event, 
Washington DC, 25 April 2007.  
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to  be  here  today,  at  the  Greater  Washington  Jump$tart 
Coalition's inaugural event, to celebrate Financial Literacy Month 2007 and to say a few words about 
the importance of financial education. I join other Jump$tart partners as well as professionals from the 
fields  of  banking,  finance,  government,  and  law  who  will  be  speaking  to  nearly  2,000  public  high 
school students about financial literacy.  
It is a special privilege to be with the students here today, the juniors and seniors of Washington's own 
Woodrow Wilson High School. You are ambassadors of your school and indeed of Washington, our 
nation's capital. I know that this is a school committed to academic excellence. As you think about the 
time,  not  so  far  away  now,  when  you  will  leave  Wilson  High,  I  hope  that  you  will  resolve  to  keep, 
throughout your life, the habits of learning and of thinking for yourself that you have gained in your 
years here.  
As  you  think  about  your  future,  don't  forget  the  importance  of  financial  literacy.  Although  financial 
matters  are  probably  not  at  the  front  of  your  minds  today,  the  day  will  come  when  you  will  be 
responsible for managing your own or your family's budget or when you will find that you need to save 
to get the things you want – a college education, a new car, or even your own home. To achieve these 
personal  goals  and  to  build  financial  security,  you  will  need  to  understand  the  fundamentals  of 
budgeting, banking, saving, and investment. It is also essential that you know how to use – properly 
and responsibly – the many types of credit that will be at your disposal, such as credit cards. Later this 
morning, my colleagues from the Federal Reserve will be talking with you about how to manage your 
credit. Because credit has become such an integral part of our economy, and because there are so 
many sources and forms of credit available, much more financial sophistication is required today than 
when  I  attended  high  school.  As  a  parent  of  two  young  adults  myself,  I  believe  that  helping  young 
people become financially literate is critical for their future economic well-being and should be a high 
priority for educators.  
In addition to celebrating Financial Literacy Month 2007, we are here today to celebrate the inaugural 
event of the Greater Washington, D.C., chapter of the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Finance. The 
Coalition is a national leader among organizations that work to improve the personal financial literacy 
of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its biennial survey of high 
school  seniors,  Jump$tart  has  brought  increased  attention  to  the  issue  of  financial  literacy  among 
youth  in  the  United  States.  The  results  of  the  surveys,  which  have  shown  that  students'  financial 
knowledge is often much less extensive than we would like, remind us of the need for continued efforts 
to help all students – as well as adults – obtain the skills they need to navigate today's increasingly 
complex financial markets. This new chapter of Jump$tart has joined forces with over fifty individuals, 
businesses,  and  not-for-profit,  educational,  and  government  organizations,  including  the  Federal 
Reserve  Board,  to  increase  knowledge  about  personal  finance  among  schoolchildren  and  young 
adults  in  the  Greater  Washington,  D.C.,  region.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  strongly  committed  to 
Jump$tart's mission and to working closely with the local Washington, D.C., chapter – as it does with 
the other Jump$tart chapters around the country through its Reserve Banks and Branches – to help 
achieve this mission.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  appreciation  of  the  teachers  and staff  of 
Wilson Senior High and the administrators of the Washington, D.C., public school district here today. It 
is your hard work and dedication to these students that will help guide them toward successful futures. 
There  is  no  higher  nor  more  worthy  objective  than  preparing  our  young  people  for  fulfilling  and 
productive lives. To the students of Wilson Senior High, I wish you the best of luck in the future, and I 
especially want to congratulate the seniors who will be graduating at the end of this term. Lastly, a 
special thanks to the Greater Washington, D.C., chapter of the Jump$tart Coalition and their partners 
for their continued support and commitment to furthering the financial education of our youth. Thank 
you.  
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
