Tarisa Watanagase: Thailand’s economic outlook and challenges under 
the volatile financial environment 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
International  Herald  Tribune  and  Citigold  Wealth  Management  Economic  Forum  2007, 
Bangkok, 19 September 2007. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today to give a keynote address at the economic forum hosted by 
the International Herald Tribune and the CitiGold Wealth Management. I also like to thank 
the  hosts  for  this  important  opportunity  to  share  with  you  my  perspectives  on  the  Thai 
economy moving forward, especially in the global environment of greater financial volatility 
and uncertainties. I believe that the media, local and international, provides a very important 
two-way avenue for the central bank to communicate our views and the rationale underlying 
our policies to the public at large, and to receive feedbacks, positive as well as negative. 
The topic of my talk today is “Thailand’s Economic Outlook and Challenges under the 
Volatile Financial Environment.” I will divide my address into three parts. First, I would like 
to highlight the key risks stemming from the recent global developments and outlook. In this 
connection, I would briefly touch on the implications of the US sub-prime market on the Thai 
economy. Second, I like to focus on recent key economic developments in Thailand and the 
outlook  for  2008.  I  will  then  discuss  the  risks  and  challenges  facing  the  Thai  economy, 
especially those relating to volatile international capital movements and their impact on the 
Thai baht in the short term and in building resiliency and enhancing productivity for the long-
term. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me start with the global picture. For a number of years now, we have witnessed strong 
global  growth  driven  mainly  by  growth  in  the  US  economy  and  in  emerging  markets, 
particularly  non-Japan  Asia.  During  this  same  period,  we  have  also  seen  growing  global 
imbalances  with  the  rest  of  the  world  financing  the  US’s  growing  current  account  deficits. 
There is yet no consensus on how this global financial imbalance will unwind, but everyone 
expects that a large dollar correction will be part of the unwinding process, which will impact 
on financial markets and exchange rates worldwide. 
My view is that we are likely to see more market jitters along the unwinding process of this 
global  imbalance.  Indeed,  for  the  last  couple  years,  we  have  already  experienced  large 
magnitude  of  capital  fluctuations  and  exchange  rate  volatilities.  This  year  alone,  we  have 
observed  two  episodes,  in  February  and  again  in  August,  of  the  shift  toward  greater  risk 
aversions,  with  sharp  falls  in  the  stock  markets  across  the  world,  from  New  York  to 
Shanghai, and Bangkok included.  
At  this  juncture,  there  seems  to  be  an  increasing  disconnect  between  global  growth  and 
financial stability. On the one hand, the global economy has continued and is expected to 
expand robustly, driven mainly by strong growth in the euro area and the emerging market 
economies, particularly China and India. Financial stability has, on the other hand, become 
more vulnerable than a few years ago. 
Recent developments in the US economy and sub-prime credit markets may indeed be an 
early wake-up call for policymakers and market players worldwide. The US sub-prime related 
problem  has  prompted  a  retrenchment  from  risky  assets  and  de-leveraging,  causing  wider 
credit  spreads  for  riskier  assets  classes  and  higher  volatilities  in  bond  and  equity  markets 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 1
around  the  world.  The  unwinding  of  carry-trade  and  flight  to  quality  of  international  capital 
have also been observed. 
Importantly, the resulting disruption has already required extraordinary liquidity injections by 
a number of central banks to smooth market fluctuations. Beside the financial sector, turmoil 
in the sub-prime markets also posed negative impact on the real sector, denting US growth 
prospects going forward. 
I would like to digress briefly to tell you that the direct exposures of Thai financial institutions 
in  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  are  relatively  minimal,  in  terms  of  shares  of  their 
total  assets.  I  also  like  to  reassure  you  that  we  are  keeping  vigilance  on  potential  indirect 
repercussion that may arise further from the impacts of US sub-prime markets to the global 
economy  and  financial  markets,  as  the  adjustment  process  is  likely  to  be  protracted. 
Moreover, we will have to wait and see how the US economy responds to the latest rate cut 
by the Fed. 
In sum, the external risks facing the Thai economy have been tilted more towards financial 
volatility rather than growth at this point. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  have  highlighted  to  you  the  risks  that  may  likely  emanate  from  the  external  front.  But  as 
recent developments in the Thai economy stemmed also from internal factors, this brings me 
to  the  second  part  of  my  talk,  which  is  the  recent  key  developments  in  Thailand  and  the 
outlook for 2008. 
This year, even though Thailand’s growth rate has underperformed those of our peers in the 
region, I still consider GDP growth of around 4-5 percent, which is expected for the whole of 
2007, quite satisfactory. Notwithstanding the baht appreciation, Thai exports have expanded 
well and remained the main engine of growth this year. Our exporters have also successfully 
penetrated  new  markets  to  compensate  the  falling  demand  from  the  traditional  market, 
namely the US. 
Much  of  the  extent  of  growth  underperformance  in  comparison  to  our  regional  peers  has 
been accounted for by slower domestic demand. Over a year-long political uncertainty led to 
weak consumer confidence and an unfavourable investment climate. I am hopeful that once 
the  general  election  date  is  scheduled  and  the  cloud  of  political  uncertainty  has  lifted, 
consumer confidence would rebound. 
In line with the consumption recovery, I also expect investment to pick up and play a stronger 
role as growth driver, to promote a more balanced economy. In this regard, greater clarity 
about  the large  public  investment  projects  will be  crucial  in  putting  both  public  and  private 
investment back on track. The continued high capacity utilization and investment promotion 
applications to the Board of Investment have pointed to stronger appetite for investment once 
the investment climate becomes more favourable. 
During this period of uncertainties, monetary policy has become more accommodative in line 
with  declining  inflation  and  low  risks  of  picking  up  going  forward.  Latest  data  for  August 
showed headline inflation at 1.1 percent and core inflation at 0.7 percent. Set in this light, the 
Monetary Policy Committee cut its policy interest rate in total by 175 basis points since the 
beginning of this year. The aim is to stimulate the domestic demand to offset the expected 
slower  export  growth  in  light  of  the  slower  US  economy  and  baht  appreciation,  though 
exports  still  remains  an  important  driver  of  growth  for  next  year.  Latest  economic  forecast 
projects the economic growth to lie between 4.5-6.0 per cent in 2008, while core inflation is 
expected to stay comfortably around 1.0-2.0 percent. 
Given the appreciation trend of the Thai baht thus far, we cannot deny that certain industries, 
especially those who rely more on the high local content materials, have been affected far 
more than those who rely more on the import-content materials. Though such deterioration in 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2007
price  competitiveness  has  been  expected  for  some  times,  we  have  not  seen  real  sector 
adjustments keeping up with the pace of changes in financial environment. 
For  those  waiting  to  hear  about  the  exchange  rate  trend,  I  will  have  to  disappoint  you  as 
always. I would just like to say that, given the current inflation targeting framework, monetary 
policy can take care of exchange rate as long as there is no conflict with inflation. And, we 
have no target level for the Thai baht in mind. Foreign exchange market is intervened when 
there is too much volatility in the market. The objective is to smooth the country’s adjustment 
during the transitional period. 
Looking forward, the baht movement would depend largely on external developments which I 
have  already  discussed.  Moreover,  there  are  also  internal  drivers:  large  surplus  in  current 
and capital accounts. The Thai stock market remains one of the most popular destinations in 
emerging  markets  for  foreign  investors,  given  its  relatively  low  P/E  ratio.  During  the  first  7 
months of this year, foreign investors became net buy about 4 billion US dollar. Such inflows 
together with foreign direct investments have also added pressure on the currency. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to turn to the third and final part of my talk today, which is Thailand’s approach in 
coping  with  the  risks  and  challenges  posed  by  globalization.  Indeed,  the  challenges  of 
globalization  are  constantly  changing.  To  meet  these  challenges  from  without,  it  is  critical 
that the Thai economy build strength from within: by continuously improving the flexibility and 
efficiency of its firms, the resiliency of its households, and the competitiveness of its business 
environment. 
But beyond getting the fundamentals right and strengthening them, the Thai economy needs 
a strategic policy package that builds a system that allows for constant self-correction – one 
that  also  let  the  economy  regain  its  strength  quickly  after  a  severe  negative  shock.  That 
system should be underpinned by a strong link to the world economy, which will encourage 
innovation and efficiency. 
Specifically,  I  should  underscore  that  this  approach  requires  policy  markers  to  focus  on 
achieving three key objectives, namely managing volatilities especially those emanating from 
volatile global capital movements; building resiliency in both real and financial sectors; and 
fostering long-term productivity improvement. 
Looking ahead, the pressing and practical challenges we face in the near term are three-fold 
and  indeed  they  are  also  inter-related.  They  are  “hot  money”  inflows  and  large  inflows  in 
general, pressure for rapid domestic currency appreciation, and finally, the potential loss of 
monetary autonomy in the sense of independent interest rate policy. 
Being  part  of  the  fast  growing  Asia,  Thailand  and  its  neighbors  have  become  attractive 
destinations for international investors – although the more powerful underlying reason may 
ironically be a medium-term flight from US dollar assets since 2002. With large capital inflow 
comes pressure for these currencies to appreciate. 
In  this  experience,  some  currencies  appreciate  faster  than  others.  In  fact,  those  that 
surrender most of their monetary autonomy or maintain restrictions on cross-border capital 
flows  need  not  feel  immediate  pressure  to  appreciate.  But  those  that  have  come  further 
along the liberalization road have to face a different kind of challenge. 
In our case, the Bank of Thailand has sought a balanced approach to managing capital flows 
under flexible exchange rate. We also undertake concomitant reforms in the area of financial 
system and market development. These initiatives are closely related and progress in one 
requires progress in the others. In building a resilient economy, prudent fiscal and monetary 
policy does help. As an automatic stabilizer, flexible exchange rate also helps. 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 3
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Hot  money,  or  indeed  large  inflows  in  general,  can  fuel  asset  prices  and  encourage 
excessive risk-taking behavior. Central banks may wish to counter that excess in the interest 
of financial stability. If the central bank chooses to maintain a high interest rate stance, the 
pressure on the currency to appreciate will likely mount. 
Since these challenges require significant ability for the domestic economy to adjust flexibly, 
the solution package we seek must help reduce the distortions in our economies. Allowing 
the  competitive  pressure  and  incentive  to  operate  is  undoubtedly  the  best  way  to  foster 
investment in physical and human capital, as well as innovation and risk-taking, all of which 
are crucial to long-term productivity growth. They are also crucial for a flexible and resilient 
economy.  But  policy  and  regulations  still  have  a  role  to  play.  The  imperative  here  is  to 
improve on policy and regulation design that can help deal with market excesses. 
Building on the spirit of entrepreneurship, the real sector must work continuously to improve 
its  competitiveness  by  strengthening  productivity.  A  sustained  rise  in  wages  and  living 
standards  cannot  take  place  without  productivity  growth.  And  adaptability  to  the  shifting 
winds of global competition cannot happen without the ability to adopt the best technology 
and the ability to use that technology efficiently. 
To  this  end,  the  best  competition  policy  for  Thailand  is  policy  to  encourage  competition. 
Encouraging competition means open markets. Open markets give firms the means and the 
incentive to invest, innovate and learn to be the best. 
As regards the financial sector, Thailand not only requires stronger financial intermediaries 
but also market players of different views and risk appetites to ensure that the markets and 
financial  system  will  undergo  constant  self-correction.  Access  to  deeper  and  more  liquid 
capital markets is another crucial element of financial development going forward.  
At this juncture, our own financial markets may not be deep enough soon enough, but some 
domestic players who are ready for it should not be encumbered from having access to the 
world  financial  markets.  Indeed,  those  who  can  manage  the  risks  have  benefited  from 
liberalized  inflows  in  the  past,  but  the  Thai  economy  may  benefit  more  if  its  citizens  can 
unload domestic systematic risk abroad. 
To this end, the Bank of Thailand has progressively pursued capital account liberalization on 
the  outflow  side.  Outflow  for  portfolio  investment  was  first  permitted  in  2003.  Since  the 
beginning of this year, we have expanded the limits of Thai direct investment and portfolio 
investment  abroad.  To  promote  more  balanced-capital  movements,  further  liberalization 
measures, including the relaxation of FX holdings by juristic persons and individuals, were 
implemented  during  the  last  two  months,  and  we  are  currently  monitoring  their  impact  on 
capital outflows. 
Indeed, the appropriate degree of financial openness through time is a controversial 
issue.  Key  is  the  right  pacing  and  sequencing  of  capital  account  liberalization.  It  is  also 
important to underline the fact that big market events that pose systemic risks tend to reflect 
collective mistakes in which most market participants are offside in the same direction. In this 
regard,  capital  control measures  can  be  useful  tools  for  reducing  the  chance  of prolonged 
financial misalignment with economic fundamentals. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Thai  financial  landscape  is  changing.  Therefore,  it  is  our  goal  to  ensure  that  our 
regulatory  and  supervisory  responses  keep  pace  with  the  financial  intermediaries  and  the 
products they offer. In this endeavor, the Bank of Thailand has put emphasis on robust stress 
testing,  enhanced  counterparty 
risk  management,  and  safe  and  efficient  market 
infrastructures.  Our  financial  and  legal  infrastructures  will  continue  to  be  strengthened 
particularly through the introduction of a number of legislations and amendments. The new 
Deposit Insurance Act and the Financial Institutions Act are in the pipeline. Specifically, the 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2007
latter  Act  will  stipulate  prompt  corrective  action  and  grant  the  Bank  of  Thailand  power  to 
conduct supervision on a consolidated basis. 
The current Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) will move into its second phase, with an 
emphasis on increased competition and consideration on potential entry of new players to 
further enhance financial efficiency and resiliency. Our accession to the Basel II accord will 
upgrade  the  risk  management  of  banks  to  the  best  standard  and  will  further  enhance 
financial sector stability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To end my talk today, I would like to emphasize that policymakers must avoid misplacing the 
focus  of  policies  just  on  short-term  issues.  They  must  instead  always  weigh  very  carefully 
between short-term and long-term objectives toward achieving strengthened resiliency of the 
overall economy. Only with such resiliency, will a small open economy like Thailand be able 
to sail through the waves of global financial turbulence in the years ahead. 
BIS Review 104/2007 
 5
