Randall S Kroszner: Encouraging responsible mortgage lending – prospective 
rulemaking initiatives  
Remarks by Mr Randall S Kroszner, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the public hearing under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA), Federal 
Reserve Board, Washington DC, 14 June 2007. 
 I am pleased to be here today to chair the Federal Reserve Board's public hearing under the Home 
Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). The hearing will focus specifically on how the Board 
might use its rulemaking authority under HOEPA to address concerns about abusive mortgage lending 
practices. In the course of this hearing, we will hear from key players in the home mortgage market: 
lenders,  brokers,  secondary  market  participants,  consumer  advocacy  and  community  development 
organizations, academics and researchers, and state regulators. Although they play different roles, all 
share  a  common  goal:  encouraging  responsible  mortgage  lending  for  the  benefit  of  individual 
consumers and the American economy as a whole.  
The Congress enacted HOEPA in 1994 in response to concerns about abusive lending in the home 
equity market, and the Federal Reserve Board was given broad authority to implement its provisions 
and to adopt regulations that the Board finds to be necessary and proper to effectuate its purposes. In 
addition, the Board has the responsibility to prohibit acts or practices it finds unfair or deceptive, or 
otherwise designed to evade HOEPA. 
The  Board  understands  its  rulemaking  responsibility  under  HOEPA  but  is  not  alone  in  facing  the 
important task of preventing unfair and deceptive practices. Other regulators share in our responsibility 
to  ensure  responsible  mortgage  lending  through  enforcement  powers.  The  states  have  extensive 
regulatory  authority  –  and  responsibility  –  under  their  own  anti-predatory  lending  statutes,  various 
other relevant legal authorities, and especially their mortgage industry licensing acts – which give them 
considerable control over the activities of mortgage brokers and lenders. Many of the states, including 
notably those that are represented on this afternoon's panel, have been very active in reining in bad 
actors  in  their  mortgage  markets.  The  FTC  also  shares  in  our  enforcement  responsibilities  under 
HOEPA and other federal laws. Finally, the other federal financial regulatory agencies each have a 
duty  to  enforce  federal  consumer  protection  laws,  including  HOEPA,  with  respect  to  the  depository 
institutions under their respective supervisory ambits. In light of the sheer magnitude of the task, we 
are very pleased that these regulators all contribute to the goal of ensuring a healthy, competitive, and 
responsible  mortgage  market.  We  are  committed  to  working  closely  with  other  federal  and  state 
regulators to ensure that the laws that protect consumers are enforced. 
HOEPA  also  directs  the  Board  to  hold  hearings  such  as  the  one  we  hold  today,  to  assess  the 
effectiveness  of  regulations  and  laws  in  protecting  consumers.  Hearings  provide  us  with  valuable 
information. In our most recent prior hearings, held last summer in four cities around the country, our 
goals included assessing the effectiveness of our 2001 amendments to the HOEPA rules in curbing 
abusive lending practices while preserving access to credit. We also wanted to gather information on 
the effectiveness of the mortgage disclosures required by our Regulation Z, pursuant to the Truth in 
Lending Act, to inform our review of those disclosures, which is underway now.  
Rising foreclosures in the subprime market over the past year have led the Board to consider whether 
and how it should use its rulemaking authority to address these concerns. In doing so, however, we 
must walk a fine line. We must determine how we can help to weed out abuses while also preserving 
incentives  for  responsible  lenders.  A  robust  and  responsible  subprime  mortgage  market  benefits 
consumers by allowing borrowers with blemished or limited credit histories to become homeowners, 
access the equity in their homes, or have the flexibility to refinance their loans as needed. 
In this task we have several tools at our disposal. These include required disclosures by lenders, rules 
to prohibit abusive practices, principles-based guidance with supervisory oversight, less formal efforts 
to work with industry participants to promote best practices, and consumer education materials. The 
Federal Reserve currently is conducting a thorough review of its policies with respect to each of these 
tools. Last year, together with other federal banking regulators, we issued guidance concerning so-
called  nontraditional  mortgages.  We  have  also  issued  proposed  supervisory  guidance  concerning 
underwriting  standards  and  disclosures  for  subprime  mortgages.  The  agencies  are  finishing  their 
review of the comments received and expect to issue the final version soon. And the Federal Reserve 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 1
produces a range of consumer education materials, including information to help potential borrowers 
understand  adjustable-rate  and  other  alternative  mortgages,  and  we  actively  promote  financial 
education by partnering with outside organizations.  
The two tools that we will focus on today, however, are lender disclosures to consumers and rules that 
prohibit  or  restrict  lending  practices.  Disclosures  provide  information  that  is  critical  to  the  effective 
functioning  of  markets.  A  core  principle  of  economics  is  that  markets  are  more  competitive,  and 
therefore more efficient, when accurate information is available to all participants. Information helps 
consumers by improving their ability to compare mortgage products and to choose those that will help 
them meet their personal goals.  
We  are  keenly  aware,  however,  of  the  substantial  volume  of  disclosures  and  other  documents  that 
mortgage lending already entails, and we are sensitive to the risk that too much information may be of 
practically  as  little  value  to  many  consumers  as  no  information  at  all.  Accordingly,  we  intend  to 
consider  mortgage  disclosures  comprehensively,  with  an  eye  to  improving  their  usefulness  to 
consumers, while remaining mindful of the total burden for industry. Perhaps most importantly, we will 
engage  in  extensive  consumer  testing  of  mortgage  disclosures,  to  ensure  that  disclosures  provide 
information  that  consumers  can  readily  use.  Our  goal  is  better  disclosures,  not  necessarily  more 
disclosures. 
We also recognize that disclosures may not always be sufficient to combat abusive practices. Because 
some  bad  lending  practices  may  require  additional  measures,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  seriously 
consider how we might use our rulemaking authority to address abusive practices without restricting 
consumers'  access  to  beneficial  financing  options  and  responsible  subprime  credit.  In  addition  to 
improved disclosures, regulations that restrict or prohibit practices that are "unfair or deceptive" may 
also  be  necessary.  We  have  heard  concerns  about  consumers  being  steered  into  mortgages  they 
cannot afford and of repeated refinancings involving closing costs that strip away a borrower's home 
equity. Today, we will gather information on how we might craft rules to stop such abusive practices. 
We also will seek information from state officials regarding their experiences with drafting laws and 
rules to combat predatory lending efficiently and effectively. 
During today's hearing, we will seek information from panelists on certain specific questions. I would 
like to close by briefly touching on some of those. There are four terms or practices that have been 
most  frequently  cited  as  troublesome  in  the  mortgage  market,  especially  the  subprime  and  home 
equity markets. They are:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
At  least  some  of  these  practices  can  be  beneficial  to  at  least  some  consumers.  For  example,  an 
informed borrower might choose a loan with a prepayment penalty in exchange for a lower interest 
rate or lower closing costs. On the other hand, prepayment penalties also can be abusive, such as 
when  a  borrower  is  unaware  that  an  adjustable  rate  mortgage  loan  has  a  substantial  prepayment 
penalty  that  will  extend  beyond  the  first  adjustment  of  the  loan's  interest  rate,  making  it  costly  or 
impossible for the borrower to refinance the loan to avoid a higher interest rate and payment. We hope 
to gather information that helps us determine whether rules can prevent the abusive use of loan terms 
or practices while preserving their use in instances where they provide benefits to consumers. 
Giving adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay a loan obviously benefits both borrowers 
and lenders. Recently, the Board and the other federal financial regulatory agencies issued guidance 
reinforcing  our  collective  belief  that  principles  of  prudent  underwriting  require  consideration  of  a 
borrower's  repayment  ability.  For  example,  the  agencies  have  provided  that  lenders  should  qualify 
borrowers  for  nontraditional  mortgage  products  such  as  interest-only  loans  and  payment  option 
adjustable-rate mortgage products based on a fully-indexed rate and fully amortizing payment. Some 
have urged the Board to adopt this broad principle as a rule, while others have urged the Board to 
preserve for lenders the flexibility to exercise their judgment in determining the likelihood that a given 
borrower  can  repay  a  loan.  While  it  seems  self-evident  that  adequate  consideration  of  repayment 
ability is necessary, our experience in crafting the guidance taught us that this principle is far easier to 
articulate  in  general  terms  than  in  detailed,  prescriptive  rules  stating  which  underwriting  practices 
constitute  "adequate"  consideration.  This  is  especially  true  in  the  context  of  mortgage  credit 
Prepayment penalties,  
Failure to require escrows for taxes and insurance,  
Stated income and low-documentation lending, and  
Failure to give adequate consideration to a borrower's ability to repay a loan.  
2 
 BIS Review 66/2007
underwriting,  which  can  depend  on  such  a  great  number  of  pertinent,  consumer-specific 
considerations. 
Today, with your help, we intend to explore in detail when these types of practices can be beneficial 
and  when  they  might  be  problematic.  We  will  seek  informed  suggestions  with  respect  to  the  four 
practices  I  have  identified,  as  well  as any  others  that  commenters  may  identify,  in  several  regards. 
First,  we  ask  whether  such  practices  should  be  prohibited,  restricted,  or  subjected  to  increased 
disclosure  requirements,  and  if  so,  why.  Second,  we  ask  whether  any  new  regulatory  treatment  of 
such  practices  should  be  limited  to  certain  types  of  loans  or  certain  types  of  borrowers,  and  if  so, 
which types and why. Finally, we ask whether any state law provisions relating to such practices might 
serve as models for the Board to adopt at the federal level, and if so, what kind of record these state 
laws  have  in  curbing  abuses  without  restricting  access  to  responsible  mortgage  credit.  Your 
participation here today, and the wealth of pertinent information to be contributed by the panelists and 
others, are very much appreciated.  
BIS Review 66/2007 
 3
