Atchana Waiquamdee: Brief look at financial market indicators 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Atchana  Waiquamdee,  Deputy  Governor  for  Monetary  Stability,  Bank  of 
Thailand, at the Workshop on Financial Market Indicators, Bangkok, 7 June 2007. 
 Good  morning,  and  allow  me  to  welcome  you  to  Bangkok,  and  to  this  morning’s  Workshop  on 
Financial  Market  Indicators.  The  issue  we  are  about  to  discuss  today,  namely  the  use  financial 
indicators, itself is not a new topic. Especially in more developed financial markets, the use of financial 
indicators has been integral to the well-functioning of markets. In those cases, utilizing financial market 
indicators in the policy-making process is nothing new. 
In many of the emerging markets of Asia, however, this has not been the case. Financial indicators in 
the emerging markets have been more difficult to come by, and even much more difficult to interpret –
due largely to gaps in market development. Yet, as the financial markets of Asian economies began to 
gather  both  depth  and  breadth,  more  and  more  financial  market  indicators  are  becoming  readily 
available for policy use. Since the availability of the indicators in emerging markets is rather recent and 
the  fundamental  conditions  in  these  markets  are  still  very  dissimilar  to  those  of  the  more  matured 
ones,  the  use  of  financial  market  indicators  in  emerging  markets  for  policy  purposes  merits  much 
thought and attention. 
So what exactly are we talking about when referring to financial market indicators? Interpreted broadly, 
this can include relatively simple indicators, such as interest rates, interest rate spreads, and returns. 
They  include  other  measures related  to  the  value  of  financial or  tangible  assets  like bonds,  stocks, 
housing,  and  gold.  And  of  course  they  also  include  more  sophisticated,  data-intensive  estimates  of 
risk, which we hope to discuss today. 
For  central  banks,  one  of  the  main  questions  that  arises  is  whether  financial  market  indicators  are 
useful in setting monetary policy. And if so, which ones are most useful for central banks, and for what 
purpose? 
In general, financial market indicators are used by central banks to: (1) gauge market sentiment with 
regards  to  expected  changes  to  policy  variables;  (2)  identify  types  and  sources  of  shocks  to  the 
economy; and (3) predict future developments in economic activity and inflation. Such predictions of 
longer-term  inflation  are  also  useful  in  checking  how  markets  view  the  credibility  of  the  authorities’ 
commitments to their final price target. 
So financial indicators can be used to double check econometric and judgmental predictions as well as 
flag a problem of asset price misalignment, which may need to be addressed by policy. In addition, 
financial  market  indicators  have  the  potential  to  reflect  developments  at  critical  stages  of  the 
transmission process. This is due to the fact that financial markets in general adjust faster than goods 
markets, and their prices are timelier and less prone to measurement error. 
Today’s workshop will give us the chance to discuss these and many other issues. I am that sure my 
colleagues around the table would like to share their practical experiences so that we could have a 
better understanding of the financial market indicators suitable for emerging markets and how we as 
policy makers can best make use of them. Let me now pass the chair to Mr. Eli Remolona, Head of 
Economics for Asia and Pacific, BIS. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
