Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening the bonds of partnership for 
better education 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Ceremonial Turn Over to DepEd of Computers under 
“Tulong Barya Para Sa Eskwela” and Teachers’ Guides on Saving & Money Management, 
Manila, 31 July 2007. 
 Secretary Jesli Lapus, Monetary Board Members Juanita Amatong and Alfredo Antonio, Dr. 
Cielito Habito, our other partners from the Department of Education, fellow central bankers – 
good morning and welcome to our turnover ceremony with the Department of Education.  
I am very pleased that you all took the time to join us in this simple but significant event. A 
warm welcome to all! Today, we see, in very concrete terms, the results of the successful 
partnership of the Department of Education and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
First, we have the symbolic turnover of more than 500 brand new computers from Bangko 
Sentral to public elementary schools under the Department of Education.  
These computers were funded from the award-winning “Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela” the 
joint program of the DepEd and the Bangko Sentral to promote efficient recirculation of our 
coins by encouraging coin donations for public elementary schools.  
If  you  recall,  schoolchildren  were  at  the  forefront  of  the  campaign,  serving  as  agents  of 
change in their homes and communities in the proper appreciation of the value of coins.  
Over a six-moth period, “Tulong Barya Para sa Eskwela” generated benefits worth P14.88 
million:  P6.65  million  in  cash  donations  from  the  public  which  have  been  turned  over  to 
DepEd and P8.23 million in coin production savings for Bangko Sentral. 
In recognition of the schoolchildren’s role in the successful campaign, the members of our 
Monetary  Board  unanimously  approved  the  donation  of  Bangko  Sentral’s  entire  savings  of 
P8.23 million through the purchase of computers for public elementary schools. Ladies and 
gentlemen,  let  us  thank  our  schoolchildren  and  our  Monetary  Board  with  a  round  of 
applause!  
Based  on  our  initial  estimates,  we  would  be  able  to  donate  472  computer  units  from  our 
savings. But because of the close cooperation of our IT Department, the Corporate Affairs 
Office,  and  our  Bids  &  Awards  Committee  we  are  getting  a  total  of  512  brand  new  and 
branded computer sets. I understand that this number may go up further to about 540 units if 
we generate additional savings. Let us therefore give these groups as well a well-deserved 
round of applause!  
But beyond the computers we are turning over to the Department of Education today, I am so 
inspired by the change in the public mindset about the barya.  
When  we  started  our  coin  recirculation  program,  our  slogan  simply  declared:  “Ang  Barya 
Mahalaga,  Huwag  Bale-wala-in  gamitin.”  When  we  launched  “Tulong  Barya  Para  sa 
Eskwela” our slogan changed to “Ang Barya Mahalaga, Lalo na Kapag Pinagsama-sama.”  
I believe this national lesson in saving proved to our schoolchildren that every little amount 
saved adds up and can be the start of wealth creation. Such is the power of barya!  
“Tulong  Barya”  therefore  is  a  perfect  introduction  to  the  integration  of  saving  and  money 
management into our public elementary school curriculum.  
I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  today,  we  are  turning  over  a  total  of  104  lesson  plans  on 
saving,  money  management,  and  basic  economics  to  be  incorporated  in  three  subjects: 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 1
I  understand 
lessons  on 
social  studies,  character  education  and  work  education. 
entrepreneurship  are  featured  extensively  in  the  teachers’  guides  for  the  work  education 
subject.  
The  development  of  these  teachers’  guides,  the  first  step  in  the  integration  process,  was 
completed by DepEd’s lesson exemplar writers from Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao last April 
here  in  Manila  under  the  collaborative  work  of  Economic  Policy  Reform  and  Advocacy  or 
EPRA, Bangko Sentral and the DepEd.  
To continue the integration process, the Monetary Board unanimously approved the budget 
for the pilot-testing of the teachers’ guides. Today, try-out teachers with their principals and 
supervisors  are  in  Mandaluyong  to  complete  a  two-day  launching  and  orientation  for  pilot-
testing  in  Luzon.  Similar  programs  will  be  held  in  the  cities  of  Angeles,  Cebu  and  Davao 
within the next two weeks.  
Overall,  pilot-testing  for  saving,  money  management  and  basic  economic  concepts  will  be 
conducted from August to September and will cover 9 regions, 15 provinces, 18 towns and 
cities, 36 schools, 180 teachers and approximately 9,000 pupils. 
This  morning,  therefore,  we  turn  over  to  the  Department  of  Education,  484  copies  of 
teachers’ guides that will be used for the pilot-test phase.  
From  October  to  November,  we  shall  be  evaluating  the  results  of  our  pilot  lessons,  make 
adjustments if necessary, and prepare for the final production of materials in time for its full 
launching in the schoolyear 2008-2009.  
Through this, we hope to raise a new generation of savers and financially literate Filipinos.  
Maraming salamat po. Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2007
