Christian Noyer: A central banker’s personal perspective on hedge funds  
Introductory speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at Conference on hedge 
funds, Washington DC, 15 April 2007. 
 Thank you all for coming. It's a pleasure and a privilege to have you all here to day. Special thanks to 
the IMF and John Lipsky for organizing this event for us and with us. 
The purpose of our meeting is to present the special issue of our Financial Stability Review on hedge 
funds. So I want to say a few words on why we embarked on such a project and how we did it. 
As you noticed, this issue of our Review is mostly based on external contributions. Some authors are 
with me to day and I also want to thank them. We are very happy that we could assemble such an 
eminent roster of contributors. 
Let  me  say  from  the  outset  that  we  did  not  intend  to  reach  a  conclusion  at  this  stage.  The 
international community is working on this issue, in particular in the framework of the FSF. The 
main  question  is:  how  can  we  best  reconcile  keeping  the  positive  inputs  of  this  activity  for 
financial markets functioning and innovation, while keeping the risks that may be generated for 
financial stability to a minimum. 
This is why there is a debate on hedge funds, which we think, is legitimate. We think it is our role as 
Central Banks to foster this debate, because we have that ultimate responsibility for financial stability. 
This being said, I may give some personal perspective and make, as an introduction a few remarks. 
Why are we having this debate at the moment? If we look back five or six years ago, we can see at 
least three major changes that have contributed to a renewed interest in hedge funds activities : 
First, the sheer size and very fast growth of their activities and portfolios which have made them 
major participants in financial markets (40% of the turnover of some major stock exchanges; between 
25% and 50% of credit derivatives turnover according to various estimates). 
Second, retail investors (as opposed to high net worth individuals) have – directly or indirectly – got 
increasingly  exposed  to  hedge  fund  type  investment,  and,  of  course,  risk.  Sometimes,  such 
exposure  might  be  not  even  known  to  the  individual  investor  (e.g.  through  pension  funds).  I  was 
surprised to learn that, in my own country, more than 20 billions euros are to day invested in Funds of 
hedge Funds or similar instruments. 
And third, fast and far reaching structural changes have taken place in credit and capital markets, 
with hedge funds playing a major role in the process. It's fair to say, for instance, that credit derivatives 
would not have expanded at the same pace and with so high innovation without strong hedge funds 
involvement. 
What do those evolutions mean for the future? Financial innovation is good and healthy for our 
economies. Changes that have occurred in the last years strongly contribute to market efficiency and 
overall  increase  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  By  allowing  wider  spreading  of  risk  through 
credit derivatives, in particular, hedge funds bring an important contribution to market efficiency and 
liquidity. 
At the same time, the implications of those changes for financial market dynamics might be 
more  complex  and  far  reaching  than  before.  New  instruments  have  been  developed  in  a  very 
benign environment. Liquidity in many market segments has not been tested in period of stress. How 
these instruments would behave in periods of stress is a major question for market participants and 
authorities alike. 
In  such  an  uncertain  environment,  securing  the  full  benefits  of  the  structural  shifts  in  the 
financial system does put a premium on risk management. Everybody would agree, I think, that 
the  first  mitigant  against  the  risks  associated  with  hedge  funds  is  robust  internal  risk  management 
systems,  both  in  hedge  funds  themselves  and  at  their  prime  brokers.  These  are  the  basis  for  an 
efficient market discipline and a condition for financial stability. Strong and rigorous implementation of 
sound principles for risk management seem essential. You have noticed the reference, in yesterday's 
G7 communiqué, to the Paulson's task force (Presidents Working Group). 
BIS Review 42/2007 
 1
Beyond that, there may be some additional questions to consider which, for the sake of argument and 
in order to launch the debate, I will put on the table rather in a provocative mode, but are dealt with in 
more detail and balance in my own (and some other) contributions to the Review. 
First question: what are the conditions to ensure an appropriate level of investor protection, 
and in particular, what are the consequences of the increased "retailization" of hedge funds? 
A  second  question  is  the  future  of  the  hedge  fund  industry.  It  is  the  nature  of  technological 
progress to spread in a way that the profits it creates to be competed away. Replicating hedge funds 
strategies – at lower costs – seems to be expanding. M. Hsieh will tell you more about it during the 
panel discussion. 
A  third  and  important  issue  relates  to  the  evolving  relationship  between  banks  and  hedge 
funds.  This  relation  is  complex  and  multi-faceted.  It  is  at  the  heart  of  the  concept  of  indirect 
regulation. 
Finally, we have an ongoing debate about "transparency", on which I am sure that members of 
the panel will tell you more in a few minutes. 
By nature, hedge funds are secretive investors. They do not publish information about their positions 
and strategies. On the one hand, for markets to be fully efficient, some investors must be able to hold 
proprietary information and make profits on this basis. 
On the other hand, financial market participants and public authorities responsible for financial stability 
require information to monitor the risks related to the hedge fund sector. 
On  those  remarks,  I  leave  the  floor  to  the  panelists,  and  first  to  Jaime  Caruana,  who  has  kindly 
accepted to kick start the panel. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2007
