Zhou Xiaochuan: China’s financial market – innovation and development 
Speech  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  National 
Association  of  Financial  Market  Institutional  Investors  (NAFMII)  Inaugural  Meeting,  Beijing, 
3 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning! It is a pleasure to attend the inaugural meeting of the National Association of 
Financial Market Institutional Investors (NAFMII). NAFMII’s establishment is a major event in 
the development of China’s financial markets, and a concrete practice of implementing the 
spirit of the National Financial Work Conference. On behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I 
would like to warmly congratulate you.  
In the year 1792, a group of twenty four traders gathered under a buttonwood tree at 68 Wall 
Street, signed the now famous Buttonwood Agreement, and agreed to follow the principles of 
fair  trading  in  the  Agreement.  This  agreement  marked  the  beginning  of  industry  self 
regulation in the U.S. financial sector. In the more than 200 years since then, various self-
regulatory  organizations  have  been  established  by  participants  of  financial  markets  in 
countries throughout the world, and rules of self discipline formulated.  
In  China,  after  ten  years  of  development,  the  inter-bank  market  has  evolved  into  a  multi-
layered system with many sub-sectors including bonds, inter-bank borrowing, bills, gold and 
foreign  exchange  markets.  In  this  system,  major  participants  are  qualified  institutional 
investors and the trading is based on direct enquiries between two parities. The market is 
expanding steadily. Take the inter-bank bond market as an example. At end August 2007, 
the  stock  of  bonds  reached  10.48  trillion  yuan,  about  25  times  of  that  at  end  1997; 
participants  numbered  7,137,  about  446  times  of  that  at  end  1997.  The  range  of  market 
participants expanded from just commercial banks to all kinds of institutional investors, and 
products on the market have been diversified from government securities and policy financial 
bonds to a much larger collection including government securities, central bank bills, policy 
financial  bonds,  commercial  bank  financial  bonds,  enterprise  bonds,  short-term  financing 
bills,  asset-backed  securities,  bonds  issued  by  international  development  institutions,  U.S. 
Dollar-denominated bonds, and etc.  
In China, the inter-bank market is a typical OTC market. In terms of international experience 
of  OTC  market  development,  various  self-regulatory  organizations  (SROs)  such  as  the 
National Association of Securities Dealers(NASD), the Japan Securities Dealers Association 
(JASD),  the  Korea  Securities  Dealers  Association(KSDA)  have  all  played  a  very  important 
role in promoting innovation and development, regulating market behaviors, safeguarding the 
industry's interests, and forestalling market risks, and are an integral part of financial market 
regulation system in their respective country. Experience has shown that the SROs enable 
market participants to mobilize themselves to exercise self discipline, help the transformation 
of  government  functions,  make  the  regulation  more  responsive  to  market  demand,  and 
promote market innovation and development in a market-based approach.  
In  recent  years,  a  lot  of  achievements  have  been  made  in  China’s  financial  market 
development.  However,  the  financial  sector  has  its  problems.  For  example,  the  imbalance 
between direct and indirect financing remains serious as bank loans still dominate financing; 
the financial market development is lopsided as the bond market still lags behind securities 
market, and enterprise bond market remains under-developed; information disclosure, credit 
rating  and  other  essential  mechanisms  have  yet  to  play  a  sufficient  role;  the  range  of 
financial products are not diversified and market functions are yet to be fully played out. It is 
an imperative task to promote innovation and development in the financial market. For quite 
some time, we focused on liquidity management in the inter-bank money market, but did not 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
fully  acknowledge  the  financing,  value  discovery  and  risk  management  functions  of  the 
market.  As  a  result,  launching  of  financial  products  that  are  conducive  to  market 
development and urgently needed by market participants has been delayed. I hope that the 
Association  will  gather  members’  wisdom  and  serve  their  need;  and  innovation  of  market 
participants will be given full play to develop innovation mechanisms and patterns based on 
the special features of OTC market.  
In the future, the products that are developed based on members’ need, and are suitable for 
trading  among  institutional  investors  who  have  pricing  and  risk  managing  abilities  will  be 
registered at the NAFMII and reported for filing with the regulatory authority. Administrative 
exam and approval procedure will be abolished for such products.  
As the agency that overseas the operation of NAFMII, the PBC has a lot of expectations on 
the newly established organization. I hope that the Association will provide good services to 
its members and to the government and the general public, exercise self regulation functions, 
and contribute to innovation, reform and development of financial markets in China through 
hard work and innovation.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2007
