Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 18 July 2007. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to 
present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the  Congress.   Monetary  Policy 
Report to the Congress. As you know, this occasion marks the thirtieth year of semiannual 
testimony  on  the  economy  and  monetary  policy  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  establishing 
these  hearings,  the  Congress  proved  prescient  in  anticipating  the  worldwide  trend  toward 
greater transparency and accountability of central banks in the making of monetary policy. 
Over  the  years,  these  testimonies  and  the  associated  reports  have  proved  an  invaluable 
vehicle for the Federal Reserve’s communication with the public about monetary policy, even 
as they have served to enhance the Federal Reserve’s accountability for achieving the dual 
objectives of maximum employment and price stability set for it by the Congress. I take this 
opportunity  to  reiterate  the  Federal  Reserve’s  strong  support  of  the  dual  mandate;  in 
pursuing  maximum  employment  and  price  stability,  monetary  policy  makes  its  greatest 
possible contribution to the general economic welfare.  
Let  me  now  review  the  current  economic  situation  and  the  outlook,  beginning  with 
developments  in  the  real  economy  and  the  situation  regarding  inflation  before  turning  to 
monetary policy. I will conclude with comments on issues related to lending to households 
and consumer protection-topics not normally addressed in monetary policy testimony but, in 
light of recent developments, deserving of our attention today. 
After  having  run  at  an  above-trend  rate  earlier  in  the  current  economic  recovery,  U.S. 
economic  growth  has  proceeded  during  the  past  year  at  a  pace  more  consistent  with 
sustainable expansion. Despite the downshift in growth, the demand for labor has remained 
solid, with more than 850,000 jobs having been added to payrolls thus far in 2007 and the 
unemployment rate having remained at 4-1/2 percent. The combination of moderate gains in 
output and solid advances in employment implies that recent increases in labor productivity 
have been modest by the standards of the past decade. The cooling of productivity growth in 
recent quarters is likely the result of cyclical or other temporary factors, but the underlying 
pace of productivity gains may also have slowed somewhat. 
To a considerable degree, the slower pace of economic growth in recent quarters reflects the 
ongoing adjustment in the housing sector. Over the past year, home sales and construction 
have  slowed  substantially  and  house  prices  have  decelerated.  Although  a  leveling-off  of 
home  sales  in  the  second  half  of  2006  suggested  some  tentative  stabilization  of  housing 
demand, sales have softened further this year, leading the number of unsold new homes in 
builders’  inventories  to  rise  further  relative  to  the  pace  of  new  home  sales.  Accordingly, 
construction of new homes has sunk further, with starts of new single-family houses thus far 
this year running 10 percent below the pace in the second half of last year.  
The pace of home sales seems likely to remain sluggish for a time, partly as a result of some 
tightening  in  lending  standards  and  the  recent  increase  in  mortgage  interest  rates.  Sales 
should ultimately be supported by growth in income and employment as well as by mortgage 
rates  that  –  despite  the  recent  increase  –  remain  fairly  low  relative  to  historical  norms. 
However, even if demand stabilizes as we expect, the pace of construction will probably fall 
somewhat  further  as  builders  work  down  stocks  of  unsold  new  homes.  Thus,  declines  in 
residential  construction  will  likely  continue  to  weigh  on  economic  growth  over  coming 
quarters, although the magnitude of the drag on growth should diminish over time.  
BIS Review 82/2007 
 1
Real consumption expenditures appear to have slowed last quarter, following two quarters of 
rapid  expansion.  Consumption  outlays  are  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  moderate  pace, 
aided by a strong labor market. Employment should continue to expand, though possibly at a 
somewhat  slower  pace  than  in  recent  years  as  a  result  of  the  recent  moderation  in  the 
growth  of  output  and  ongoing  demographic  shifts  that  are  expected  to  lead  to  a  gradual 
decline in labor force participation. Real compensation appears to have risen over the past 
year, and barring further sharp increases in consumer energy costs, it should rise further as 
labor demand remains strong and productivity increases. 
In the business sector, investment in equipment and software showed a modest gain in the 
first quarter. A similar outcome is likely for the second quarter, as weakness in the volatile 
transportation  equipment  category  appears  to  have  been  offset  by  solid  gains  in  other 
categories.  Investment  in  nonresidential  structures,  after  slowing  sharply  late  last  year, 
seems to have grown fairly vigorously in the first half of 2007. Like consumption spending, 
business  fixed  investment  overall  seems  poised  to  rise  at  a  moderate  pace,  bolstered  by 
gains in sales and generally favorable financial conditions. Late last year and early this year, 
motor  vehicle  manufacturers  and  firms  in  several  other  industries  found  themselves  with 
elevated  inventories,  which  led  them  to  reduce  production  to  better  align  inventories  with 
sales. Excess inventories now appear to have been substantially eliminated and should not 
prove a further restraint on growth. 
The  global  economy  continues  to  be  strong.  Supported  by  solid  economic  growth  abroad, 
U.S. exports should expand further in coming quarters. Nonetheless, our trade deficit – which 
was about 5-1/4 percent of nominal gross domestic product (GDP) in the first quarter – is 
likely to remain high. 
For the most part, financial markets have remained supportive of economic growth. However, 
conditions  in  the  subprime  mortgage  sector  have  deteriorated  significantly,  reflecting 
mounting  delinquency  rates  on  adjustable-rate  loans.  In  recent  weeks,  we  have  also  seen 
increased  concerns  among  investors  about  credit  risk  on  some  other  types  of  financial 
instruments.  Credit  spreads  on  lower-quality  corporate  debt  have  widened  somewhat,  and 
terms  for  some  leveraged  business  loans  have  tightened.  Even  after  their  recent  rise, 
however,  credit  spreads  remain  near  the  low  end  of  their  historical  ranges,  and  financing 
activity in the bond and business loan markets has remained fairly brisk.  
Overall, the U.S. economy appears likely to expand at a moderate pace over the second half 
of  2007,  with  growth  then  strengthening  a  bit  in  2008  to  a  rate  close  to  the  economy’s 
underlying trend. Such an assessment was made around the time of the June meeting of the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) by the members of the Board of Governors and 
the  presidents  of  the  Reserve  Banks,  all  of  whom  participate  in  deliberations  on  monetary 
policy.  The  central  tendency  of  the  growth  forecasts,  which  are  conditioned  on  the 
assumption of appropriate monetary policy, is for real GDP to expand roughly 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 
percent  this  year  and  2-1/2  to  2-3/4  percent  in  2008.  The  forecasted  performance  for  this 
year  is  about  1/4  percentage  point  below  that  projected  in  February,  the  difference  being 
largely  the  result  of  weaker-than-expected  residential  construction  activity  this  year.  The 
unemployment rate is anticipated to edge up to between 4-1/2 and 4-3/4 percent over the 
balance of this year and about 4-3/4 percent in 2008, a trajectory about the same as the one 
expected in February.  
I turn now to the inflation situation. Sizable increases in food and energy prices have boosted 
overall inflation and eroded real incomes in recent months – both unwelcome developments. 
As  measured  by  changes  in  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE 
inflation), inflation ran at an annual rate of 4.4 percent over the first five months of this year, a 
rate  that,  if  maintained,  would  clearly  be  inconsistent  with  the  objective  of  price  stability.1 
                                                 
1   Despite the recent surge, total PCE inflation is 2.3 persent over the past twelve months. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2007
Because  monetary  policy  works  with  a  lag,  however,  policymakers  must  focus  on  the 
economic outlook. Food and energy prices tend to be quite volatile, so that, looking forward, 
core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) may be a better gauge than overall 
inflation of underlying inflation trends. Core inflation has moderated slightly over the past few 
months, with core PCE inflation coming in at an annual rate of about 2 percent so far this 
year.  
Although  the  most  recent  readings  on  core  inflation  have  been  favorable,  month-to-month 
movements  in  inflation  are  subject  to  considerable  noise,  and  some  of  the  recent 
improvement  could  also  be  the  result  of  transitory  influences.  However,  with  long-term 
inflation expectations contained, futures prices suggesting that investors expect energy and 
other commodity prices to flatten out, and pressures in both labor and product markets likely 
to ease modestly, core inflation should edge a bit lower, on net, over the remainder of this 
year  and  next  year.  The  central  tendency  of  FOMC  participants’  forecasts  for  core  PCE 
inflation – 2 to 2-1/4 percent for 2007 and 1-3/4 to 2 percent in 2008 – is unchanged from 
February. If energy prices level off as currently anticipated, overall inflation should slow to a 
pace close to that of core inflation in coming quarters. 
At each of its four meetings so far this year, the FOMC maintained its target for the federal 
funds  rate  at  5-1/4  percent,  judging  that  the  existing  stance  of  policy  was  likely  to  be 
consistent  with  growth  running  near  trend  and  inflation  staying  on  a  moderating  path.  As 
always, in determining the appropriate stance of policy, we will be alert to the possibility that 
the economy is not evolving in the way we currently judge to be the most likely. One risk to 
the outlook is that the ongoing housing correction might prove larger than anticipated, with 
possible  spillovers  onto  consumer  spending.  Alternatively,  consumer  spending,  which  has 
advanced  relatively  vigorously,  on  balance,  in  recent  quarters,  might  expand  more  quickly 
than expected; in that case, economic growth could rebound to a pace above its trend. With 
the level of resource utilization already elevated, the resulting pressures in labor and product 
markets  could  lead  to  increased  inflation  over  time.  Yet  another  risk  is  that  energy  and 
commodity  prices  could  continue  to  rise  sharply,  leading  to  further  increases  in  headline 
inflation and, if those costs passed through to the prices of non-energy goods and services, 
to higher core inflation as well. Moreover, if inflation were to move higher for an extended 
period  and  that  increase  became  embedded  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations,  the  re-
establishment of price stability would become more difficult and costly to achieve. With the 
level  of  resource  utilization  relatively  high  and  with  a  sustained  moderation  in  inflation 
pressures  yet  to  be  convincingly  demonstrated,  the  FOMC  has  consistently  stated  that 
upside risks to inflation are its predominant policy concern.  
 In  addition  to  its  dual  mandate  to  promote  maximum  employment  and  price  stability,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  an  important  responsibility  to  help  protect  consumers  in  financial 
services  transactions.  For  nearly  forty  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  active  in 
implementing, interpreting, and enforcing consumer protection laws. I would like to discuss 
with you this morning some of our recent initiatives and actions, particularly those related to 
subprime mortgage lending.  
Promoting access to credit and to homeownership are important objectives, and responsible 
subprime  mortgage  lending  can  help  advance  both  goals.  In  designing  regulations, 
policymakers should seek to preserve those benefits. That said, the recent rapid expansion 
of the subprime market was clearly accompanied by deterioration in underwriting standards 
and,  in  some  cases,  by  abusive  lending  practices  and  outright  fraud.  In  addition,  some 
households  took  on  mortgage  obligations  they  could  not  meet,  perhaps  in  some  cases 
because they did not fully understand the terms. Financial losses have subsequently induced 
lenders  to  tighten  their  underwriting  standards.  Nevertheless,  rising  delinquencies  and 
foreclosures are creating personal, economic, and social distress for many homeowners and 
communities – problems that likely will get worse before they get better.  
BIS Review 82/2007 
 3
The  Federal  Reserve  is  responding  to  these  difficulties  at  both  the  national  and  the  local 
levels. In coordination with the other federal supervisory agencies, we are encouraging the 
financial  industry  to  work  with  borrowers  to  arrange  prudent  loan  modifications  to  avoid 
unnecessary foreclosures. Federal Reserve Banks around the country are cooperating with 
community and industry groups that work directly with borrowers having trouble meeting their 
mortgage obligations. We continue to work with organizations that provide counseling about 
mortgage products to current and potential homeowners. We are also meeting with market 
participants  –  including  lenders,  investors,  servicers,  and  community  groups  –  to  discuss 
their concerns and to gain information about market developments. 
We are conducting a top-to-bottom review of possible actions we might take to help prevent 
recurrence  of  these  problems.  First,  we  are  committed  to  providing  more-effective 
disclosures to help consumers defend against improper lending. Three years ago, the Board 
began a comprehensive review of Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act 
(TILA). The initial focus of our review was on disclosures related to credit cards and other 
revolving credit accounts. After conducting extensive consumer testing, we issued a proposal 
in  May  that  would  require  credit  card  issuers  to  provide  clearer  and  easier-to-understand 
disclosures to customers. In particular, the new disclosures would highlight applicable rates 
and fees, particularly penalties that might be imposed. The proposed rules would also require 
card issuers to provide forty-five days’ advance notice of a rate increase or any other change 
in  account  terms  so  that  consumers  will  not  be  surprised  by  unexpected  charges  and  will 
have time to explore alternatives.  
We are now engaged in a similar review of the TILA rules for mortgage loans. We began this 
review last year by holding four public hearings across the country, during which we gathered 
information on the adequacy of disclosures for mortgages, particularly for nontraditional and 
adjustable-rate  products.  As  we  did  with  credit  card  lending,  we  will  conduct  extensive 
consumer  testing  of  proposed  disclosures.  Because  the  process  of  designing  and  testing 
disclosures  involves  many  trial  runs,  especially  given  today’s  diverse  and  sometimes 
complex  credit  products,  it  may  take  some  time  to  complete  our  review  and  propose  new 
disclosures.  
However, some other actions can be implemented more quickly. By the end of the year, we 
will propose changes to TILA rules to address concerns about mortgage loan advertisements 
and  solicitations  that  may  be  incomplete  or  misleading  and  to  require  lenders  to  provide 
mortgage  disclosures  more  quickly  so  that  consumers  can  get  the  information  they  need 
when it is most useful to them. We already have improved a disclosure that creditors must 
provide  to  every  applicant  for  an  adjustable-rate  mortgage  product  to  explain  better  the 
features and risks of these products, such as “payment shock” and rising loan balances.  
We  are  certainly  aware,  however,  that  disclosure  alone  may  not  be  sufficient  to  protect 
consumers. Accordingly, we plan to exercise our authority under the Home Ownership and 
Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) to address specific practices that are unfair or deceptive. We 
held a public hearing on June 14 to discuss industry practices, including those pertaining to 
pre-payment penalties, the use of escrow accounts for taxes and insurance, stated-income 
and  low-documentation  lending,  and  the  evaluation  of  a  borrower’s  ability  to  repay.  The 
discussion  and  ideas  we  heard  were  extremely  useful,  and  we  look  forward  to  receiving 
additional public comments in coming weeks. Based on the information we are gathering, I 
expect that the Board will propose additional rules under HOEPA later this year.  
In coordination with the other federal supervisory agencies, last year we issued principles-
based guidance on nontraditional mortgages, and in June of this year we issued supervisory 
guidance  on  subprime  lending.  These  statements  emphasize  the  fundamental  consumer 
protection  principles  of  sound  underwriting  and  effective  disclosures.  In  addition,  we 
reviewed  our  policies  related  to  the  examination  of  nonbank  subsidiaries  of  bank  and 
financial holding companies for compliance with consumer protection laws and guidance.  
4 
 BIS Review 82/2007
As a result of that review and following discussions with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the 
Federal Trade Commission, and state regulators, as represented by the Conference of State 
Bank Supervisors and the American Association of Residential Mortgage Regulators, we are 
launching  a  cooperative  pilot  project  aimed  at  expanding  consumer  protection  compliance 
reviews  at  selected  nondepository  lenders  with  significant  subprime  mortgage  operations. 
The reviews will begin in the fourth quarter of this year and will include independent state-
licensed  mortgage  lenders,  nondepository  mortgage  lending  subsidiaries  of  bank  and  thrift 
holding companies, and mortgage brokers doing business with or serving as agents of these 
entities.  The  agencies  will  collaborate  in  determining  the  lessons  learned  and  in  seeking 
ways to better cooperate in ensuring effective and consistent examinations of and improved 
enforcement for nondepository mortgage lenders. Working together to address jurisdictional 
issues and to improve information-sharing among agencies, we will seek to prevent abusive 
and fraudulent lending while ensuring that consumers retain access to beneficial credit.  
I believe that the actions I have described today will help address the current problems. The 
Federal Reserve looks forward to working with the Congress on these important issues. 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 5
