Zamani Abdul Ghani: Significant trends surrounding the takaful industry 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  The  3rd  International  Convention  on  Takaful  and  Retakaful,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
29 August 2007. 
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  
Distinguished Speakers,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Assalamualaikum w.r.t. and Good Morning.  
I  am  indeed  very  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  to  welcome  you  to  Kuala  Lumpur  . 
Alhamdulillah, we have among us today distinguished market players, regulators, scholars as 
well  as  participants  from  many  parts  of  the  world,  including  Brunei,  Thailand,  Indonesia, 
Singapore,  Bangladesh,  Sudan,  Nigeria,  Pakistan,  Kuwait,  Egypt,  UAE,  Bahrain,  Jordan, 
Turkey  and  many  others.  On  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I  wish  to  congratulate  the 
Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia  (IBFIM)  and  the  Malaysian  Takaful 
Association  (MTA)  for  their  efforts  in  organizing,  for  the  third  consecutive  year,  this 
International  Convention  on  Takaful  and  Retakaful.  Let  me  at  the  outset  reiterate  the 
importance of this Convention as a source of collaboration for ideas, sharing of knowledge 
and  exchange  of  experiences  for  the  continuous  development  and  improvement  of  the 
takaful and retakaful industry.  
In  few  days  time,  on  31st  of  August,  Malaysia  is  celebrating  the  50th  National  Day  and 
therefore, the organization of this 3rd Convention on Takaful and Retakaful is indeed very 
special. The convention and independence celebration have similarities in their core values. 
Both cherish the spirit of alliance, tolerance and togetherness. Both also share strong call for 
“muhasabah” or reflection – to strategize for the future by reflecting on past experiences. My 
address today will touch on these two aspects. I will share my observations on the significant 
trends surrounding takaful industry in recent years as well as key focus areas for the industry 
moving forward. Finally, I will highlight a couple of major initiatives undertaken by Malaysia to 
further  strengthen  as  well  as  expand  the  breadth  and  depth  of  the  takaful  and  retakaful 
industry.  
High growth potential of global takaful market  
As  a  starting  point,  allow  me  to  share  with  you  five  major  trends  in  global  takaful  industry 
over the past few years. These trends have significant bearing on the development of this 
industry moving forward.  
First, the takaful and retakaful industry continued to show rapid growth momentum, and is 
increasingly being recognized as one of the major components of the overall Islamic financial 
system  .  Global  takaful  contributions  amounted  more  than  USD2  billion  in  2005  and  are 
expected  to  reach  USD7  billion  by  2015.  The  past  few  years  have  seen  growth  rates  of 
around 20%, indicating high growth potential in years to come due especially to the present 
very low rate of takaful market penetration. As for Malaysia, a commendable track record of 
the takaful industry has been recorded since its inception more than two decades ago. For 
the  first  half  of  this  year,  the  total  assets  of  the  takaful  funds  stood  at  RM7.6  billion  (as 
equivalent  to  USD2.2  billion).  This  represents  6.3%  of  the  entire  takaful  and  insurance 
industry funds assets and an increase of 11% as compared to the end of 2006. In terms of 
net contributions, RM1.2 billion was recorded in the first half of the year, an increase of 36% 
from the same period of last year. 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 1
Second, there is growing international consensus on the need to have a strategic direction 
for an orderly development of the global Islamic finance industry. The ten-year blueprint on 
the development of Islamic finance, a joint initiative by the Islamic Financial Services Board 
and Islamic Development Bank, has laid down guidelines on the strategic steps to be taken 
by  several  specific  jurisdictions  for  this  purpose.  It  is  envisaged  that  with  more  orderly 
development of Islamic financial services, including takaful, a more comprehensive Islamic 
financial  system  will  evolve  in  more  jurisdictions.  The  number  of  takaful  operators,  which 
currently stands at more than 100, is set to increase.  
Third, dramatic growth of the global sukuk market can potentially become a key supporting 
factor for the strong growth of takaful and retakaful industry. Sukuk is increasingly becoming 
an  important  investment  avenue  for  the  takaful  industry.  Today,  the  global  sukuk  market, 
denominated  in  international  currencies,  is  estimated  to  have  exceeded  USD50  billion 
[including  domestic  sukuk  issuance].  Although  the  size  of  the  market  is  modest  by  global 
standards,  the  sukuk  market  is  experiencing  remarkable  growth,  increasing  at  an  average 
rate of growth of 40% per annum. Issuance of sukuk with longer tenure will match investment 
and  risk  management  needs  of  takaful  industry  with  largely  long  term  liability.  This,  in 
particular, will greatly spur the growth potential of investment-linked products. I am sure you 
will also be briefed on the development of the sukuk market in Malaysia later on.  
Fourth, the increase in outsourcing and white labelling activities. Competitive elements and 
strong  demand  for  takaful  require  takaful  players  to  constantly  search  for  solution towards 
greater  efficiency  and  shorter  time  to  market.  There  is  strong  potential  for  strong  and 
experienced takaful players to leverage on their competitive strengths to be an ally of other 
players,  especially  from  a  new  market,  by  becoming  either  outsourcing  partner  or  white 
labelling provider.  
Fifth,  as  seen  in  international  Islamic  banking  scene,  there  was  growing  participation  of 
major  conventional  global  players  in  the  takaful  and  retakaful  industry.  In  Malaysia  ,  the 
strategy to encourage alliances and collaborative efforts between local and foreign players 
has resulted in a positive outcome with the licensing of new takaful operators consisting of 
joint ventures and consortia of local and foreign players which have registered early strong 
performance.  In  addition,  the  other  100%-owned  Malaysian  takaful  operators  are  now 
actively looking for strategic partnership with foreign financial institutions so as to facilitate 
their expansion abroad and exploit opportunities in untapped markets.  
These  five  trends  point  to  one  direction  –  that  the  industry  will  continue  to  present  high 
growth  potential  with  growing  demand,  increasing  competition,  supported  by  greater 
sophistication  and  innovation  of  products  and  services.  While  the  double  digit  growth  is 
commendable, the takaful industry is still small i.e. constituting 6.3% in terms of assets of the 
insurance industry. The success of takaful in the future rests on the ability of the industry to 
collectively position itself strategically to meet the needs of the economy and the ability to be 
competitive and innovative.  
Global takaful strategies  
Let  me  now  turn  to  t  he  strategies  for  the  global  takaful  industry  moving  forward,  which 
essentially is the theme of the Convention. The key strategy is to amplify a simple, but yet a 
powerful concept, which is the core concept of takaful itself, that is, collaboration. That is in 
consonance with the Quranic verse from Surah Aali-Imran verse 103's quote: "And hold fast, 
all  together,  by  the  rope  which  God  (stretches  out  for  you),  and  be  not  divided  among 
yourselves and remember with gratitude God's favour on you…" end of quote. Allow me to 
expound a few angles on this new collaborative framework.  
2 
 BIS Review 95/2007
The first area is talent development 
A  key  challenge  confronting  the  industry  at  present  is  the  shortage  of  talent.  Rapid 
development of the takaful industry in recent years demands adequate supply of competent 
human capital to drive innovation, to sustain competition and to raise the performance of the 
takaful  industry  to  greater  heights.  The  takaful  operators  are  constantly  in  search  for  high 
level  of  expertise  in  all  relevant  areas  in  the  management  of  takaful  business  including 
technical,  actuarial,  distribution,  underwriting,  investment,  Shariah  as  well  as  strong 
leadership at the helm of a takaful operator. This talent war even persists in Malaysia where 
medium and long term plans to develop adequate human capital are in place. It may not be 
sustainable  for  the  industry  to  rely  on  the  current  pool  of  intellectual  capital  in  this  rapidly 
growing industry.  
For this, concerted and collaborative efforts should be taken at the industry level involving all 
stakeholders  to  develop  structured  human  talent  developmental  programmes  at  all  levels 
which include the leaders, technical personnel as well as the regulators. The organization of 
this Convention by IBFIM and MTA presents a model for such collaboration between takaful 
stakeholders in promoting human talent development, not only for Malaysian takaful industry, 
but also for the global takaful sector. The industry needs also to consider further proactive 
approach to address this issue. For example, the industry may take a united stance to train a 
specific  number  of  new  talent  in  key  areas.  For  Malaysia  alone,  assuming  that  a  good 
candidate  requires  two  years  of  training  to  be  a  well-rounded  takaful  practitioner,  if  each 
operator is able to train 50 new talent at various levels in specific key areas, we will have at 
least 2000 new talent in 2009. In fact, we should do better.  
The second area relates to operational harmonization and global support system 
To sustain the current pace of growth in this new industry, global takaful alliance is indeed 
crucial. The takaful industry needs to present itself as a united front with a common voice in 
operational  and  even  Shariah  matters.  Although  minor  differences  are  needed  to  propel 
innovation and creativity, major divergence in operational practices and Shariah application 
would pose unnecessary confusion to the consumers at large.  
For this, the transformation of an informal grouping of ASEAN Takaful Group or ATG into a 
registered legal entity limited by guarantee called "Global Takaful Group" or GTG is indeed 
timely. I am glad to note that the Annual Meeting of GTG was held yesterday in conjunction 
with this Convention. I believe GTG will serve as the best platform to enhance greater mutual 
co-operation and foster cooperation and interlinkages among the takaful operators globally. It 
is  a  tangible  vehicle  of  cooperation  among  takaful  operators  and  provides  a  conduit  for 
exchange of information on all facets of takaful operations among the members. I understand 
that currently there are more than 20 member companies of GTG and it is our hope to see 
more takaful operators from all over the world to join this Group. I  wish to urge  all takaful 
operators  to  leverage  on  this  Group  as  an  official  platform  for  greater  interaction  and 
collaboration,  not  only  among  the  players,  but  also  with  other  stakeholders  such  as  the 
regulators, Governments and the public at large.  
It  is  also  encouraging  to  note  that  rating  agencies  have  come  forward  to  formulate  rating 
methodology and review for takaful operators.  
Third area relates to the need for joint effort to shape prudential rules for takaful.  
For the formulation of prudential standards, the setting up of the IFSB remained one of the 
landmark  developments  in  this  decade.  Established  in  2002,  the  IFSB's  core  role  is  to 
promote  prudent,  transparent  and  robust  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  services 
industry  through  the  promulgation  of  international  prudential  standards  that  are  consistent 
with  the  principles  of  Shariah.  The  IFSB  provides  the  platform  for  cooperation  among  the 
regulators  through  meetings,  conference  and  the  setting-up  of  working  groups  that  give 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 3
opportunity  for  the  regulators  to  discuss  and  exchange  information  on  issues  confronting 
Islamic finance. For takaful industry, two developments are relevant that are:  
i. 
the  issuance  of  Issues  Paper  jointly  by  IFSB  and  IAIS  on  the  applicability  of  IAIS 
core principles to takaful, and  
the  formation  of  a  working  group  to  formulate  corporate  governance  standard  for 
takaful industry.  
ii. 
In view that the formulation of the IFSB standards involves consultation with IFSB members, 
I would like to call more takaful operators to be members of the IFSB so as to provide the 
opportunity for the players to be part of the official consultation procedure for IFSB and to 
make comments on draft IFSB standards. Given your vast experience in the area of takaful, 
both  domestically  and  globally,  we  believe  that  the  industry  players  will  provide  valuable 
contribution  towards  the  formulation  of  the  IFSB  international  takaful  standards.  Your 
experience  and  inputs  on  issues  are  relevant  to  or  have  impact  on  the  regulation  and 
supervision of the takaful industry.  
Malaysia as takaful & retakaful hub  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  final  part  of  my  address  by  sharing  Malaysia's  latest  initiatives  to 
strengthen its position as a takaful and retakaful centre.  
MIFC initiatives  
I. 
Malaysia  aims  at  enhancing  its  inter-linkages  with  the  global  Islamic  financial  markets. 
Among these are its continuous efforts to not only develop the financial infrastructure of the 
takaful  industry  but  to  also  implement  measures  and  initiatives  that  will  strengthen  our 
position  as  an  international  takaful  and  retakaful  centre.  Besides  allowing  up  to  49%  of 
foreign  equity  participation  in  domestic  takaful  operators,  the  Malaysian  Government  has 
also launched an initiative known as the Malaysia International Islamic Financial Centre or 
MIFC.  The  MIFC  initiatives  are  specifically  undertaken  by  the  collective  efforts  of  the 
country's  financial  and  market  regulators,  including  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  ,  the  Securities 
Commission, the Labuan Offshore Financial Services Authority and Bursa Malaysia, together 
with the participation of representatives of the banking, takaful and capital market sectors. It 
is aimed at building greater intermediation linkages between East Asia, South Asia and the 
Middle  East  which  will,  in  turn,  further  expand  inter-regional  trade  and  cross  border 
investment flows.  
As part of these initiatives, foreign financial institutions are allowed to establish International 
Islamic Banks, International Takaful Operators,  as well as International Currency  Business 
Units  to  undertake  international  currency  business  in  Islamic  finance  with  non-residents  in 
Malaysia or abroad through a locally incorporated entity or a branch. This entity is granted 
attractive  tax  package  in  terms  of  a  10-year  tax  holiday.  To  date,  ten  financial  institutions 
have  been  granted  approval  to  set  up  international  currency  business  units,  and  one 
institution  has  been  granted  approval  to  set  up  an  International  Islamic  Bank.  The  strong 
sukuk market in Malaysia that accounted for about two thirds of the global outstanding sukuk 
issued in 2007 would further provide a conducive environment for the MIFC activities.  
New retakaful framework  
II. 
Malaysian  Government  has  also  focus  ed  its  efforts  towards  widening  and  deepening  the 
retakaful sector in complementing the growth and expansion of the takaful industry. I wish to 
announce  and  declare  here  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  inviting  strong  and  qualified 
applicants  to  make  Malaysia  as  their  centre  for  retakaful  activities.  The  application  for 
retakaful licenses are open to qualified local and foreign players. Besides fulfilling the need 
for  retakaful  support  of  the  takaful  operators,  the  new  retakaful  licencees  will  assist  in 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2007
reducing the industry's dependency on conventional reinsurance support. More importantly, 
the  licensing  of  new  retakaful  operators  in  Malaysia  will  also  ensure  that  the  technical 
knowledge is made more readily available and enhanced in the market, particularly in takaful 
and  retakaful  underwriting,  as  well  as  in  promoting  product  development  and  innovation. 
Under  this  initiative,  qualified  applicants  will  be  allowed  to  conduct  in  both  the  Malaysia 
Ringgit and international currencies retakaful business under the Takaful Act 1984. Flexibility 
is accorded to the retakaful operators to conduct its retakaful business in Malaysia by way of 
an incorporated entity or a branch. Foreign applicant is also welcome d to conduct retakaful 
business in Malaysia through a joint-venture with Malaysian companies, subject to the merits 
of each case. It is anticipated that this measure would serve as a catalyst in our efforts for 
Malaysia to become the centre for takaful and retakaful business through the establishment 
of a significant number of strong and reputable retakaful operators.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me conclude by saying that the future prospects of the takaful industry will be very much 
depend on the combined efforts of all the relevant parties; the regulators, market participants 
and  the  international  community  at  large,  to  chart  the  strategic  direction  for  the  industry. 
Collective effort is crucial in order to maximize the potential for the industry. Sharing common 
vision and goal will be an important first step. I believe that our sincere efforts in realizing this 
noble objective would InsyaAllah, God Almighty will shower us with His blessings, guidance 
and assistance.  
On that note, I wish you a successful and productive Convention.  
Wabillahi taufik walhidayah. Assalamualaikum warah matullah hi wabarakatuh. 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 5
