Stefan Ingves: Swedish experiences of monetary policy with an inflation target  
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Conference  on  Inflation 
Targeting,  organised  by  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  Central  Bank  of  Hungary)  at  the  Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 19 January 2007. 
 First and foremost, thank you for the invitation to come here! The theme of my talk here today has a 
"practical" leaning. I will talk about the Swedish experiences of conducting an inflation-targeting policy 
and how our monetary policy strategy has developed along the way. Conducting monetary policy is in 
many ways a learning process. The Swedish experiences of the past decade or so provide a concrete 
example of how such a process may look. 
The Riksbank is one of the central banks that conduct monetary policy with an explicit inflation target. 
This is a group that has grown considerably in recent years. The main reason for this is probably that 
the experiences of this policy have on the whole been very good. In fact, so good that it has become 
an interesting alternative even for economies that are already functioning well. 
However, this was not the case at the beginning of the 1990s, when Sweden changed over from a 
fixed exchange rate to inflation-targeting and a floating exchange rate. We were then in the middle of a 
deep economic crisis and a situation where it was necessary to reform the entire stabilization policy 
framework.  Monetary  policy  based  on  an  inflation  target  was  a  relatively  new  phenomenon  at  that 
time. There was also great uncertainty about how this would work in Sweden. For those of us who 
were around during the crisis years, it is particularly pleasing to see how well the Swedish economy 
has  developed  over  the  past  ten  years,  compared  with  the  previous  two  decades.  Naturally,  one 
cannot  ascribe  all  success  to  the  changeover  in  stabilization  policy  –  the  general  economic 
developments  have  also  been  favourable.  However,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  new  regime  with  an 
inflation target for monetary policy has given a steadiness and stability to economic policy that was 
previously lacking. A stable fiscal policy has also been very important. 
A lot has happened to the monetary policy framework since the inflation target was introduced. This 
includes much of the learning process I mentioned in my introduction. As deputy governor during the 
years 1994 to 1998, I was involved in setting the course, so to speak, and when the work on building 
up competence and analysis tools for the bank’s main tasks - monetary policy and financial stability - 
began.  Other  important  tasks  included  improving  communication  and  increasing  transparency,  both 
internally and externally. It was necessary to win confidence in monetary policy as quickly as possible 
and this required openness and clarity. Since I returned to the Bank at the beginning of last year, I 
have been able to note that the Riksbank’s work procedures have continued to develop and modify. 
We do not think, act or communicate in the same way today as we did when the inflation targeting 
regime was new. The driving force behind the changes has come partly from practical experiences, 
both in Sweden and other countries conducting an inflation-targeting policy. Academic research has 
also played an important role. 
Before  I  go  into  greater  detail  on  how  the  Riksbank’s  way  of  conducting  monetary  policy  has 
developed, I intend to begin by describing the background to the establishment of an inflation target in 
Sweden. 
The background to Sweden introducing an explicit inflation target 
Today the Swedish krona has been floating for fourteen years and two months. 19 November 1992 will 
always  have  a  special  significance  for  the  Riksbank.  This  was  the  day  when  we  were  forced  to 
abandon the fixed exchange rate, under very dramatic circumstances and after a stubborn defence of 
the Swedish krona. At that time we were in the middle of the most serious economic crisis in Sweden 
since the 1930s – a tragic end to almost 20 years of stabilization policy problems. 
The idea behind the fixed exchange rate policy was to ensure that inflation in Sweden would be in line 
with that in the countries that were our most important trading partners, and that the fixed exchange 
rate would function as a nominal anchor. But for various reasons the economic policy conducted in the 
1970s and 1980s tended to be too expansionary. Price and wage developments repeatedly came on a 
collision course with the fixed exchange rate and Sweden suffered cost crises. To rectify the situation, 
BIS Review8/2007 
 1
the krona was devalued a total of five times during a period of seven years. But the trend increase in 
domestic prices and wages continued to rise. The fundamental problem still remained. 
The result was modest economic growth, poor productivity growth and more or less stagnant growth in 
real wages. The performance was markedly weak both compared with earlier periods and in relation to 
other countries. During the crisis years at the beginning of the 1990s the situation got even worse. 
Unemployment increased fourfold in the course of a few years and the central government finances 
deteriorated dramatically. Long-term interest rates rose and the interest rate differential towards, for 
example, Germany occasionally came to several percentage points. 
The fixed exchange rate lost its credibility and finally had to be abandoned, following large currency 
outflows and extreme interest rate hikes in attempts to defend the krona. The nominal anchor that was 
to hold down inflation and inflation expectations in the economy had loosened. To secure it again and 
bring the Swedish economy onto a better track required drastic measures. The solution was what one 
might call a stabilization policy change of regime. The tasks of both monetary policy and fiscal policy 
were fundamentally redefined and we were given a clear allocation of roles in economic policy. Fiscal 
policy  had  previously  often  been  too  expansionary  and  contributed  to  high  inflation.  Now  it  was 
subjected to requirements for long-term stability and durability in public finances. With a floating krona 
the  main  task  of  monetary  policy  was  to  directly  act  to  ensure  that  inflation  remained  at  a  low  and 
stable rate. 
In January 1993 the Riksbank specified this task as ensuring that inflation remained at two per cent a 
year. The target would formally apply with effect from 1995. This created a new norm for monetary 
policy and Sweden then became one of the first countries in the world to conduct monetary policy with 
a floating exchange rate and an explicit inflation target. 
It  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  the  Riksbank’s  tasks  are  also  stipulated  by  law.  The  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability  and  the  task  of  promoting  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system  were 
introduced  into  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  in  1999.  In  connection  with  this  the  Riksbank  was  given 
greater independence. Monetary policy is now formally the Riksbank’s task and the six members of 
the  Executive  Board  are  expressly  forbidden  to  seek  or  receive  instructions  when  carrying  out 
monetary policy tasks. This is the same model as applied within the ESCB. 
The period with an inflation target 
How have the past ten years or so of inflation targeting functioned? Looking back, it is difficult to come 
to any other conclusion than that the new stabilisation policy regime has lived up to expectations. The 
high-inflation economy with recurring cost crises and high interest rates is a thing of the past. Inflation 
has instead been low and stable. GDP growth has on average been higher and also more stable than 
in the 1970s and 1980s. Real wage growth has also been considerably more favourable. Productivity 
growth  has  been  surprisingly  strong  –  stronger  than  in  almost  all  of  the  other  EU  countries.  Most 
people seem to be in agreement now that the potential growth in the economy has been increased. 
Employment has not developed as well, but the situation today is much better than it was in the mid-
1990s. 
It is also interesting to study inflation expectations. Although inflation has on average remained fairly 
close  to  2  per  cent,  there  have  been  both  shorter  and  longer  periods  when  inflation  has  deviated 
significantly from the target. The past few years are such an example. Inflation has been below target, 
which is largely due to productivity having developed much more strongly than we had expected. How 
has  confidence  in  monetary  policy  been  affected  by  the  deviations  we  have  experienced?  Even 
though inflation expectations can be measured in different ways, I think that the overall picture is clear. 
From around 1996-97 expectations have been in line with the target a couple of years ahead. This is 
of  course  pleasing,  and  a  much  better  development  than  many  people  expected  when  the  new 
monetary policy regime was introduced in the early 1990s. 
However, the stabilization policy change in regime was not only about monetary policy. Compared with 
other  countries  that  have  implemented  similar  reforms,  it  is  perhaps  primarily  the  changes  in  fiscal 
policy  that  distinguish  Sweden.  During  the  mid-1990s  a  radical  consolidation  program  was 
implemented,  with  broad  parliamentary  support,  and  a  framework  with  an  expenditure  ceiling  and 
target  balance  was  introduced.  The  relatively  good  central  government  finances  over  the  past  ten 
years have undoubtedly been a source of strength for the Swedish economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2007
The Riksbank’s monetary policy framework and strategy 
Let  me  now,  with  this  as  background,  move  on  to  describe  our  monetary  policy  strategy  in  slightly 
more detail.1
The inflation target 
The Riksbank has chosen to specify an explicit target for inflation. The target is for the annual rate of 
change  in  the  consumer  price  index,  CPI,  to  be  2  per  cent,  with  a  tolerance  for  deviations  of  ±  1 
percentage point. The decision to define the target for monetary policy clearly in terms of a specific 
figure was of course partly due to the desire to create a nominal anchor that everyone could recognise 
and  base  their  expectations  on.  However,  another  important  reason  was  that  it  would  facilitate 
assessments  of  the  Riksbank’s  activities  and  make  the  Bank  more  easily  accountable.  This  is 
particularly important now that the Bank is so independent. 
Inflation  can  be  measured  in  many  different  ways.  The  Riksbank  chose  the  CPI  as  target  variable 
partly because it is a broad price index that represents typical purchases made by consumers, and the 
index is familiar to the general public. However, the development of the CPI cannot always indicate 
what  monetary  policy  is  needed  at  a  particular  time  –  no  single  inflation  measure  can  do  this.  The 
Riksbank therefore uses different measures of underlying inflation to describe the trend rate of inflation 
and  to  justify  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  Our  most  commonly  used  measure,  with  the  rather 
difficult to pronounce name of UND1X, consists of the CPI adjusted for certain items that are affected 
by fiscal policy and monetary policy in a direct way. 
There are educational gains with using measures of underlying inflation. However, it can also create 
uncertainty as to how the inflation target is defined, even if we try to be clear about why a particular 
measure has been highlighted at a particular time. Such experiences have given us reason to think 
about how the need for various adjusted inflation measures can be reduced. One possibility could be 
to  make  forecasts  covering  longer  periods.  For  the  Riksbank  the  need  to  emphasise  alternative 
measures of inflation growth has declined in that we have for some time now published forecasts of 
developments  three  years  ahead  instead  of  two  years  ahead.  With  a  longer  forecast  horizon  it  is 
possible to illustrate more clearly when various shocks have effects that are temporary and how they 
dissipate  over  time  without  having  any  lasting  impact  on  inflation.  This  makes  it  easier  to  explain 
whether or not the interest rate needs to be changed.2
The target horizon and real stability considerations 
When the inflation target was announced in January 1993, the Riksbank also formulated a tolerated 
deviation interval of ± 1 percentage point. One purpose of this was to illustrate that it is not suitable or 
even possible for monetary policy to maintain inflation at exactly two per cent all of the time. Changes 
in the policy rate, known as the repo rate in the Riksbank’s case, are a blunt instrument with regard to 
steering  inflation  in  the  short  term.  It  takes  time  before  interest  rate  changes  have  an  effect  and 
monetary policy must therefore be based on forecasts of the inflation rate a couple of years ahead. In 
addition, there is uncertainty over how the economy functions. It is therefore impossible to parry all 
shocks that affect the economy and so, temporary deviations from target will arise. 
The tolerance interval also provides scope for temporary deviations from target that may be justified 
with reference to the stability of production and employment. Let us say that a shock occurs, which 
makes inflation deviate from target. By not aiming to restore inflation to target as quickly as possible, 
scope is created to dampen fluctuations in, for instance, growth and employment. However, for the 
inflation target to retain its credibility, the deviations cannot be permitted to become too large or to last 
for exceedingly long periods. To create greater clarity, monetary policy is guided by a principle that the 
Riksbank’s ambition is normally to bring inflation back on target within two years. One might say that 
this two-year horizon is a restriction that the Riksbank has placed upon itself to maintain confidence in 
the inflation target. 
                                                      
1   A description of the Riksbank’s objective and strategy for monetary policy can be found in the document “Monetary policy in 
Sweden”, which can be downloaded from the Riksbank’s website, www.riksbank.se, or ordered in printed form. 
2   See Lars Heikensten’s speech at the Swedish Economics Association on 22 February 2005, “Thoughts on how to develop 
the Riksbank’s monetary policy work”. 
BIS Review8/2007 
 3
We have chosen a two-year horizon for monetary policy because this is considered to give sufficient 
scope  in  most  cases  to  ensure  acceptable  developments  in  the  real  economy.  However,  the  exact 
pace at which inflation should be brought back on target within this horizon will of course depend on 
what  kind  of  shocks  have  affected  the  economy.3  Sometimes  the  deviations  from  target  can  be  so 
large that there is reason to allow inflation to return to target beyond the normal two-year horizon. In 
these cases, we shall explain this clearly in connection with our decisions. 
These  thoughts  on  how  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  not,  of  course, 
unique  to  the  Riksbank.  Although  the  formal  guidelines  may  vary  slightly  from  country  to  country,  I 
believe  it  is  correct  to  say  that  all  central  banks  with  an  inflation  target  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting, that is, they give some consideration to real economic activity. In other words, we are not 
"inflation nutters” to borrow Mervyn King’s famous expression. Our aim is not in all situations to bring 
inflation back on target as quickly as possible and at any cost. 
At  the  same  time,  the  flexibility  is  part  of  our  means  of  conducting  monetary  policy,  which  has 
gradually changed during the period with an inflation target. It is also natural as this type of flexible 
application of monetary policy assumes that there is considerable confidence in the inflation target – 
confidence  that  must  first  be  won.  Immediately  after  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target  in  1993, 
there was little confidence in either monetary policy or fiscal policy. Because of this, there was limited 
scope  for  giving  consideration  to  the  real  economy.  The  Riksbank’s  rhetoric  and  probably  also  the 
actual policy were mainly focused on developments in inflation. The underlying factor behind this was 
probably  concern  over  credibility  problems.  However,  from  the  mid-1990s  the  stability  of  the  real 
economy has gained ground, and the Riksbank has in various ways tried to make clear that we give 
consideration to developments in production and employment. 
Let me also say something in this context about risks. More specifically, risks linked to rising asset 
prices and credit expansion. This is a question that has been much discussed in recent years, both 
between  central  banks  and  within  the  academic  world,  as  house  prices  have  risen  rapidly  in  many 
countries, including Sweden. This debate could in itself be a subject for a speech, so let me just briefly 
mention that the Riksbank’s view is that we do not consider it reasonable to completely ignore these 
risks, although it is not possible to give consideration to the risks in any simple manner in the normal 
forecasting process. We have therefore acted to reduce these risks to some extent and to contribute to 
a  smoother  adjustment  in  indebtedness  and  house  prices.  The  approach  we  have  chosen  has  in 
practice  only  meant  a  fairly  marginal  change  in  the  timing  of  our  interest  rate  decisions.  Neither 
household  indebtedness,  house  prices,  nor  other  asset  prices  have  any  significance  for  monetary 
policy in themselves, apart from their effects on inflation and the prospects for the macro economy. 
The inflation forecast and future interest rate developments 
As I mentioned earlier, our work procedures have changed and developed over time. This is natural. 
We have had new experiences and been given new conditions along the way. As recently as three 
days ago, we members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided to change the assumption for 
the policy rate on which we base our forecasts – this is a step in our work on improving the bases for 
our  monetary  policy  decisions  and  our  communication.4  This  change  means  that  with  effect  from 
February this year we will publish our own views of what would be a suitable development in the repo 
rate  in  connection  with  the  presentation  of  our  inflation  forecasts.  Let  me  give  you  some  brief 
background information before I go into this in more detail. 
Like most central banks with an inflation target, up until October 2005 the Riksbank made forecasts 
under the assumption that the policy rate would not change during the forecast period. The advantage 
of this method was that it illustrated in a simple manner when there was reason to change the policy 
rate. If the forecasts showed that inflation two years ahead would be lower than two per cent, this was 
a signal that the interest rate needed to be cut. If inflation would be higher, the interest rate needed to 
be  raised.  Of  course,  this  rule  could  not  capture  all  of  the  aspects  of  the  monetary  policy 
considerations, but it provided a rough explanation of the monetary policy decisions. 
                                                      
3   See, for instance, Apel, M. et al (1999), ”Different ways of conducting inflation targeting – theory and practice”, Sveriges 
Riksbank Economic Review, 1999:4, 13-42, Svensson, L. (1997), “Inflation forecast targeting: Implementing and monitoring 
inflation targets”, European Economic Review, 41, 1111-1146 and Batini, N., and E. Nelson, (2001), “Optimal horizons for 
inflation targeting”, Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 25, 891-910. 
4   See the minutes of the Executive Board meeting on 16 January 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2007
This rule was easy to understand and in that respect it was a good educational tool. However, there 
were also disadvantages. In normal cases it is not, for instance, particularly realistic that the policy rate 
would  remain  unchanged  a  couple  of  years  ahead.  The  assumption  made  it  difficult  to  assess  our 
forecasts  and  to  compare  them  with  those  of  other  forecasters.  The  latter  usually  base  their 
assessments  on  the  policy  rate  being  changed.  It  was  also  difficult  to  apply  the  assumption  in  a 
consistent manner in the forecasting process. These problems would have become worse when we 
extended our forecast horizon. 
Moreover,  it  gradually  became  clear  that  this  rule  could  sometimes  be  an  obstacle  in  our 
communication.  It  created  an  exaggerated  focus  on  the  current  interest  rate  decision  and  on  the 
inflation forecast exactly two years ahead. The gradual shift towards more flexible monetary policy led 
to a greater need to illustrate the fact that it is the entire expected sequence of events for inflation and 
the real economy a few years ahead that is important in monetary policy decisions, and not only the 
levels we foresee two years ahead. And the focus should not only be on current interest rates, but also 
on expectations of future interest rate changes.5
We left most of these problems behind us when we changed over in October 2005 to making forecasts 
based  on  market  expectations  of  the  future  development  of  the  policy  rate.  Compared  with  the 
assumption of an unchanged repo rate, market expectations normally provide a much more realistic 
forecast. 
But  the  assumption  that  the  policy  rate  will  develop  in  accordance  with  market  expectations  also 
entails some difficulties. Examples of problems include how one should measure market expectations 
and the communication of the interest rate path. It feels natural to move on from this now and go on to 
publish  our  own  view  of  what  would  be  a  reasonable  development  for  the  repo  rate.  Basing  the 
forecasts  on  the  policy  rate  development  expected according  to  the  pricing  in  the  financial  markets 
was  a  major  step  towards  greater  openness  and  clarity.  Now  we  are  taking  a  further,  but  slightly 
smaller, step. 
There  are  several  good  reasons  why  we  are  now  choosing  to  publish  our  own  forecast  for  the 
development of the repo rate. The main one may be that we will have an even better tool for anchoring 
expectations. It will be easier to explain to the general public and the financial markets how we reason 
when making monetary policy decisions and how we see future interest rate developments. We will 
also avoid the communication problems that may arise if the central bank’s and the financial markets’ 
expectations of interest rate developments differ. 
But of course there are also potential problems. The forecast for the policy rate that we will present in 
connection with the inflation forecasts, is one we Executive Board members will make an assessment 
of together. Although we only formally make a decision on the level of the repo rate that will apply until 
the next monetary policy meeting, we must make an assessment of what would be a desirable level 
for  the  repo  rate  throughout  the  entire  forecast  period.  Situations  may,  of  course,  arise  where  the 
Executive  Board  members  have  different  opinions  regarding,  for  instance,  the  current  economic 
situation or how quickly inflation should be returned to target after a shock. This type of situation may 
be  complicated.  But  in  practice  we  nevertheless  believe  that  we  will  be  able  to  manage  such 
situations,  and  to  agree  on  an  interest  rate  path  that  a  majority  of  us  support.  We  have  previously 
managed  to  agree  on  an  interest  rate  message  that  contained  information  on  our  future  intentions 
when commenting on market expectations. 
Now that we are producing a forecast for the repo rate, it is important to point out that new information 
may  be  received  that  significantly  changes  our  view  of  future  interest  rate  developments.  The 
publication of our own interest rate forecast does not involve any commitment from the Riksbank that 
the repo rate will actually follow this path. We must also, as before, make it clear that the assessments 
are uncertain. One way of doing this is to calculate uncertainty intervals around the interest rate path. 
This we intend to do. 
                                                      
5   See Jansson, P., and A. Vredin, (2004), ”Preparing the Monetary Policy Decision in an Inflation Targeting Central Bank: The 
Case of Sveriges Riksbank”, in the conference volume Practical Experiences With Inflation Targeting, Czech National Bank, 
Woodford, M. (2005), “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, essay presented at a symposium organised 
by FRB Kansas City ‘The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future’, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 25-27 August and Faust, J., 
and D. W. Henderson, (2004), “Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis 
Review, 86(4), 117-143. 
BIS Review8/2007 
 5
Openness, clarity and communication 
This  brings  me  on  to  the  final  point  that  I  intend  to  take  up  today:  openness  and  communication. 
Openness and clarity are important when justifying our monetary policy decisions so that confidence in 
price  stability  can  in  the  long  term  be  combined  with  flexible  inflation  targeting.  They  are  also  a 
condition for retaining the legitimacy of our activities and independence.6 Moreover, it contributes to 
greater efficiency and quality in our internal analyses. Openness was therefore given high priority right 
from the start when the new monetary policy framework was introduced, and it is no coincidence that 
the Riksbank is usually ranked high in international comparisons of monetary policy transparency in 
central banks.7
Let me mention some concrete measures we have taken to increase openness. Three times a year 
the Riksbank publishes Inflation Reports which include the analytical base for the interest rate decision 
made.8 After each monetary policy meeting a press release is published, containing the reasons for 
the decision made. A press conference is also organised. We have recently decided to make some 
changes to the Inflation Report. For one thing, it will change its name to ”Monetary Policy Report” with 
effect from the report published in February, and it will now contain a clear link between the forecasts 
and  the  monetary  policy  decision.  The  discussion  at  the  monetary  policy  meetings  will  be  reported 
around two weeks later in the separate minutes of the meeting. The minutes contain the arguments 
put forward and show whether any reservations were made against the interest rate decision. In my 
opinion, we could even go one step further in this field and name the members in the minutes, not 
merely any reservations against the interest rate decision they might have made. But this is a question 
that we Executive Board members would have to decide together. 
We Executive Board members hold around thirty speeches every year, where we can describe our 
views  of  economic  developments.  The  Governor  of  the  Riksbank  appears  before  the  Riksdag 
(Swedish  parliament)  Committee  on  Finance  twice  a  year  for  a  discussion  of  the  monetary  policy 
conducted. 
The  Riksbank  has  also  been  evaluated  by  external  assessors,  who  were  commissioned  by  the 
Committee on Finance. As recently as December last year an evaluation of Swedish monetary policy 
during  the  period  1995-2005  was  published.  The  evaluation  was  made  by  professors  Francesco 
Giavazzi and Frederic Mishkin.9
Finally, our decision to publish our own forecast for the repo rate is of course a further step towards 
greater openness, clarity and more efficient communication. 
This all means that there are good opportunities for the general public to find out how monetary policy 
decisions  are  made.  This  openness  from  the  Riksbank  makes  it  possible  for  all  those  who  are 
interested  to  follow  our  policy  and  see  whether  we  live  up  to  our  principles.  I  am  convinced  that 
transparency  has  been  a  central  issue  in  gradually  building  up  confidence  in  the  Riksbank  and  the 
inflation target. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, let me note that it is difficult to say anything else than that the changeover in economic 
policy in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s has on the whole been successful. The inflation target 
for monetary policy has contributed to providing a stability in economic policy that was lacking in the 
Swedish  economy  during  the  1970s  and  1980s.  The  consolidated  public  finances  are  another  very 
important factor. 
                                                      
6   Chapter 1 of Blinder, A. S. (2004), The Quiet Revolution – Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press, contains a 
discussion of political and economic arguments in favour of transparency in central banks. 
7   See, for instance, Eijffinger, S. and P. Geerats, (2006), “How transparent are central banks?” European Journal of Political 
Economy, vol. 22, 1-21. 
8   See Leeper, E. (2003), ”An Inflation Reports Report”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2003:3, 18-42, for an evaluation 
of the Riksbank’s Inflation Reports. 
9   Giavazzi, F. and F.S. Mishkin (2006),  “An evaluation of Swedish  monetary policy  1995-2005”,  Reports from the Riksdag 
2006/07:RFR 1, Committee on Finance. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2007
I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  give  you  an  insight  into  how  our  monetary  policy  strategy  has 
developed and how it looks today. At the beginning of my talk, I said that the development of monetary 
policy  was  a  learning  process.  In  my  opinion,  it  has  to  be  so.  We  are  working  in  a  world  that  is 
constantly changing and always making new demands of us. It is only natural that we must always 
work  on  refining  and  improving  our  strategy  and  framework.  Openness,  clarity  and  efficient 
communication are important guiding principles in this process. 
It  is  also  a  strength  to  be  able  to  learn  from  others’  experiences  in  the  monetary  policy  field. 
Gatherings like this are excellent opportunities to do just that. Perhaps the Swedish experiences of 
monetary  policy  with  an  inflation  target  may  in  some  way  be  useful  to  other  countries  planning  to 
introduce an explicit inflation target? I hope so! 
Thank you. 
BIS Review8/2007 
 7
