Ben S Bernanke: Globalization and monetary policy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Fourth Economic Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, 
California, 2 March 2007. 
 My topic this evening is the implications of ongoing global economic integration “globalization” for short 
–  for  U.S.  monetary  policy.  At  the  broadest  level,  globalization  influences  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy through its powerful effects on the economic and financial environment in which monetary policy 
must operate. As you know, several decades of global economic integration have left a large imprint 
on the structure of the U.S. economy, including changes in patterns of production, employment, trade, 
and financial flows. Other than by contributing to general economic and financial stability, monetary 
policy can do little to affect these structural changes or the powerful economic forces that drive them. 
However,  to  make  effective  policy,  the  Federal  Reserve  must  have  as  full  an  understanding  as 
possible of the factors determining economic growth, employment, and inflation in the U.S. economy, 
whether those influences originate at home or abroad. Consequently, one direct effect of globalization 
on Federal Reserve operations has been to increase the time and attention that policymakers and staff 
must  devote  to  following  and  understanding  developments  in  other  economies,  in  the  world  trading 
system, and in world capital markets. 
A  narrower  question,  but  one  that  is  critical  for  monetary  policy  makers,  is  whether  the  increased 
openness of the U.S. economy has in some way affected the ability of the Federal Reserve to meet its 
congressional mandate to foster price stability and maximum sustainable employment. On this issue, 
some analysts have argued that globalization hinders monetary policy – for example, by reducing the 
ability of the Federal Reserve to affect U.S. interest rates and asset prices or by diminishing the role of 
domestic factors in the inflation process. 
You  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  quite  interested  in  the 
implications  of  globalization  for  the  conduct  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Members  of  the 
Board staff have conducted extensive research on the topic, and the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco – which is deeply engaged in Asia-Pacific issues – has been a leader in this area as well. 
The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has created a Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, which 
will  support  the  study  of  globalization’s  effects  on  policy  and  the  economy,  and  a  number  of  other 
Reserve Banks have undertaken similar efforts. 
In the remainder of my talk I will discuss two channels through which globalization may have affected 
the  transmission  and  effectiveness  of  U.S.  monetary  policy.  First,  I  will  consider  whether  the 
globalization  of  finance  has  weakened  or  otherwise  affected  the  ability  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  to 
influence  domestic  financial  market conditions.  Second,  I  will discuss what  we  know  about  the  way 
international factors influence the determination of inflation, a key goal variable for monetary policy. 
Globalization, monetary policy, and financial markets 
Monetary  policy  works  in  the  first  instance  by  affecting  financial  conditions,  including  the  levels  of 
interest rates and asset prices. Changes in financial conditions in turn influence a variety of decisions 
by households and firms, including choices about how much to consume, to produce, and to invest. 
Anyone  who  participates  in  financial  markets  these  days  is  aware  that  these  markets  transcend 
national  borders  and  are  highly  sensitive  to  economic  and  political  developments  anywhere  in  the 
world.  Does  financial  globalization  significantly  reduce  the  influence  of  the  Federal  Reserve  on 
financial  conditions  in  the  United  States  and  thereby  possibly  make  U.S.  monetary  policy  less 
effective? 
Certainly,  the  financial  environment  in  which  U.S.  monetary  policy  is  made  has  been  irrevocably 
changed by the remarkable increases in the magnitudes of financial flows into and out of the United 
States. A quarter-century ago, foreign holdings of U.S. financial assets were limited, and therefore, the 
influence of foreign investors and foreign financial conditions on U.S. financial markets was in most 
cases  relatively  modest.  As  I  have  already  noted,  that  situation  has  changed  markedly,  as  global 
financial markets have become increasingly integrated and both foreign and domestic investors have 
become  more  diversified  internationally.  Today,  foreigners  hold  about  one-quarter  of  the  long-term 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 1
fixed-income  securities  issued  by  U.S.  entities  of  all  types  and  more  than  half  of  publicly-held  U.S. 
Treasury  securities. Cross-border  financial  flows  are  enormous and  growing: For example,  in  2006, 
foreigners acquired on net more than $1.6 trillion in U.S. assets, while U.S. investors purchased more 
than $1 trillion in foreign assets. Given their scale, capital inflows and outflows certainly influence long-
term U.S. interest rates and other key asset prices, both by affecting the underlying supply-demand 
balance  between  saving  and  capital  investment  and  by  helping  to  determine  the  premiums  that 
investors receive for holding assets that are risky or illiquid. 
How  does  all  this  affect  monetary  policy?  It  is  helpful  to  think  about  the  potential  implications  of 
globalized  financial  markets  for  monetary  policy  by  beginning  with  the  first  stages  of  the  monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. In particular, as you know, the Federal Reserve influences financial 
conditions through its ability to control the federal funds rate, the interest rate at which banks lend to 
each other overnight. Through the use of open-market operations and other techniques, the Federal 
Reserve can manage the supply of funds in the interbank market as needed to keep the federal funds 
rate close to its target, a capability that has not been affected by the increased international integration 
of  financial  markets.  Although  the  federal  funds  rate  does  not  itself  have  a  major  influence  on 
economic activity, other short-term rates – such as Eurodollar rates – are determined largely by the 
current and expected future values of the funds rate, reflecting the close substitutability of alternative 
short-term  sources  of  funding.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  control  the  federal  funds  rate  thus 
gives it a strong influence over other short-term dollar nominal interest rates and, to the extent that 
inflation is inertial or sticky in the short run, over short-term real interest rates as well. 
The  Fed’s  ability  to  set  the  short-term  interest  rate  independently  of  foreign  financial  conditions 
depends  critically,  of  course,  on  the  fact  that  the  dollar  is  a  freely  floating  currency  whose  value  is 
continuously  determined  in  open,  competitive  markets.  If  the  dollar’s  value  were  fixed  in  terms  of 
another currency or basket of currencies, the Fed would be constrained to set its policy rate at a level 
consistent with rates in global capital markets. Because the dollar is free to adjust, U.S. interest rates 
can differ from rates abroad, and, consequently, the Fed retains the autonomy to set its federal funds 
rate target as needed to respond to domestic economic conditions. 
Short-term interest rates affect the domestic economy through a number of channels (for example, by 
affecting the cost of holding inventories), so monetary policy could influence economic activity to some 
degree even if its control were limited to the short end of the yield curve. Moreover, the pricing of some 
putatively  long-term  financial  assets  may  be  strongly  influenced  by  shorter-term  rates.  Thirty-year 
fixed-rate  mortgages  provide  one  example.  Because  people  move  or  refinance  their  loans,  leading 
them to prepay their mortgages, and because the pattern of real mortgage payments is more front-
loaded than that of nominal payments, the effective duration of a thirty-year mortgage may be closer to 
five years than to thirty years. 
Nevertheless, the ability to influence longer-term interest rates and the prices of longer-term assets is 
an  important  component  of  the  Fed’s  toolkit  for  managing  aggregate  demand.  What  are  the 
implications of increased global financial integration further along the transmission mechanism? The 
globalization  of  financial  markets  does  at  times  make  the  Fed’s  analysis  of  financial  and  economic 
conditions more complex. The behavior of long-term interest rates over the past few years is a case in 
point.  Compared  with  historical  averages,  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  have  remained  relatively 
low  in  recent  years  –  the  phenomenon  that  the  previous  Chairman,  Alan  Greenspan,  termed  a 
“conundrum” – even as the Federal Reserve was withdrawing monetary accommodation by raising the 
target for the federal funds rate by more than 400 basis points. As a consequence, the Treasury yield 
curve has become inverted – that is, long-term rates have been lower than short-term rates, another 
historically unusual pattern. Developments in global capital markets have contributed significantly to 
these  outcomes.  For  example,  strong  foreign  demand  for  U.S.  long-term  debt  has  been  one  factor 
tending to reduce the term premium, the extra return that investors demand to hold longer-term bonds. 
All else equal, a smaller term premium implies a lower level of long-term interest rates. At the same 
time, increases in the net supply of saving in global capital markets – which, to a significant extent, are 
a  product  of  the  large  current  account  surpluses  of  some  emerging-market  economies  and  of  oil-
producing nations – have resulted in lower real long-term interest rates both in the United States and 
abroad.  Clearly,  to  understand  and  evaluate  the  behavior  of  the  term  structure  and  to  assess  the 
implications of current yields for the domestic economy, the Fed must take into account the various 
effects of foreign capital flows on U.S. yields and asset prices, a task that can be quite challenging.  
With globalized financial markets comes increased financial interdependence. One statistical indicator 
of that interdependence is that the correlations between long-term interest rates in the United States 
and those in other industrial countries are high and appear to have risen significantly in the last few 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2007
years. For example, from 1990 to 2006, the daily correlation between changes in ten-year swap rates 
in the United States and Germany averaged 0.42, a relatively high value. During the last three years of 
that  period,  however,  that  correlation  rose  to  0.65,  an  increase  that  is  both  economically  and 
statistically  significant.  Similar  results  obtain  for  the  correlation  of  U.S.  yields  with  yields  of  other 
industrial  countries,  including  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Japan.  That  interdependence 
suggests that monetary policy makers must pay attention to conditions abroad as well as at home. 
However, the greater analytical complexity and interdependence associated with the globalization of 
financial markets notwithstanding, both theory and – perhaps more persuasively – recent experience 
support the view that the Federal Reserve retains considerable leverage over longer-term rates and 
key asset prices, although the links from monetary policy decisions to longer-term rates are somewhat 
looser than those to short-term rates. In particular, by employing consistent and predictable policies, 
the Fed can help to shape market participants’ views of how future nominal short-term rates are likely 
to evolve and how they are likely to respond to economic developments. Because long-term nominal 
interest rates can be viewed as the sum of a weighted average of expected future short-term nominal 
interest  rates  plus  a  term  premium,  Federal  Reserve  policies  and  communications  substantially 
influence the behavior of these rates. In analogous fashion, the Fed’s ability to influence real interest 
rates at shorter horizons provides a lever for affecting longer-term real yields. Like nominal long-term 
yields, real long-term yields can be viewed as an average of current and future expected short-term 
real rates, so that the effects of monetary policy on shorter-term real yields feed into longer-term yields 
as  well.  Well-anchored  inflation  expectations  are  also  helpful  in this  regard:  If  expectations  of  long-
term  inflation  are  stable,  then  changes  in  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  translate  into  similar 
changes in long-term real rates.  
The  empirical  literature  supports  the  view  that  U.S.  monetary  policy  retains  its  ability  to  influence 
longer-term  rates  and  other  asset  prices.  Indeed,  research  on  U.S.  bond  yields  across  the  whole 
spectrum of maturities finds that all yields respond significantly to unanticipated changes in the Fed’s 
short-term interest-rate target and that the size and pattern of these responses has not changed much 
over time (Kuttner, 2001; Andersen and others, 2005; and Faust and others, 2006). Empirical studies 
also find that U.S. monetary policy actions retain a powerful effect on domestic stock prices.1  
If globalization has not constrained the ability of U.S. monetary policy to influence domestic financial 
conditions,  why  are  long-term  interest  rates  and  key  asset  prices  so  correlated  across  economies? 
One possibility is that economic integration has increased the extent that economic shocks – to the oil 
market, for example – have global rather than purely local effects and that most of the world’s central 
banks  are  guiding  their  policy  response  in  similar  ways  to  such  shocks.  Recent  research  suggests 
another possibility, which is that U.S. monetary policy actions may have significant effects on foreign 
yields and asset prices as well as on domestic financial prices. For example, changes in U.S. short-
term  interest  rates  seem  to  exert  a  substantial  influence  on  euro  area  bond  yields  (Ehrmann, 
Fratzscher, and Rigobon, 2005; Faust and others, 2006) and appear to have a strong effect on foreign 
equity indexes as well.2 In contrast, the effects of foreign short-term rates on U.S. asset prices appear 
to  be  relatively  weaker.  These  cross-border  effects  of  policy,  and  their  asymmetric  nature,  are 
somewhat puzzling. One would expect a more symmetric relationship between the United States and 
the euro area, for example, as the two regions are of comparable economic size. It will be interesting 
to see if these relationships persist. 
I  draw  two  conclusions  on  this  issue.  First,  the  globalization  of  financial  markets  has  not  materially 
reduced the ability of the Federal Reserve to influence financial conditions in the United States. But, 
second, globalization has added a dimension of complexity to the analysis of financial conditions and 
their determinants, which monetary policy makers must take into account. 
                                                      
1   The decline of U.S. stock markets to a hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the federal funds target rate is estimated to 
be  5.3  percent  by  Bernanke  and  Kuttner  (2005),  5.5  percent  by  Ehrmann  and  Fratzscher  (2006),  and  6.2  percent  by 
Rigobon and Sack (2004). Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega (2005) find similar results. 
2   Ehrmann,  Fratzscher  and  Rigobon  (2005)  find  that  euro  area  stock  markets  drop  by  nearly  2  percent  in  response  to  a 
hypothetical 100 basis point tightening in the United States on the same day. The estimated effect of euro area monetary 
policy  on  U.S.  stock  markets  is  much  smaller,  about  0.5  percent.  Ehrmann  and  Fratzscher  (2006)  and  Hausman  and 
Wongswan (2006) examine the effect of U.S. monetary policy announcement surprises on equity indexes of fifty countries. 
These studies find that, on average, a hypothetical 25 basis point rise in the federal funds rate is associated with a drop of 
about 1 percent  in foreign equity indexes. Equity indexes in countries with a less flexible exchange rate regime respond 
more to U.S. monetary policy surprises. 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 3
Has globalization affected the U.S. inflation process? 
Other  than  through  its  influence  on  financial  markets,  globalization  may  also  have  affected  the 
operation of monetary policy by changing the relative importance of the various factors that determine 
the domestic inflation rate.3 As national markets become increasingly integrated and open, sellers of 
goods, services, and labor may face more competition and have less market power than in the past. In 
particular, prices and wages may depend on economic conditions abroad as well as on conditions in 
the local market. These linkages suggest that, at least in the short run, globalization and trade may 
affect the course of domestic inflation. 
International  factors  might  affect  domestic  inflation  through  several  related  channels.  First,  the 
expansion  of  trade  may  cause  domestic  inflation  to  depend  to  a  greater  extent  on  the  prices  of 
imported  goods  –  not  only  because  imported  goods  enter  the  consumer  basket  or  (in  the  case  of 
imported intermediate goods) affect the costs of domestic production, but because competition with 
imports affects the pricing power of domestic producers. Second, competitive pressures engendered 
by globalization could affect the inflation process by increasing productivity growth, thereby reducing 
costs,  or  by  reducing  markups.  Third,  to  the  extent  that  some  prices  are  set  in  internationally 
integrated  markets,  pressures  on  resource  utilization  in  foreign  economies  could  be  relevant  to 
domestic inflation.4  
Some analysts might object to the proposition that globalization affects the inflation process at all on 
the grounds that the structural changes that globalization engenders can affect only the relative prices 
of  goods  and  services;  in  contrast,  inflation  –  the  rate  of  change  of  the  overall  price  level  –  must 
ultimately be determined solely by monetary policy (Ball, 2006). Certainly, monetary policy determines 
inflation  in  the  long  run,  and  the  central  bank  must  take  responsibility  for  the  inflation  outcomes 
generated  by  its  policies.  For  example,  the  opening  of  trade  with  emerging-market  economies  that 
have  low  labor  costs  may  reduce  the  relative  prices  of  imported  manufactures,  but  if  the  long-run 
inflation  objective  of  the  central  bank  is  held  constant,  then  the  ultimate  effect  of  the  lower  import 
prices on inflation will be nil as changes in other prices offset the effect of import prices. 
However, the conclusion that inflation is determined only by monetary policy choices need not hold in 
the short-to-medium run. In the shorter term, central banks do not usually offset completely the effects 
of shocks to supply or prices – of which a change in the relative price of imports is an example – in 
part because any monetary action made in response will take time to be effective. Consequently, such 
shocks  may  affect  domestic  inflation  for  a  time.  More  subtly,  a  central  bank  following  a  strategy  of 
“opportunistic disinflation” might react to a favorable shock to supply or prices by lowering its medium-
term objective for inflation (Orphanides and Wilcox, 2002). In the case of a central bank pursuing such 
a  strategy,  foreign  factors  that  depress  domestic  inflation  may  have  a  persistent  effect  so  long  as 
inflation exceeds the central bank’s long-term objective.5  
What, then, is the evidence for the view that globalization is affecting the inflation process in the United 
States? Of the various channels that have been suggested, probably the most intuitive is the idea that 
greater openness to trade has increased the influence of import prices on domestic inflation. In the 
major  industrial  economies  over  the  past  decade  or  so,  import  prices  –  particularly  the  prices  of 
imported  manufactured  goods  –  have  generally  risen  at  a  slower  rate  than  other  consumer  prices, 
slowing overall inflation. The slower growth in import prices reflects to some extent rapid productivity 
gains in the production of manufactures, an important component of trade.6 Increased exports by low-
                                                      
3   Some material in this section reflects research described in Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (forthcoming). For additional 
perspective on these issues, see Kohn (2006) and Yellen (2006). 
4   This list is not exhaustive. For example, if domestic pricing power is affected by international competition, globalization could 
affect the relationship between inflation and resource utilization at home. 
5   Rogoff (2003) provides an alternative theory of how globalization may affect the central bank’s inflation objective. He argues 
that  deregulation  and  international  integration  have  led  to  more  flexible  prices,  so  that  any  attempt  by  a  central  bank  to 
stimulate the real economy by allowing inflation to rise unexpectedly will be less effective than it would have been in the 
past. Because central banks have less incentive to create unexpected inflation, their promises to keep inflation low are more 
credible,  which  in  turn  reduces  the  cost  of  keeping  inflation  low.  Accordingly,  in  Rogoff’s  analysis,  globalization  has  led 
monetary  authorities  to  maintain  lower  long-term  inflation  rates.  A  criticism  of  this  story  is  that  it  implies  that  the  Phillips 
curve is steeper today than in the past (that is, that inflation is more sensitive to slack in the economy), a prediction that 
does not accord with most empirical studies. 
6   The  dollar  prices  of  imports  are  also  affected  by  changes  in  the  value  of  the  exchange  rate.  However,  the  effects  of 
exchange-rate changes on the domestic prices of imported goods have been quite low in recent years. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2007
cost emerging-market economies have also helped keep down the prices of imports received by the 
United States and other industrialized countries. Indeed, the share of U.S. non-oil imports coming from 
the emerging Asian economies has increased from 27 percent to 34 percent over the past decade or 
so.  
Overall, research indicates that trade with developing economies in particular has slowed the rate of 
growth of import prices faced by industrialized countries, with estimates of the reduction ranging widely 
from 1/2 to 2 percentage points. One study, for example, estimated that trade with China alone has 
reduced annual import price inflation in the United States by about 1 percentage point over the period 
1993-2002 (Kamin, Marazzi, and Schindler, 2006)7. However, imported goods make up only part of 
what people consume, and so the effect on overall inflation is less than the deceleration in the prices 
of imports alone. Typical estimates of the short-term effect on the overall inflation rate of less-rapid 
increases  in  the  prices  of  imports  stemming  from  trade  with  China  are  in  the  neighborhood  of  0.1 
percent or less per year – a discernable but certainly not a large effect. 
This  result  requires  several  qualifications.  First,  the  direct  effect  of  lower  import  prices  on  overall 
consumer  price  inflation  could  understate  the  overall  effect,  if  lower  import  prices  force  competing 
domestic  firms  to  restrain  their  prices  as  well.  Research  has  generally  found  that  import  prices  do 
affect  the  prices  charged  by  domestic  producers.8  For  example,  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
found  that,  in  a  range  of  industrial  economies,  the  prices  of  domestic  products  were  restrained  by 
competition from imports, the effect being larger with greater penetration (IMF, 2006). To the extent 
that  import  competition  slows  the  rate  of  increase  of  domestic  prices,  the  tendency  of  lower-cost 
imports to reduce domestic inflation will be enhanced. 
On  the  other  hand,  not  all  aspects  of  globalization  and  trade  reduce  inflation.  For  example, 
globalization  has  been  associated  with  strong  growth  in  some  large  emerging-market  economies, 
notably  China  and  India,  and  this  growth  likely  has  contributed  to  recent  increases  in  the  prices  of 
energy and other commodities. During 2003-05, for example, China alone accounted for nearly one-
third of the growth in both global real gross domestic product (GDP) and oil consumption. It is difficult 
to assess the exact extent to which increased demand by developing countries has contributed to the 
run-ups in commodity prices in recent years, as these prices are also affected by supply conditions 
and  other  factors.  However,  one  study  estimated  that,  if  the  share  of  world  trade  and  world  GDP 
enjoyed by non-industrial countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005 real oil prices would 
have been as much as 40 percent lower, and real metals prices 10 percent lower, than they actually 
were (Pain, Koske, and Sollie, 2006). Accordingly, in the past several years, the effect of growth in 
developing economies on commodity prices has been a source of upward pressure on inflation in the 
United States and other industrial economies. 
When the offsetting effects of globalization on the prices of manufactured imports and on energy and 
commodity  prices  are  considered  together,  there  seems  to  be  little  basis  for  concluding  that 
globalization overall has significantly reduced inflation in the United States in recent years; indeed, the 
opposite  may  be  true.  That  said,  the  integration  of  rapidly  industrializing  economies  into  the  global 
trading system clearly has had important effects on the prices of both manufactures and commodities, 
reinforcing the need to monitor international influences on the inflation process. 
Globalization  also  may  affect  the  inflation  process  through  other  channels.  Some  researchers,  for 
example,  have  suggested  greater  openness  to  trade  and  the  resulting  increase  in  competition  may 
have led to reduced markups of price over cost (Chen, Imbs, and Scott, 2004). However, the rise in 
profit rates in recent years seems inconsistent with the view that markups have declined (Bowman, 
2003;  Kohn,  2006).9  The  competition  fostered  by  trade  should  also  promote  productivity  growth, 
reducing growth in costs and making the attainment of low inflation easier. That productivity growth is 
                                                      
7   The share of imports coming from China is relatively high for the United States, and so the effect of trade with China may be 
lower for other industrialized countries. For example, one analysis of trade between the United Kingdom and both China and 
India found that, over the period 1999-2002, the effect on import-price inflation was only about minus 0.5 percentage point 
annually (Nickell, 2005). Research by the European Central Bank, however, found that the euro area’s trade with a wide 
range of developing economies had reduced the rate of increase in import prices to the area about 2 percentage  points 
annually over 1996-2005 (European Central Bank, 2006). 
8   An  exception  is  Kamin,  Marazzi,  and  Schindler  (2006),  who  find  little  effect  on  the  prices  of  domestic  U.S.  producers  of 
similar goods. 
9   Bowman (2003) finds little evidence that competition has increased or that markups declined in industrial economies. 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 5
linked to the intensity of competition is plausible, and more-rapid productivity growth seems to help to 
explain the slowing of inflation in the United States in the mid-1990s. However, the fact that most other 
industrial countries did not experience the same increase in productivity growth as the United States 
during that period, even as they became more open to trade, suggests that the relationship between 
productivity and trade may be complex. 
In  a  globalized  economy,  the  level  of  resource  utilization  in  the  world  economy  is  another  potential 
influence on domestic inflation. Standard analyses of inflation based on the concept of a Phillips curve 
assign  a  role  in  inflation  determination  to  the  domestic  output  gap  –  the  difference  between  the 
economy’s potential output and its actual production. According to this theory, the existence of slack in 
the economy makes it more difficult for producers to raise prices and for workers to win higher wages, 
with the result that inflation slows. These conventional analyses have considered only the possible link 
between  domestic  inflation  and  the  domestic  output  gap.  But  in  an  increasingly  integrated  world 
economy, one may well ask whether a global output gap can be meaningfully defined and measured 
and,  if  it  can,  whether  it  affects  domestic  inflation.  In  other  words,  all  else  being  equal,  would  a 
booming world economy increase the potential for inflationary pressures within the United States? 
In  principle,  with  the  domestic  determinants  of  inflation  held  constant,  reduced  slack  in  the  global 
economy could increase domestic inflation for a time if it led to higher prices for some traded goods 
and  services  relative  to  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  that  are  not  usually  traded.  For  example, 
suppose that the United States produces personal computers both for export and for domestic use, 
and  that  more-rapid  growth  abroad  increases  the  world  demand  for  computers.  Stronger  global 
demand  for  computers  raises  the  prices  that  U.S.  producers  can  charge  their  foreign  customers. 
Moreover, because all computer producers are facing a stronger global market, U.S. producers can 
charge more for their output at home as well. If producers of many goods face increases in worldwide 
demand, the net effect could be higher inflation in the United States, even though there may be no 
measurable effect on the prices of U.S. imports. 
The  idea  is  intriguing  but  again,  unfortunately,  the  evidence  is  so  far  inconclusive.  Early  work, 
including  some  done  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  found  no  effect  of  global  demand 
conditions  on  U.S.  inflation,  as  did  most  of  the  subsequent  research.10  Recently,  however,  several 
researchers affiliated with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) have reported results favorable 
to  the  global  output  gap  hypothesis  (Borio  and  Filardo,  2006).  Using  data  for  sixteen  industrialized 
countries (plus the euro area) for 1985-2005, they found significant effects of the global output gap on 
domestic inflation rates – indeed, effects that were generally larger than those of domestic output gaps 
and that were rising over time. This provocative result has in turn been challenged by Federal Reserve 
Board researchers, who find that the empirical support for a role for the global output gap does not 
survive  modest  changes  in  the  way  the  data  are analyzed.  As domestic output  gaps  are  difficult  to 
measure, even with the benefit of hindsight, it is perhaps not surprising that measuring and assessing 
the effects of a global output gap have proved contentious. A clear resolution of the question of how 
global economic conditions affect domestic inflation may continue to elude us.  
Overall,  global  factors  do  seem  to  influence  domestic  inflation.  Most  directly,  increasing  trade  with 
China and other developing countries has led to slower growth in the prices of imported manufactured 
goods. However, this effect has been offset in the most recent period by the increases in the prices for 
energy  and  commodities  associated  with  the  rapid  growth  in  these  emerging  market  economies. 
Other,  more  indirect  channels  may  exist,  including  the  possibilities  that  trade  promotes  productivity 
growth and thus lower costs and that global demand conditions influence domestic pricing decisions. 
However, more research is needed to pin down the significance of these indirect influences. 
Conclusion 
I  have  foreshadowed  my  conclusions.  Without  doubt,  ongoing  global  economic  integration  is  a 
phenomenon  of  the  greatest  importance,  one  that  will  help  shape  the  U.S.  economy  for  decades. 
Globalization  has  not  materially  affected  the  ability  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to  influence  financial 
conditions in the United States, nor has it led to significant changes in the process which determines 
                                                      
10   Work finding no role or, at best, a marginal one for a global output gap includes Tootell (1998), Hooper, Slok, and Dobridge 
(2006), Pain, Koske, and Sallie (2006), and Ball (2006). In contrast, Gamber and Hung (2001) find that, over 1976-99, a 
trade-weighted average of capacity utilization for thirty-five U.S. trading partners is a significant determinant of U.S. inflation. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2007
the U.S. inflation rate. However, effective monetary policy making now requires taking into account a 
diverse set of global influences, many of which are not yet fully understood. The Federal Reserve will 
continue to place a high priority on understanding the effects of globalization on the U.S. economy in 
general and on the conduct and transmission of U.S. monetary policy in particular.  
of 
no. 
pp. 
60, 
No. 
vol. 
616, 
paper 
Paper 
Central 
Journal 
working 
Policy?” 
Finance 
Finance, 
European 
Discussion 
International 
References 
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., (2005). “Real-Time Price Discovery in Stock, 
Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets,” unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvania. 
Ball,  Lawrence  (2006).  “Has  Globalization  Changed  Inflation?”  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  12687 
(November). http://www.nber.org/papers/w12687
Bernanke, Ben and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal 
Reserve 
1221-1257. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/FEDS/2004/200416/200416abs.html
Bowman,  David  (2003).  “Market  Power  and  Inflation,”  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, 
783. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2003/783/default.htm
Borio, Claudio and Andrew Filardo (2006). “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence 
on  the  Global  Determinants  of  Domestic  Inflation,”  unpublished  paper,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March). 
Chen, Natalie, Jean Imbs, and Andrew Scott (2004). “Competition, Globalization, and the Decline in 
Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4695. www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP4695.asp
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher (2006). “Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy 
Shocks,” 
Bank. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp616.pdf (683 KB PDF) 
Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Roberto Rigobon (2005). “Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets, 
and  Exchange  Rates:  Measuring  International  Financial  Transmission,”  working  paper  no.  452, 
European Central Bank. http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp452.pdf (953 KB PDF) 
European Central Bank (2006), “Effects of the Rising Trade Integration of Low-Cost Countries on Euro 
Area 
(August),  pp.  56-57. 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/mb/html/index.en.html
Faust,  Jon,  John  H.  Rogers,  Shing-Yi  B.  Wang,  and  Jonathan  Wright  (forthcoming).  “The  High-
Frequency  Response  of  Exchange  Rates  and  Interest  Rates  to  Macroeconomic  Announcements,” 
Journal of Monetary Economics. 
Gamber, Eduard N. and Juann H. Hung (2001). “Has the Rise in Globalization Reduced U.S. Inflation 
in the 1990s,” Economic Inquiry, vol. 39 (January), pp. 58-73. 
Hausman,  Joshua  and  Jon  Wongswan  (2006).  “Global  Asset  Prices  and  FOMC  Announcements,” 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  International  Finance  Discussion  Paper  No. 
886. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2006/886/default.htm
Hooper,  Peter,  Torsten  Slok,  and  Christine  Dobridge  (2006).  “Understanding  U.S.  Inflation,”  Global 
Markets Research, Deutsche Bank (July 26). 
Ihrig, Jane, Steven Kamin, Deborah Lindner, Jaime Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the 
Globalization  and  Inflation  Hypothesis,”  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, 
International Finance Discussion Papers. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2006).  “How  Has  Globalization  Changed  Inflation?”  World  Economic 
Outlook, 
97-134. 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/index.htm. 
Kamin, Steven B., Mario Marazzi, and John W. Schindler (2006). “The Impact of Chinese Exports on 
Global Import Prices,” Review of International Economics, vol. 14 (May), pp. 179-201.  
Kohn, Donald (2006). “The Effects of Globalization on Inflation and their Implications for Monetary 
Policy,” speech delivered at the 51st Economic Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank 
Import  Prices,”  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin,  Frankfurt,  Germany 
Washington, 
D.C.: 
April, 
IMF, 
pp. 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 7
of Boston, Chatham, Mass., June 16. 
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060616/default.htm.  
Kuttner,  Kenneth  N.  (2001).  “Monetary  Policy  Surprises  and  Interest  Rates:  Evidence  from  the  Fed 
Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 47 (June), pp. 523-44. 
Nickell, Stephen (2005). “Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?” Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin, London, vol. 45, pp. 92-107. 
Orphanides,  Athanasios,  and  David  Wilcox  (2002).  "The  Opportunistic  Approach  to  Disinflation," 
International Finance, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47-71.  
Pain,  Nigel,  Isabell  Koske,  and  Marte  Sollie  (2006).  “Globalisation  and  Inflation  in  the  OECD 
Economies,” Economics Department Working Paper No. 524, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, Paris (November). 
Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2004). “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,” Journal of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 51 (November), pp. 1553-75. 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2003). “Globalization and Global Disinflation,” Paper prepared for the Conference on 
Monetary  Policy  and  Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing  Economy,  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve 
28-30. 
August 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2003/pdf/Rogoff2003.pdf (237 KB PDF) 
Tootell,  Geoffrey  M.B.  (1998).  “Globalization  and  U.S.  Inflation,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston, 
New 
21-33. 
http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/neer/neer1998/neer498b.htm
Yellen, Janet (2006), “Monetary Policy in a Global Environment,” speech delivered at the conference 
“The  Euro  and  the  Dollar  in  a  Globalized  Economy,”  University  of  California  at  Santa  Cruz,  Santa 
Cruz, California, May 27. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2006/060527.pdf (346 KB PDF) 
Hole,  Wyoming, 
(July/August), 
Economic 
England 
Jackson 
Kansas 
Review 
Bank 
City, 
pp. 
of 
8 
 BIS Review 21/2007
