Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Harnessing credit for a better life for all 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  75th anniversary  of  Credit  Management  Association  of  the  Philippines, 
Manila, 19 April 2007. 
 Senator/Governor/Sec.  Joey  Lina,  President  Marlo  Cruz,  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Credit 
Management Association of the Philippines, special guests. Good morning.  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate the Credit Management Association of the 
Philippines  on  its  diamond  anniversary.  There  are  few  organizations  that  can  claim  such  longevity. 
This is, indeed, admirable! And while your organization may be old, your members definitely are not. 
I believe that your longevity is due to a clear vision of what your organization can and should do.  
As President Marlo earlier mentioned, your organization was officially incorporated as the Association 
of Credit Men (Phils.) Inc. in 1932, exactly seventy-five years ago today, when our country was still 
under American rule, and our population was roughly about 15 million.  
Since then, the Philippines has won its independence; your association has changed its name to the 
Credit Management Association of the Philippines – a recognition of the equally important role women 
play in credit management; while our population has multiplied 5 ½ times to 84 million!  
Through  all  these  changes,  CMAP’S  reason  for  being  has  remained  constant:  credit  information 
exchange.  It  is  a  tribute  to  your  founding  fathers’  vision  that  they  identified  this  vital  cooperative 
undertaking very early in our economic history.  
With  the  significant  growth  of  our  economy  since  then,  and  the  associated  demand  to  finance  it, 
effective credit management has become today’s imperative to sustain our country’s development.  
For this, we need a comprehensive and unified approach to credit information. This is the reason why 
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is a strong supporter of the proposed legislation that would create a 
centralized credit information bureau that will provide comprehensive information on credit histories.  
As  envisioned,  this  centralized  credit  information  bureau  will  improve  the  quality  of  financial 
information available to creditors; enhance credit access of institutions and individuals; lower interest 
rates  and  facilitate  loan  processing  particularly  for  borrowers  with  good  credit  record;  minimize 
exposure to risks of financial intermediaries; and lower intermediation costs that will benefit both the 
creditors and the borrowers.  
A recent World Bank study covering 51 countries showed that having a credit bureau resulted in the 
following:  
First, a marked increase in the volume of lending, particularly to previously excluded sectors like the 
micro, small and medium enterprises. It said that with a credit bureau, the probability of a small firm 
obtaining a bank loan increased from 28% to 40%; and 
Second, lower default rates from stronger credit discipline. In Brazil, for instance, complete reporting of 
credit  information  lowered  default  rates  from  3.37  percent  to  1.84  percent.  In  the  Philippines,  a 
centralized credit bureau could further reduce non-performing loans, which as of last February stood at 
5.6 percent for universal and commercial banks. 
Clearly, a credit information system that will generate such benefits will boost our country’s economy 
and our global competitiveness. I find it fitting therefore that the theme for your 27th National Credit 
Congress is “Credit Management: Key to Philippine Global Competitiveness.”  
Ladies and gentleman. As of February this year, total outstanding loans of commercial banks, thrift 
banks  and  rural  banks  have  reached  P1.97  trillion.  Compared  to  a  year  ago,  this  is  higher  by 
7.7 percent.  
Considering that our country’s economy, as measured by Gross Domestic Product, is targeted by the 
government to increase by 6.1%-6.7% this year, it is likely that demand for loans will continue to rise 
as  well.  Economic  growth  drivers  are  expected  to  be  exports,  agriculture  and  the  services  sectors. 
Relatively low borrowing rates should also spur demand for loans, housing included.  
BIS Review 38/2007 
 1
Access to credit is an important element of economic development. The Bangko Sentral therefore is 
committed  to  the  “democratization”  of  credit  to  ensure  fair  access  to  credit  by  all  sectors  of  our 
economy – from blue-chip companies, to the man on the street, to start-up micro-enterprises.  
Ladies and gentlemen. One of the challenges before us is to ensure that our microenterprises gain 
more access to credit. Already, we have made big strides in encouraging banks to do microfinance. 
Today, more than 200 banks are providing microfinance services to over 650,000 micro borrowers, 
with a total loan portfolio of over P4 billion.  
If  we  factor  in  the  microfinance  activities  of  cooperatives  and  NGOs,  nearly  two  million  Filipino 
households  now  enjoy  access  to  microfinance  services.  Nevertheless,  with  millions  of  Filipinos  still 
living in poverty, we have to work harder and faster in terms of empowering our entrepreneurial poor.  
There is one important lesson we have learned from microfinance: our borrowers may be poor, but 
they have good paying habits! Repayment rates for microfinance loans in the Philippines are hitting as 
much as 98%!  
Nobel Peace Price awardee Muhammad Yunus of Bangladesh is another case in point. If you recall, 
Mr.  Yunus  parlayed  his  microfinance  model  into  the  successful  Grameen  Bank,  with  a  total  loan 
portfolio  of  $6  billion  for  7  million  borrowers.  In  other  words,  he  has  proven  repeatedly…  that  the 
entrepreneurial  poor  are  bankable.  He  said:  “Conventional  banks  look  for  the  rich;  we  look  for  the 
absolutely poor. All people are entrepreneurs, but many don't have the opportunity to find that out.”  
Providing  credit  access  to  SMEs  is  another  challenge.  According  to  the  UPS  survey  of  SME 
competitiveness in Asia, Philippine SMEs consider access to funding and working capital as obstacles 
to their competitiveness. I hope therefore that CMAP will find ways to help address these concerns.  
On  our  part,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  have  launched  electronic  rediscounting  to  spur 
lending  activities  down  to  the  countryside  and  also  to  lower  transaction  costs  of  banks.  With 
eRediscounting, banks may conduct their rediscounting transactions with the BSP in an online, real-
time  basis  from  their  own  bank  premises.  At  the  same  time,  the  system  allows  BSP  to  process 
rediscounting  applications  within  10  minutes,  release  loan  proceeds  on  line,  and  accept  online 
payments for banks’ rediscounting obligations. 
In  addition,  the  BSP  is  advocating  the  passage  of  the  Corporate  Recovery  Act  to  update  the 
Insolvency Law by putting in place procedures for liquidation, and thereby strengthen the framework 
for quick resolution of financially-distressed enterprises. This should balance the rights of creditors vis-
à-vis debtors. I hope CMAP will support this as well.  
Another area for cooperation with CMAP is financial education. In this regard, I am pleased to inform 
you  that  the  Bangko  Sentral  and  the  Department  of  Education  are  principal  partners  in  the 
incorporation  of  money  management  in  elementary  curriculum. The  earlier children can  learn  about 
money management, the better. The Bangko Sentral is also conducting money management seminars 
for OFWs and their dependents.  
We believe that learning the basics of money and credit management can help Filipinos make smart 
decisions that will transform them into net savers and investors, fostering in the process, a more self-
reliant  and  more  efficient  economy.  I  hope  therefore  that  consumer  education  will  be  an  important 
agenda item in CMAP’s program as well.  
Ladies and gentlemen. CMAP’s celebration of its diamond anniversary, brings to mind how diamonds 
have evolved into symbols of wealth, strength and staying power. It is my hope that CMAP will take on 
these characteristics of diamonds so that it will continue to play a pivotal role in helping bring about a 
better life for our people, in our country.  
Again, our congratulations! Mabuhay ang CMAP! Mabuhay ang Pilipino!  
2 
 BIS Review 38/2007
