Grant Spencer: Recent intervention by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in the 
foreign exchange market  
Opinion  article  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand, 
27 June 2007. 
 On 11 June, the Reserve Bank confirmed that it had intervened in the foreign exchange market to sell 
New Zealand dollars. This was the first such intervention since the exchange rate was floated in March 
1985.  
The  Bank’s  11  June  announcement  has  prompted  a  lot  of  discussion  and  commentary  around  the 
objectives and impact of FX intervention. It is useful to clarify a number of issues around this subject.  
Foreign exchange intervention is an ongoing process and the Bank will not be commenting publicly on 
its specific intervention activities. We will, however, continue to release our financial accounts, which 
show the accumulated impact of the Bank’s intervention activities. These accounts are posted on the 
Bank’s website at the end of each month, with a lag of one month. 
Under  the  Bank’s  Policy  Targets  Agreement  with  the  Minister  of  Finance,  the  Bank  seeks  to  avoid 
unnecessary variability in interest rates, output and the exchange rate as it goes about maintaining low 
inflation. The Bank’s primary monetary policy instrument is the Official Cash Rate (OCR). The foreign 
exchange intervention framework provides an additional tool for the purpose of trying to moderate the 
extremes of the exchange rate cycle.  
Intervention operates at the margin, affecting the balance of demand and supply for the New Zealand 
dollar. It can have an immediate downward impact on the exchange rate as it did on 11 June. That can 
help to moderate the “peaks” in the exchange and the length of time we spend at peak levels. It does 
not  attempt  to  defend  a  particular  level  of  the  exchange  rate.  Rather  it  sends  a  signal  that,  in  the 
Bank’s  view,  the  exchange  rate  is  out  of  alignment  with  the  economic  fundamentals.  Those 
speculating in the New Zealand dollar need to be aware that the exchange rate is not a one-way bet; 
they need to be cautious.  
The  Bank’s  policy  is  to  intervene  only  when  the  exchange  rate  is  at  exceptional  levels;  when  it  is 
unjustified by medium term economic fundamentals; when intervention is seen as consistent with the 
Policy Targets Agreement; and when market conditions make intervention opportune.  
In recent times, the New Zealand dollar has been at levels that the Bank regards as both exceptionally 
high and unjustified by the economic fundamentals. Many businesses would agree. The high level of 
the exchange rate is creating challenging conditions for large parts of the tradables sector, particularly 
for those not directly benefiting from the recent rise in world commodity prices. With New Zealand’s 
current account deficit sitting around 9 percent of GDP, it is our view that the exchange rate cannot be 
sustained at current levels over the medium term. 
Does trying to lower the New Zealand dollar run counter to monetary policy and the Reserve Bank’s 
low inflation objective? We do not believe so. Intervention is about seeking to moderate the trend in 
the exchange rate and rebalancing monetary policy pressure. It does not fundamentally alter monetary 
policy and does not signal a future easing of conditions. The direct liquidity impact of FX interventions 
is always offset via the Bank’s money market operations.  
The mechanics of foreign exchange market intervention are quite simple. The Reserve Bank acquires 
foreign currency reserves by selling New Zealand dollars. This activity may be limited by the amount of 
foreign reserves we are prepared to accumulate; but is not limited by the Bank’s ability to supply NZ 
dollars. In this sense, intervention to lower the NZ dollar is less restricted than in the reverse situation 
where intervention is working to support the NZ dollar by running down reserves.  
Many  countries  around  the  world  have  policies  which  allow  foreign  reserves  to  be  built  up  as  the 
exchange  rate  rises  and  reduced  when  their  currencies  come  under  pressure.  Unlike  many 
commercial  traders,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  the  scope  to  hold  additional  foreign  reserves  for  an 
indefinite period. When the exchange rate eventually falls to a more sustainable level, the holding of 
foreign reserves should become profitable as their value will increase in New Zealand dollar terms. 
Claims  by  some  observers  that  the  Bank  has  somehow  “thrown  away”  taxpayers’  money  by 
intervening simply do not stack up. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
FX  intervention  is  a  supplementary  monetary  policy  tool  and  is  considerably  less  potent  than  the 
central OCR instrument which has an important influence on the trend of the exchange rate. As noted 
in the Bank’s June Monetary Policy Statement, the outlook for the OCR will depend on how inflation 
pressures  evolve  over  the  months  ahead.  Evidence  that  inflation  pressures  are  abating  will  be  an 
important step in seeing the exchange rate return to more sustainable levels. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
