L Wilson Kamit: Brief review of economic developments in Papua New 
Guinea 
Speech by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor and Chairman of the Board of the Bank of 
Papua New Guinea, on the occasion of the Payment of the 2006 Bank of Papua New Guinea 
Dividend to the Government, Port Moresby, 9 August 2007.  
 Introduction 
The  Minister  for  Treasury,  Right  Honourable  Sir  Rabbie  L.  Namaliu,  CSM,  KCMG,  MP, 
members of the Board, executives of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, ladies and gentlemen. 
The Central Banking Act (CBA) 2000 specifies the objectives and functions of the Bank of 
Papua New Guinea. Our core functions are that of formulating and implementing monetary 
policy,  supervising  the  financial  system,  ensuring  an  efficient  payments  system,  and 
promoting macroeconomic stability and economic growth in Papua New Guinea, the Central 
Bank also has a special relationship with its shareholder, the Government. 
In our thirty one years of independence we have had, fourteen years of stable low growth up 
to 1989, ten years of very difficult times up to 1999, following the Bougainville crisis. This lost 
decade  was  characterized  by  gross  mismanagement  of  the  economy  that  resulted  in  an 
almost default on our foreign currency liabilities in 1994, which forced us to float the Kina our 
national currency, an almost second default in 1998 to 1999, the combined effect of a very 
severe drought, the Asian Financial Crisis and the world economic slowdown exacerbated by 
continued gross mismanagement of the economy. 
We  were  very  fortunate  that  in  mid  1999,  a  new  government  was  formed,  that  undertook 
some  major  reforms.  Like  minded  leaders,  especially  our  Ministers,  continued  with  this 
reform  process  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  the  new  Government  on  the  reform 
agenda. 
It  took  four  years  to  stabilize  the  economy,  re-establish  the  confidence  of  the  public,  and 
realising  that  the  Constitutional  Changes  introduced  to  the  political  system  through  the 
Integrity of Political Parties Act, will result in political stability. We are experiencing for the first 
time a government which lasted a full term of five years. 
These developments assisted by very high commodity prices of oil, copper and some of the 
agricultural  exports  like  rubber,  resulted  in  a  very  stable  macro-economic  environment,  of 
fiscal  surpluses,  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates,  an  appreciating  exchange  rate  and  fast 
accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserve.  I  am  not  going  to  the  statistics  but  just  as  an 
indication,  our  foreign  currency  reserves  increased  have  increased  from  around  US$300 
million to US$1.85 billion today. 
Economic activity as measured by GDP growth is projected by the Bank to be high at 4.5 
percent  this  year.  Sir  Rabbie,  in  your  recent  presentation  of  the  mid  year  economic 
assessment and fiscal outlook, GDP growth is project at 5.25 percent for the year. We are 
encouraged  by  this  optimism  and  we  all  want  to  ensure  that  the  great  majority  of  the 
population is benefiting from the mineral boom. To ensure this, we have to generate a 6 to 7 
percent growth. I have stated this in my recently released July 31st 2007 Monetary Policy 
Statement. I am sure that following the consolidation, and the stability period, we are moving 
into a fast growth phase in the years ahead. 
The authorities must strive to continue removing some of the impediments to investment by 
improving the efficiency and reducing the very high cost structure of public utilities and basic 
infrastructure services and that will enhance private sector investment and economic growth. 
There  is  nothing  like  wanting  to  be  on  the  winning  team.  Just  look  at  the  state  of  origin 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
games and see the value of competition. If privatization or corporatisation or right sizing is 
such  an  unpalatable  approach,  let  us  not  mark  time.  Lets  get  on  with  competition  in  the 
telecommunication, power and public utilities industries. 
Right  Honourable  Minister,  we  also  take  care  of  our  stakeholders.  Today  marks  another 
occasion when the Central Bank pays its due to its shareholder, the Government, on behalf 
of the people of Papua New Guinea. The due this time is the payment of our dividend to the 
Government  from  our  2006  operating  profit.  We  want  to  encourage  other  similar 
organizations to do the same. 
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Board to which I am most privileged to be the 
Chairman; the management and staff of the Central Bank for the support and commitment 
they continue to display in their various roles. I also wish to thank the Auditor General and his 
staff for their assistance over the years. 
Honourable Minister with these few remarks, I now present to you our dividend payment for 
the 2006 financial year of K33.0 million. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
