Anselmo L S Teng: Overview of recent financial and economic developments in 
Macao 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  L  S  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the  Spring 
Cocktail Reception, Macao, 15 March 2007. 
 The Honorable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Francis Tam; 
The Honorable Director of the Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office of the Central 
People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Zhou Zhikui; 
The Honorable Chairman of the Audit Committee of AMCM, Mr. Leonel Alberto Alves; 
The Honorable Chairman of the Macau Association of Banks, Mr. Ye Yixin; 
The Honorable President of the Macau Insurers’ Association, Mr. Si Chi Hok; 
The Honorable President of the Macau Insurance Agents and Brokers Association, Mr. Tou Kam 
Seng; 
The Honorable President of the Federation of Macau Professional Insurance Intermediaries, Mr. Frank 
Ip; 
The Honorable President of the Macau Financial Markets Association, Mr. Chan Kam Chun; 
The Honorable President of the Association of Macau Financial Employees, Mr. Ng Chi Peng; 
The Honorable President of the Macau Money Changers Association, Ho Hao Chio; 
Distinguished guests, friends of media, dear colleagues; 
Spring is around although chill is occasionally being felt. On the occasion of this reception held in the 
melody of spring, we farewell the past and embrace the future. Here, I take the liberty of representing 
the Board of the Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM) to extend our warmest welcome to Mr. Francis 
Tam, the Secretary for Economy and Finance; Mr. Zhou Zhikui, the Director of the Economic Affairs 
Department  of  the  Liaison  Office  of  the  Central  People’s  Government  in  MSAR;  our  distinguished 
guests  and  friends  of  media.  Moreover,  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  Mr.  Francis 
Tam  for  his  unremitting  support  and  guidance;  to  the  government  departments,  all  sectors  of  the 
society and the business communities for their support and co-operation. 
Under  the  auspices  of  the  Central  Government  and  the  visionary  leadership  of  the  MSAR 
Government,  Macao  manages  to  sustain  its  past  growth  momentum  with  favourable  development 
noted  in  consumption,  investment  and  trade.  Basked  in  a  buoyant  market,  unemployment  rate 
continues  to  spiral  downwards,  GDP  regains  its  double  digit  growth  while  surplus  is  noted  in 
international balance of payment and fiscal account. The credit rating of Macao has also been raised 
from “stable” to “positive”.  
2006 is another record year for the local financial field in the wake of Macao’s high economic growth 
and  the  prolonged  favourable  economic  situation  of  the  neighbouring  regions.  While  the  banking 
sector continues with the enhancement of risk management, it has also strived to diversify its range of 
financial  products,  broaden  up  its  business  network,  implement  different  operational  strategies  and 
improve  service  quality.  Accordingly,  the  sector  succeeds  in  widening  up  its  revenue  source, 
expanding  its  operational  scope,  enhancing  its  quality  of  service  and  achieving  better  operational 
efficiency.  As  per  statistics  as  at  year  end,  total  assets  of  the  banking  sector  jumped  26.5%  to 
MOP273.8 billion; deposits increased by 24.2% to MOP229.9 billion; loans stood at MOP76.4 billion, 
representing  an  increase  of  17.1%;  non-performing  loan  ratio  was  at  record  low  of  1.1%.  Overall 
annual  profit  jumped  remarkably  year-on-year  by  30.1%  to  MOP3.96  billion.  Capital  adequacy  ratio 
was 14.7%, far better than the benchmark set by the Basel Committee.  
As  for  the  insurance  sector,  continued  growth  was  also  witnessed  in  2006.  As  at  year  end,  gross 
premium  registered  a  10.5%  growth  to  MOP2.48  billion.  Growth  momentum  of  non-life  insurance 
continued to be strong by posting a year-on-year increase of 27.4% to MOP720 million. Life insurance 
remained stable with total premium grew at a rate of 4.7% to MOP1.75 billion. Private pension fund 
scheme  has  also  secured  a  faster  development.  As  at  the  end  of  2006,  the  number  of  registered 
entities hugely increased by 44.4% to 309. Workforce covered by the scheme increased by 46.3% to 
63,000. Assets under fund management increased by 21.4% to MOP2.8 billion.  
Other trades such as money exchange, cash remittance and securities are also developing fastly with 
year-on-year growth of 22%, 34% and 70% respectively.  
BIS Review 29/2007 
 1
We continue to adopt a prudent investment strategy in managing the MSAR Reserves. As a result, it is 
capable of posting reasonable return in a turbulent market environment. As at the end of the year, the 
exchange reserves of the MSAR reached MOP73.1 billion, representing an increase of 36.8% when 
compared with the previous year. As regards MSAR Reserve Fund, the balance was MOP11.6 billion.  
As far as monetary policy is concerned, the MSAR continues to adhere to a policy which maintains 
free flow of capital, free currency convertibility, market driven interest rate and the link of the MOP to 
the HKD. In the past year, we ensured the sufficient and timely circulation as well as the stability and 
convertibility of the MOP through the flexible use of different kinds of monetary policy instruments.  
Simultaneously, effort has also been made to strengthen our supervision to cope with the changing 
market  situation.  To  protect  the  stability  and  healthy  development  of  the  local  financial  system,  we 
have  coordinated  and  cooperated  with  other  government  departments  to  combat  illicit  financial 
activities.  
As ever, we abide by the framework of applicable laws and regulations to carry out routine supervision 
on financial institutions through onsite inspection, offsite surveillance and other measures. In the past 
year,  we  did  onsite  inspection  on  7  banks,  5  money  changers,  2  exchange  counters  and  2  cash 
remittance  companies.  Furthermore,  we  strengthen  and  perfect  formulation  of  relevant  supervisory 
policies.  
In the area of banking supervision, guideline on anti-money laundering was revised and put into force 
on  November  12  last  year.  Besides,  consultation  on  the  draft  “Guidelines  on  the  Management  of 
Country  Risks”  has  been  completed  and  is  ready  for  promulgation  and  implementation  this  year. 
“Guidelines on the Risk Management of Electronic banking” has been revised and is ready for second 
consultation. “Licensing-Review and Approval Procedures” for financial institutions such as banks has 
been finalized. It is expected that through the use of these procedures, the approval process can be 
made  more  systematic,  effective  and  transparent.  Internally,  “Onsite  Inspection  Manual”  has  been 
revised  with  an  aim  to  achieve  higher  degree  of  standardization  and  better  efficiency  in  daily 
operation. A survey was conducted last year to assess market risk. The related findings will be used 
as a base to establish market risk supervision capital requirement.  
Basel II is planned to be implemented in Macao in stages to cope with the actual market situation. 
Under  Pillar  I,  capital  charge  for  credit  risk  will  be  appropriately  adjusted  and  capital  charge  for 
operational  risk  will  be  introduced.  Implementation  will  be  made  by  taking  into  consideration  the 
development  of  the  credit  market  and  credit  risk  management  technique.  For  Pillar  II,  supervisory 
process will be enhanced. Supervision and capital requirement will apply based on the nature of risk, 
risk  management  techniques,  measures  and  standard  adopted  by  the  financial  institutions.  Under 
Pillar  III,  banks  may  face  higher  and  additional  disclosure  requirements  which  will  be  broadened 
gradually with an aim to maintain tighter market discipline. We will continue to reinforce cooperation 
with overseas supervisory authorities and strengthen cross-border comprehensive supervision in an 
effort to coordinate with the global implementation of Basel II.  
On  the  insurance  supervision  front,  while  our  initiatives  are  meant  to  facilitate  stable  market 
development, ensure fair market competition and protect the legitimate interest of the consumers, we 
also tend to fine tune the relevant laws and regulations, popularize insurance knowledge and promote 
development of the industry. In 2006, in response to the new laws on anti-money laundering (AML) 
and combating the financing of terrorism (CFT) implemented in Macao, we revised the “Guidelines on 
Prevention and Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism in Insurance”. Besides, the 
limit of indemnity of the Employee’s Compensation Insurance Ordinance was adjusted upward to cope 
with  the  market  situation.  A  24-hr  hotline  was  established  to  provide  speedy  response  to  public 
enquiries.  
Anti-money  laundering  and  combating  terrorism  financing  carry  weight  in  supervision.  We  have  not 
only  revised  the  related  guidelines  but  also  made  special  organization  restructuring  to  support  the 
cause.  Both  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  and  Insurance  Supervision  Department  have 
established their own special taskforce. A cross-departmental working committee is also established 
for coordination purpose. To enforce its execution, apart from routine offsite inspection, the Banking 
Supervision  Department  has  already  completed  the  first  round  AML  onsite  inspection  on  all 
institutions.  Reports  of  the  related  findings  and  recommendations  were  sent  to  the  entities  for  their 
reference.  Indeed,  we  summarized  our  findings  and  discovered  some  common  issues  which  we 
shared  with  the  institutions  in  the  form  of  a  circular.  An  explanatory  seminar  is  expected  to  be 
convened  in  April  for  sharing  this  information.  Regarding  insurance  supervision,  the  related 
department has already embarked on an overall AML onsite inspection. Inspection will first be carried 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2007
out  on  all  life  insurance  companies,  followed  by  non-life  insurance  companies.  A  report  similar  in 
nature  to  the  one  compiled  by  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  will  be  prepared  subsequently. 
Support and coordination from the business sector is expected.  
In the past year, we actively participated in the MSAR government trans-departmental AML taskforce. 
We assisted and coordinated in the establishment of the Financial Intelligence Office. Moreover, we 
approached the International Monetary Fund and received its technical assistance. The Asia Pacific 
Group  on  Money  Laundering/Offshore  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  (APG/OGBS)  conducted  a 
second  mutual  evaluation  on  our  AML/CFT  systems.  To  broaden  our  exposure,  we  assigned 
representatives to act as APG experts to perform similar evaluation on other APG members. Through 
participating  in  AML  related  activities,  we  have  established  good  communication  and  close  working 
relationship with the related international bodies and their members.  
Apart  from  reinforcing  financial  supervision,  the  AMCM  also  dedicated  efforts  to  foster  financial 
development.  All  along,  we  have  been  maintaining  good  communication  and  close  working 
relationship  with  the  participants,  who  have  shared  with  us  many  opinions  in  relation  to  business 
development  and  supervision.  Our  collaborative  effort  helps  to  facilitate  the  stable  and  healthy 
development of the Macao financial market. Internationally, we have been maintaining communication 
with relevant overseas supervisory authorities in sharing constructive ideas relating to the introduction 
of cross-border financial business, cooperation on cross-border supervision and the establishment of 
cross-border financial facilities.  
Apart  from  regular  bilateral  meetings,  we  executed  a  “Financial  Cooperation  Arrangement”  with  the 
Shenzhen  Central  Sub-branch  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  and  a  “Letter  of  Intent  for  the 
Cooperation  in  the  Development  of  Payment  and  Settlement  System”  with  the  Shenzhen  Financial 
Electronic  Settlement  Centre  in  2006.  Besides,  we  were  entrusted  with  the  mission  to  organize  a 
MSAR government delegation and an entrepreneur delegation to participate in the “Pan-Pearl River 
Delta Region Financial Services Forum” held in Hong Kong. We joined force with the Macau Insurers’ 
Association,  the  Macau  Insurance  Agents  and  Brokers  Association  and  the  Federation  of  Macau 
Professional  Insurance  Intermediaries  to  organize  the  third  insurance  exhibition.  Furthermore,  we 
jointly organized the “Mainland, Hong Kong and Macao Onsite/Offsite Inspection Seminar” in Yunnan 
with the State Administration and Foreign Exchange and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority.  
We  are  confident  that  the  economic  growth  of  Macao  will  sustain  and  the  business  of  the  financial 
sector  will  continue  to  flourish.  However,  the  international  economic  and  financial  ecology  is 
undergoing some changes. Macao is receiving more and more attention internationally. The financial 
sector is expected to encounter more challenges after the flying colours achieved in past few years. 
Challenges do not necessarily arise from the limitation of business development. They may also come 
from the continued requirement in risk management enhancement or even external factors beyond our 
control.  
Despite  the  tremendous  challenges  ahead,  we  believe  that  all  financial  institutions  have  already 
mapped out strategies to enhance risk management, swiftly adapt to changing market environment, 
provide more financial products and services that would be conducive to the development of the local 
economy and society, facilitate the sophistication and stable development of the local financial market. 
Being a supervisor and facilitator, AMCM will strive to maintain the stability of the financial system by 
further  improving  the  supervisory  teams  and  policies,  strengthening  routine  supervision,  perfecting 
related law and guidelines, expanding financial infrastructure, maintaining close communication with 
institutions  and  engaging  in  cross-border  cooperation  with  overseas  supervisory  authorities  and 
actively containing illicit financial activities.  
Let us work together to lift our financial sector to a higher level in the international market. 
Finally, I would like to wish all of you happiness, health and prosperity.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2007 
 3
