Jean-Claude Trichet: Introductory remarks at ETUC Congress 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  11th  ETUC 
(European Trade Union Confederation) Congress, Seville, 22 May 2007. 
 Let me begin with a few remarks about the importance of price stability for the welfare of euro area 
citizens. The successful maintenance of stable prices and longer-term inflation expectations that are 
securely  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  attaining 
sustainable growth in economic activity and sustainable employment creation. Looking back over the 
period since the euro was launched euro area inflation has indeed been very close to 2% on average. 
Stability-oriented monetary policy has therefore directly improved the well-being of euro area citizens, 
inter alia, by supporting the purchasing power of their income and savings. 
While single monetary policy continues to deliver on its mandate, the euro area economy also faces 
significant challenges that point to the need for structural reforms. Among these challenges, improving 
the productivity performance of the euro area is particularly important: at the level of the euro area as 
a  whole,  the average  annual  increase of  labour  productivity declined  from  1.6%  between  1991  and 
1998 to 0.8% between 1999 and 2006, whereas it increased in the United States from 1.3% to 2.2%. 
Pursuing structural reforms is also essential to maintaining the competitiveness of the euro area as a 
whole and to translating the opportunities brought about by globalisation into achievements.  
At the same time, euro area labour markets have been characterised by favourable trends in the last 
few years. Since 1999 the euro area has witnessed an increase of more than 12 million in the number 
of people employed and a substantial decline in the unemployment rate from 10% to 7.9% on average 
in 2006 and 7.2 % in March 2007.  
Looking forward, it is important that this favourable trend in labour markets continues, so contributing 
to  the  diminishing  of  unemployment  as  well  as  a  prolonged  and  robust  economic  growth.  In  this 
respect, the Governing Council of the ECB considers decisive that the social partners continue to meet 
their responsibilities. Wage agreements should avoid wage developments that would eventually lead 
to inflationary pressures and harm the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. Beyond this, it is 
important to point out that particular wage agreements should take into account price competitiveness 
positions,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many  economies  and  productivity  developments 
across  sectors.  Wages  should  be  sufficiently  differentiated  across  countries  and  sectors  to  reflect 
these factors. 
More specifically, moderate wage developments in the euro area as a whole reflect an aggregation of 
diverse  wage  developments  across  euro  area  countries  with  important  implications  for  cost 
competitiveness.  Indeed,  over  longer  horizons  we  observe  that  euro  area  countries  that  have  been 
able  to  preserve  a  low  level  of  unit  labour  cost  growth  have  also  experienced  significant  gains  in 
employment.  At  the  same time,  when  looking  at  accumulated unit  labour  cost  changes we  observe 
that a number of economies which lost cost competitiveness also experienced a loss of market shares, 
less gains in job creation and/or deteriorating current account position. 
Despite  the  decline  in  the  euro  area  average  unemployment  rate  over  the  last  few  years, 
unemployment remains too high in several countries and regions of the euro area. In these countries 
and regions, wage increases should not fully exhaust productivity gains in order to provide incentives 
for  firms  to  create  additional  jobs.  In  this  respect,  sufficient  wage  differentiation  is  also  required  to 
improve the employment opportunities for less skilled workers where there is high unemployment for 
this category of employees.  
The  extent  to  which  an  increase  in  nominal  wage  growth  leads  to  upward  pressure  on  inflation 
depends crucially on trend labour productivity growth. Under normal circumstances, stronger labour 
productivity growth would justify an increase in nominal wage growth, thus allowing wage earners to 
participate  in  economic  growth  without  adding  to  inflationary  pressures.  But  for  the  same  reason, 
without  sustained  improvements  in  labour  productivity  higher  nominal  wages  would  not  lead  to 
improvements  in  real  purchasing  power,  but  fuel  inflationary  pressures.  Importantly,  industries  are 
characterised  by  different  productivity  developments.  Therefore,  wage  setting  should  allow  for 
sufficient wage differentiation and agreements in one industry or sector can not readily be transferred 
to others. 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 1
Those are the reasons whey the Governing Council calls for a high level of responsibility from social 
partners.  It  is  aiming  at  preserving  and  improving  the  situation  of  employees  and  of  all  our  fellow 
citizens  in  the  euro  area. Such  a responsible policy  directly  benefits  those  who  are  unemployed by 
significantly  improving  their  employment  possibilities.  It  benefits all  our  fellow  citizens  by supporting 
the purchasing power of their income, thus preserving the well-being of euro area households. And it 
contributes  to  meeting  one  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  long-term  growth  and  active  job 
creation in the euro area, which is price stability. 
Naturally there are also a number of other factors that are contributing to sustainable growth and job 
creation,  in  particular  sound  public  finances  and,  as  I  already  said,  structural  reforms  that  enhance 
competition,  increase  productivity  and  foster  economic  flexibility  in  order  to  elevate  the  growth 
potential of our vast euro area economy. Augmenting the growth potential of Europe is a major goal for 
all of us.  
Background information 
Table 1: Compensation per employee growth (whole economy) across euro area countries 
 2 
 BIS Review 52/2007
Table 2: Unit labour costs growth (whole economy) across euro area countries 
Table 3. Labour productivity growth in the euro area countries 
  BIS Review 52/2007 
 3
Table 4. Employment growth in the euro area countries 
Table 5. Unemployment rates across euro area countries 
  4 
 BIS Review 52/2007
