Jean-Claude Trichet: The need for structural reforms in Europe 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
Jean Monnet Lecture of the Lisbon Council’s Board of Economists, Brussels, 4 June 2007. 
 I would first like to thank the organisers for inviting me in the occasion of this Jean Monnet Lecture of 
the  Lisbon  Council’s  Board  of  Economists.  It  is  both  a  privilege  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here 
today, to share with such a distinguished audience my views on the need to further structural reforms 
in Europe.  
Opening a lecture series named Jean Monnet, is even more than that for me. Jean Monnet was at the 
very heart of the foundation of European Union. The reading of his Memoirs is profoundly inspiring. 
Today  perhaps  he  would  say  again  –  I  am  only  changing  the  tense  of  his  verbs  –  :  “Ceux  qui  ne 
voulaient  rien  entreprendre  parce  qu’ils  n’étaient  pas  assurés  que  les  choses  iraient  comme  ils 
l’avaient  arrêté  par  avance  se  condamnaient  à  l’immobilité.  Personne  ne  pouvait  dire  la  forme 
qu’aurait  l’Europe  où  nous  allions  vivre  demain  car  le  changement  qui  naît  du  changement  est 
imprévisible » ; « Those who did not want to start anything because they were not ensured that things 
would  go  exactly  as  they  had  planned  were  condemning  themselves  to  remain  immobile.  Nobody 
could  say  what  Europe  would  be  tomorrow  because  future  changes  that  are  triggered  by  today’s 
changes  are unpredictable”.  The setting  up  of  the  single currency  has  been  a remarkable  success, 
acknowledged in Europe as well as across the entire world. However, to fully exploit the benefits of the 
euro, Europe needs to face important challenges that require major policy measures. 
In 2006, real GDP in the euro area grew by 2.8%, which is the highest rate since 2000. Along with the 
recent economic recovery, hourly labour productivity growth has accelerated and employment growth 
remained  positive.  These  positive  developments  are  very  encouraging,  but  this  is  no  time  for 
complacency.  Europe  still  has  some  way  to  go,  if  it  wants  to  cope  with  globalization  and  meet  the 
challenges of rapid technological changes and ageing population. This is true at the level of Europe as 
a whole as well as at the level of each particular economy. Economic research has demonstrated the 
major role of structural reforms in explaining cross-country disparities in economic performance1. If all 
European countries summon up their strength and reinforce their push forward with structural reform, 
the  improvement  in  economic  activity  presently  observed  in  Europe  will  be  broadened  and  made 
sustainable  in  the  long  run.  This  is  why  the  ECB  has  always  encouraged  the  implementation  of 
structural reform within the Lisbon Strategy. Six years after the launch of the Lisbon Strategy in March 
2000, the 2006 Implementation Reports of the euro area countries’ National Reform Programmes for 
the period 2005-2008 confirm the awareness of governments to step up the pace of reform and the 
strong commitment by all countries to deliver effective measures. In March, the 2007 Spring European 
Council stressed the significant progress in implementing the renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and 
Jobs  in  most  European  countries.  At  the  same  time  it  also  called  on  Member  States  and  EU 
Institutions to reinforce their actions in particular to boost employment, strengthen the internal market, 
improve  significantly  competitiveness  and  create  better  framework  conditions  for  research  and 
innovation. 
Against this background, I will first review the past economic growth performance of the euro area, 
focusing  on  some  of  the  underlying  factors  of  potential  output  growth,  namely  labour  resource 
utilisation  (or  labour  supply),  hourly  labour  productivity  and  demographic  trends,  in  particular  in 
comparison  to  the  US.  Then  I  will  elaborate  on  the  reforms  which  I  see  as  particularly  essential  in 
making Europe fit for the future.  
The economic performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s. 
When  comparing  the  euro  area’s  economic  performance  with  that  of  the  US,  from  the  mid  1990’s 
onward euro area output growth underperformed. Since 1996, the annual growth rate for the euro area 
                                                      
1   See the March 2007 ECB Monthly Bulletin Article “Output growth differentials in the euro area: Sources and implications” for 
a discussion and further references. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 1
has averaged 2.1% per year2 compared to 3.3% in the US. What are the fundamental causes of this 
unsatisfactory low trend growth in the euro area? The answers can be found by looking at the factors 
that  determine  potential  or  long-term  economic  growth,  namely:  the  degree  of  labour  utilisation, 
productivity growth and the demographic trends.3
The  euro area  witnessed a  considerable  improvement  in  the  employment situation4.  The euro area 
overall employment rate significantly increased from 58% in 1996 to 64.4% in 20065, accompanied by 
a decline in the annual average unemployment rate from 10.7% to 7.9%. Since the beginning of the 
EMU in 1999 the euro area has witnessed an increase of more than 12 million in the number of people 
employed. The rise in the overall employment rate in the euro area over the last ten years has been 
mainly  due  to  an  increase  in  the  female  and  older  workers  employment  rates,  partly  driven  by  the 
progress  made  by  structural  reforms  in  some  European  countries.  This  improvement  in  the 
employment situation is also reflected in the contribution of workers to economic growth. The degree 
of labour utilisation reflects the extent to which the labour force in an economy actually contributes to 
the  production  process  and  therefore  has  a  direct  influence  on  output  growth.  For  the  euro  area, 
labour  utilisation  grew  on  annual  average  by  0.4%  [percentage  changes]  between  1996  and  20066 
[compared with 0.1% in the US] when defined as the total annual hours worked divided by the total 
population.7  
Although  this  is  a  very  encouraging  fact,  which  shows  that  the  positive  employment  effect  we 
witnessed over the last ten years has significantly helped us to counteract the growth differential to the 
US,  one  has  to  remain  aware  of  the  inferior  starting  position  of  euro  area  countries.  These 
improvements did not cancel out structural weaknesses of labour markets.  
First  of  all,  despite  the  important  progress  recorded,  the  overall  employment  rate  in  the  euro  area 
remains low by international standards [64.5% in the euro area compared with 72% in the US in 2006] 
and the unemployment rate is still clearly too high [7.9% compared with 4.6% in the US on annual 
average in 2006 and 7.1 % to be compared to 4.5 % in April this year]. Also to be noted in 2006, the 
number of annual hours worked in the euro area was 1604 compared to 18048 in the US. This clearly 
suggests that there is still considerable room for improvement as regards increasing the level of labour 
resource utilisation in Europe.  
Second, while the prime-age male employment rate in the euro area is comparable to that observed in 
the  United  States,  when  we  look  at  the  youth,  female  and  older  worker  employment  rates,  the 
disparities  remain  important.  In  2006  the  female  employment  rate  was  56.5%  in  the  euro  area  and 
66% in the US, the older workers employment rate was 41.7% in the euro area and 61.8% in the US, 
the youth employment rate was 37.1% in the euro area and 54.2% in the US. These figures appear to 
be  consistent  with  an  “insider-outsider”  characterisation  of  the  European  labour  market,  where 
structural impediments prevent those groups “at the margin” of the labour market from entering and 
participating in it. 
Productivity is the other major factor determining growth. Over the last decade, the diverging trend in 
hourly labour productivity growth has indeed been the main reason explaining the growth differential 
between the euro area and the US. According to the last figures available, during the 1980’s and the 
first half of the 1990s, hourly labour productivity in the euro area grew on average by 2.4%, then it 
decelerated to 1.3% on average between 1996 and 2006. By contrast, US hourly labour productivity 
growth rose from 1.3% to 2.1% over the same period. 
                                                      
2   European Commission – AMECO database. 
3   Data from European Commission database AMECO. Hours worked data from the OECD. 
4   See “Developments in the structural features of the euro area labour markets over the last decade” ECB Monthly Bulletin, 
January 2007. 
5   Labour Force Statistics - Eurostat. 
6 
In  the  context  of  a  growth  accounting  framework,  these  figures  can  be  either  interpreted  as  percentage  changes  or 
contribution to real GDP growth in percentage points. 
7   The positive contribution of employment growth has partly been dampened by a fall in the average annual hours worked per 
person of 0.4% per annum over the same period compared with a fall of 0.2% in the US. 
8   OECD Employment Outlook. Data for 2006 are partly estimates 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2007
Several  causes  have  been  mentioned  to  explain  this  downward  trend  in  the  euro  area.  Specific 
policies  aiming  at  increasing  employment  particularly  in  the  unskilled  segment  of  the  labour  market 
may have contributed to the observed slowdown in labour productivity growth. However, this apparent 
trade-off  between  labour  utilisation  and  productivity  is  likely  to  be  a  temporary  phenomenon  that 
should progressively fade, when the economy reaches a higher “equilibrium” labour/output ratio. In this 
respect, it is worth mentioning that the US managed at the same time to increase both labour input 
and labour productivity. 
There is indeed another major reason that explains the big difference in the rate of labour productivity 
growth in Europe compared with the US, which in my view is a major policy issue, namely the fact that 
the  European  economy  does  not  take  advantage  as  does  the  US  economy  of  all  the  opportunities 
offered in particular by the advances of science and technology including, but not exclusively, in the 
ICT sector. More generally, restructuring of the productive sector and re-engineering of the production 
processes  appear  to  be  more  difficult  in  a  relatively  significantly  less  flexible  economy  like  the 
European one, having a negative influence on total factor productivity. 
A number of international institutions and academics have highlighted the major role of innovation and 
ICT  in  the  revival  of  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  US.9  Over  the  last  10  years,  total  R&D 
investment in the euro area accounted for 1.8% of GDP and the ICT sector represented as much as 
20% of this amount, while in the US, 2.6% of GDP was spent on R&D and the ICT sector represented 
as much as 30% of this total.10 Similarly important seems to be the effect ICT diffusion has had on 
productivity  in  the  US  economy,  particularly  in  some  market  service  sectors  intensively  using  ICT 
technology, although the exact contribution is obviously hard to quantify.11 ICT investment, which can 
be used as a proxy of ICT diffusion, represented on average 4% of GDP in the US or 29% of total 
investment from 1996 to 2005 compared with only 2.3% of GDP or 16% of total investment in the euro 
area.12 At the sectoral level, it appears that the gap in labour productivity growth between the euro 
area  and  the  US  has  been  mainly  driven  by  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade  sectors  as  well  as  the 
financial  sectors.  In  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade  sectors,  hourly  labour  productivity  significantly 
accelerated  in  the US  from  0.7%  to  2.6%  over  the periods  1980-1995  and  1996-2004,  while  at  the 
same time it decelerated in the euro area from 2.3% to 0.1%. In the financial sectors, over the same 
periods,  hourly  labour  productivity  growth  has  also  accelerated  in  the  US  and  has  been  roughly  4 
times  higher  than  the  growth  rate  observed  in  the  euro  area  over  the  period  1996-2004.  [In  the 
financial sectors, over the periods 1980-1995 and 1996-2004 hourly labour productivity grew by 0.7% 
and 2.6% respectively in the US and in the euro area it grew by 0.1% to -0.6% respectively].13  
The structural characteristics of the US economy – a more flexible labour market, a higher degree of 
competition in product markets and lower barriers to entry for new firms – were more conducive to 
exploiting  the  opportunities  provided  by  new  technologies,  than  the  more  rigid and  less competitive 
structures of Europe.  
Finally,  let  us  not  forget  the  demographic  change  occurring  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Indeed, 
Europe’s long term growth performance has also been constrained by the low rate of increase of its 
population and the ageing of its society. Since the mid 1990’s, population in the euro area has been 
growing at a rate of just 0.4% compared to 1.1% in the US. This aggregate result should however not 
                                                      
9   See  Oliner  and  Sichel  (2002),  “Information  technology  and  productivity:  where  are  we  now  and  where  are  we  going?”, 
Federal Reserve Board. See also Jorgenson, D., M.S. Ho and K. Stiroh (2002), “Information Technology, Education, and the 
Sources of Economic Growth across U.S. industries”, mimeo. See Pilat, D., F. Lee and B. van Ark (2002), “Production and 
use of ICT: a sectoral perspective on productivity growth in the OECD area”, OECD Economic Studies No 35. See Gomez-
Salvador, Musso, Stocker and Turunen (2006), “Labour productivity developments in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper 
series No 53. 
10   European Commission. 
11   It  is  important  to  mention  a  number  of  caveats  related  to  the  measurement  of  labour  productivity  in  the  service  sectors. 
Indeed,  data  on  hourly  labour  productivity  and  ICT,  especially  in  the  service  sectors,  are  surrounded  by  considerable 
uncertainty and caution is therefore required when interpreting the results. In addition there are alternative explanations that 
may  explain  the  labour  productivity  growth  acceleration  in  the  US  in  some  services  sectors  such  as  higher  entry  rate, 
organisational changes and restructuring in the  US, increasing efficiency and therefore accelerating TFP growth.  See C. 
Denis,  K.Mc  Morrow,  W.  Roger  and  R.  Veugelers  “The  Lisbon  Strategy  and  the  EU’s  Structural  productivity  problem” 
European Commission 2005. 
12   OECD. 
13   EUKLEMS database. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 3
cover  the  important  role  immigration  has  had  in  supporting  economic  growth  in  some  euro  area 
countries. However, what is worrisome is that at the same time, the gap in population growth has been 
even larger with regard to growth in the working age population [the working age population grew on 
average  by  0.3%  in  the  euro  area  over  the  period  1996-2006  compared  to  1.4%  in  the  US],  which 
manifests that Europe has a more acute problem of population ageing. I will deal with some of the 
policy implications of ageing later on in my presentation.  
The need for further structural reforms in Europe 
Overall, this brief assessment of the underlying causes of Europe’s relatively disappointing longer-term 
growth performance provides a mixed picture of the European economy. Of course, I focused on a 
specific set of supply-side determinants of economic growth. Economic growth is also influenced by 
other factors, including the macroeconomic policy framework. The lack of sufficient structural reform in 
Europe  is  however,  in  my  view,  a  major  cause  of  the  difference  in  the  growth  potential  in  Europe 
compared with the US and with some other advanced industrialized economies. All in all, it appears 
that the overriding policy concern for Europe is how to simultaneously achieve solid employment and 
productivity growth. I should stress that the implementation of the reforms on the Lisbon agenda, by 
easing labour and product market rigidities, by permitting the full completion of the single market, by 
enhancing education training and research and development and therefore by improving productivity 
growth will also improve the effectiveness of monetary policy by facilitating price stability. 
I  will  now  turn  to  those structural reforms  identified  in  the  Lisbon  agenda  that  have  the  potential  to 
increase both euro area labour productivity growth and labour utilisation, and therefore the long-term 
growth potential of the European economy.  
It  is  clear  that  such  major  structural  reforms  are  not  easy  to  achieve,  but  pursuing  resolutely  such 
reforms  is  especially  needed  in  the  current  environment,  where  the  European  economy  is  facing  a 
number of important challenges, including rapid technological change, ageing populations as well as 
accelerating globalisation.  
For  instance,  ageing  will  not  only  put  pressure  on  public  finances  by  driving  up  ageing-related 
expenditure,  but  will  also  bring  down  the  potential  growth  rate  of  Europe  if  no  reforms  take  place. 
According  to  the  European  Commission’s  and  ECB  projections,  the  impact  of  ageing  populations 
alone could reduce on average potential output growth in Europe by nearly half by 2040, if structural 
reforms are not carried out.14  
All in all, these challenges will require continuity in the policy of reforms to increase the output growth 
and adjustment capacity of the economy of the euro area in general and the flexibility of all its markets. 
There is a unique opportunity for European governments to take advantage of the present favourable 
growth developments to push ahead with the structural reforms that have been already agreed upon 
but are still far from being achieved. Without aiming to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of 
the key priorities for reform in four main areas, namely:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Getting more people into work,  
Increasing competition, 
Unlocking business potential,  
And finally, supporting an innovative environment. 
Getting more people into work 
First  of  all,  well-functioning  labour  markets  are  extremely  important  in  fostering  higher  economic 
growth. The differences in labour market developments, especially with regard to the level of labour 
utilisation, between the US and Europe has prompted some economists to suggest the existence of a 
                                                      
14   See  “The  economic  costs  of  non-Lisbon:  A  survey  of  the  literature  on  the  economic  impact  of  Lisbon-type  reforms”  by 
Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission Occasional papers No 16, March 2005 EC. 
See “Demographic change in the euro area: projections and consequences” ECB Monthly Bulletin October 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2007
“European model” and a “US model”, related to the trade-off between labour and leisure.15 One view is 
that the lower levels of GDP per capita in Europe reflect a European preference for more leisure time. 
However, we should bear in mind that lower participation rates are not necessarily associated solely 
with personal preferences, but are also triggered by the legal and regulatory environment, tax systems 
and  social  institutions.  Benefit  systems  that  are  too  generous  discourage  job  searching,  early 
retirement schemes encourage early withdrawal from the labour market and marginal tax rates that 
are too high discourage labour market entry and have a downward effect on average hours worked. 
Necessary  measures  to  increase  labour  utilisation  or  labour  supply  include  the  reform  of  tax  and 
benefit  systems  to  address  these  problems  and  increase  incentives  to  work.  Measures  aimed  at 
reconciling  motherhood  with  professional  life,  such  as  the  provision  of  childcare,  should  also  raise 
participation  rates.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  flexible  forms  of  work  such  as  part-time  and  temporary 
work may also provide further working incentives.16
High unemployment rates in the euro area and in particular unacceptable high youth unemployment 
rates clearly suggest the need to spur not only labour supply but also labour demand. In this context, 
there  is  a  need  to  reduce  labour  market  rigidities  restricting  wage  differentiation  and  flexibility. 
Adjustments should be made to employment legislation where it impedes the hiring of younger and 
older workers in particular.  
The  experience  of  European  countries  which  have  undertaken  some  courageous  and  successful 
reforms show that it pays off. In particular Denmark, Ireland and the Netherlands – which, by the way, 
are all three, de jure or de facto for Denmark, in the euro area – have achieved success in reducing 
unemployment  and  stimulating  job  creation,  despite  significantly  different  economic  conditions.17  In 
2006 the unemployment rate in these countries stood below 4.5%, while their overall employment rate 
was  above  or  close  to  the  US  level,  namely  72  %.  To  achieve  such  remarkable  success,  these 
countries  reformed  their  tax  and  benefit  systems  by  reducing  for  example  tax  wedges  on  labour 
income  and  by  carrying  out  a  stricter  enforcement  of  job  search  rules  and  a  better  surveillance  of 
eligibility. They also increased, when and where needed, the flexibility of their labour market.  
Increasing competition 
What all these countries also have in common is a significant reduction of product market regulation. 
This leads to the second prerequisite for higher medium to long-term growth: increasing competition 
towards establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets. 
Most  studies  point  to  the  potential  that  improving  competition  has  to  increase  employment  in  the 
medium  and  long  run,  and  to  boost  productivity  trends  by  improving  production  efficiency  and  by 
enhancing the incentive to invest and innovate. The links between competition and productivity growth 
are now both theoretically and empirically well-established. The ECB and the Eurosystem as well as 
the Commission have been working in this domain of research.18
In the EU, some progress has been made in this regard. For example, several network industries, like 
telecommunications, are now fully or largely open to competition and the hourly labour productivity in 
this  particular  sector  significantly  accelerated  from  4.9%  to  8.4%  over  the  periods  1980-1995  and 
1996-2004  [By  comparison  in  the  US,  hourly  labour  productivity  grew  by  3.4%  and  4.4%  over  the 
same periods in the telecommunication sectors].  
A lot remains however to be done: the extension and deepening of the EU internal market remains a 
priority.  It  is  essential  to  ensure  full  implementation  of  Community  directives,  where  greater  efforts 
                                                      
15   See Blanchard, O. (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, pp. 3-26; and 
also Gordon, R. J. (2004): “Two centuries of economic growth: Europe chasing the American frontier”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper, No. 4415. 
16   See, for example, Genre, V., R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do(n’t) they work”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
17   See Anthony Annett (2006) “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe” IMF euro area policies: selected 
issues, August 2006. 
18   See the ECB Occasional Paper Series No 44 “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services sector”, by the 
Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, April 2006. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 5
need to be made, for example on the effective opening of energy markets. More should also be done 
to improve access to public procurement contracts or to ensure effective competition in services.  
Let  me  now  focus  more  specifically  on  the  financial  sectors.  Financial  integration  is  indeed,  of  key 
importance for the ECB, given the relevance for the conduct of the single monetary policy. Despite 
significant progress in recent years, financial services integration appears not yet to have reached its 
potential and competition seems insufficient in some areas, leaving European consumers unable to 
take  full  advantage  of  the  benefits  of  the  EMU  and  the  Single  Market.19  This  seems  also  to  have 
constrained  the  economic  performance  and  the  development  of  these  sectors  in  the  euro  area  as 
illustrated by their disappointing labour productivity growth performance. 
More generally speaking, evidence indicates that the reallocation of capital from declining industries to 
industries with high investment opportunities and high productivity is faster in countries with developed 
financial markets.20 For these countries, investment is also more responsive to technical innovation.21 
These  findings  suggest  that  countries  with  more  liquid  capital  markets  and  a  developed  banking 
system are growing faster on average. Some authors have calculated that if the average size of capital 
markets in the EU was bigger – in the US for instance this size is around 450% of GDP instead of 
220%  in  the  EU  (based  on  an  overall  indicator  measuring  total  financing  in  the  economy  by 
aggregating bank credit to the private sector, stock market capitalisation and the outstanding amount 
of domestic debt securities issued by the private sector) – then annual GDP per capita growth in the 
EU could be positively influenced.22  
At this stage of my presentation, I would like to stress that the euro area countries will be the more 
equipped for the increased globalised economy the more they are able to exploit the benefits of EMU 
and the EU internal market. In this regard, existing impediments to the internal market for goods and 
services need to be removed and financial integration further fostered. Further efforts in the fields of 
product market deregulation and liberalisation are required to raise product market competition – at 
the EU and national level. This would enable more efficient production structures associated with a 
more competitive price setting. 
In this context, the adoption of the Services Directive by the European Parliament in February 2006 
constitutes  a  step  forward  in  the  right  direction.  But  let  me  also  stress  that  the  mere  adoption  of 
Internal Market directives does not automatically produce benefits. Once adopted, directives must be 
transposed into national law and enforced in order to produce benefits and Member States have the 
primary responsibility for these tasks. 
Unlocking of business potential 
A third prerequisite for higher growth in the euro area is the unlocking of business potential by creating 
an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment. Europe needs more new and thriving firms willing 
to  reap  the  benefits  of  opening  markets  and  to  embark  on  creative  or  innovative  ventures  for 
commercial exploitation on a larger scale. It is increasingly new and smaller firms, rather than large 
ones,  that  are  the  major  providers  of  new  jobs.23  The  contribution  from  firm  dynamic  processes  to 
aggregate labour productivity growth and innovation also plays a major role, in particular in high-tech 
industries. All in all, an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment would imply less red tape for 
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  to  help  them  develop  at  home  and  across  borders,  as  well  as 
positive  action  to  ease  access  to  the  finance  they  need.  As  regards  risk  capital  markets,  venture 
capital financing is also crucial. Without these funds, many new and innovative companies will simply 
not emerge. Europe is significantly lagging behind in this field, as venture capital financing in Europe 
remains only a fraction of what it is in the US relative to the size of their economies. According to the 
                                                      
19   See “Financial integration in Europe” (2007). 
20   See  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and  innovation  for 
productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper forthcoming. 
21   See  A.  Ciccone  and  E.  Papaioannou  (2006),  “Finance,  capital  and  growth”,  paper  presented  at  the  ECB-CFS  network 
conference  on  “Financial  System  Modernisation  and  Economic  Growth  in  Europe”,  Berlin  (http://www.eu-financial-
system.org/Berlin2006_programhtm.html). 
22   See G. Favara (2006), “An empirical reassessment of the relationship between finance and growth”, mimeo. 
23   See the European Commission’s Green Paper entitled “Entrepreneurship in Europe”, 21.01.2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2007
European  Innovation  Scoreboard  2006,  the  innovation  gap  of  Europe  with  the  US  is  significantly 
explained by the superior US performance in early-stage venture capital availability. 
The decisive  importance of  having  an entrepreneurial-friendly  economic  environment  is  increasingly 
appreciated by European governments, and several initiatives at national or EU level have started to 
implement actions for “better regulation”. The call by the European Council for the establishment of 
“one-stop-shop”  arrangements  in  each  Member  State  by  the  end  of  2007,  which  would  enable  a 
company to be set up in one week was a symbolic but important orientation. 
Supporting an innovative environment 
Fourth, to fully exploit productivity potential, the labour and product market reforms I just mentioned 
need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  help  innovation  and  technological  change.  This  includes, 
inter  alia,  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher  investment  in  research  and  development 
(R&D). The immense importance of this issue, and the great opportunities provided by investment in 
research, are also increasingly appreciated by European governments and firms. A large majority of 
Member States now have specific strategies in place for stimulating both the quantity and quality of 
R&D  activity.  [Without  aiming  to  be  exhaustive,  I  should  like  to  mention  “The  pact  for  Research”  in 
France,  the  Science  Budget  2004  in  the  Netherlands,  The  Strategy  for  science,  technology  and 
innovation  2006-2013  in  Ireland  and  the  “Ingenio  2010”  in  Spain].  Nevertheless,  the  European 
Commission's  2006  Annual  Progress  Report  on  Growth  and  Jobs  shows  that  while  many  Member 
States expect to increase their R&D spending, Europe will fall short of the 2010 overall EU target of 
achieving  3%  of  GDP.  The  efforts  of  European  countries  to  increase  R&D  investment  are  still 
insufficient and Member States should make a stronger commitment to R&D and innovation. Particular 
attention  should  be  paid  to  increase  public  R&D  spending  efficiency  by  facilitating  for  instance  the 
cooperation  between  the  public  and  private  sector.  As  regards  private  R&D  investment,  more 
attractive conditions for technology-intensive markets should be created. This includes for instance a 
better use of public procurement, a more innovation-friendly regulation and stepping up the provision 
of  targeted  fiscal  incentives  to  the  private  sector.  The  European  Commission  estimated  that  an 
increase in the share of R&D expenditures in GDP from 1.9% in 2004 to 3% by 2010 would result in 
an increase of 1.7% in the level of GDP by 2010. It goes without saying that it is not only a quantitative 
issue and that at the same time the efficiency of research an development in terms of industrialisation 
is crucial. In the longer term, GDP could be up by 4.2% in 2015 and 7.0% in 2020, equivalent to a 
growth surplus of nearly 0.5% per year.24 To make these measures most effective, they need to be 
accompanied by efforts to improve the labour force’s level of education and expertise.  
The  impact  of  education  on  growth  may  be  related  to  innovation,  as  well  as  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies. Policies aimed at improving human capital are usually considered to be of the utmost 
importance in this field.25 One possible explanation, commonly mentioned in the literature, is that the 
diffusion of innovation and new technology is associated with learning costs that decrease over time, 
as a function of the increasing number of users. More wide-spread knowledge about how to exploit 
new technology is therefore speeding up the rate of diffusion. 
All  in  all,  meeting  the  challenges  of  technological  progress  and  ensuring  the  labour  force’s 
employability  and  flexibility,  requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to  labour  market 
needs through improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. 
The  last  decades  have  already  brought  about  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of  educational 
attainment, the so-called “catching-up effect in education”. In the euro area, according to OECD data 
for  2004,  an  average  of  74%  of  those  aged  from  25  to  34  had  attained  at  least  upper  secondary 
education, compared to only 45% of persons aged from 55 to 64.26  
However,  so far  investment  in human  capital  in  Europe  is still  clearly  inadequate  for a “knowledge-
intensive” economy. In 2003, the US annual expenditure on higher education institutions represented 
                                                      
24   European Commission, 2004, “A 3% R&D effort in Europe in 2010: an analysis of the consequences”, study prepared by the 
Research Directorate General of the European Commission. 
25   Stiroh, K.J. (2000), “What drives productivity growth?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
26   Unweighted average. OECD Education at a Glance 2006. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 7
2.9% of GDP, while in the euro area it only represented 1.2%.27 The gap is mainly a result of greater 
private  funding.  European  universities  should  be  allowed  and  encouraged  for  instance  to  seek 
complementary private sources of funding and legal, and other barriers to public-private partnerships 
between  universities  and  businesses  should  be  removed.  A  better  and  more  effective  education 
system, as estimated by some research of the European Commission, might add as much as 0.3 to 
0.5 percentage points to the annual EU GDP growth rate.28  
Before concluding, there is one more policy issue I would like to mention: fiscal policy challenges and 
more specifically the quality of public finances. Indeed, a lot of structural measures, I mentioned have 
fiscal implications. It is therefore essential, in the context of indispensable sound fiscal policies fully in 
line with the Stability and Growth Pact, to reduce public spending inefficiency in order to facilitate the 
reorientation  of  public  expenditure  towards  productivity-enhancing  physical  and  human  capital 
accumulation. In this domain we should also never forget that the countries of the European Union as 
well as the countries of the euro area have today a level of public spending as a proportion of GDP 
which is largely superior to the level of all major global industrialized competitors. This is hampering 
our growth and job creation in the present highly competitive global economy.  
Conclusion 
Europe is in the process of reforming its economy so as to adapt to the challenges of globalisation, 
technological change and ageing. Significant progress has already been achieved as reflected by the 
significant rise in employment growth.  
Monetary Union has been effective – and hugely successful – in supporting growth through a credible 
monetary policy achieving price stability in the medium-run, lowering of financing costs for a number of 
euro  area  countries  through  a  reduction  of  risk  premia  and  in  giving  impetus  to  further  resolute 
European  integration,  particularly  in  financial  markets,  and  further  reduction  to  the  barriers  to 
competition.  That  said,  we  have  the  tool  in  our  hands  to  address  more  fully  the  challenges  I 
mentioned: the Lisbon strategy, as refocused and reaffirmed by the European Council. The challenges 
ahead of us are a reminder that European integration is a dynamic process and that it will bring about 
deeper structural transformations. As a matter of fact, the historical process of European integration is 
moving steadily forward and will require our utmost effort and commitment for years to come. I am 
thoroughly optimistic for the future of Europe.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                      
27   OECD Education at a Glance 2006. 
28   European Commission, 2003, “Chapter 3 – Education, training and growth”, in: The EU Economy: 2003 Review. 
8 
 BIS Review 58/2007
