David Opiokello: Business continuity and risk mananagement regional 
workshop in Uganda  
Speech by Mr David Opiokello, Acting Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the opening of the 
Regional Workshop on Business Continuity and Risk Management, Entebbe, 5 February 2007. 
 Distinguished Resource persons 
Our Colleagues from Bank of Tanzania and Central Bank of Kenya, 
Reserve Bank of Malawi 
Directors, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome all of you here today. I would most especially like to 
welcome  Mr.  Christian  Völlmer  and  Mr.  Wolfgang  Forttinger  from  the  Centre  for  Technical  Central 
bank Cooperation at the Deutsche Bundesbank and Mrs. Sue Milton of the Centre For Central Bank 
Studies (CCBS) at the Bank Of England. The two institutions have partnered with Bank Of Uganda to 
make  this  workshop  a  reality.  Mrs.  Sue  Milton’s  pivotal  role  in  putting  together  this  program  at  the 
invitation of Bank Of Uganda is especially acknowledged and appreciated. 
I am also very happy to welcome all the delegates to this workshop and in a special way I would like to 
recognize our colleagues from the Reserve Bank of Malawi. Reserve Bank Of Malawi is placed in a 
slightly  different  position  here,  because  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  Bank  Of  Tanzania  may  be 
considered, within the context of the East African Community, to be joint hosts. 
Bank Of Uganda attaches great importance to this workshop and this is demonstrated by the fact that 
the entire senior management team of the Bank have put aside tight schedules for an entire week to 
attend to this workshop. When Bank of Uganda approached the Centre for Central Bank Studies in 
2005 about this program, Bank of Uganda had just adopted a standard approach to risk management 
in  the  Bank  which  came  2  years  after  the  business  continuity  program  that  started  in  2003.  The 
decision to move along this direction was prompted by the desire to adopt internationally acceptable 
best practices as well as adhering to good corporate governance. 
Running parallel to these developments within the Bank of Uganda are the regional efforts towards a 
common  monetary  and  political  union  of  the  countries  in  the  region.  To  achieve  such  integration, 
harmonisation of policies and practices (especially in the Central Banks) has been taken seriously. As 
such harmonisation demands that cooperating institutions adopt uniform internal procedures, practices 
and  policies  on  various  issues  on  central  banking.  Towards  this  end  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  Bank  of 
Tanzania  and  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  have,  through  the  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  East 
African Community not only been meeting to take decisions on various policy issues but they have 
also  been  conducting  joint  seminars  such  as  this  one  to  share  experiences  and  learn  from  one 
another. 
This workshop therefore comes at such an opportune moment to assist our central banks to achieve 
the internal and regional objectives. The workshop offers various opportunities to all of us in a number 
of ways: 
• 
First, this is an opportunity to jointly re-assess and evaluate our performance in the areas of 
business continuity management and risk management over the period. 
Secondly, it provides us with an opportunity to learn from organisations that have run risk 
management and business continuity programs for many years. 
Third, this is an opportunity for each of our Central Banks with programs in their infancy to 
lay the correct foundation to implement sound and resilient risk management and business 
continuity programs. 
Fourth, this is an opportunity to obtain uniform training for each of the key players in their 
respective roles. 
   With a common foundation, the objective of harmonisation in the region will draw closer to reality. 
Bank  of  Uganda  would  greatly  benefit  if  the  following  areas  are  specifically  addressed  within  this 
workshop: 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 1
     Performance  measurement:  what  are  the  key  indicators  that  central  bank  management 
should use to know that their business continuity and/or risk management programs are giving 
them the intended benefits? 
Evaluation: How does the central bank evaluate performance over time and which tools are 
recommended? 
Reporting: what should be reported about risk and business continuity at the different levels 
of the organisation including the Board? 
Incident reporting and monitoring: How does the central bank ensure that all risk incidents 
are systematically reported and monitored? 
Culture change: What are the different approaches to organisational culture change towards 
risk and business continuity? 
I would like to conclude by again thanking you all for coming to this workshop and to thank the Centre 
for  Central  Bank  studies  and  the  Centre  for  Technical  Central  Bank  cooperation  for  the  technical 
support. Bank of Uganda is greatly indebted to them. 
I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
It is now my pleasure to declare this workshop officially opened. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2007
