Lars Nyberg: Monetary and financial stability from a central bank 
perspective  
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the conference on 
the  10th  Anniversary  of 
the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Sarajevo, 
13 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
What is the interaction of monetary and financial stability? This is one of the most discussed 
issues in central banks and academia today, and is likely to remain high on the agenda for 
the foreseeable future.  
Many central banks, including the Swedish Riksbank, now have dual tasks: maintaining price 
stability  and  promoting  financial  stability.  I  will  begin  by  discussing  these  tasks  separately, 
and then turn to the questions the success in bringing down inflation has raised with regard 
to financial stability, and how this has influenced the conduct of monetary policy in Sweden. 
Before proceeding, I should stress that the views I am about to express are my own, and do 
not necessarily reflect those of the other members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank. 
Moreover,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  my  remarks  primarily  are  based  on  my  own 
experiences from an inflation targeting central bank, operating in a small open economy.  
Price stability 
The taming of inflation, after the destructive price-wage spirals of the 1970s and 1980s, is 
one of the major success stories in modern economic policy making. Economic theory tells 
us  that  high  inflation  is  bad  for  a  number  of  reasons.  These  theories  now  appear  to  have 
been  vindicated.  The  last  decade  has  seen  strong  global  economic  growth,  while,  at  the 
same time, output volatility have dropped.  
In practice, two paths have emerged for achieving price stability. One way is through a fixed 
exchange  rate  regime,  such  as  a  currency  board.  Under  such  an  arrangement,  a  country 
simply imports the monetary policy of a country with a highly credible low-inflation regime. 
This  path  has  emerged  as  the  weapon  of  choice  of  many  emerging  economies.  These 
countries want to achieve price stability, while avoiding the costly deflations which otherwise 
might  be  necessary  to  anchor  inflation  expectations.  The  other  way  is  through  an 
independent central bank with a mandate to maintain price stability. This mandate is often 
formulated  in  terms  of  an  inflation  target.  The  inflation  target  operated  by  the  Swedish 
Riksbank  stipulates  that  consumer  price  inflation  should  be  2  per  cent  per  year,  with  a 
tolerance  interval  of  plus/minus  1  percentage  point.  For  all  practical  purposes  this 
arrangement  is  close  to  what  is  found  in,  for  example,  the  UK,  Australia,  Norway  and  the 
Eurozone. It should also be said that there is a general consensus that the inflation target in 
Sweden has been a successful one. 
Financial stability 
As I mentioned earlier, many central banks today also have an objective to promote financial 
stability. While there is close to universal agreement on what price stability means, there has 
yet  to  emerge,  some  attempts  none  withstanding,  a  consensus  on  a  working  definition  of 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 1
financial  stability.1  Given  the  problems  in  defining  and  measuring  financial  stability,  why 
should we pay any attention to it? One answer is that we simply cannot afford not to do so, 
as financial crises carry with them huge costs to society. This was shown by events in Japan 
and the Nordic countries during the early 1990s, and in much of South East Asia in 1997. In 
fact, one could even claim, that financial stability takes precedence over price stability, in the 
sense that the latter is quite irrelevant if the financial system is on the brink of collapse.  
An  important  difference  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  is  that  while 
responsibility  for  price  stability  rests  squarely  on  the  central  bank,  financial  stability 
necessitates the cooperation of the central bank, supervisors and the government. However, 
the  exact  roles  played  by  different  authorities  differ  from  country  to  country.  Another 
difference  is  the  number  of  instruments  available  to  policy  makers.  In  the  case  of  price 
stability,  there  basically  exist  one  instrument  (either  the  short-term  interest  rate  or  the 
nominal  exchange  rate).  Maintaining  financial  stability,  on  the  other  hand,  requires  a  wide 
spectrum of policy measures, such as professional supervision, a legal framework that does 
not encourage “moral hazard”-type behaviour and crisis management plans.  
A recent complication is the surge in cross border banking activities, which means that the 
national  authorities  engaged  in  financial  stability  work,  increasingly  must  work  with  their 
foreign colleagues. While the internationalisation of the banking industry holds the potential 
for  efficiency  gains,  and  increased  household  welfare,  it  has  also  added  a  score  of  new 
challenges.  Perhaps  the  most  serious  of  these  challenges  is  what  has  been  termed  the 
home-host problem. This can, in all its essence, be described as follows: Suppose a bank, 
which  is  of marginal  importance  in its  home  country,  sets  up  a  branch  in  another country, 
which  turns  out  to  be  systemically  important  for  that  country.  Given  that  the  bank  is  not 
important  in  its  home  country,  the  home  supervisors,  who  have  responsibility  for  the 
supervision,  might  not  think  that  the  bank  merits  close  supervision.  However,  for  the  host 
country, which will foot the bill for the salvage operation in case the bank fails, the incentives 
to monitor the bank are huge. This dilemma is not new in theory, but has now become of 
great practical importance as financial globalization progressively is making national borders 
less relevant. 
Asset prices, financial stability and monetary policy 
Are there instances when these goals come into conflict with each other? This question has 
become particularly relevant in the last few years as asset prices have surged, while, at the 
same time, consumer price inflation has remained muted.  
On the whole, I think it is reasonable to assume that price stability in the long run reinforces 
financial stability. The main reason for this is that low and stable inflation reduces the risk of 
misallocating  investments.  Although  I  believe  that  low  inflation  fosters  financial  stability,  it 
would be wrong to disregard the possibility that changes in the inflationary process can have 
unintended consequences for the stability of the financial system. The  success in bringing 
down inflation has lowered both nominal and real interest rates. Moreover, factors such as 
the  integration  of  emerging  markets  into  the  world  trading  system,  and  high  productivity 
growth,  has  put  downward  pressure  on  prices  of  manufactured  goods.  This  may  have 
induced key interest rates to be lower, than what otherwise would have been justified in this 
cyclical position of the economy.  
Given the fact that the low inflation regime has yielded high and stable growth, in conjunction 
with low interest rates, it is no wonder that asset prices have surged. While much of this price 
movement is fundamentally based, there is a risk that households and firms might become 
too  optimistic  about  future  earnings  and  interest  rates.  Put  differently,  there  is  a  risk  that 
                                                 
1   See e.g. Schinasi, G. (2004): ”Defining Financial Stability”, IMF Working Paper, WP/04/187. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2007
asset prices rise to unsustainable levels during the transition from a regime with high inflation 
to a regime with low inflation.  
Another, but not unrelated issue, concerns how risk is priced in the credit markets. The last 
few  years  saw  risk  premiums  in  credit  markets  falling  to  record  low  levels.  The  fall  in  risk 
premiums meant that the effect on asset prices were more important than what the changes 
in the risk free rate alone would suggest. While low risk premiums, taken at face value, signal 
a healthy economy, many supervisors and central banks were concerned that risk premiums 
had  fallen  too  far.  As  we  all  know,  risk  premiums  in  credit  market  rose  dramatically  this 
summer. Uncertainty over the value of US subprime mortgage backed securities then ignited 
a  furious  “flight-to-quality”,  which  actually  seized  up  important  segments  of  the  money 
market. It is too early to tell what the permanent outcome of these events will be. However, it 
is clear that if they signal a return to higher risk premiums and tighter credit conditions, asset 
price inflation is likely to slow down. 
The area where the current regime of low interest rates and small risk premiums has had its 
most marked impact is probably that of residential property and household debt. The rise in 
house prices the last ten years have indeed been unprecedented in duration, magnitude and 
synchronisation across countries. In Sweden, this has caused a substantial amount of public 
concern, and an often asked question is if there is a significant overvaluation in the housing 
market and if the households are overly indebted. 
Answering  these  questions  is  a  daunting  task,  and  requires  an  educated  opinion  on  the 
equilibrium price of residential property and on the optimal level of household indebtedness. 
Such  assessments  are  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  there  have  been  a  number  of 
important structural changes in the mortgage markets. Without going into detail, weighing the 
available  evidence  together,  we  do  not  think  that  residential  property  in  Sweden  is 
significantly overpriced in general. Nor do we believe that households in general are overly 
indebted. However, this does not preclude the possibility that there are other countries where 
house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  have  risen  to  levels  beyond  what  can  be 
fundamentally motivated.  
Yet,  even  if  we  don’t  believe  that  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  have  been 
disconnected from their fundamental drivers, there are still reasons for us to be concerned by 
the  rise  in  property  prices  and  household  indebtedness.  In  the  last  years,  in  Sweden  as 
elsewhere, household debt has grown much faster than disposable income. Obviously, this is 
not  sustainable  in  the  long  run,  as  households  then  ultimately  would  be  unable  to  service 
their  debts.  In  the  long  run  it  is  likely  that  indebtedness  and  house  prices  will  increase 
roughly at the same rate as the nominal growth of the economy. This type of adjustment, to 
more restrained growth rates, will normally occur smoothly, as households begin to feel that 
their finances cannot tolerate a higher level of indebtedness. However, if there is an overly 
sharp correction or “hard landing” if you like, it could lead to weak growth in the economy for 
a long period of time. In this case, it would also have effects on inflation.  
So, in short, in Sweden a situation has prevailed where subdued inflationary pressures have 
called  for  an  expansionary  monetary  policy,  while,  at  the  same  time,  property  prices  have 
been  surging  in  a  fashion  that  in  no  way  can  be  deemed  as  sustainable.  How  can,  and 
should,  a  central  bank  in  a  small  open  economy  with  an  inflation  target  deal  with  such  a 
situation? 
The first thing a central bank can do is to engage in “open-mouth operations” and constantly 
remind  everyone  of  the  existence  of  the  risks  through  speeches  and  documents.  One 
publication that can prove particularly useful in this regard is the Financial Stability Reports, 
which  are  now  published  by  an  increasing  number  of  central  banks.  By  taking  a  systemic 
view of the financial system, the Financial Stability Reports investigate the collective impact 
stemming  from  the  actions  of  individual  financial  institutions.  By  communicating  these 
findings to market participants and the general public, the central bank can raise awareness 
of risks to financial stability, which might otherwise go unnoticed. 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 3
But,  at  times,  all  this  may  not  be  enough,  and  then  the  inevitable  question  begs  to  be 
answered  –  How,  if  at  all,  should  a  central  bank  let  changes  in  asset  prices  influence  its 
monetary policy? The Riksbank runs a flexible inflation target, which means that we also take 
the real economy into account when we set interest rates. Changes in, for example, property 
prices are routinely taken into account in such a framework since the trajectory of the policy 
rate for the forecast horizon is set by the outlook for inflation and output, and these outlooks 
are affected by changes in property prices among other things.  
However, it is close to impossible to properly quantify, or capture the risks, of overly sharp 
corrections of property prices some time in the future. We therefore have to take risks of that 
kind  into  account  in  a  different  way  than  in  the  normal  approach,  where  the  forecasts  for 
inflation and the real economy serve as the foundation. This is done by adjusting the timing 
of  the  policy  rates  changes,  for  example  by  raising  the  policy  rate  somewhat  earlier  than 
would be justified by the forecasts for inflation and the real economy. By doing so, we hope 
to minimize the probability of a hard landing scenario.  
Concluding remarks  
If I were to sum up my experiences from the last few years, I think three conclusions can be 
drawn.  
First of all, as long as asset price inflation only is deemed to be a macroeconomic risk, it can 
be addressed within the framework of a flexible inflation target. If it is deemed to be a threat 
to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  the  brunt  of  the  policy  response  would  not  be  on 
monetary policy, but rather on the regulatory side.  
Secondly,  I  think  that  the  problem  of  how  to  manage  the  risks  from  asset  prices  in  the 
monetary policy decision process to a large extent is pedagogical, i.e. explaining that we do 
not target asset prices, but that we do not completely ignore them. However, monetary policy 
is  a  topic  on  which  a  lot  of  people  have  an  opinion,  and  you  are  never  going  to  please 
everyone.  In  fact,  in  recent  years  the  Riksbank  has  been  criticized  for  putting  either  too 
much, or too little, emphasis on property prices.  
Finally, I would like underscore the necessity of stress-testing the banking sector for sudden 
shifts  in  property  prices.  You  can  have  a  whole  staff  of  PhDs  running  all  kinds  advanced 
models telling you that assets are not overvalued. That’s fine, but at the end of the day they 
might be wrong, and then you would like to know what the consequences are going to be for 
the banking system.  
Let  me  end  by  thanking  the  central  bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  for  hosting  this 
conference and congratulate the bank on its 10th anniversary. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2007
