Radovan Jelašić: Serbia in transition 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  the  occasion  of 
celebrations of “St Vitus Day of Diaspora in Serbia”, Belgrade, 29 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Cubrilo, 
It is a great pleasure to me to greet you all on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia on the occasion of 
the traditionally organized celebrations of “St Vitus Day of Diaspora in Serbia”. Serbia is in a whirl of 
change and you are the ones who can best see effects of transition and judge what next Serbia has to 
do to regain its rightful place among the moderately developed countries. 
Allow me to begin by “reporting” the results achieved over the last year: 
1. 
Price stability – Last time Serbia recorded a 4.4% rate inflation was in the bygone 1963. In 
the meantime, we have grown so used to the abnormal inflationary environment manipulated 
by the state to cheat on its citizens and to scoop additional tax revenue that it feels almost 
strange now that inflation is suddenly gone. As for our dinar – the very image of our country 
–  it  has  never  felt  freer  floating  along  other  currencies.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  are  at 
their  record  high  of  US$  12.2  billion  and  the  price  of  capital,  though  slowly,  is  doubtless 
falling in contrast to its price in countries whence you came where such price, though slowly, 
is doubtless rising! If not this year, I hope to see these two sets of lending rates meet half 
way within the span of the next 3 to 5 years.  
If there is anything in Serbia now that resembles European Union, it is the banks – 80% of 
the banking sector is in foreign majority ownership, with foreign meaning EU countries. Just 
as we are unable at the moment to use our bank account in Frankfurt to effect transactions 
in Paris – though both accounts are in the same currency – so shall we be able to have a 
single account for transactions across the whole of Europe only once Serbia joins European 
Union  and  banks  set  up  their  branches  in  Serbia  instead  of  daughter  banks.  In  the 
meantime, our payment cards are accepted at 1,800 ATMs and over 50,000 POS terminals.  
As  for  the  rest  of  the  financial  sector,  insurance  companies,  voluntary  pension  funds  and 
leasing companies – a notable step forward has also been achieved.  
2. 
3. 
Transfer of remittances from abroad represents one of the key pillars of macroeconomic stability of 
Serbia and reached USD 3.02 billion in 2006, which is almost half the value of total exports of Serbia 
over the same period. In the course of last year, two institutions engaged in a comprehensive analysis 
of  the  types, levels  and  frequency  of such  transfers.  The  World Bank staff  analysis  focused  on  the 
transfer  of  remittances  from  Germany  to  Serbia  while  EBRD  and  the  Government  of  Switzerland 
placed  the  emphasis  on  such  transfers  from  Switzerland.  The  key  findings  of  both  studies  are  as 
follows: 
1. 
Serbian diaspora is among the most numerous in each of the above countries. Data for 2004 
rank Serbia number 11 in terms of the volume of remittances transferred (US$ 4 billion).  
Majority of remittances, up to 80%, is transferred by informal channels, mainly via friends or 
bus drivers, who often charge for such services, and only a lesser portion, mainly retirement 
pays, are transferred via bank channels.  
Remittances are mainly spent to cover basic living expenses to raise the standard of living of 
the  recipients  above  the  poverty  line  and  are  not  part  of  total  savings  nor  invested  in  the 
development of the country.  
There is no strategy planned with regard to the use of such remittances nor are those funds 
included in investment projects.  
Transfer of money via banking channels is still expensive and slow and sometimes takes as 
long  as  five  days.  Plus,  banks  in  Serbia  are  not  very  much  interested  in  attracting  those 
transfers.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
With the kind of organization of money transfers from abroad that we currently have in Serbia, it is 
soon going to be cheaper to fly to Belgrade by low cost airline than to send money via bank channels! 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
This is exactly the domain of interest that the NBS is currently exploring and I hope to be able next 
year to inform you that we have not only established fast and efficient ways of money transfer but also 
that it will have become cheap, even several times cheaper than it is today. We are currently working 
along two parallel lines. With one mobile operator in Serbia we are trying to organize money transfers 
via  mobile  phones  and  money  withdrawals  via  payment  cards.  The  other  system  is  similar  to  the 
classic  transfer  of  remittances  and  payments  would  also  be  received  by  using  payment  cards  in 
Serbia. Both of the above systems imply use of the DinaCard system and crediting of accounts literally 
within minutes. 
Finally, let me address those who are still interested in returning to Serbia after many, many years of 
staying  away,  to  keep  me  company  here  and  be  my  allies  in  the  process  of  transition  which  is 
obviously not as easy as we thought it would be back in the year 2000. In late March this year the NBS 
organized  a  gathering  in  London  of  about  one  hundred  Serbs  who  are  employed  in  the  most 
prominent financial institutions of the UK capital. I must admit that it was only then that I fully realized 
where  the  really  very  best  have  gone.  But,  the  times  are  a-changing,  Serbia  is  taking  big  strides 
towards  the  European  Union,  standard  of  living  is  improving  and  there  are  ample  professional 
challenges around. We have managed to persuade some of those young professionals to come back 
to Serbia and work in the National Bank. Let me emphasize again that the doors of our Bank, and the 
doors of my Office are kept wide open to all who wish to work for Serbia and not only make profit in 
Serbia!!! 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
