Anselmo L S Teng: Financial innovation and the win-win outcome for the 
regional economy  
Speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Pan Pearl 
River Delta Regional Cooperation and Development Financial Forum, in Chang Sha, Hunan Province, 
9 June 2007.  
 Honourable officials, 
Dear representatives,  
Ladies & gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  today’s  forum.  On  behalf  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Macao,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  viewpoints  on  the  theme  –  “Financial 
Innovation  and  the  Win-Win  Outcome  for  the  Regional  Economy.”  On  this  occasion,  I  would  like  to 
thank  the  elaborate  planning  and  assiduous  efforts  displayed  by  the  financial  academies  from  nine 
provinces in organizing this forum and the meticulous arrangement made by the organizers and co-
organizers. Here, I sincerely wish this forum a great success in materializing the objective of a win-win 
outcome for the region.  
First, I would like to update you on Macao’s economic and financial status. Then, I will share with you 
some of my views on the main theme. 
As  it  is  commonly  known,  the  Macao  Special  Administrative  Region  is  small  with  a  rather  limited 
economic capacity.  Nevertheless, since  the return  to  the  Motherland,  the Macao  SAR  is capable of 
achieving  rapid  economic  growth  with  record  achievement  noted  in  the  financial  sector.  This 
favourable  result  is  attributed  to  the  auspices  of  the  Central  Government  and  the  fraternity  of  the 
provinces, cities and regions. In the first quarter of 2007, we achieved a real GDP growth of 25.6%, 
after having attained 16.6% in 2006. Rapid growth in foreign direct investment, private consumption 
and  tourism  services  were  the  main  propellers  for  the  economic  performance.  Besides,  we  witness 
that  the  policies  and  measures  diligently  pursued  by  the  MSAR  government  for  proper  economic 
diversification  is  taking  shape. Apart  from  gaming,  other  forms  of  tourism  such  as  corporate  travel, 
culture and leisure, sports, convention and exhibition have been growing briskly. Meanwhile, change is 
also observed in the source of inbound tourists. Traditionally, China, Hong Kong and Chinese Taiwan 
are the major source of inbound tourists. Today, tourists coming from East Asia, Europe, the U.S.A., 
Japan, Korea and Australia have been growing at a faster pace. Other business sectors, including the 
financial  sector,  also  enjoy  better  growth  opportunities  in  the  face  of  substantial  gains  recorded  in 
overall consumption as well as local and foreign investments.  
The  local  financial  sector  accounts  for  around  10%  of  GDP.  It  mainly  consists  of  27  banks  and  25 
insurance companies, which are mostly subsidiaries or branches of banks and insurance companies 
outside Macao. It is recognized as a pillar industry in terms of its total assets or its contribution to GDP. 
Buoyed by rapid local economic growth and sustained development in the neighbouring economies, 
the banking sector managed to achieve record performances year after year. As at the end of the first 
quarter of 2007, total assets of the banking sector grew by 22.3% year-on-year to MOP281.1 billion; 
deposits  increased  by  18.2%  to  MOP236.4  billion;  loans  reached  MOP78.1  billion,  representing  an 
increase of 18.1%. Non-performing loan ratio was at record low of 1.1%. The overall profit for the first 
quarter jumped by 30.3% to MOP1.09 billion, after a notable result of MOP3.9 billion scored for the full 
year of 2006. Consolidated capital adequacy ratio of the whole sector at the end of 2006 was kept at a 
high level of 14.7%, well above the minimum 8% required by the Basel Committee. The favourable 
performance has not only reflected the result of the fast growth of the local economy and sustained 
development of the neighbouring economies, it is also the result of the unrelenting effort of the banking 
sector devoted to enhancing its risk management and financial innovation.  
Financial innovation is a perpetual endeavour for the financial industry which covers a broad and wide-
ranging  scope.  I  consider  that  it  should  embrace  new  financial  ideas  as  well  as  improving  existing 
ones; in general, it covers the following 4 aspects:  
1. 
Innovation in 3 main financial structures: financial market, financial institutions and financial 
products; 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
2. 
3. 
4. 
Innovation in 3 main financial channels: public financial infrastructures, internal operational 
facilities and external services measures; 
Innovation in 3 main users of the financial system: government, enterprises and residents; 
Innovation in 3 main financial regimes: financial rules and regulations, financial supervision 
and cross-border financial cooperation. 
If the above definition of financial innovation is established, its realization will vary in accordance with 
time, place and people involved.  
It  would  be  unrealistic  for  Macao  to  realize  an  overall  financial  innovation.  Macao’s  development  is 
confined  by  many  objective  factors  such  as  limited  capacity,  absence  of  a  comprehensive  financial 
market  and  lopsided  economic  structure.  As  such,  our  financial  innovation  effort  is  restrained  by 
inherent factors. Nevertheless, all along, we have been actively promoting financial innovation in line 
with  the  needs  of  economic  development  which  can  simultaneously  maintain  the  sustainable 
development of the financial industry in a stable and sound manner.  
Being an operator, the local financial sector has been remarkable in financial innovation. In the past 
few  years,  we  have  witnessed  the  emergence  of  various  types  of  financial  products,  ranging  from 
telephone  banking,  mobile  banking,  online  banking,  investment  fund,  bankassurance,  personal 
banking, private banking to privileged banking services.  
Being  a  regulator,  we  allow  adequate  freedom  to  financial  enterprises  by  adopting  appropriate 
measures  to  innovate  our  system.  To  cope  with  actual  market  environment,  we  revise  or  relax 
enforcement  of  certain  regulatory  requirements  subject  to  the  premise  that  there  is  a  thorough 
understanding of risk management capability of the sector. Furthermore, we continue to enhance our 
regulatory  practice  by  conducting  onsite  investigation  for  a  specific  purpose.  We  gather  thorough 
knowledge of a certain facet within a relatively short time span. Upon completion of the investigation, 
we share mutual findings with the inspected institutions in a timely manner with minimum disruptions 
to the their daily operation while they all stand to benefit.  
Being a facilitator, we organize activities for the industry participants to cultivate business opportunities 
locally and overseas through cross-border exchange and cooperation via various channels, especially 
liaisons with our regulatory counterparts and arrangements with other governments.  
In  comparison,  the  Mainland  market  is  boundless.  The  government  is  easing  control  on  financial 
regulations as reform of the financial system is moving forward on all fronts. The pattern of economic 
development and household consumption is changing while the Mainland economy continues to grow 
rapidly. Regional and global economic integration is gathering steam. Development in the securities 
market  and  the  pervasiveness  of  renminbi  carries profound  implications. The  combined  effect  of  all 
these forces has not only contributed to the establishment of a solid and sound foundation conducive 
to financial innovation, it has also brought creative opportunities for financial innovation to the regions 
that are closely connected with the economic and financial development of the Mainland. 
The PAN-Pearl Delta Region, 9 provinces and 2 special administrative regions are vast in area, each 
has its own competitive edge and solid economic strength. Their governments, business sectors and 
residents have comparatively better knowledge about finance. Against this backdrop, there is a great 
future for financial innovation. Although I have mentioned earlier that Macao has limited experience in 
this respect, I would like to take this occasion to share with you the following observations:  
1. 
Appropriate  laws  and  regulations  are  needed  to  foster  a  regulatory  environment  that  is 
conducive to financial innovation. It is worthwhile to attempt new ideas as long as they would 
not contravene the requirements of existing laws and regulations. However, we must have a 
full understanding of the related risks. And, we must have an appropriate risk control system 
or  measures  to  mitigate  or  eliminate  the  risks.  Apart  from  complying  with  necessary 
regulatory procedure, the new ideas must facilitate market development without impairing the 
rights  of  consumers.  To  this  end,  the  QDII  scheme  for  stock  investment  can  serve  as  a 
classic example. The introduction and moderation of the QDII scheme as well as the gradual 
opening of the Mainland capital market represent an important step towards financial system 
reformation.  These  measures  are  also  financial  innovation  conducive  to  financial  market 
development. Based on this situation, we can expect more innovation in financial policies. In 
the near future, a wave of keenly anticipated innovations in financial institutions, products, 
service and cooperation will arise from innovated financial policies.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
to  exploit  potential  business  opportunities  while 
There should be ongoing observation of changes in market development, analysis of special 
needs of customers, segmentation of customers and markets, as well as the establishment 
of a system to trace the demand of market and customers. The regulators should proceed in 
tandem  with  the  pace  of  market  development  and  monitor  changes  and  characteristics  of 
consumer  demands.  As  far  as  financial  products  are  concerned,  asset  management  and 
structural financing that are selling like hot cakes are good examples. 
Financial  innovation  should  be  adapted  to  time,  place  and  people.  This  issue  has  been 
explored before with Macao as an example. 
Maintain  good  communication  between  regulators  and  market  participants.  It  is  normal  for 
regulators to receive tons of complaints and enquiries from consumers. As these letters are 
mostly  pinpointing  financial  products  and  services,  regulators  would  gain  a  better 
understanding  or  come  up  with  a  general  idea  on  the  types  of  services  demanded  by 
consumers during the course of handling these complaints and enquiries. 
Investors and consumers need education. It is desirable to initiate a two-pronged measure. 
Based on the objectives of protecting the rights of the consumers and investors as well as 
facilitating  the  penetration  of  the  financial  market,  the  regulator  can  actively  embark  on 
financial  consumption  related  education  through  various  channels  such  as  the  media  and 
topical exhibitions etc. On the other hand, the market participants are encouraged to launch 
more  promotions  that  are  infused  with  educational  elements.  This  approach  allows  the 
participants 
fulfilling  certain  social 
responsibilities. 
Cross-border  exchange  and  cooperation  are  imperative.  Apart  from  taking  into  full 
consideration  the  elements  of  time,  place  and  people,  we  can  benefit  from  observing  the 
achievement of others in financial innovation. For products or services that are sophisticated 
or  distinctive,  we can  study  the  concepts,  repackage  or  adapt  them  for  introduction  to  the 
local market. Much can be gained and shared from getting to know other markets through 
cross-border  exchange.  Through  mutual  understanding  and  interaction,  we  have  better 
understanding  of  other  markets  and  hence  better  knowledge.  Since  the  return  to  the 
Motherland  and  the  signing  of  the  Closer  Economic  Partnership  Agreement  (CEPA), 
economic  ties  between  Hong  Kong,  Macao  and  the  Mainland  have  much  strengthened. 
There will be profound implications if trade transactions between these places can be settled 
in Renminbi. This is a form of financial innovation which can only be materialized through 
cross-border cooperation involving not only the trading of commodities but also cooperation 
between  the  governments  concerned.  Now,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  another  live 
experience. As we all know, since the return to the Motherland, the Macao SAR government 
has  been  trying  to  turn  Macao  into  a  service  platform  for  the  Mainland  and  Portuguese-
speaking countries by capitalizing on the historical relationship that Macao built up with the 
latter.  Financial  cooperation  between  Portuguese-speaking  countries  and  MSAR  has 
flourished from mere acquaintance. In September 2006, the Bank of China (Macao Branch), 
BPI of Portugal and its Angolan subsidiary, BFA, signed a tri-partite cooperation agreement 
in the annual “Macao International Trade & Investment Fair” (“MIF”). This agreement covers 
financial services including remittance made available to Chinese enterprises and workers in 
Angola. This appears to be a very simple cooperation arrangement. However, a closer look 
shows  a  few  special  features.  Traditionally,  similar  arrangements  involve  only  two  parties. 
Now,  this  one  involves  one  more  party  for  a  specific  reason.  The  arrangement  is  not 
concluded for business between Macao and Angola or between Macao and Portugal. It is 
specially arranged  for  transactions  between Angola  and  the  Mainland.  From this  example, 
there  is  great  potential  for  financial  innovation  in  the  area  of  cross-border  cooperation. 
Besides, we believe that much can be achieved between the Pan-Pearl Delta Region and its 
brother provinces and regions, between Macao and the Mainland, as well as between the 
Mainland and Portuguese-speaking countries through Macao as the intermediary 
The above is a summary of my basic viewpoints on the theme of this forum. It provides merely food for 
thought which I hope can lead to further elaboration from the audience.  
Thank you! 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
