Radovan Jelašić: Price stability and state ownership in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at a Roundtable discussion 
with representatives of the Government of Serbia, Belgrade, 3 July 2007. 
 stability of prices in the light of interplay between fiscal and monetary policy, and  
state ownership.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me focus on this occasion on two topics: 
1. 
2. 
Few days ago I heard someone say: “It is the stable currency that everybody wants at first, and then 
they  want  as  much  as  possible  of  the  same  currency”.  That  is  a  true  picture  of  Serbia  today.  And, 
while monetary policy sets a priority to constantly watch over the first part of this sentence, our citizens 
soon forget that a “surplus brings on a headache”, i.e. that by increasing spending we keep going back 
to  the  first  part  of  the  sentence  and  demand  “stable  currency.”  It  is  of  course  unrealistic  to  expect 
citizens  to  gladly  forsake  some  of  their  earnings  in  favour  of  the  state  so  that  the  currency  could 
remain stable. On the other hand, that is exactly why countries have or should have a responsible and 
professional government which takes into account medium and long run solutions to macroeconomic 
issues and is fully aware that the second part of the above sentence “and then they want as much as 
possible of the same currency”, in fact means inflation. 
In contrast to the NBS whose main objective “to attain and preserve price stability” is precisely defined 
by  the  law,  governments  are  free  to  define  their  objectives  and  are  not  bound  by  any  legal 
formulations. Governments often alter their objectives as they go along. They are often unwilling to 
remember promises made only a few days earlier, not to speak of those made before they came to 
power  or  those  made  in  their  early  days  in  power.  As  the  Governor,  I  am  very  pleased  that  the 
Parliament  has  clearly  defined  our  objective  and  that  the  objective  is  very  good  –  “to  attain  and 
preserve price stability”. I am convinced, however, that that particular objective was set much more in 
line with the principle of “follow thy neighbour” policy than due to some deep seated conviction that 
price stability is key to economic development, improvement in the standard of living of all citizens, 
attracting  foreign  investment,  etc.  For  forty  years  Yugoslavia  and  Serbia  have  been  trying  to  attain 
“growth and development” and putting stability of prices into the second or the third line of interest. 
The culmination of this process is well known – the longest period of hyperinflation in the 20th century 
that lasted for longer than twelve months! We obviously took our time in taking the decision what to do! 
And recently we received a positive assessment of our decision – inflation has never been lower than 
recorded at end-May while economic growth has never been higher than recorded in the first quarter 
of  2007  when  it  reached  as  much  as  8.0%.  Of  course,  the  media  will  not  be  enticed  by  this  fact 
because it represents a confirmation of what we have been trying to impress on the public for years! 
Prices of the NBS services have never been lower than they are today, and while everybody else is 
looking  for  ways  to  solve  their  problems  almost  exclusively  by  increasing  prices,  and  naturally  by 
taking advantage of their monopoly position, we in the NBS have been continually decreasing prices 
of  our  services.  The  NBS  total  wage  bill  recorded  in  2004  at  total  employment  of  5,500,  remains 
adequate today and, I am convinced, will remain so over the next two to three years. The government 
increased the budget-financed employment last year and has done it this year again. The NBS is not 
the reason for the existence of the banking sector, but quite the other way around. The state should 
follow the same principle. I think it is absurd, not amusing, that many ministers are aware of the fact 
that a cut in employment would mean higher efficiency of government administration, higher quality of 
services and higher wages, but readily use one and the same pretext: “why should I be the one to do 
the dirty job when others have even bigger excess work force.” The impact of such policy on inflation 
is obvious as growth in regulated prices contributed 3.6 percentage points to the 4.2% overall growth 
in prices, of which: prices of electricity by 1.08%, communal services by 0.71%, cigarettes by 0.68%, 
oil derivates by 0.50% and medicaments by 0.10%. Naturally, all those adjustments in regulated prices 
mean higher revenue for the budget or some other indirect users of the budget revenue – and when 
money is more abundant, there is no reason not to spend more. 
Being  a  keen  onlooker  of  structural  reforms,  I  am  personally  honestly  fascinated  by  the  lack  of 
principles as well as by partiality and randomness in their implementation: 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
  On  the  one  hand,  some  of  the  banks  with  which  our  citizens  hold  savings  accounts  are 
foreign-owned and, to tell the truth, their savings can be taken out of the country as there is 
no authority that would force those banks to grant credits in Serbia against such savings. On 
the other hand, though pension funds are long-term investments similar to those that banks 
engage in – it is the state which takes care of the voluntary pension funds and life insurance 
funds today and will continue to do so in future. The question arises as to why this is so? 
Does the state of Serbia have a proven track record over the last fifty years of expertise in 
making profitable investments or do we have some special skills which are superior to those 
of the top-ranking investment funds worldwide?  
We have sold our milk farms, yet agriculture, we say, matters to us, cement producers are of 
no interest, yet we want to increase housing construction and building in general. Citizens of 
Serbia have been deprived of the opportunity to smoke home-grown tobacco, yet we would 
not let go of the EPS, or part of it, of Telekom Srbija, one of the three operators that seems 
to be the state-interest, not to speak of the NIS – a veritable national treasure! Why? What is 
the rationale behind all of this or have I missed something over the last 2 to three years or, 
as it may be, have others changed?  
it is a majority owner,  
it manages those enterprises,  
it supervises their operations and, most importantly  
it adopts the overall legislative framework that is relevant for their operations!  
Generally speaking, in terms of big public enterprises, the government has four functions:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
The latter two functions, i.e. supervision and adoption of the legislative framework, remain within the 
remit of the state independently of the former two functions. To illustrate, we have retained those same 
functions in relation to banks as well. If the sole aim of the government is to maximize budget revenue, 
the whole matter seems to be rather simple – we need to sell the minority share today and commit to 
privatize the remaining portion in several years time. But what is more important, the state needs to 
surrender  management  of those enterprises  to  their majority  owners! This  at  the  same  time  means 
that  somebody  other  than  the  state,  i.e.  the  majority  owner,  will  be  making  all  the  preparations  for 
putting such enterprises on the market, implementing their reorganization, undertaking measures to 
increase their price. It is more and more often that we hear the words such as “first we shall reorganize 
the enterprise and then make big money by selling it.” Does the government of Serbia really have the 
expertise and the managers of such calibre that is rarely found among private businessmen, not to 
speak of the state sector? Does it have sufficient funds, experience, etc, to restructure, reorganize, 
instead of concerning itself with the health care, education, infrastructure and the similar? Everybody 
seems to be inventing some kind of a privatization model that enables you to sell and, at the same 
time,  to  keep  the  management  share!  Let  me  repeat,  if  the  state  wishes  to  make  sure  that  1)  the 
service provided is high quality, there is no need for it to retain ownership or management over the 
enterprise,  but  only  to  implement  efficient  supervision  of  its  operations,  and  if  it  wishes  to  2)  make 
money, it can always do so via taxes, excise duties, compensations, retroactive measures. But, let us 
not fool ourselves – at the end of the day, the government of Serbia wishes to govern. It is only the 
excuses which keep changing. 
Life goes on and I bet that in five years time at the latest some of these “holy cows”, like EPS, NIS or 
Telekom Srbija will be privatized for a very simple reason – the state coffers will be empty. Following 
the  increase  in  wages  and  salaries  during  the  last  and  this  year,  the  state  will  get  used  to  a 
comfortable living and may even become more lavish with state pensions too. We need investments 
more  than  anything  else,  while  on  the  other  hand we  have  been  decreasing  taxes  for  state  coffers 
though  the  money  is  melting  away!  I  know,  though,  that  the  laws  get  changed  by  necessity,  and  I 
decide to rest my case. 
However,  I  sincerely  hope  that  this  first  roundtable  discussion  will  bring  about  more  than  just 
identification of the problems at hand. Everybody knows what the problems are, even those who have 
not had much success. I hope that we shall do something, something concrete, and something that 
can lead to a success! 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2007
