Ranee Jayamaha: Role of external auditor and implications of the new 
Companies Act 
Speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at a seminar at 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 11 June 2007. 
 Given the rapidly expanding financial landscape in Sri Lanka in which finance and leasing companies 
are making a significant contribution to the financial services industry, it is imperative that the role of 
each stakeholder is recognized for purposes of clarity, financial reporting and in the interest of wider 
financial system stability. 
The business of finance, hire purchase and leasing has grown significantly in the last few years, but at 
a lower pace than that of the banking sector. In 2006 alone, the growth in leasing portfolio of banks 
was 80%, while the finance companies and leasing companies recorded growth rates of 13% and 6%, 
respectively,  in  their  lease  portfolios.  Banks  and  finance  companies  have  access  to  low  cost  funds 
through  deposit  mobilization.  Here  too,  banks  have  current  accounts  at  zero  costs.  Leasing 
companies, on the other hand, rely on bank borrowing or borrowing through debt instruments which is 
costly to them. Recently, the Central Bank has recommended amendments to the Leasing Companies 
Act to regularize leasing company borrowings from the public through the issue of debt instruments. 
The Central Bank will monitor such borrowings to ensure that highly geared leasing companies do not 
borrow excessively from the market and terms and conditions will be imposed to mitigate risks to the 
investors in debt instruments issued by leasing companies. 
In  addition  to  business  growth  and  fund  raising,  the  viability  of  the  finance  and  leasing  companies 
should also be monitored and watched, although their asset base accounts for a mere 4.8% of total 
financial sector assets. Also, these institutions are engaged in granting credit to the more risky sectors 
in the economy absorbing higher credit risks which the conventional banking sector is not willing to 
take on. Their contribution to the capital formation in the economy particularly through the provision of 
leasing and hire purchase facilities is significant. A failure of one or two big companies would have a 
far reaching impact from a stability point of view, given the ripple effects it could have on the whole 
financial  sector.  There  are  several  stakeholders  involved  in  examining  the  viability  of  businesses  of 
finance  and  leasing  companies.  The  chief  among  them  are  shareholders,  regulators,  auditors, 
investors, depositors and creditors. All these stakeholders have functions and responsibilities assigned 
to, or assumed by them by law or practice. It is becoming increasingly clear that some of the functions 
and responsibilities will not be effective if done in isolation without consulting the other stakeholders. In 
particular, 
their  roles  and 
responsibilities. The regulator as well as the external auditor starts their examinations and audits with 
the financial reporting aspects of companies. The external auditor is basically looking at the financial 
performance of the company and its compliance with the laws, observance of auditing and accounting 
standards  and  rules  and  regulations  set  out  by  the  regulator.  They  also  look  into  aspects  such  as 
health  of  the  balance  sheet,  status  of  the  profit  &  loss  account  and  the  ability  of  the  company  to 
operate  as  a  going  concern.  The  regulator,  on  the  other  hand,  has  to  make  sure  that  not  only 
companies adhere to provisions in the governing laws and comply with rules and regulations but also 
ensure that finance and leasing companies have put in place necessary processes and procedures to 
mitigate  risks,  be  it  credit,  liquidity,  market  or  systemic.  The  regulator  makes  recommendations  to 
initiate action, if such risk mitigation methods are not considered adequate. The regulator is conscious 
of not only the viability of the company to operate as a going concern, but also its ability to pay its 
liabilities  to  creditors  and  depositors.  Sometimes,  there  is  an  over-lapping  of  the  two  roles  of  the 
regulator and external auditor, but with closer dialogue, coordination and cooperation, the duplication 
of work can be avoided. 
The regulator should have quarterly/monthly dialogue with the companies and external auditors which 
is  a  healthy  practice  than  working  on  an  isolated  basis.  It  is  also  important  to  understand  financial 
reporting formats and the auditing standards specified by the external auditors and ensure that there 
are no conflicting instructions issued by the regulator or the external auditor. This task can also be 
facilitated  through  continuous  dialogue  between  the  relevant  parties  and  in  forums  like  this,  where 
such issues can be raised and resolved. 
the  regulators  and  external  auditors  should  closely  coordinate 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
Neither  the  regulator  nor  the  external  auditor  can  ensure  that  the  companies  are  acting  in  a 
transparent and an accountable manner. The boards of directors and the senior management should 
be accountable to relevant stakeholders. This is why it is necessary to adopt corporate governance 
practices  both  at  the  board  level  and  throughout  the  operations  of  the  institution.  There  is  an 
increasing  trend  of  making  some  of  the  corporate  governance  practices  mandatory  either  through 
rules and regulations issued by the regulator or by separate mandatory codes. From 2009 onwards, all 
finance  and  leasing  companies  will  have  to  observe  mandatory  governance  principles.  Therefore, 
contribution by the boards of directors and the senior management of finance and leasing companies 
is extremely important as it will facilitate the roles of both regulator and auditor. 
The role of an auditor under the new Companies Act 
Given  the  fiduciary  responsibility  of  finance  and  leasing  companies,  it  is  important  to  differentiate 
normal company audits from financial institution audits. Auditors are appointed by the shareholders, 
but their prime responsibility should be to ensure that the company can function as a going concern 
and pay back the depositors’ funds as and when needed. The auditors’ opinion lends credibility to the 
financial statements and promotes confidence in the system. 
Auditors generally cover their opinion with a statement in which they certify accounts of the company 
as true and fair on the basis of information made available to them. While recognizing this clarification, 
in the interest of wider financial system stability, it is important that external auditors find out the true 
position  of  the  company  and  alert  regulators,  even  though  it  is  beyond  audit  ethics.  The  audit 
profession should be independent and they must win confidence of the investing community and the 
general public by providing accurate and timely audits. In that sense, external auditor also performs 
the “watchdog’s” and the “whistleblowers” role in the financial system. 
The new Companies Act, which came into being just a month ago, is somewhat explicit in the role of 
the auditor in the following areas: 
1. 
Fair judgment: An auditor shall ensure that his judgment is not impaired by reason of any 
relationship with, or interest in the company or any of its subsidiaries. While regularizing the 
company under audit, as its client, the auditors must distance themselves in judging the true 
financial status of the company. 
Issue of certificate of solvency: The new Companies Act strictly looks at the company’s 
ability to meet the solvency test at the time of a distribution. Distribution does not only refer 
to  dividends  but  also  to  the  transfer  of  property,  incurring  of  debt  to  or  for  the  benefit  of 
shareholders. An auditor needs to issue a Certificate of Solvency assuring compliance with 
the  solvency  criteria.  This is  something  new  in  the  new  Companies  Act  and  it  is  specially 
relevant  to  finance  and  leasing  companies  which  deal  in  depositors/lenders’  funds  with 
fiduciary responsibilities. 
Also,  before  the  board  of  a  company  resolves  to  reduce  its  stated  capital  (as  companies 
have the option of buying back its own shares), the board shall obtain the auditors certificate 
of solvency. 
Determination of fair value: The new Companies Act enables a company to purchase its 
own  shares  provided  an  auditor  opines  that  the  consideration  given  is  a  fair  value  (i.e. 
market  value).  If  a  company  is  to  alter  the  Articles  to  reflect  a  removal  or  an  addition  of 
business  activity  or  to  carry  out  a  major  transaction  or  an  amalgamation,  minority 
shareholders could request the company to purchase their shares. Auditor has to make a fair 
judgment  on  this,  which  is  introduced  as  a  facility  to  minority  shareholders.  Unlike  in  the 
previous Companies Act, the external auditor is given a specific responsibility in making the 
judgment. 
2. 
3. 
There may be several other clauses in the new Companies Act which casts additional responsibility on 
the external auditor. There are experts to discuss these topics in this Forum and let me not pre-empt 
them. I hope the deliberations today will bring such issues into light and that there will be a meaningful 
discussion. 
I wish the seminar a success. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
