Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the 
half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 14 June 2007. 
 The Swiss National Bank is raising the target range for the three-month Libor with immediate effect by 
0.25  percentage  points  to  2.00–3.00%.  With  this  move,  the  National  Bank  is  ensuring  that  inflation 
prospects remain favourable. The SNB intends to hold the rate in the middle of the target range for the 
time being. 
Switzerland's  economy  is  in  excellent  shape.  Indeed,  the  economy  is  developing  even  better  than 
expected back in March. For 2007, the National Bank now expects real GDP to grow at a rate of close 
to 2.5%. The healthy economy in the neighbouring countries and exchange rate developments have 
been  contributing  factors.  Together  with  a  renewed  rise  in  oil  prices,  this  has  led  to  a  slight 
deterioration in inflation prospects – even after today's increase in the interest rate. Assuming that the 
three-month  Libor  remains  unchanged  at  2.50%,  the  National  Bank  expects  an  average  annual 
inflation  rate  of  0.8%  in  2007,  1.5%  in  2008,  and  1.7%  in  2009.  Consequently,  forecast  inflation 
continues to rise. 
However, at present there is considerable uncertainty with regard to the assessment of the inflation 
outlook. On the one hand, structural changes in the economy still have a dampening effect on prices. 
On the other hand, given the high level of capacity utilisation and movements in the exchange rate, 
there  is  a  danger  that  higher  production  costs  will  increasingly  be  passed  on  to  prices.  Should 
economic momentum remain unchanged or should movements in the Swiss franc result in a further 
relaxation of monetary conditions, further increases in the interest rate are likely in the months ahead. 
Economic outlook 
The  international  environment  has  a  strong  impact  on  economic  developments  in  Switzerland. 
According  to  the  IMF  forecasts,  the  global  economy  is  poised  to  grow  at  a  sustained  rate  of 
approximately 5% in 2007. While the economic activity in the United States has been satisfactory, it is 
a little less dynamic than expected. By contrast, the economic situation in Europe is clearly healthier 
than we had expected. This encouraging development has had a favourable impact on our economy. 
Economic activity in Switzerland continued to be dynamic in the first months of the year. In the first 
quarter, gross domestic product (GDP) was up by 3.2% saar, exceeding the long-term average growth 
rate by a significant amount.  
The strong economic performance assisted the recovery of the labour market. Employment was up in 
industry as well as in the construction and service areas. As a result, unemployment figures dropped 
further and the unemployment rate fell below the level of 3%. Demand indicators were still trending 
upwards,  which  should  result  in  a  renewed  drop  in  unemployment  in  the  months  ahead.  Moreover, 
labour demand continued to be met by a significant influx of labour from abroad. The opening of the 
labour  market  within  the  context  of  the  bilateral  agreements  with  the  EU  creates  additional  growth 
potential. 
The competitive position of our economy is high, and the recent depreciation of the Swiss franc on the 
foreign exchange market gave it an additional boost. While exports continued to increase at a rapid 
pace, their growth rate may slow down somewhat compared with 2006. 
The healthy state of the economy and the improvement in the labour market have a favourable impact 
on consumer sentiment. Since the beginning of the year, household spending has been increasing at 
very steady pace. A continuance of this trend is possible, since the current near full employment is 
likely to lead to an increase in real wages. 
During the next quarters, companies will continue to step up equipment investment since the rate of 
technical  capacity  utilisation  –  in  particular  in  the  manufacturing  sector  –  is  high.  Construction 
investment should stabilise at a high level. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 1
These developments in demand components led us to revise our GDP growth forecast upwards for 
2007. For the current year, we now expect growth close to 2.5%. 
Development in monetary and financial conditions 
In the Swiss capital market, we have been observing a steady increase in long-term interest rates over 
the  past  three  months.  The  yield  on  10-year  Swiss  Confederation  bonds  reached  3%  in  May.  Real 
interest  rates  for  long  maturities  have  therefore  registered  an  increase.  This  is  a  new  development 
because up until now, long-term interest rates had not clearly reacted to the progressive increase in 
the Libor. This will reinforce our efforts to tighten monetary conditions, since economic activity reacts 
more noticeably to long-term interest rates than to short-term ones. 
By contrast, in foreign exchange markets, movements in the Swiss franc have resulted in a relaxation 
of monetary conditions. As of the beginning of 2006, the Swiss franc started losing ground steadily vis-
à-vis the euro. However, it firmed slightly against the dollar during the same period. Since our March 
assessment, the actual depreciation of the Swiss franc, i.e. weighted in terms of exports , amounts to 
1.7%. The corresponding relaxation in monetary conditions is weakening the effects of our policy of 
lifting interest rates and is increasing inflationary pressure through two channels. One the one hand, it 
is bringing about an increase in import prices, which could have an effect on consumer prices. Even 
though the impact of this channel may have diminished during the past few years due to increased 
competition, there is no guarantee that – against the current backdrop of near full employment – it will 
not  again  be  reactivated.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  strengthening  the  competitive  position  of  our 
economy, thereby giving exports and economic activity a boost. As a consequence, the weak franc 
could heighten inflationary pressure in an economy already running at full steam. 
On the credit market, growth in mortgage lending is slowly receding, with the current rate of increase 
below 5%. The “other loans” category continues to expand rapidly, while matching observations of the 
past in comparable phases of the economic cycle. This category is now growing at a rate of about 8–
10%, as at the beginning of the 2000s, when their level in fact considerably exceeded the levels we 
are currently experiencing. 
M1 and M2 shrank, which is nothing out of the ordinary during a phase of rising interest rates. When 
this happens, savings and sight deposits are shifted into time deposits. M1 and M2 are affected by this 
substitution. M3, which is not affected, is growing at a rate of 2% to 3%, which is appropriate for an 
expanding economy. 
Inflationary risks 
In the current environment, price stability is subject to three types of risk:  
The first risk is connected with the development in the price of oil. The barrel price for Brent crude rose 
by 40%, from USD 51.0 in January to USD 71.7 in May. This will lead to higher inflation during the 
course  of  the  year. Unlike  oil  price  hikes between 2004  and  2006,  the most  recent rally  took  place 
when capacity utilisation was higher. If the current surge in oil prices were to continue, it could affect 
prices more easily than previously. 
The  second  risk  is  due  to  the  fact  that  demand  is  growing  at  too  rapid  a  pace  in  relation  to  the 
development in production capacity. We estimate the GDP growth rate that can be sustained without 
pushing up inflation – potential GDP growth – at between 1.5% and 2%. This is lower than the growth 
rate  we  have  observed  since  2006.  Measuring  the  output  gap  is  tricky,  however,  because  certain 
favourable factors, such as the influx of skilled labour, the deregulation of certain domestic markets 
and  increased  global  competition  might  have  pushed  up  potential  GDP  growth.  Having  said  this, 
however,  we  should  not  overlook  those  factors  which  have  the  opposite  effect.  For  instance, 
equipment  investment  has  receded,  which  has  a  dampening  effect  on  potential  growth.  Moreover, 
even if capacity utilisation as a whole is not excessive, bottlenecks might occur in certain sectors of 
the  economy.  And,  above  all,  experience  has  shown  that  the  output  gap  is  often  underestimated 
during  phases  of  growth.  Consequently,  the  risk  of  underestimating  the  output  gap  may  now  be 
greater than that of overestimating it. 
The third risk is associated with the future development of the Swiss franc. As its exchange rate is 
determined by the market, it is subject to fluctuations. Movements in the export-weighted Swiss franc 
index  alter  the  degree  of  restrictiveness  of  our  monetary  policy.  Normally,  during  periods  of  rising 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2007
interest  rates,  this  index  tends  to  increase,  thereby  amplifying  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  by 
mitigating price increases in imported products and slowing the expansion in economic activity. This 
reaction  pattern  was  not  observed  during  the  past  two  years,  which  could  put  pressure  on  interest 
rates. 
Monetary policy decision 
Before  commenting  our  decision  today,  I  would  like  to  point  out  the  changes  that  are  shaping  our 
current environment. In December 2005, when the present cycle of interest rate hikes began, we were 
concerned with the normalisation of the interest rate level – at the time the Libor was at 0.75% – while 
allowing  the  economy  to  reduce  its  level  of  unused  resources.  Our  concern  now  is  to  ensure  that 
monetary conditions are such that the healthy state of the economy does not jeopardise price stability 
in the medium term. 
We  are  still  observing  that  the  competitive  pressure  in  the  market  is  high,  the  labour  market  very 
flexible  and  that  movement  in  the  monetary  aggregates  is  moderate.  However,  my  analysis  of  the 
current situation has demonstrated that the inflation outlook has deteriorated in different respects since 
our  last  assessment:  higher  oil  prices  will  have  an  impact  on  the  consumer  price  index;  economic 
performance,  which  is  better  than  expected,  will  result  in  an  improved  utilisation  rate  and  increase 
pressure on prices and, finally, a renewed weakening of the Swiss franc has neutralised the intended 
tightening in monetary conditions. Today's decision to raise the target range for the three-month Libor 
by 25 basis points takes into account this deterioration in the outlook for price stability. 
Inflation forecast graph 
I will now turn to the last part of my remarks. What is our inflation forecast? The dashed red curve 
represents  the  new  forecast  which  covers  the  period  from  the  second  quarter  of  2007  to  the  first 
quarter 2010. It shows the inflation outlook after today's increase in the Libor under the assumption 
that  the  level  of  2.50%  will  be  kept  constant  during  the  forecasting  period.  For  purposes  of 
comparison,  the  dash-dotted  green  curve  shows  the  inflation  forecast  of  the  March  monetary 
assessment which was based on a Libor of 2.25%. 
The combined effect of higher oil prices, economic developments that were better than expected and a 
weaker franc leads to a deterioration in the inflation forecast for the coming months. Today's interest 
rate rise will stabilise the rate of inflation at a slightly higher level from mid-2008 onwards than that 
established last March. Inflation will subsequently continue to rise and approach the 2% mark towards 
the end of the forecasting period. 
 In lifting the three-month Libor by 25 basis points today, deterioration in the inflation prospects over the 
past months will be offset. Any forecast and any decision are obviously fraught with uncertainty and 
risk. Should economic momentum remain unchanged or should movements in the Swiss franc result in 
a  further  relaxation  in  monetary  conditions,  further  increases  in  the  interest  rate  are  likely  in  the 
months ahead. 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 3
  4 
    BIS Review 67/2007
