Y V Reddy: Select aspects of the Indian economy 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  Tokyo, 
27 May 2007. 
 Governor Fukui and friends, 
I  am  honoured  by  the  kind  invitation  of  Governor  Fukui  to  visit  your  esteemed  bank.  We,  in  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI),  deeply  appreciate  the  gesture.  Governor  Toshihiko  Fukui  is  highly 
respected  in  various  central  banks’  fora  for  his  depth  of  knowledge,  wisdom  and  very  transparent 
expositions on the economy of Japan and the Bank of Japan’s policies. We look forward to Governor 
Fukui's  acceptance  of  our  invitation  to him  to  visit  the Reserve Bank and  give  us  the benefit  of  his 
address. 
At the outset, I would like to recall and record that, in July 1991, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) had provided 
a credit facility of US$195 million to India against the collateral of gold, which was also fully settled by 
us  during  September-November  1991.  The  timely  gesture  enabled  India  to  maintain  its  impeccable 
reputation  of  unfailingly  discharging  its  external  obligations,  and  proceed  with  the  program  of 
stabilisation  as  well  as  reforms.  In  fact,  that  period  has  been  a  defining  moment  in  our  economic 
history and separates the pre-reform period from the post-reform period, the latter ushering in an era 
of high growth and stability. 
The BOJ and the RBI have had, in the past, several instances of mutually beneficial and productive 
interaction. For example, in June 1968, the then Governor of RBI, had requested the Bank of Japan to 
depute an expert to study the export credit problems in India and suggest improvements in the system. 
The Japanese consultant, Mr. Yoshiaka Toda of BOJ, identified several gaps and weaknesses in our 
system, and made several recommendations. In true Japanese tradition, Mr. Toda’s final evaluation 
was that "the Indian export credit system was one of the best conceived by central banks in the world". 
Introduction to the RBI 
The RBI  was  established under  the Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  on  April 1,  1935 as a  private 
shareholders' bank but since its nationalisation in 1949, is fully owned by the Government of India. 
The Preamble of the RBI describes the basic functions as “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and 
keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generally, to operate the 
currency and credit system of the country to its advantage”. Thus, unlike the current trend in many 
countries, there is no explicit mandate for price-stability or formal inflation targeting, but the mandate 
appears to be similar to that of the Federal Reserve of the USA. The twin objectives of monetary policy 
in India have evolved over the years as those of maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow 
of  credit  to  facilitate  the  growth  process.  The  relative  emphasis  between  the  twin  objectives  is 
modulated  as  per  the  prevailing  circumstances  and  is  articulated  in  the  policy  statements. 
Consideration of macro-economic and financial stability is also subsumed in the mandate. The RBI is 
also entrusted with the management of foreign exchange reserves (which include gold holding also), 
which are reflected in its balance sheet.  
While RBI is essentially a monetary authority, its founding statute mandates it to be the manager of 
public debt of the Government of India and banker to the Government.  
The  function  of  regulating  and  supervising  of  banks  has  been  assigned  to  the  RBI  by  a  separate 
legislation  enacted  in  1949,  while  the  regulation  of  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies  (NBFCs)  has 
been  entrusted  to  it  through  an  amendment  to  the  RBI  Act.  The  powers  for  regulation  of  money 
markets, government securities market, forex market and gold are derived from the RBI Act and the 
regulation  explicitly  entrusted  through  government  notifications  under  the  Securities  Contracts 
(Regulation) Act. 
The regulation of current and capital account transactions of the external sector was assigned to the 
RBI under another statute in 1999, replacing an earlier one in 1973.  
In addition to the issuance of currency, the RBI is also entrusted with the responsibilities relating to 
distribution of coins.  
BIS Review 55/2007 
 1
The  RBI  has  been  assigned  some  responsibilities  in  several  statutory  bodies  such  as  public  sector 
banks, development finance institutions governing Agriculture, Housing and Deposit Insurance, etc.  
The Reserve Bank's affairs are governed by a Central Board of Directors, consisting of fourteen non-
executive, independent directors nominated by the Government, in addition to the Governor and up to 
four  Deputy  Governors.  Besides,  one  Government  official  is  also  nominated  on  the  Board  who 
participates in the Board meetings but can not vote.  
The RBI has 22 regional offices, mostly in state capitals. RBI is the debt-manager and banker to State 
governments (i.e., the provinces constituting the Indian federation).  
The RBI renders advise to the Central and the State Governments, particularly in regard to financial 
sector reforms. 
In  brief,  the  RBI  has  been  assigned  several  functions,  in  addition  to  monetary  management.  In 
performing each of the functions, the statute as well as the functional content, requires that the RBI 
exercise  varying  degrees  of  autonomy  and  coordination  vis-à-vis  the  government.  The  three  over-
arching features governing the relations with the Government are autonomy in operations; harmony in 
policies; and coordination in structural transformations.  
Glimpses of the Indian economy 
With  only  2.3  per  cent  of  the  world’s  land  area  (seventh-largest  country),  India  is  the  second  most 
populous country in the world with a population of 1.029 billion, which is among the youngest in the 
world. The proportion of population in the working age group of 15-64 years is currently around 62.9 
per cent and is expected to increase to close to 70 per cent by 2026. The “demographic dividend” is 
expected to extend over the next few decades of this millennium. India is unique in pluralism in terms 
of  languages,  religions,  ideologies  and  traditions  spread  over  twenty-eight  provinces  and  seven 
federally governed union territories, each with its distinct identity and socio-cultural ethos. While the 
Constitution of India recognises 22 languages as the official languages, the number of mother tongues 
in  India  is  reported  to  be  as  high  as  1,652.  India  is  well  endowed  with  natural  resources,  human 
resources  and  varied  climatic  regions,  which  is  reflected  in  the  institutional  architecture:  uniquely 
flexible  federalism,  democracy  with  universal  adult  suffrage,  and  coexistence  of  public  and  private 
sector.  
A  recent  but  positive  feature  of  the  Indian  economy  is  the  sustained  high  growth  that  has  been 
experienced since the 1980s. Real GDP growth, which averaged 5.8 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s, 
has accelerated to 8.6 per cent in the period 2003-07. In 2006-07 (we measure our financial year from 
April-March) real GDP growth was 9.2 per cent, which was one of the highest growth rates in the world 
in that year. If the current GDP growth rate of around 9 per cent is maintained, a person can hope to 
see the standard of living multiplying by almost five times in his lifetime.  
Another noteworthy aspect of the evolution of the Indian economy is the structural transformation that 
has been underway. At the time of independence from British rule in 1947, we were predominantly an 
agrarian  economy  with  traditional  industrial  base,  mainly  plantation  and  agro  dependent.  Today, 
agriculture  constitutes  merely  18.5  per  cent  of  GDP,  although  over  60  per  cent  of  our  population 
continues to depend on agriculture in some form for livelihood. While we regard the performance of 
agriculture  over  the  past  few  years  as  unsatisfactory  in  terms  of  our  expectations  in  view  of  the 
stagnation in output of key crops and the volatility in agricultural activity, some significant gains have 
been made in a few areas. 
In the industrial sector, there is a growing realisation of productivity and efficiency gains. In the face of 
free access to imports and foreign direct investment (FDI), Indian industry is increasingly becoming 
internationally competitive and is aggressively securing access to international markets on the strength 
of dynamic competitive advantage. The policy environment has also played a role in this resurgence of 
Indian industry. Tariffs, on a weighted average basis, are comparable to ASEAN levels and taxes on 
business incomes are internationally comparable. In 2006-07, industrial growth was 11.3 per cent and 
exports of manufactured goods rose by 16 per cent in US dollar terms (April-January).  
The mainstay of the Indian economy is currently the services sector, which constituted 61.9 per cent of 
GDP in 2006-07 and contributed two-thirds of average real GDP growth for the period 2002-07. The 
story of India’s information technology (IT) capacities is well known. The impulses of growth are now 
strengthening  in  other  services  as  well  such  as  engineering  and  consultancy,  communication, 
entertainment,  business,  finance  and  information  services  as  well  as  a  host  of  personal  services 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2007
including  tourism  and  hospitality.  The  Indian  development  experience  is,  in  fact,  regarded  by 
economists as unique in terms of the mutation of growth from a primary economy directly to tertiary 
activity rather than the conventional path of primary to secondary and then to tertiary stages of growth. 
The  Indian  economy  has  evolved  from  a  virtually  closed  economy  until  early  1980s  to  one  that  is 
opening up and rapidly integrating into the global economy since the commencement of major reforms 
in early 1990s. In terms of a traditional measure of openness, the ratio of exports and imports (both 
goods and invisibles) to GDP has risen steadily from 21.1 per cent in 1991-92 to over 50 per cent in 
2005-06  and  is  expected to  have  gone  up  further  in  2006-07.  Both  exports  and  imports have  been 
rising in recent years above the long-term trend. The merchandise trade deficit is currently close to 7 
per cent of GDP; however, the current account deficit is under 1.5 per cent of GDP, mainly due to the 
knowledge and competitive advantage we have in services and the steady support from remittances 
from Indians working abroad. These factors provide an in-built cushion to the balance of payments and 
help to keep the current account gap within sustainable limits. In this sense, the Indian economy has 
not contributed to the current global imbalances. 
Since  the  early  1990s,  when  we  instituted  structural  reforms  widely  and  deeply  with  a  progressive 
liberalization  of  the  economy,  India  has  been  receiving  large  capital  inflows,  reflecting  international 
confidence in the underlying fundamentals of the performance of the Indian economy. The ratio of net 
capital inflows to GDP has almost doubled from 1.5 per cent in 1991-92 to 2.9 per cent in 2005-06. In 
recent  years,  the  capital  flows  have  become  even  larger,  accounting  for  15  per  cent  of  global  net 
private capital flows to emerging market economies in 2006. There has been a pick-up in the FDI into 
India as well as borrowings in international financial markets by Indian corporates. Portfolio flows into 
Indian  stock  exchanges  have  shown  resilience  in  the  face  of  two  major  sell-offs  in  global  equity 
markets in May-June 2006 and February 2007. An important emerging element in the capital account 
of the balance of payments is the growing FDI from India (i.e., the overseas investments of the Indian 
corporates).  With  the  financing  requirement  of  the  current  account  deficit  being  modest,  the  rising 
profile of net capital flows has resulted in steady accretions to the foreign exchange reserves, which 
have more than doubled from US$ 76 billion at the end of March 2003 to around US$ 200 billion at the 
end March 2007. While the level of foreign exchange reserves is extremely modest compared to that 
of Japan, our reserves exceed each – a full year’s imports as well as the entire external debt. Since 
2002, India has turned creditor to the IMF and has engaged in prepaying external debt.  
While the RBI is invested with multiple objectives and is not mandated by law with target/instrument 
autonomy,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  consistently  evolved  around  the  goals  of  sustained 
growth,  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  with  a  continuous  rebalancing  of  weights  assigned  to 
each, depending on the evolving macroeconomic scenario. In the recent period, the objective of price 
stability and well-anchored inflation expectations has been accorded priority against the backdrop of 
global and domestic developments. It is heartening to note that high growth in the last four years has 
been associated with a moderation of inflation. The headline inflation rate, in terms of the wholesale 
price index, has declined from an average of 11.0 cent during 1990-95 to 5.3 per cent during 1995-
2000 and to 4.9 per cent during 2002-07. The trending down of inflation has been associated with a 
significant  reduction  in  inflation  volatility,  which  is  indicative  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations, 
despite the visitations of adverse shocks, both domestic and external.  
There  is  evidence  that  the  widening  and  deepening  of  the  financial  sector,  the  diffusion  of  micro 
structural  reforms  along  with  improved  regulatory  and  supervisory  oversight  have  enabled  the 
development  of  a  robust,  efficient  and  diversified  financial  system  with  sound  and  well-functioning 
financial markets. The combined effects of competition, regulatory measures, policy environment and 
motivation have imparted greater strength, efficiency and stability to the financial sector. The efficacy 
of financial sector reforms is also reflected in the significant improvement in the asset quality of the 
banking  sector.  Currently,  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  are  compliant  with  the  minimum  capital 
adequacy ratio of 9 per cent. The overhang of gross non-performing assets of scheduled commercial 
banks has declined from 8.80 per cent of advances in 2002-03 to 3.30 per cent in 2005-06. Operating 
expenses  as  a  ratio  of  total  assets  has  declined  from  2.24  per  cent  in  2002-03  to  2.11  per  cent  in 
2005-06.  
Developments in monetary policy 
A  monetary  targeting  framework  was  in  place  in  India  since  mid-1980s  and  till  1997-98  with  broad 
money (M3) as an intermediate target. In practice, the monetary targeting framework was used in a 
flexible  manner  with  feedback  from  developments  in  the  real  sector.  The  Reserve  Bank  formally 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 3
switched over in 1998-99 to a multiple indicator approach. As per this approach, interest rates or rates 
of  return  in  different  markets  (money,  capital  and  government  securities  markets),  along  with  data 
such as on currency in circulation, credit extended by banks and financial institutions, fiscal position, 
trade  balance,  capital  flows,  inflation  rate,  exchange  rate,  refinancing  and  transactions  in  foreign 
exchange, which are available with high-frequency, are juxtaposed with the trends in output, with a 
view  to  deriving  policy  perspectives.  The  multiple  indicator  approach  made  the  monetary  policy 
operation  more  broad-based  on  a  large  set  of  information  and  provided  flexibility  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary management.  
As  regards  the  operating  procedure  of  monetary  policy  in  India,  reliance  on  direct  instruments  has 
been reduced and a policy preference for indirect instruments has become the cornerstone of current 
monetary policy operations. However, recourse to direct instruments is taken when warranted by the 
circumstances.  Liquidity  management  in  the  system  is  carried  out  through  open  market  operations 
(OMO) in the form of outright purchases/sales of government securities and daily reverse repo and 
repo operations under a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF). 
The liquidity management was further refined in 2004  with the introduction of a market stabilisation 
scheme (MSS) under which the Reserve Bank was allowed to issue government securities as part of 
liquidity  sterilisation  operations  in  the  wake  of  large  capital  inflows  and  surplus  liquidity  conditions. 
While these issuances do not provide budgetary support, interest costs are borne by the fisc; and as 
far as Government securities market is concerned, these securities are also traded in the secondary 
market, on par with the other government stock. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  actively  engaged  in  developing,  widening  and  deepening  of  money, 
government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets  combined  with  a  robust  payments  and 
settlement system various markets. The medium-term framework is to keep developing the financial 
markets,  preserving  the  integrity  of  financial  markets  and  thereby,  improving  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy impulses.  
Some  of  the  important  developments  pertaining  to  the  money  market  are:  First,  with  a  view  to 
transforming the call/notice money market into a pure inter-bank market with participation of banks and 
primary dealers (PDs) only, non-bank participants have been completely phased out of the call money 
market.  Second,  several  new  financial  instruments  have  been  introduced.  The  traditional  refinance 
support on fixed terms has been replaced by a full-fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility with a view to 
modulating short-term liquidity under diverse market conditions. Third, measures have also been taken 
to make various other money market instruments (such as CDs, CPs, etc.) freely accessible to non-
bank participants. These measures were intended to improve the depth of as well as the efficiency and 
transparency  of  operations  in  the  money  market.  Fourth,  as  part  of  the  development  of  new 
instruments,  a  major  initiative  pertains  to  Collateralised  Borrowing  and  Lending  Obligation  (CBLO), 
which was operationalised as a money market instrument.  
As a debt manager to the Government, the development of a deep and liquid market for Government 
securities  is of  critical  importance  to  the  Reserve  Bank as  this results  in  better  price  discovery  and 
reduces the cost of Government borrowing. This market is also important for an effective transmission 
mechanism for monetary policy and facilitating the introduction and pricing of hedging products and 
serve  as  benchmarks  for  other  debt  instruments.  Efforts  towards  development  of  the  Government 
securities  market  have  focused  on  three  areas:  institutional  measures,  innovations  through 
instruments, and enabling market development measures.  
Major  developments  in  Government  securities  market  include:  establishment  of  a  Delivery  versus 
Payment system to reduce settlement risk; institution of the system of Primary Dealers to strengthen 
market  intermediation;  formation  of  market  bodies  such  as  Fixed  Income  Money  Market  and 
Derivatives  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA),  and  Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India  (PDAI)  to 
improve practices; permission to Foreign Institutional Investors to invest in Government securities in 
both the primary and secondary markets, with a view to broaden the markets; operationalisation of the 
Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS);  and  the  announcement  of  an  indicative  auction  calendar  for 
Treasury  Bills  and  dated  securities,  to  help  investors  plan  their  investment  better  and  to  enhance 
transparency and stability in the Government securities market.  
The RBI has undertaken various measures towards development of spot as well as forward segments 
of  foreign  exchange  market.  Market  participants  have  also  been  provided  with  greater  flexibility  to 
undertake  foreign  exchange  operations  and  manage  their  risks.  This  has  been  facilitated  through 
simplification of procedures and availability of several new instruments, e.g., foreign currency-rupee 
options.  Authorised  dealers  have  been  permitted  to  use  innovative  products  like  cross-currency 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2007
options,  interest  rate  swaps  (IRS)  and  currency  swaps,  caps/collars  and  forward  rate  agreements 
(FRAs)  in  the  international  forex  market.  There  has  also  been  significant  improvement  in  market 
infrastructure in terms of trading platform and settlement mechanisms.  
Financial sector development 
The banking sector reforms in India, initiated since 1992 have brought about structural changes in the 
financial  sector  by  easing  external  constraints  in  the  working  of  the  banks.  Major  policy  measures 
include  phased  reductions  in  statutory  pre-emption  like  cash  reserve  and  statutory  liquidity 
requirements and deregulation of interest rates on deposits and lending, except for a select segment. 
The  diversification  of  ownership  of  banking  institutions  is  yet  another  feature  which  has  enabled 
private shareholding in the public sector banks, through listing on the stock exchanges, arising from 
dilution of the Government ownership. On account of healthy market value of the banks’ shares, the 
capital  infusion  into  the  banks  by  the  Government  has  turned  out  profitable  for  the  Government. 
Foreign direct investment in the private sector banks is now allowed up to 74 per cent, subject to the 
prescribed guidelines.  
The co-existence of the public sector, private sector and the foreign banks has generated competition 
in  the  banking  sector  leading  to  a  significant  improvement  in  efficiency  and  customer  service.  The 
share of private and foreign banks in total assets increased to 27.6 per cent at end-March 2006 from 
24.7 per cent at end-March 2005 and less than 10.0 per cent at the inception of reforms.  
The  prudential  regulatory  norms  for  the  banks  for  capital  adequacy,  income  recognition,  asset 
classification and provisioning have progressively moved towards convergence with the international 
best practices. The Basel – II capital adequacy framework is being implemented in a phased manner, 
and the RBI has issued the final guidelines recently. A three-track approach has been adopted for the 
three types of banks, i.e., commercial banks, cooperative banks and regional rural banks, to facilitate 
smooth  transition.  These  norms  have  strengthened  the  financials  of  the  banking  sector,  as  evident 
from  a  decline  in  non-performing  loans  and  improvement  in  capital  adequacy  ratio  –  despite 
progressive stringency of the norms. For instance, as on March 31, 2007, nine out of 25 public sector 
banks have reported zero net NPAs, as a proportion to the total advances. This has been possible 
also on account of certain legislative and institutional measures implemented to expedite and facilitate 
the recovery of NPAs through special tribunals and restructuring mechanism. There is an increasing 
focus on governance aspects in the banks through adoption of “fit and proper” criteria for the owners, 
directors and senior managers of the banks. 
The Reserve Bank has also initiated a number of steps – institutional, procedural and operational – for 
making  the  payment  systems  safe,  secure  and  efficient.  For  efficiency  enhancements  and  risk 
reduction,  usage  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  System  and  other  electronic  payment 
mechanisms have been encouraged in a big way. The Reserve Bank has also provided a significant 
thrust to implementation of information technology in the banking sector. 
To strengthen the supervisory framework within the RBI, a Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) was 
constituted in 1994,comprising select members of the Reserve Bank’s Central Board with a variety of 
professional  expertise  to  exercise  “undivided  attention  to  supervision”  and  ensure  an  integrated 
approach  to  supervision  of  commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  Reserve  Bank  also 
instituted an Off-site Monitoring and Surveillance (OSMOS) system for banks in 1995, which provides 
for Early Warning System (EWS) as also a trigger for on-site inspections of the vulnerable institutions. 
The scope and coverage of off-site surveillance has since been widened to capture various facets of 
efficiency and risk management of banks. 
As  we  progress  further  in  the  reform  process,  the  main  focus  would  be  to  ensure  that  the  pace  of 
further deregulation and liberalisation remains consistent with the progress of reform in the real and 
fiscal  sectors.  In  practice,  within  the  given  legal  framework,  priorities  have  to  be  appropriately  set 
ensuring implementation of intended reforms in banking sector in tune with the evolving domestic and 
external developments. 
Summing up 
To sum up, India reflects diversity; yet there is an overwhelming preference in Indian society and polity 
for confluence. This is particularly reflected in the stability of the political system, which, in turn, has 
contributed to macroeconomic stability and sustained growth. Turning to the outlook, growth prospects 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 5
of Indian economy have strengthened considerably and appear well entrenched to build on the current 
momentum. The overarching policy challenge at this juncture is to manage the transition to a higher 
growth path while containing inflationary pressures. The Reserve Bank’s policy endeavor would be to 
contain inflation close to 5.0 per cent in 2007-08 and in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent over the medium-
term with a view to maintaining self-accelerating growth. The likely evolution of macroeconomic and 
financial conditions indicates an environment supportive of sustaining the current growth momentum in 
India complemented by appropriate emphasis on price stability and anchoring inflation expectations. 
Let me conclude by expressing my deep appreciation of the kind courtesies extended by the Bank of 
Japan, and in particular, for the warm hospitality extended by respected Governor Fukui. 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2007
