Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Highlights of economic performance in the 
Philippines over the past year and key challenges ahead 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Corporate Planning Society of the Philippines' 2006 4th General 
Membership Meeting and Christmas Party, Manila, 28 November 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Corporate  Planning  Society  of  the  Philippines,  fellow  workers  in 
government, special guests. Good afternoon and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
I am delighted that the Bangko Sentral is hosting your association's 4th general membership meeting. 
This provides us the opportunity to directly share with you our insights on vital inputs you need to firm 
up your plans for the coming years; after this, we can have a free-wheeling discussion so that we can 
also hear from you, learn about your concerns, and clarify certain issues. This is our way of supporting 
the cause of strategic planning in our country, the critical and essential function of creating a road map 
to achieve institutional goals that….taken together….sustain a nation's growth and development.  
First,  I  will  discuss  the  highlights  of  our  economic  performance  over  the  past  year  and  our 
expectations, moving forward. I will also touch on the key challenges ahead and how this will influence 
the policy direction of the Bangko Sentral.  
The economy in perspective 
Well, as you are aware, our key economic indicators have been telling us that 2006 is bound to be one 
of our best years….as positive results have been broad-based. In fact, analysts have been describing 
2006  as  a  defining  moment  for  our  economy,  as  it  has  turned  around  negative  perceptions….  and 
raised investor confidence in our country.  
Overall, our economy continues to grow, buoyed by the vibrant performance of key sectors notably 
manufacturing, trade and finance as well as the resurgence of agriculture, fishery and forestry. In fact, 
real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) accelerated to 5.5 percent during the first half of 2006 from 4.8 
percent in the previous year.  
Significantly,  we  were  able  to  keep  inflation  at  single-digit  levels….even  as  our  economy  grew  and 
absorbed record high domestic oil prices. In fact, we have been seeing a steady decline in inflation 
from a high of 7.6% in March this year to 5.4% last October, the lowest level since June 2004. Please 
note that this is within the Bangko Sentral's forecast range of between 5 to 5.7%.  
As  the  institution  mandated  to  stabilize  prices,  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  satisfied  with  this  trend. 
Essentially,  the  continued  softening  of  fuel  prices  and  the  strengthening  of  the  peso  supported  the 
further deceleration in inflation in October.  
Latest  forecasts  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  continues  to  indicate  a  generally  declining  path  for  inflation, 
with  average  inflation  for  2007  expected  to  fall  within  the  4-5  percent  target,  barring  unforeseen 
adverse shocks of course.  
As a result, the Monetary Board, in its last policy meeting on November 2, kept the Bangko Sentral's 
benchmark policy rates unchanged, but reinstated a tiering of interest rates on bank placements with 
the BSP to encourage further bank lending. Treasury bill (T-bill) rates also declined across the board 
in  early  November,  due  primarily  to  the  improved  fiscal  position  of  the  National  Government, 
manageable outlook for inflation and ample liquidity.  
On  the  external  front,  the  overall  balance  of  payments  position  for  the  first  six  months  of  2006 
recorded a surplus of $2.04 billion, an improvement from the US$1.98 billion surplus recorded in the 
same period in 2005. The improvement resulted from higher inflows in current transfers, particularly 
from remittances of overseas Filipino workers (OFWs), higher exports and investment inflows. 
During the first nine months this year, OFW remittances reached US$9.1 billion, up 14.4 percent from 
the same period last year as more Filipinos found work overseas and banks became more aggressive 
in  offering  remittance  services  to  OFWs.  Based  on  this  trend,  we  expect  total  OFW  remittances  in 
2006 to set a new record and approximate $12 billion.  
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
I am also pleased to inform you that our country's gross international reserves (GIR) reached a new 
record-high  level  of  US$22.3  billion  in  October  this  year.  Given  the  sustained  uptrend  in  our 
international reserves, we have in fact pre-paid some of our foreign loans.  
Likewise, these developments on the external front continue to sustain the appreciation of the peso 
versus the US dollar. I am sure you are all aware that the peso hit P49.60 to one US dollar yesterday, 
its highest level since 2002, as market sentiment continues to be positive. Better-than-expected fiscal 
performance  is  a  key  factor  in  this  regard,  as  government  spending  remains  restrained  even  with 
higher revenues generated from the Revised and the Expanded Value Added Taxes.  
To  summarize,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  better  macroeconomic  fundamentals  as  inflation 
continues  to  decelerate,  the  peso  remains  strong  against  the  US  dollar,  and  our  fiscal  position 
continues to improve, with actual surpluses posted in four months so far this year. As the Government 
adheres  to  the  implementation  of  its  economic  reform  program,  we  should  see  more  positive 
developments, moving forward.  
The financial sector reform agenda 
Similarly, our financial reform agenda has been generating positive results. In particular, the resources 
of the Philippine banking system reached record high levels as banks continued to register modest 
growth in deposits and capital accounts. This is significant… as banks account for more than 95% of 
the assets of the Philippine financial system.  
In  as  much  as  our  economy  depends  practically  on  the  banking  sector  for  its  financial  needs,  it  is 
imperative that banks are kept sound, healthy and responsive to the needs of its customers.  
For  your  information,  the  Bangko  Sentral  supervises  41  operating  universal  and  commercial  banks 
with 4,277 branches, 84 thrift banks with 1,209 branches, and 754 rural and cooperative banks with 
1,305 branches. These figures are as of June 30, 2006. With the series of mergers and consolidations 
that are taking place as banks seek to comply with more stringent capitalization requirements under 
Basel  2  and  international  accounting  standards,  we  should  see  fewer,  but  stronger  banks  in  the 
coming years.  
The BSP remains steadfast in its efforts to help clean up banks' balance sheets to stimulate lending 
activity. So far, we have seen the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio of universal and commercial banks 
drop  from  a  high  of  17.4%  in  2001….to  8.5%  in  December  2005….  and  further  to  7.43%  last 
September.  
Aggregate capitalization of the banking sector using the new and more stringent risk-based framework 
indicates that the banking industry's capital adequacy ratio (CAR) continues to exceed the statutory 
level  set  by  the  BSP  at  10  %  and  the  global  standard  of  8%  set  by  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements.  
Parallel to this positive development, outstanding loans of commercial and universal banks increased 
by 6.1% year-on-year in September to P1.597 trillion, the highest growth rate since May 2005.  
While these may be modest compared to levels reached in the previous years and by international 
standards, the numbers nevertheless indicate the overall soundness of the Philippine banking system 
on  account  of  continuing  reforms  in  recent  years.  These  include,  among  others,  adherence  to 
international best practices and the good governance tenets of fairness, accountability, transparency 
and social responsibility.  
Capital  market  reform  to  broaden  the  funding  sources  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  to  ease  the 
vulnerability of banks to economic downturns, remains a priority for Bangko Sentral. In collaboration 
with other government agencies and the private sector, the Bangko Sentral worked for the completion 
of needed infrastructure that would enhance financial system integrity and overall market confidence. 
The operation of the fixed income exchange (FIE) and the implementation of the third-party custodian 
scheme are part of these initiatives to provide viable and sustainable alternative sources of funds. 
The challenges ahead 
In the years ahead, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas will remain focused on its mandate of ensuring 
price stability by adhering to its inflation target; ensuring that the banking sector remains sound and 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
able  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the economy; and  ensuring  the stability  of  the Philippine 
payments system to minimize or prevent systemic risks.  
To  pursue  its  price  stability  mandate,  the  Monetary  Board,  the  policy-making  body  of  the  Bangko 
Sentral, will continue to rely on the following basic instruments: policy rates which are set every six 
weeks and influence the interest rates at which banks transact with their clients; reserve requirements 
or  the  share  of  depositors'  money  that  banks  must  set  aside  to  meet  withdrawals;  open  market 
operations which allow the Bangko Sentral to influence the level of money circulating in the economy 
through the purchase or sale of government securities; and rediscounting which encourages banks to 
finance priority economic activities such as exports and microfinance.  
The  Bangko  Sentral  uses  inflation  targeting  as  a  framework  to  maintain  price  stability.  Under  this 
strategy, the BSP calibrates its policy actions to achieve the rate of inflation agreed upon with other 
economic agencies of government. Adopted in 2002, this approach has served us in good stead. The 
challenge for us is to keep our forecasting tools on the money so that our policy rate decisions will 
generate the desired outcome when its full impact is absorbed by the economy 18 to 24 months down 
the road. Yes, ladies and gentlemen; this is the lag time we have to contend with in measuring the 
effectiveness of our policy response to ensure stable prices.  
As  the  sole  issuer  of  Philippine  currency,  the  Bangko  Sentral  must  also  ensure  that  there  is  just 
enough  money  in  circulation  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  country.  The  amount  of  money  in 
circulation must not be too low that it could lead to higher interest rates and slower economic growth. 
On  the  other  hand,  money  supply  must  not  be  too  high  that  it  will  be  inflationary  and  reduce  the 
purchasing power of the peso. This is a complex and challenging balancing act.  
As mentioned before, it is imperative that the banking sector remains sound and healthy as it provides 
the  funding requirements of  the economy,  using  essentially money  entrusted to  it  by  the  people.  In 
fact, funding for more than 70% of the resources of the banking system come from deposits which, as 
of June 2006, had reached P3.2 trillion.  
Ensuring  the  stability  of  our  payments and  settlements  system  is  equally  important.  As  the  bank  of 
banks, the Bangko Sentral serves as an effective clearing house for high value inter-bank transactions 
as  it  holds  cash  balances  of  the  banks. For  this  purpose,  the  Bangko  Sentral  operates  a  real-time 
gross  settlement  system  which  we  call  the  Philippine  Payments  and  Settlements  System  or 
PHILPASS  which  processes  about  2,000  transactions  with  a  total  value  of  about  300  billion 
pesos….daily.  
This is therefore a vital service as it minimizes settlement risks for high value transactions that may 
adversely affect the stability of the financial system.  
I hope that you will continue to support Bangko Sentral's policies and programs; in the same manner, 
you can depend on our support….if there is convergence on what our respective institutions want to 
accomplish.  
Indeed,  with  appropriate  programs  of  cooperation  and  complementation,  the  government  and  the 
private sectors can unleash the synergy which could sustain growth and development of our economy; 
jobs and income for the man on the street; as well as peace and prosperity for our country.  
Let us therefore work together to sustain our growth momentum and continue to implement our reform 
agenda. Remember, in the face of increasing global competition and millions of Filipinos who remain 
mired in poverty, we either innovate….or stagnate. Let us choose to innovate… together.  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.  
BIS Review 5/2007 
 3
