Anselmo L S Teng: Update of the economic development in Macao   
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Anselmo  L  S  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the 
BIS – advanced reserve management workshop, Macao, 22-25 May 2007. 
 Honoured Guests, Dear Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning, 
First of all, I would like to thank the BIS for choosing the Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) 
as the venue for this workshop, and for inviting me to deliver this opening remark. I would also like to 
wish the participants a great stay in this enclave which is a combination of nostalgia and excitement, 
as well as a good blend of eastern and western culture. 
Let me also take this opportunity to provide you an update of the economic development of Macao. As 
you are aware, Macao is a highly open economy. In 2006, Macao registered another year of two-digit 
economic growth, at 16.6%. Its GDP per capita reached USD28.4 thousand, representing one of the 
highest  among  Asian  economies.  Tourism-dominated  service  exports,  investment  and  private 
consumption  all  witnessed  strong  growth.  As  the  leading  industry,  tourism  showed  splendid 
performance, with visitor arrivals reaching an all-time high of 22 million last year.  
The economy continued to fare well in the first few months of 2007 as the growth of the tourism sector 
hardly  showed  any  moderating  signs.  Visitor  arrivals  increased  by  21.4%  in  the  first  quarter.  After 
years  of  strong  growth,  however,  the  resource  constraint  and  inflationary  pressure  have  become 
apparent. While unemployment rate further shrank to 3.2% in the first quarter of this year from 3.5% in 
the last quarter of 2006, inflation was 4.57% in the first quarter after easing from 5.15% last year.  
In the past few years, the economic prosperity has been largely built on the thriving tourism services 
sector.  Specialising  in  a  few  economic  activities,  however,  is  widely  believed  to  be  risk  prone  and 
unfavorable to macroeconomic stability. Diversifying the structure of our economy is therefore closely 
related to the sustainability of Macao’s development, employment environment and the stability of the 
community.  For  a  very  small  economy  like  Macao  that  easily  faces  tight  resource  constraints  and 
possesses  a  competitive  tourism  services  sector,  any  diversification  initiative  naturally  opts  for  a 
gradual  approach  with  a  long-term  perspective  in  order  not  to  incur  a  high  cost  of  disrupting  the 
development of the leading industry. The SAR Government has therefore been determined to promote 
vertical diversification of the tourism services industry, putting emphasis on non-gaming tourism with 
new elements of culture, leisure, sport, convention and meeting. Besides, the continuous effort by the 
government to optimize business environment, as well as the gradual deepening of CEPA; the role as 
platform  of  trade  and  services;  and  the  scheme  of  cross  border  industrial  zone  will  be  part  of  the 
driving force in diversifying the economy of Macao over the longer term. 
Now,  let’s  talk  about  reserves.  Also  benefiting  from  the  robust  tourism  sector,  Macao’s  external 
account remains favorable. In 2006, the trade account surplus was equivalent to one-third of nominal 
GDP, pushing our foreign exchange reserves up by 36.8% to USD 9.1 billion by the end of 2006. This 
amount of foreign exchange reserves represented an ideal level of 15 months of total imports in 2006. 
As  at  the  end  of  March  2007,  foreign  exchange  reserves  further  rose  to  USD  10.3  billion.  It  is 
considered substantial for a small city with a population of 500 000. 
The  management  of  the  reserves  of  the  Macao  SAR  is  in  the  good  hands  of  my  colleagues  in  the 
Monetary Authority. By adopting a prudent strategy, they managed a reasonable return in a turbulent 
market  environment.  However,  through  out  the  process,  like  everybody  else  who  is  in  charge  of 
managing a reserve, they may feel like walking on a tight rope – they have to strike a balance between 
return and risk, which is becoming more so as rapid development in the financial market opened up 
new  opportunities  to  invest  in  different  asset  classes  beyond  traditional  ones  and,  as  a  result,  risk 
management challenges also mount. 
When I look around the global financial market, I always ask myself a question: if a correction is bound 
to happen what will trigger its fall? It will certainly arise from an implosion of one or more instruments. 
Everything appears to be frothy these days. The suspect can be debts, stocks, commodities, hedge 
funds, private equity firms, carry trades, derivatives, just to name a few. The market value of any one 
of the above categories is measured in terms of billions of US dollars. Indeed, we witnessed last year 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 1
the fall of two substantial hedge funds. In February this year, the unwinding of Yen carry trades sent 
worldwide  stock  markets  tumbling  down.  Recently,  global  financial  markets  fret  about  the  possible 
collapse of U.S. real estates market which may interact with the default of subprime loans to form a 
vicious  cycle.  Fortunately,  the  global  financial  system  appears  to  be  more  resilient  than  what  we 
expect.  But  there  is  no  ground  for  complacency.  We  should  stay  vigilant  in  the  turbulent  financial 
markets. These events may be ominous. 
Universal  asset  inflation  has  in  fact  been  caused  by  excess  liquidity  which  is  flooding  the  financial 
world  and  prompts  the  cash  owners/managers  to  acquire  riskier  assets  in  order  to  secure  a  return 
which is in line with the norm of investment world. There are many explanations why there is so much 
money moving around the global village. Some of them are: 
• 
After the Asian crisis, most of the Asian nations have recovered and prospered again with 
much better fiscal conditions and stronger economic structure; 
Unlike  pre-Asian  crisis,  Asian  countries  have  accumulated,  since  then,  substantial  foreign 
exchange reserves; 
Although  part  of  the  exchange  reserves  have  to  be  maintained  to  ensure  the  stability  of 
national currencies, excess exchange reserves are building up quickly in this region; 
To alleviate the economy from plummeting into a tailspin after the dotcom bubble of 2000 
and 911 incident of 2001, the FED eased money supply and allowed FED fund rate to fall to 
as low as 1% in mid 2003. 
The near zero interest rate policy in Japan and the comparatively weaker Yen has given rise 
to carry trades.  
Oil exporters have reaped a windfall in the wake of a sharp rise in oil prices in the past few 
years, the huge surplus has joined the river of excess liquidity. 
     The recent financial market dilemma has posed a big problem to managers of all kinds of reserves. On 
one hand, they have to take bigger risks in order to earn a return which ranks pari passu with those of 
their  peers. On  the  other,  they  are well  aware  of  the  business cycle  and  the consequence  of  froth. 
When will the party end and how it will end is everybody’s guess. What we really worry about is what 
we cannot predict and therefore we have difficulty in taking the necessary measures to maintain our 
portfolios. 
Today,  I  am  very  pleased  that  the  BIS  has  invited  experts  in  this  field  to  shed  some  light  on  this 
pressing  issue.  After  this  meeting,  I  believe  that  the  participants  will  be  able  to  obtain  sufficient 
enlightenment  to  formulate  a  policy  conducive  to  the  purposes  of  setting  up  that  particular  reserve 
which  he  or  she  manages.  I  would  again  like  to  thank  the  BIS  for  the  arrangement  and  choosing 
Macao to hold such a practical and meaningful workshop. 
Thank you very much. Enjoy your workshop and the rest of your stay in Macao. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2007
