András Simor: On the road to the euro – good governance and effective 
partnership 
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  András  Simor,  Governor  of  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (the  central  bank  of 
Hungary), at the Conference “On the Road to the Euro: Good Governance and Effective Partnership”, 
Budapest, 19 April 2007.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I should like to thank you for attending this conference, jointly organised by the Ministry of Finance and 
the MNB, and sharing with us your valuable thoughts on the forms and possibilities of co-operation 
between the Government and the central bank on the road to the euro.  
I. 
The introduction of the euro is a joint enterprise for us. It is not merely a legal obligation we 
undertook  in  the  treaty  of  accession  but  much  more  than  that  –  a  unique  opportunity  that 
may  enable  the  Hungarian  economy  to  catch  up  more  quickly  and  may  ensure  lasting 
economic and financial stability. However, we can only exploit the benefits of the common 
currency  if  we  are  well-prepared  to  enter  the  gate  of  Eurozone.  In  these  preparations 
important tasks that extend beyond fulfilling the nominal convergence criteria devolve upon 
both the Government and the central bank.  
a. 
Above  all,  the  Government  must  create  a  balanced  budget  that  allows  sufficient 
room  for  manoeuvre  as  a  member  of  the  Eurozone  to  be  able  to  reduce  the 
fluctuations of growth in case of shocks to the economy.  
The  central  bank  has  to  prepare  players  in  the  economy  to  exploit  the  benefits 
arising from price stability as well as possible. We need to learn that our income 
can only grow at the rate our productivity grows, and inflationary expectations must 
be anchored.  
b. 
II. 
III. 
While we have to perform various tasks on the road to the euro, this is the common interest 
of the Government, the central bank and all players in the economy, and so we have to we 
help  and  support  each  other.  As  it  was  emphasised  in  the  speeches  here  today,  the 
Government and the central bank can co-operate most efficiently and achieve the best joint 
results  if  the  tasks  and  the  goal  to  be  reached  are  defined  precisely  for  both  parties,  but 
thereafter  independence  is  guaranteed  in  using  the  instruments  available  to  attain  the  set 
targets.  
The central bank’s objectives in inflation targeting were jointly set by the Government and 
the central bank, bearing in mind the Government’s convergence programme. At the same 
time,  as  regards  the  way  to  reach  the  targets  and  achieve  price  stability  as  well  as  the 
instruments to do so there was no such unanimity of views between the Government and the 
central  bank.  The  relationship  between  the  two  institutions  has  not  until  now  been 
characterised  by  this  situation,  called  by  the  experts  instrument  independence.  The 
difference of opinions was increased by the lack of confidence between the Government and 
the management of the central bank. This was reflected in that the central bank expressed 
serious  criticism  of  government  policy  in  issues  that  were  not  related  to  the  remit  of  the 
central bank as defined by law. On the other hand, the governing parties tried to influence 
monetary policy also during implementation.  
Naturally,  the  central  bank  must  be  accountable.  Just  like  any  other  company  limited  by 
shares, it must manage its resources cost effectively. In the central bank there should be a 
responsible  manager  who  is  answerable  for  operation  and  financial  efficiency,  while  the 
owner  of  the  central  bank,  the  Hungarian  state,  should  supervise  its  management.  As 
regards the administration of monetary policy, however, the accountability of the central bank 
needs to be placed on another footing. Clear targets that the Government supports as well 
need  to  be  set,  but  the  central  bank  should  be  afforded  the  opportunity  of  using  its  best 
expertise  in  employing  the  instruments  available  to  achieve  these  jointly  set  goals.  The 
governor  of  the  MNB  should  not  be  called  to  a  parliamentary  hearing  when  the  Monetary 
Council raises interest rates but when reaching the target set for inflation is in jeopardy.  
BIS Review 39/2007 
 1
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
2 
 the 
the  best 
international  practice  vis-à-vis 
Independence of the Government and the central bank does not mean there should be no 
room  for  coordination,  that  we  should  disregard  each  other’s  plans  and  measures  in 
fashioning  our  own  policy.  If  possible,  we  should  strengthen  favourable  processes  but, 
perhaps  even  more  importantly,  we  should  counteract  the  impacts  that  could  drive  the 
economy  off  its  jointly  plotted  course.  A  monetary  policy  that  works  efficiently  can  best 
support  achieving  the  Government’s  objectives  by  more  stable  growth,  a  predictable 
economic environment and the lower risk premium this engenders, which is also reflected in 
the reduction of the costs of financing the national debt.  
In order to make this mutual consideration of each other and working for common goals as 
fruitful  as  possible,  as  well  as  to  allow  the  other  players  in  the  economy  to  profit  to  the 
greatest extent possible from this, the Government and the MNB must adhere to the same 
two basic values. Our activity should be efficient and predictable. The speeches made during 
the  day  serve  as  a  guide  as  to  how  the  Government  can  improve  the  efficiency  of  its 
expenditure. Introducing a fiscal regulation strengthening long-term predictability – reducing 
implementation  risks  of  fiscal  policy  –  would  be  of  major  significance  also  from  the 
viewpoints of retaining investor confidence and the administration of monetary policy.  
In the central bank as well there are numerous ways to increase efficiency and predictability. 
We  saw  from  Professor  Eijffinger’s  speech  that  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy 
favourably  influences  the  performance  of  the  economy.  Transparent  monetary  policy 
contributes  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  with  constantly  low  interest  rates.  The  MNB 
conforms  with 
formal  requirements  of 
transparency:  we  have  a  set  target,  an  inflation  report  and  the  minutes  of  the  Monetary 
Council are published. I see, however, an opportunity to advance further in clearly explaining 
monetary policy measures and demonstrating our future intentions. Improving considerations 
behind monetary policy decisions and forward-looking communication by the central bank is 
indispensable for the efficient and predictable operation of the central bank.  
I believe that organisational changes are needed in the central bank to make its operation 
more  efficient  than  it  is  at  present.  Thorough  consideration  must  be  given  to  its 
organisational  structure,  the  division  of  duties  and  responsibilities,  and  harmonising  the 
spheres  of  authority  for  decisions  and  the  necessary  competences  for  good  decisions.  In 
part  changes  improving  efficiency  can  be  made  within  our  own  area  of  competence.  My 
colleagues  at  the  MNB  are  striving  to  run  a  rationally  structured,  smoothly  operating 
institution that handles taxpayers’ money with care. There are, however, other measures that 
go beyond the central bank’s remit, and so I ask for Government and legislative support in 
bringing them about.  
According  to  the  law  on  the  central  bank,  the  Monetary  Council  is  the  principal  decision-
making  body  on  matters  affecting  the  central  bank’s  core  activity.  The  professional 
preparations for these decisions are made by the central bank’s expert team but, according 
to  the  present  rules,  of  the  deputy  governors  directing  the  work  of  and  representing  the 
expert team only one has a seat on the Monetary Council. This places a restriction on the 
Monetary Council’s access to information in the MNB and to considerations that arise during 
professional  debates  among  the  team,  which  thereby  impedes  the  efficiency  of  making 
decisions.  I  therefore  propose  that  we  create  the  possibility  of  making  the  ratio  of  the 
external and internal members of the Monetary Council more balanced and better adapting 
to  international  practice,  and  of  giving  the  core  activities  of  the  central  bank  due 
representation in decision making.  
Professor Gavin Bingham raised the issue of the composition of the Monetary Council being 
problematic from another aspect. Academic results show that in the area of monetary policy, 
decisions  made  by  a  body  are  more  effective  than  those  made  by  individuals  as  the 
members  can  deal  with  the  information  more  effectively  and  can  represent  more  aspects 
jointly. At the same time, the marginal utility derived from increasing the number of members 
beyond a certain point falls quickly, indeed may become negative, as in a large organisation 
agreeing  positions  becomes  exceptionally  complicated  and  time-consuming;  beyond  a 
certain level there is no opportunity to find a consensus acceptable to everyone. This is why I 
believe  that  in  the  long  term  it  is  necessary  to  reduce  the  number  of  members  of  the 
Monetary  Council.  As  we  have  also  heard,  in  a  country  the  size  of  Hungary  with  a  non-
federal system, a 5 to 7 member Monetary Council is thought to be optimal.  
BIS Review 39/2007
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
Another important aspect regarding the efficient and predictable operation of the Monetary 
Council is continuity. One way to promote this is for the members of the Monetary Council to 
change  gradually  over  several  years.  It  would  be  practical  to  implant  this  into  Hungarian 
practice by changing at most 1 or 2 members each year.  
Last  but  not  least,  at  the  central  bank,  as  in  every  organisation,  a  balance  needs  to  be 
created between corporate and individual decisions and responsibilities. While approval of 
strategic  decisions  is  more  fortunate  when  made  by  a  body,  one  body  making  a  decision 
whose implementation encroaches on the competence of another body within the institution 
needs to be avoided. It is more efficient if in the area of implementing corporate decisions 
and in the direction of everyday work individual responsibility is placed in the foreground.  
Clarifying the goals, accountability and an efficient decision-making structure. These are the 
conditions  that  produce  the  appropriate  institutional  framework  for  the  efficient  and 
predictable  running  of  the  central  bank,  and  efficient  co-operation  with  the  Government.  I 
believe that the lessons of our conference today will find support in both legislation and in 
government circles as an efficiently working monetary policy facilitates the ability to plan and 
achieve  budgetary  targets,  and  helps  the  Hungarian  economy  meet  the  prerequisites  for 
acceding to the Eurozone as speedily and at the price of as few sacrifices as possible.  
Thank you for your kind attention. Goodbye.  
BIS Review 39/2007 
 3
