Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The role of communication in ensuring effective 
central banking 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Second IMF Regional Seminar on Central 
Bank Communications, Makati, 8 July 2007. 
 far 
for 
traveled 
this  Second 
Mr Ariyoshi, Mr. Reza Baqir, members of the BSP Monetary Board, distinguished speakers, 
fellow central bankers around the region, other officers of the IMF, good morning. On behalf 
of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I bid our guests a warm welcome to our country! 
You  have 
IMF  Regional  Seminar  on  Central  Bank 
Communications. This conveys, in very strong terms, the significance you attach to the role 
of communication in ensuring effective central banking.  
No doubt, the sea changes in global finance and markets as well as in the domestic macro-
economy have posed significant effects in the conduct of monetary policy. In particular, we 
have seen the rapid evolution of monetary policy towards increased transparency. I share the 
general observation that secrecy or deliberate obfuscation are no longer the buzzwords in 
central banking circles.1
In  sharp  contrast  to  the  past  practice  of  reticence  among  monetary  authorities,  greater 
emphasis  on  effective  communication  is  now  a  best-practice  policy  among  central  banks 
around the world. In fact, in the last two decades or so, we were witness to an expansion in 
disclosure  mechanisms  employed  by  central  banks.  Moreover,  there  has  been  a  dramatic 
change in the nature and quality of information that monetary authorities are now willing to 
disclose.  
This morning, I will share some of my thoughts on central bank communication in general 
and  provide  you  with  an  overview  of  the  communication  strategy  that  we  employ  at  the 
Bangko  Sentral,  with  focus  on  our  framework  for  communication  with  other  government 
agencies.  
The importance of central bank communication 
I.  
The  move  toward  greater  transparency  is  a  key  element  of  good  corporate  governance. 
Central  banks  have  become  increasingly  independent  so  there  is  scope  for  greater 
accountability.  After  all,  a  central  bank  is  a  public  office  whose  policy  decisions  have  an 
important bearing on the direction of the economy.  
Thus, the central bank should be able to clearly define its goals and provide a compelling 
explanation behind its policy actions. In turn, transparency allows for an honest assessment 
of central bank performance, given the goals it has pledged to achieve. 
The emphasis on better transparency practices also recognizes the idea that transparency 
makes monetary policy generally more effective, in part by ensuring that market expectations 
are formed efficiently.  
                                                 
1   See  for  example:  Blinder,  Alan,  Charles  Goodhart,  Philipp  Hildebrand,  David  Lipton  and  Charles  Wyplosz 
(2001) How Do Central Banks Talk? Geneva Reports on the World Economy 3, Geneva: International Center 
for Monetary and Banking Studies 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
As  central  bankers,  we  are  aware  that  the  potency  of  monetary  policy  actions  can  be 
strengthened  if  markets  understand  the  overall  intention  behind  the  central  bank’s  policy 
decision and the results it expects to achieve.  
Indeed, the emergence of “open mouth” operations as a policy tool outside of the traditional 
channels of monetary policy has been recognized by central bankers.  
As pointed out by Ehrmann and Fratzccher (2005): “Central banks have direct control over a 
single interest rate, usually the overnight rate, while their success in achieving their mandate 
requires that they are able to influence asset prices and interest rates at all maturities” .  
In  the  case  of  the  Bangko  Sentral,  we  typically  adjust  our  overnight  policy  rate,  when 
necessary, by increments of as low as 25 basis points. If we really think about it, we do not 
expect that such a marginal adjustment in a very short-term instrument will do the job for us. 
Rather,  we  rely  on  the  markets  to  interpret  our  signals  properly  and  allow  for  appropriate 
adjustments  in  the  prices  of  financial  assets  that  really  matter,  including  the  longer-term 
tenors.  
In  general,  central  banks  now  avoid  surprising  the  market  since  this  could  generate 
unwarranted volatility. This is where communication comes in: it increases the predictability 
of  policy  decisions  and  helps  the  market  anticipate  how  the  central  bank  might  react  to  a 
particular  situation,  event  or  development.  Indeed,  good  transparency  practices  promote 
greater market efficiency.  
For an inflation targeting central bank such as the Bangko Sentral, communication is crucial 
in anchoring inflation expectations. To help guide public expectations, it is incumbent upon 
an  inflation  targeting  central  bank  to  disclose  its  outlook  for  future  inflation.  Managing  the 
expectations channel is, therefore, critical. 
Apart  from  influencing  the  market  with  its  policy  actions,  communication  also  allows  the 
central  bank  to  obtain  useful  feedback  from  its  stakeholders,  which  in turn  is  an  important 
input to policy formulation.  
Given  these  arguments  in  favor  of  communication,  the  next  critical  issue  is  the  extent  of 
transparency. How transparent should central banks be?  
My  view  is  that  central  banks  should  take  a  pragmatic  approach  to  communication.  While 
transparency  is  a  good  policy,  excessive  transparency  could  hamper  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy and potentially harm market stability. 
Specifically,  extensive  disclosure  requirements  about  internal  policy  discussions  on  money 
and  exchange  market  operations  might  disrupt  markets,  constrain  frank  discussion  by 
policymakers, or prevent adoption of contingency plans. 
In other words, good transparency practices should allow for flexibility to take into account 
country-specific circumstances. After all, there is no one-size-fits-all formula for central bank 
communication.  
Communication between the central bank and other government agencies 
II.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  importance  of  communication  between  the  central  bank  and  other 
government agencies.  
While  most  central  banks  enjoy  independence  from  other  branches  of  government, 
continuing  coordination  with  other  government  agencies 
for  macroeconomic  policy 
formulation remains an imperative. Inter-agency arrangements should be in place to ensure 
consistent and coherent economic policies. After all, monetary and fiscal policies, along with 
other government policies, are interlocking elements of the country’s overall macroeconomic 
strategy.  
2 
 BIS Review 81/2007
The  consensus  among  economists  and  policymakers  is  that  well-coordinated  policies  are 
integral to durable, broad-based and strong economic growth. As such, fiscal and monetary 
authorities,  as  well  as  other  economic  managers  in  government,  should  share  information 
and be aware of their agencies’ respective policy intentions and decisions. A silo approach to 
government  policy  formulation,  where  one  agency  formulates  policy  on  its  own  without 
consultation, does not and will not work. 
In fact, the absence of coordination among policymakers could undermine the credibility of 
the country’s macroeconomic policy. As Worrell (2000) argued in his paper: “the invariable 
consequence  of  any  appearance  of  conflict  among  the  authorities  is  an  increase  in 
uncertainty  in  financial  markets,  a  loss  of  credibility  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  an 
increased  probability  of  price  and  output  instability”.  Thus,  good  communication  with  other 
economic managers is of prime importance in macroeconomic management. 
The  same  principle  applies  in  the  field  of  financial  supervision.  Even  in  central  banks  with 
financial  supervision  functions  such  as  the  Bangko  Sentral,  jurisdiction  over  the  financial 
sector  is  often  shared  with  other  government  supervisory  agencies.  In  the  Philippines,  for 
instance, supervision over non-bank financial institutions without quasi-banking functions is 
shared by the Bangko Sentral, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Insurance 
Commission.  This  underscores  the  need  to  maintain  close  coordination  among  these 
agencies  to  ensure  consistency  of  policies,  as  well  as  access  to  timely  and  accurate 
information.  
An  important  caveat  in  communication  between  the  central  bank  and  other  government 
agencies  is  the  responsibility  to  respect  the  confidentiality  of  sensitive  information  being 
shared.  
The BSP’s communication strategy 
III.  
The Bangko Sentral, like many other central banks, continues to enhance its communication 
strategy to reach all its stakeholders. Our adoption of inflation targeting in 2002 served as an 
additional stimulus for us to work on improving our transparency practices.  
In  dealing  with  the  press  and  the  market,  the  Bangko  Sentral  employs  a  wide  range  of 
disclosure  mechanisms.  One  of  these  mechanisms  is  the  BSP  website  which  carries  our 
press statements, statistical releases and our advocacies. 
In the area of monetary policy, a press statement is issued immediately after each monetary 
policy meeting. Typically, each policy statement contains the reasons behind the Monetary 
Board decision, along with a brief discussion on the outlook for future inflation.  
The highlights of our policy meetings are also made public after a predetermined lag of four 
weeks. The highlights were initially published with a lag of six weeks but we shortened it to 
four  weeks,  beginning  July  last  year,  to  further  improve  transparency  in  monetary  policy-
making.  
We  also  publish  a  quarterly  Inflation  Report  to  document  the  rigorous  economic  analysis 
behind the conduct of monetary policy and inform the public of the overall thinking behind our 
decisions. The release of the Inflation Report for each quarter is accompanied by a briefing 
for the media and market analysts. 
In cases of a breach of the inflation target, the BSP issues an open letter to the President to 
account for the reasons behind it and to outline the actions that will be undertaken to bring 
inflation back to the target range. 
Further,  we  conduct  public  information  campaigns  across  the  country  to  foster  better 
understanding and support for the central bank’s policies and programs. The Bangko Sentral 
also  conducts  regular  dialogues  with  the  press  and  periodic  engagements  with  its  various 
constituencies. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 3
is  done  by 
In  the  Philippines,  the  generation  of  macroeconomic  assumptions  and  formulation  of 
government’s  medium-term  budget  strategy 
the  Development  Budget 
Coordinating Committee, which is composed of the Department of Budget and Management, 
and the Department of Finance, the National Economic and Development Authority and the 
Office of the Executive Secretary. The BSP used to be a member of this committee but, in 
recognition  of  its  administrative  and  fiscal  autonomy,  was  re-assigned  as  a  resource 
institution. 
Under  the  inflation  targeting  framework,  the  inflation  targets  are  set  by  the  Committee  in 
coordination  with  the  BSP.  This  effectively  commits  the  Government  as  a  whole  to  the 
inflation  target.  Equally  important,  this  ensures  that  our  monetary  policy  actions  remain 
consistent  with  the  Government’s  economic  policy  agenda,  even  as  we  maintain  our 
independence. 
In the field of financial supervision, the Bangko Sentral has cooperative arrangements with 
other  financial  regulators.  Among  others,  the  Bangko  Sentral  chairs  the  Financial  Sector 
Forum  which  includes  the  members  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  the 
Insurance Commission and the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation It focuses on three 
broad areas: harmonization of supervisory and regulatory policies in the Philippine financial 
system; information exchange; and consumer education or financial literacy. 
In addition, the Bangko Sentral is in various stages of negotiations with foreign supervisory 
authorities for the adoption of minimum ground rules on information sharing involving cross-
border  financial  institutions  under  their  supervision  .  Through  this  initiative,  we  hope  to 
strengthen cooperative arrangements with our foreign counterparts. 
Another important dimension of our interface with the government is our interaction with the 
Executive and Legislative branches of Government. As mandated in our charter, we submit 
regular  reports  to  the  President  and  both  houses  of  Congress.  These  include  a  report  on 
economic and financial conditions, a report on the central bank’s financial condition, and a 
review  on  the  state  of  the  Philippine  financial  system.  The  BSP  is  also  required  by  law  to 
report  to  the  President  and  Congress  any  unusual  movements  in  monetary  aggregates, 
credit and price levels, as well as the remedial measures undertaken by the Bangko Sentral 
to correct them. 
In addition, the Bangko Sentral engages in a variety of informal interactions with the other 
branches  of  government  through  appearances  in  committee  hearings  in  both  houses  of 
Congress and its participation in various government inter-agency committees and working 
groups. 
In other words, we invest time and resources to communicate our policies and programs with 
other branches of government.  
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
This IMF seminar, therefore, comes at an opportune time when central bank communication 
has emerged as a potent policy tool, rather than a mere channel to transmit information. As 
an  institution  that  recognizes  the  significance  of  communication  in  making  our  operations 
more effective, we at the Bangko Sentral are pleased to co-host this Second IMF Regional 
Seminar on Central Bank Communication. 
This seminar should build on the IMF’s initiative, which started in Mumbai, to provide a forum 
to  discuss  emerging  issues  in  central  bank  communications  and  gain  insights  from  one 
another’s experiences. 
We thank the IMF and their representatives who are here with us this morning…for setting up 
this forum for central bank communication in this region. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2007
Finally,  I  wish  this  seminar  on  central  bank  communication  will  be  fruitful  and  highly 
successful,  not  only  in  terms  of  generating  fresh  perspectives  but  also  in  fostering  regular 
exchange and cooperation among the participants.  
Have a wonderful stay in our country. Thank you and Mabuhay! 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 5
