David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report Update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, 18 January 2007. 
 Today we released the January Monetary Policy Report Update, which discusses current economic 
and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
The Canadian economy is judged to have been operating at, or just above, its production capacity at 
the end of 2006, following weaker-than-expected growth in the second half of last year. This slowdown 
stemmed from reduced demand for Canadian exports - related to weakness in the U.S. automotive 
and housing sectors - and from the need for Canadian businesses to adjust inventories.  
Looking ahead, real GDP growth is now expected to average about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 
2007, rising  to  about 2  3/4  per cent  in  the second half  of  this  year.  In  2008,  growth  is  projected  to 
remain  in  line  with  the  growth  of  potential  output (estimated  at 2.8  per  cent),  keeping  the  economy 
operating near its capacity throughout the projection period. Expressed on an average annual basis, 
this profile implies growth of 2.3 per cent in 2007 and 2.8 per cent in 2008.  
Total consumer price inflation will continue to be affected by movements in energy prices and, during 
the  first  half  of  2007,  by  last  year's  reduction  in  the  Goods  and  Services  Tax  (GST).  Total  inflation 
should average just above 1 per cent in the first half of this year, returning to the 2 per cent target in 
early 2008. Core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and stay there.  
On  16  January,  the  Bank  left  its  key  policy  rate  unchanged  at  4.25  per  cent.  The  risks  around  the 
Bank's  inflation  projection  continue  to  be  judged  to  be  roughly  balanced,  but  the  main  upside  and 
downside  risks  have  diminished  somewhat  since  the  October  MPR.  The  current  level  of  the  policy 
interest rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium 
term. 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 1
