Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament   
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a hearing before the 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 21 March 2007. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la  Commission  Economique  et 
Monétaire, c’est avec un intérêt chaque fois renouvelé que je parais, tous les trimestres, devant votre 
Commission  afin  de  poursuivre  le  dialogue  de  la  Banque  Centrale  avec  le  Parlement.  La  Banque 
Centrale  Européenne  est,  vous  le  savez,  très  attachée  à  cet  exercice  qui  contribue  à  rendre  notre 
action  transparente  vis-à-vis  du  citoyen  européen.  Je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une 
évaluation de la situation économique et monétaire. Anschließend werde ich auf die Unterschiede, die 
bei den geldpolitischen Transmissionskanälen in den USA und dem Euroraum bestehen, sowie ihre 
praktischen Auswirkungen eingehen. Zum Abschluss möchte ich die Bedeutung von Preisstabilität aus 
sozialpolitischer Perspektive erläutern. 
Economic and monetary issues 
Since  my  previous  appearance  before  the  European  Parliament  in  December  last  year,  newly 
available  information  has  served  to  confirm  our  assessment  that  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area 
continues to expand robustly. In addition, the cross-checking of our economic and monetary analyses 
have  underlined  the  existence  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term. 
Accordingly, on 8 March the Governing Council of the ECB decided to increase key ECB interest rates 
by 25 basis points. Our decision to increase key ECB interest rates in March contributes to ensuring 
that medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area remain solidly anchored at levels 
consistent  with  price  stability,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing 
contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Let 
me explain the assessment underlying this decision and the outlook for the economy and risks to price 
stability. 
Starting  with  the  economic  analysis,  according  to  Eurostat’s  first  estimate,  the  quarter-on-quarter 
growth rate of real GDP in the euro area for the fourth quarter of 2006 was 0.9%, which was above 
previous  expectations.  Both  domestic  demand  and  exports  made  significant  contributions  to  this 
growth, confirming the sustained and broad-based nature of the current expansion. The information on 
economic  activity  from  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-based  estimates  supports  the 
assessment that economic growth has continued into 2007. 
Looking ahead, conditions remain in place for the euro area economy to grow solidly. Global economic 
growth has become more balanced across regions and, while moderating somewhat, remains robust, 
providing support for euro area exports. Domestic demand is expected to maintain its relatively strong 
momentum.  Investment  is  expected  to  remain  dynamic,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of  very 
favourable  financing  conditions,  balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong 
earnings, and gains in business efficiency. Consumption should also strengthen further over time in 
line with developments in real disposable income as employment conditions continue to improve. This 
outlook for economic developments is also reflected in the new ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
which  foresee  average  annual  real  GDP  growth  in  a  range  between  2.1%  and  2.9%  in  2007  and 
between 1.9% and 2.9% in 2008. 
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding the favourable outlook for economic growth are 
broadly balanced over the shorter term. At longer horizons, risks lie mainly on the downside, relating to 
the  possibility  of  a  renewed  increase  in  oil  prices,  fears  of  a  rise  in  protectionist  pressures  and 
concerns about possible disorderly developments owing to global imbalances.  
Turning to the price developments, annual HICP inflation was 1.8% in February 2007, unchanged from 
January  2007.  The  lower  annual  HICP  inflation  rates  since  the  summer  of  2006  have  been 
predominantly  due  to  lower  energy  prices.  Looking  ahead,  last  year’s  volatility  in  energy  prices  will 
lead to significant base effects, affecting the profile of annual inflation rates this year. Accordingly and 
on the basis of the current level of oil prices and oil price futures, annual inflation rates are likely to fall 
during the spring and summer before rising again towards the end of the year and hovering again at 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 1
around 2%. The new ECB staff macroeconomic projections point to annual HICP inflation averaging 
between 1.5% and 2.1% in 2007 and between 1.4% and 2.6% in 2008.  
At  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon,  the  outlook  for  price  developments  remains,  in  the 
Governing Council’s view, subject to upside risks. These stem from the possibility of renewed oil price 
increases and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced 
and decided thus far. More fundamentally, stronger than currently expected wage developments would 
pose significant upward risks to price stability, particularly in view of the favourable momentum of real 
GDP growth. It is therefore crucial that the social partners continue to meet their responsibilities and 
that wage agreements take into account present relative price competitiveness positions, the still high 
level  of  unemployment  in  many  countries  as  well  as  productivity  developments.  The  Governing 
Council will monitor the upcoming wage negotiations in the euro area countries very carefully. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, this confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium 
to longer horizons. Annual M3 growth was unchanged at 9.8% in January, remaining at the highest 
rate  observed  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  At  10.6%,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the 
private sector also remained strong in January. This reflects the continuation of the upward trend in 
the growth of borrowing by non-financial corporations seen since mid-2004. Meanwhile, the growth of 
household borrowing has shown some further signs of moderation in recent months, albeit remaining 
at still high rates.  
Taking  the  appropriate  medium  to  longer-term  perspective,  the  latest  developments  confirm  the 
continuation of a persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion. Furthermore, 
following several years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation in the euro area is ample by 
all plausible measures. The robust expansion of money and credit in an environment of ample liquidity 
points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments 
therefore  continue  to  require  very  careful  monitoring,  particularly  against  the  background  of  a  solid 
expansion in economic activity and continued strong property market developments in many parts of 
the euro area.  
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look through any short term volatility in inflation 
rates. At the policy-relevant horizon of the medium term, risks to price stability remain on the upside, 
relating  in  particular  to  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  developments  in  a  context  of  robust 
ongoing growth in employment and economic activity. Given the vigorous monetary and credit growth 
in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over the medium to longer term.  
Monetary policy transmission in the euro area and the US 
In  my  remarks  today  I  would  also  like  to  discuss  differences  and  similarities  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy in the euro area and the US.  
Optimal monetary-policy actions depend on the nature of the shocks hitting the economy, the present 
and  future  expected  economic  environment  and,  importantly,  on  the  transmission  mechanisms  of 
monetary  policy  actions.  These  elements  have  a  precise  bearing  on  comparative  exercises 
highlighting  parallels  and  differences  between  monetary  policies  in  different  currency  areas.  For 
example, in order to compare the monetary policy decisions of the Federal Reserve and the European 
Central Bank, we must analyse, among other things, the structure of the economies in which they are 
operating,  because  economic  structures  and  institutions  determine  the  functioning  of  the  monetary 
policy transmission mechanisms and, therefore, indirectly influence the design of policy.  
Is the monetary transmission mechanism in the United  States significantly different from that of the 
euro area? Applied economics has approached this question from two different angles: statistical and 
structural analysis.  
Statistical  analysis  has  studied  the  business  cycle  properties  of  aggregate  data,  such  as  GDP  and 
inflation for the US and the euro area. By applying a battery of statistical tests, this approach seeks to 
assess whether macroeconomic time series display similar or different dynamic patterns over the cycle 
in the two areas. A related approach has applied statistical techniques to identify the way in which a 
monetary policy innovation propagates through the economy.  
But  statistical  analysis  is  imperfect  because  it  is  difficult  to  see  –  based  solely  on  aggregate  data 
statistics – whether a difference in statistical patterns originates in shocks or in economic structures, 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2007
and what feature of the economic structures and institutions is responsible for what particular aspect of 
the transmission of monetary policy impulses.  
Structural  analysis  has  concentrated  –  more  fundamentally  –  on  two  related  aspects.  First,  it  has 
constructed measures of price and wage rigidity: these have been expressed by the frequency of price 
and wage adjustments. In economies with more rigid goods and labour markets – where, for example, 
labour practices and contractual institutions hamper a prompt transmission of shocks to wages – the 
macroeconomic  adjustment  to  shocks  takes  longer  to  run  its  course  and,  more  importantly,  falls 
disproportionately on production and employment.  
Second, structural analysis has provided evidence of the sensitivity of inflation expectations to past 
inflation developments. The relevance of inflation expectations to the transmission mechanism is more 
subtle but central. An inflationary shock tends to be more persistent if wage and price rigidities are 
greater,  unless  inflation  expectations  are  found  to  be  insensitive  to  the  inflation  history  and  more 
solidly anchored around the objective of the central  bank. Again, this has important implications for 
monetary  transmission.  A  shock  to  inflation  is  faster  to  dissipate  –  even  if  prices  and  wages  are 
relatively more rigid – if inflation expectations are more firmly anchored.  
Now, while the statistical approach has generally failed to spot significant differences across the two 
areas, structural analysis comes to two main conclusions. The first is that, in the euro area, prices are 
distinctly less flexible than in the United States.1  
Second, an inflationary shock dissipates quickly in the euro area despite rigidities, and inflation has a 
tendency  to  return  to  its  long-run  norm  reasonably  quickly.  Survey-based  measures  of  inflation 
expectations, for example, suggest that the ECB’s influence on expectations seems to have become 
much stronger since the establishment of the euro.2
What are the implications for policy? I will mention two of them, both stemming from the notion that the 
appropriateness of policy cannot be judged in abstract terms: policy needs to be carefully calibrated to 
the underlying economic structure.3 First, in a relatively rigid economy, the adjustment falls primarily 
on quantities. So, a central bank is generally well-advised to avoid volatile policy paths, which in those 
conditions  can  transmit  unwelcome  volatility  to  the  economy  and  often  necessitate  corrective, 
countervailing action further down the road. Second, inflation expectations that look more forward – to 
the central bank’s intentions – than backward – to inflation history – call for more persistence in the 
policy direction. Again, a central bank that moves its policy rate around in response to each twist and 
turn in the data would under these circumstances have only a limited impact on the economy. When 
the inflation process is as forward-looking as it is in the euro area, policy shifts that lack persistence 
have little impact on longer-term interest rates, on expectations and – ultimately – on macroeconomic 
and pricing decisions.  
Counterfactual  policy  evaluation  is  difficult  to  conduct  and  necessarily  conditional  on  a  long  list  of 
technical  assumptions.  Nonetheless,  recently  conducted  counterfactual  policy-evaluation  exercises 
suggest that since 2001 – and compared with the flexible economy par excellence, the US – our policy 
interventions  had  a  greater  stabilizing  effect  on  the  economy.  In  tune  with  the  structural  conditions 
                                                      
1   The Eurosystem has made important contributions to the analysis of price rigidities in the euro area. A summary of a very 
extensive  research  project  conducted  jointly  by  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  is  provided  in  Altissimo,  F.,  M 
Ehrmann.  And  F.  Smets  (2006),  “Inflation  Persistence  and  Price  Setting  in  the  Euro  Area:  A  Summary  of  the  Inflation 
Persistence Network Evidence” ECB Occasional Paper 46, Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank. The paper reports 
that the average duration of CPI price spells in the euro area is 4.3 quarters. By comparison, M. Bils and P. Klenow, in 
“Some  evidence  on  the  importance  of  sticky  prices”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy  112,  2005,  calculate  that  the  average 
duration  of  CPI  prices  in  the  United  States  is  2.2  quarters.  Other  Phillips  curve-based  analyses  broadly  confirm  these 
results. For the euro area, see J. Gali, M. Gertler and D. Lopez-Salido, “European inflation dynamics”, European Economic 
Review 45(7), 2001, and J. Gali, M. Gertler and D. Lopez-Salido, “Erratum”, European Economic Review 47(4), 2003. 
2   The consumer survey on inflation expectations compiled by the European Commission is a good barometer of the sensitivity 
of short-term inflation expectations to recent inflation dynamics. Results are presented in terms of the difference between 
the percentage of respondents who believe prices will increase and the percentage of respondents who believe that they will 
decrease or stabilise. Prior to the euro cash changeover there was a close relationship between this qualitative indicator and 
actual inflation developments, with a correlation coefficient near to 1. However, since the cash changeover, the correlation 
between the two series has dropped to 0.4. 
3   Christiano, J., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007), “Shocks, Structures or Policies? The Euro Area and the US after 2001” 
(forthcoming  in  the  Journal  of  Economic  Dynamics  and  Control)  argue  along  these  lines  on  the  basis  of  a  structural 
estimated model of the euro area and the US. 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 3
prevailing  in  the  euro  area,  the  overall  degree  of  accommodation  delivered  by  the  ECB  was  more 
ample, albeit back-loaded, because it was more persistent.4  
Of course, keeping our interest rate at an unprecedented low level for two years and a half would not 
have been part of a feasible policy, without consistent signs that expectations were well-anchored and 
the inflationary shocks that were hitting the economy at the time of the downturn were being quickly 
reabsorbed.5  
Social benefits of price stability  
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  last  point  today  in  which  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  critical  role  of  our 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  in  orienting  expectations.  I  have  mentioned  how  persistent 
conditions  of  price  stability  can  change  the  transmission  channels  in  ways  that  can  partly  alleviate 
structural  shortcomings  of  the  economy.  In  the  euro  area,  notwithstanding  structural  rigidities  that 
impede  price  and  wage  adjustments  –  rigidities  that  cannot  be  corrected  by  a  central  bank  –  well-
anchored  inflation  expectations  partly  compensate  for  and  make  the  transmission  mechanism  less 
inefficient than it would be otherwise.  
But welfare analysis has also drawn attention to other, and perhaps even more fundamental, channels 
through which price stability can enhance growth prospects and contribute to the living standards of 
citizens.  
First, in a market economy, the price system plays a key role in the efficient allocation of resources to 
alternative uses. Price pressures in a specific market can signal profitable investment opportunities to 
firms.  Price  stability  improves  the  quality  of  the  signals  that  prices  convey  to  both  households  and 
firms, which can then easily recognise changes in the relative prices of different goods, allowing them 
to  make  well-informed  consumption  and  investment  decisions.  By  contrast,  in  an  inflationary 
environment,  prices  only  provide  blurred  signals:  price  increases  in  a  specific  market  can  either 
indicate strong demand and investment opportunities or simply reflect a general increase in the price 
level.  By  helping  market  forces  to  guide  resources  to  those  uses  in  which  they  can  be  used  most 
productively, price stability contributes to sustainable increases in productivity and employment, and 
ultimately higher standards of living.  
Second,  price  stability  contributes  to  lower  levels  of  both  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  Inflation 
erodes the real value of nominal claims and, in an inflationary environment, lenders typically require an 
inflation risk premium to compensate them for the inflation risks associated with their investments. By 
contrast,  creditors  do  not  require  such  a  risk  premium  when  price  stability  is  ensured.  By  reducing 
inflation risk premia, price stability results in lower levels of real interest rates, thereby making more 
investment  projects  profitable.  By  supporting  investment,  lower  interest  rates  contribute  to  higher 
levels of employment and economic growth. 
Third, it is well known that inflation acts like a tax on holdings of cash. Inflation increases the price of 
the transaction services of money. While this certainly is not a palpable economic phenomenon in the 
euro  area  today,  a  handful  of  hyperinflation  episodes  in  economic  history  still  makes  this  so-called 
“inflation tax” one of the most widely known examples of the undesirable consequences of inflation. By 
setting the “inflation tax” to negligible levels, price stability minimises transaction costs in the economy 
as  a  whole.  This  benefits  all  citizens  on  a  daily  basis,  and  even  more  so  those  who  are  not  in  a 
position to protect themselves against inflation.  
Finally,  inflation  brings  about  an  arbitrary  redistribution  of  income  and  wealth.  The  more  vulnerable 
groups in society typically suffer the most from inflation. They have a relatively higher share of their 
savings invested in cash and savings accounts, the real value of which is easily eroded by inflation. 
Their limited access to financial markets leave them with little room to evade the “inflation tax”. In this 
respect, pensioners who have to live on their pension entitlements and savings accumulated during 
their working life constitute a group that is particularly vulnerable to inflation. Price stability ensures 
that the real value of both pension entitlements and savings is maintained.  
                                                      
4   The counterfactual is conducted in Christiano, et al (2007), op. cit. 
5   See  in  particular  the  following  speeches  (published  on  the  ECB  website):  J.-C.  Trichet,  “Monetary  policy  and  credible 
alertness” (Jackson Hole, 27 August 2005) and “Activism and alertness in monetary policy” (Madrid, 8 June 2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2007
Today, the level of inflation in the euro area is below the threshold of our definition of price stability, of 
“less than 2%, close to 2%”, while medium and long-term inflationary expectations in the euro area are 
solidly  anchored.  Against  this  background,  the  social  benefits  of  price  stability  are  often  taken  for 
granted. I should therefore like to stress here that the undesirable social and economic consequences 
of  inflation,  namely  inefficient  allocation  of  resources,  high  levels  of  interest  rates,  the  regressive 
inflation tax, arbitrary redistribution of income and wealth to the detriment of the most vulnerable, and, 
last  but  not  least,  economic  instability,  lower  growth  and  lower  job  creation,  are  the  benchmarks 
against  which  one  has  to  assess  the  social  benefits  of  price  stability.  This  is  why  a  credible 
commitment to maintaining price stability is so important for the living standards of European citizens. 
And why our fellow citizens, according to all surveys, are so profoundly attached to price stability.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 27/2007 
 5
