Petar Goshev: Promotion of the European Fund for Southeast Europe – EFSE 
in the Republic of Macedonia  
Welcoming speech by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  first  official  presentation  of  the  European  Fund  for  Southeast  Europe  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, Skopje, 1 March 2007. 
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen! 
Allow me to express my pleasure, more precisely the pleasure of all employees of the National Bank 
of the Republic of Macedonia for being hosts of the first official presentation of the European Fund for 
Southeast  Europe  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  Therefore,  I  greet  the  representatives  of  the 
European  Fund  for  Southeast  Europe,  wishing  them  a  warm  welcome  to  our  country,  where,  I 
sincerely  assure  them,  they  could  fully,  equally,  safely  and  more  ambitiously  offer  their  financial 
services  to  the  market  of  the  highly  open  Macedonian  economy,  also  encouraged,  of  course,  from 
their previous positive experience they acquired through their cooperation with the Export and Credit 
Bank, AD Skopje.  
I  would  also  like  to  especially  welcome  all  of  you  that  responded  to  the  invitation  by  attending  this 
presentation, thus de facto showing respect and interest in yet another new financial initiative in the 
Republic of Macedonia. Certainly, there is a deep reason for such respect and interests. Namely, we 
are hosts of one of the world's largest development finance funds, established with a capital support of 
the  European  Union,  the  governments  of  Germany,  Switzerland  and  Austria,  as  well  as  many 
international financial institutions such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the European 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the German Development Bank (KFW) and the 
Netherlands  Development  Finance  Company  (FMO).  This  means  that  we  have  partners  and 
institutions labeled by the Republic of Macedonia at its list as "vital interest". 
Their primary objective is, and they will present it better than me though, to finance the development of 
the  Southeast  Europe,  particularly  focusing  on  the  financing  needs  of  micro  and  small  enterprises 
(MSEs) and private households. Actually we are honored to have the leaders of the European Fund 
for Southeast Europe to provide details on its structure and objectives, on extending long-term funds 
and  the  wide  range  of  financial  instruments  designed  to  support  the  development  of  the  countries 
throughout our region. I have no doubts that these financial instruments will make you interested and 
take  initiative  for  forthcoming  potential  cooperation  with  the  European  Fund,  and  hence  with  other 
qualified intermediaries, besides the already established cooperation with the Import and Credit Bank 
AD Skopje. 
Dear guests, 
The  fact  that  the  leaders  of  this  Fund  offered  to  present  their  financial  services  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  the  Central  Bank  certainly  encouraged  and  supported  this  initiative,  shows  that  these 
important partners consider the Republic of Macedonia a friendly environment for launching various 
mutually beneficial business initiatives and projects. Yet, we do not forget though, that some of these 
institutions  had  no  doubts  whatsoever  about  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  even  in  the  most  difficult 
periods for us after gaining the independence, since when nobody else was coming, they were here. 
We certainly appreciate that.  
Regardless of all above, we still have many reasons that urge us to notice and convince others why is 
it good to invest in the Republic of Macedonia and to develop partnership with our economic agents 
and,  of  course,  to  inform  on  the  activities  that  all  of  us  in  our  country  perform,  directed  towards 
increasing  the  attractiveness  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  as  investment  destination.  Hence,  we 
definitely need such financial offers. The economic growth could be accelerated by more investments, 
competitive offer of financial instruments and products, which are likely to eventually bring about lower 
costs for borrowing capital. 
The potential investors should be aware that the Macedonian financial sector is booming, but that the 
room for investments is yet to be opened. The gross national savings is low, not more than 12-17% of 
GDP, over the recent several years. The gross domestic savings have been even lower over the last 
five  years,  swinging  around  2.5%  of  GDP,  on  average.  Since  1995,  the  gross  investments  have 
virtually  never  exceeded  20%  of  GDP.  The  foreign  investments,  except  in  the  years  of  large 
BIS Review 25/2007 
 1
privatizations by foreign companies, are also low, barely 2% of GDP, on average, in the last 4 years. 
The total bank assets, even though registering a fast growth over the last years, making up roughly 
50% of GDP, still shows low level of financial intermediation in the country.  
The above figures were target of a deep impact of the external shocks the country suffered, besides, 
of  course,  the  inexcusable  delay  of  many  essential  reforms  of  the  vital  sectors  of  the  country.  But, 
eventually, the potential investors and creditors have to believe that: 
- 
- 
the political and security shocks in the region and inside the country are behind us, 
the economy accelerates its growth, which over the recent years is not below 4% real GDP 
growth, 
we  preserve  high  macro-economic  stability  that  implies  exceptionally  disciplined  monetary 
and  fiscal  policies,  which  in  turn  result  in  low  inflation,  stable  exchange  rate  and  foreign 
exchange market, sustainable trade and current account deficits and strictly controlled public 
debt  and  that  these  policies  for  maintaining  macro-economic  stability  will  be  further 
conducted, as a prerequisite for good business, 
the price stability policy will be further implemented, 
the growth will accelerate registering rates higher than before, 
serious  structural  reforms  are  underway  under  the  leadership  of  the  government  in 
cooperation  with  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF.  The  tax  policy  has  undergone  reforms  by 
reducing  the  tax  burden.  The  administration  has  undergone  reforms  for  increasing  its 
capacity. Additional reforms in the financial sector and improvement of the financial market 
operations  have  been  underway.  There  are  reforms  in  the  cadastre.  The  conditions  for 
foreign direct investments have been improving. The process of economy deregulation has 
been underway. The judiciary reforms have improved the efficiency in the contract execution. 
The ownership rights have been protected.  
  The  bank  soundness  and  safety  have  been  strengthening.  The  depositors  feel  that  and  repay  with 
over 20% deposit growth over the last several years. And now, we are truly challenged by the further 
increase in the bank competition, and deeply confident that this process will considerably accelerate 
very soon. The experience, however, shows that the best come only in well regulated financial sector, 
in a banking governed by regulations based on the European directives and the world best practices. 
In this light, the forthcoming new Banking Law allows for further strengthening of the bank corporate 
governance;  minimizing  or  eliminating  all  possibilities  for  non-transparent  shareholder  structures; 
increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  procedure  for  exclusion  from  the banking system  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, of shareholders that lack reputation and integrity, thus compromising the stability not only 
of  their  bank  but  across  the  banking  system.  Therefore,  it  allows  for  establishing  proper  risk 
management systems and internal control systems, thus facilitating the gradual migration to risk-based 
supervision,  which  is  already  encompassed  in  the  assignment  related  to  the  implementation  of  the 
New Capital Accord (so-called BASEL II), over the next several years. All things considered, we could 
send a message, without any hesitation, to the potential investors and providers of financial services 
and products that the Republic of Macedonia is a safe place to invest and fructify the capital and that 
the creation of good, friendly business environment, with competitive advantages compared to others, 
has been permanently improving.  
I wish the European Fund for Southeast Europe a successful business and good cooperation with our 
financial  intermediaries.  The  room  for  its  policies  directed  towards  micro  and  small  business, 
household  finance,  rural  sector  finance  is  even  wider.  Thousands  of  micro  and  small  enterprises, 
thousands  of  families  have  no  access  to  financial  services  and  products  whatsoever,  and  most  of 
those who do, cannot borrow under the existing borrowing costs and required collaterals. Some has 
already noticed: "one micro-financing loan could change the future of a family, few could change the 
future of a local community and thousands of such credits could make an enormous contribution to the 
development  of  the  overall  economy".  This  Fund  will  make  its  contribution  to  this  purpose,  since  it 
offers long-term source of financing and because it is aimed at target groups the access of which to 
the  financial  injection  is  most  difficult.  Let  us  encourage  them  by  noticing  that  they  have  wide 
opportunities to help them accomplish their mission. And, profit and development for the region. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2007
