Nout Wellink: Economic and Monetary Union at eight – achievements and 
challenges 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking Supervision, at  the  Nieuwegein  Business  Center,  Studievereniging  ECU  '92, Nieuwegein, 
31 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
Eight years after its establishment, it is sometimes forgotten what a monumental achievement Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  actually  is.  In  the  early  nineties,  many  people  believed  it  would  never  happen. 
Others speculated that if it were to happen, it would soon fall apart. These doomsayers were wrong. 
Monetary Union happened and it happened smoothly, bringing huge benefits to the people who share 
the  euro.  With  this  in  mind,  I  will  today  resist  the  temptation  to  predict  the  future  of  Monetary  Union. 
Instead, I will touch upon the benefits of having the Monetary Union and the key challenges it still faces. 
By taking up these challenges, I am positive its future can be shaped into a more prosperous one. 
The achievements of EMU 
Let  me  first  go  into  the  economic  benefits  of  the  Monetary  Union.  The  euro  has  brought  about 
substantial  improvements  in  the  macroeconomic  policy  framework.  Most  notable  is  that  the  ECB  has 
managed to deliver low and stable inflation. Although countries like Germany and the Netherlands also 
enjoyed low inflation before the adoption of the euro, the ECB has been able to “export” that benefit to 
other countries, such as Italy and Spain. This has been greatly facilitated by the ECB´s independence 
and its mandate to safeguard price stability. As a result, annual consumer price increases in the euro 
area have been kept around 2 percent over the past 7 years. The ECB has also succeeded in anchoring 
stable  and  low  inflation  expectations,  as  indicated  by  consumer  surveys  and  inflation-indexed  bonds. 
This is a major achievement for a young central bank, in particular considering the shocks the euro area 
faced such as sharp rises in oil prices. Along with lower inflation, interest rates have fallen dramatically. 
Globalisation has definitely played a role, but the credibility of the ECB has also contributed to lower 
interest rate levels. 
It takes two to tango: macroeconomic stability in a monetary union cannot be guaranteed without sound 
fiscal  policies.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  aims  to  ensure  prudent  fiscal  policy  over  the  economic 
cycle. In the medium and long run, the Pact also promotes sustainability of public finances. If we look at 
the cyclical-adjusted fiscal balance over time, we see an impressive improvement in the run up to the 
euro. Between 1995 and 1999, the average public sector deficit fell from 4.5 to 1.5 percent of GDP. In 
the following years this deficit worsened again, to a low-point of 2.8 percent of GDP in 2002. The good 
news  is  that  this  bottom  lies  at  a  much  better  level  than  the  troughs  in  the  1980s  and  1990s.  As  a 
consequence, the increasing trend in the debt-to-GDP ratio, which rose to almost 75 percent of GDP in 
1997,  has  been  reversed  and  declined  to  69  percent  of  GDP  in  2006.  While  this  performance  is  not 
impressive against the backdrop of lower interest rates, it does suggest that with the arrival of the euro 
the worsening in public finances has come to a halt. 
Besides supporting macroeconomic stability, Monetary Union has been a catalyst for integration. The 
euro  has  eliminated  exchange  rate  risks  within  the  euro  area  and  has  increased  price  transparency 
across borders. These factors have led to significant positive effects on trade within the euro area. A 
popular  empirical  model  to  analyse  trade  flows  is  the  so-called  gravity  model.  It  is  a  straightforward 
application  of  the  Newtonian  model  of  gravity  from  physics.  Translated  to  economics,  bilateral  trade 
tends to increase with the size of the countries concerned and to decrease with their mutual distance. 
Figuratively  speaking,  distances  have  become  smaller  between  member  states  by  the  elimination  of 
exchange rate risk and the reduction of transactions costs. Studies using this method estimate a positive 
growth  effect  on  trade  of  5  to  10  percent1.  Another indication  of  increased  trade  within  the  Monetary 
                                                      
1   R. Baldwin (2006), The euro’s trade effects, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 594, March 2006. 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 1
Union is the substantial decline in the differences of traded-good prices across member states. These 
have dropped to a level akin to regional price differences in the US2.  
But Monetary Union has left it greatest mark on European financial markets. Traditionally, the efficiency 
of these markets has been hampered by costs associated with the use of multiple currencies. Given the 
large  volumes  traded  in  financial  markets,  even  small  transaction  costs  can  produce  substantial 
distortions. The euro has reduced those transaction costs and has improved the efficiency of European 
financial  markets.  For  example,  euro  area  cross-border  holdings  of  bonds  have  increased  strongly  – 
from about 10 percent at the end of the 1990s to 60 percent in 20063. This suggests that investors are 
increasingly diversifying their portfolios across the euro area. Together with financial innovation, the euro 
has increased market liquidity and the opportunity for risk sharing. The bond market’s depth has recently 
increased to 11 trillion dollar, outnumbering the size of euro area’s GDP. Admittedly, the corporate bond 
market in the euro area is still substantially smaller than in the US, as European firms traditionally rely 
more  on  bank  financing.  However,  firms  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  increasingly  make  use  of  debt 
securities. Between 1998 and 2006, the value of outstanding bonds in terms of GDP has doubled, while 
it  increased  “merely”  60  percent  in  the  US4.  More  efficient  and  deeper  financial  markets  benefit 
companies through lower borrowing costs. 
The challenges for EMU 
As we speak, the euro area is undergoing an upturn. Economic figures have been better than expected. 
In  2006,  GDP  grew  by  2.9  percent,  outstripping  the  United  States  for  the  first  time  in  5  years. 
Unemployment has fallen to 7.5 percent in 2006, the lowest level in 15 years. While the recovery reflects 
a cyclical upswing, these figures also suggest that structural reforms in the past are starting to pay off. 
However, as Henry Kissinger once said: “each success only buys an admission ticket to a more difficult 
problem”. Monetary Union’s problem is twofold:  weak public finances and subdued per-capita-income 
growth.  Things  have  improved,  but  I  am  convinced  we  can  do  much  better.  Without  aiming  to  be 
exhaustive,  I  will  mention  a  few  steps  that  enable  countries  to  tackle  these  issues  and  to  further 
capitalise on the advantages of the single currency. 
Creating sustainable fiscal positions 
A first challenge will be to bring public finances on a sustainable footing. In periods of buoyant revenue 
growth, there is often a tendency to overestimate the strength of the underlying budgetary position. That 
is partially because economists can only tell you tomorrow why things predicted yesterday didn’t happen 
today.  If  spending  is  allowed  to  increase  on  a  structural  basis,  but  higher  revenues  turn  out  to  be 
transitory, the budgetary position starts to deteriorate as soon as economic conditions turn nasty. This 
was exactly the mistake made by some countries in the beginning of this decade. Let’s not repeat that 
mistake. Countries with sizeable deficits and public debts should use the current windfall in tax revenues 
to  consolidate.  Sound  public  finances  are  also  crucial  for  dealing  with  the  costs  due  to  population 
ageing. While living longer is good news, public expenditures in the euro area are projected to increase 
by up to 10 percent of GDP by 2050 if the implications of ageing are not addressed5. Action is therefore 
needed. By lowering public debt more financial room is created for less favourable democratic times. But 
governments should also reduce the burden of ageing itself by, for example, reforming public pay-as-
you-go pension schemes. Germany and the UK have recently announced a gradual rise in the statutory 
retirement  age  to  67  and  68.  As  this  measure  appears  quite  effective  to  absorb  an  increasing  life 
expectancy6, other European countries should follow this example. 
                                                      
2   J.H. Rogers (2007), Monetary Union, Price Level Convergence, and Inflation: How Close is Europe to the United States?, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (2007) 785-796, and Faber and Stokman (2005), Europese convergentie in vogelvlucht, 
Economische Statistische Berichten, 128-130. 
3   ECB (2007), Financial Integration in Europe, March 2007. 
4   BIS (2007), BIS Quarterly Review, March 2007. 
5   Economic Policy Committee (2006), The impact of ageing populations on public spending, November 2006. 
6   CPB (2006), Ageing and the sustainability of Dutch public finances, March 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2007
Improving labour markets 
Fiscal  consolidation  is  more  likely  to  succeed  if  it  is  accompanied  by  structural  reforms  that  lift  the 
potential growth path. One obvious candidate is the labour market. The average participation rate in the 
euro area still relatively low. This is most striking for workers aged between 55 and 64, where the rate is 
just  two-third  of  the  figure  in  the  US.  It  is  often  argued  that  this  is  because  Europeans  are  keen  on 
leisure. But financial incentives play a large role in people’s decision to either work or not. For example, 
empirical studies show that labour supply is responsive to the tax rate on labour. This suggests that if we 
want  to  increase  economic  wellbeing,  improving  financial  incentives  could  be  of  help.  Labour  force 
participation could be stimulated by further lowering marginal taxes on labour. According to the OECD, 
the average marginal tax rate on labour in the euro area is high and it hovers around 15 percent points 
above  the  rate  in  the  US7.  Female  participation  could  be  supported  by  providing  adequate  childcare 
facilities. Euro area’s labour markets could also use some extra flexibility. The OECD indicated that rigid 
employment protection and generous unemployment benefits have barely changed over the last years. 
In 2005, the average replacement rate of unemployment benefits8 in the euro area was more than 20 
percent  higher  than  the  OECD  average9. Improving  labour  market  dynamics  involves  making 
employment protection less stringent and reducing the length of unemployment benefits. Through this, 
employees  will  get  a  stronger  incentive  to  seek  a  job,  while  firms  will  find  it  more  attractive  to  hire 
people. 
Fostering service market competition and a friendly business environment 
Increasing  competition  in  service  markets  is  another  condition  for  higher  economic  growth.  A  lack  of 
competition  harms  productivity  growth  by  limiting  efficient  production  and  reducing  the  incentive  to 
innovate. “Necessity is the mother of innovation”, Veblen once said. I think he is right. When there is 
pressure  from  contenders,  one  tends  to  perform  better  than  without  competition.  Much  headway  has 
been  made  in  raising  competition  in  product  markets.  Also  in  some  service  sectors  there  has  been 
progress. Noteworthy in this regard is the opening up of the telecommunication sector in the late 1990s. 
However,  differences  in  permits,  regulations  and national  monopolies  continue  to  hinder cross-border 
competition in a number of service sectors, such as mail and electricity. This is particularly regrettable, 
given that services represent 70 percent of GDP and employment in the euro area. That also illustrates 
the  importance  of  the  European  Service  Directive.  While  this  Directive  has  been  watered-down 
compared  to  the  Commission’s  original  proposal,  it  still  has  benefits.  It  has  been  calculated  that 
consumption in the EU can rise by 0.3-0.7 percent permanently due to the Directive10. I agree, this does 
not sound spectacular, but it only entails the static effect of increasing trade opportunities. If the dynamic 
effects  from  increased  competition  are  taken  into  account,  the  number  is  expected  to  be  higher.  Air 
travel offers an example of what can happen. Due to liberalisation and competition, air travel within the 
EU has come within reach of tens of millions of people, often at lower fares than 20 years ago. In view of 
these benefits, it is important that countries bring their legislation in line with the Directive over the next 
years. 
Enhancing cross-border competition one thing, creating an entrepreneur-friendly environment is another. 
This includes lowering the costs and constraints imposed by the public sector on existing and start-up 
firms.  According  to  the  World  Bank,  in  2005  the  average  cost  of  starting  a  business  with  up  to  50 
employees in the euro area is estimated to be 10 times higher than in the US. That is, if entrepreneurs 
have not given up starting a business in the meantime, as it takes on average 27 days to set up a new 
business in the euro area, compared to just 5 in the US11. I always had respect for entrepreneurs, but 
it’s getting larger in view of the red tape they have to cut through. In this respect, I fully underscore the 
                                                      
7   Marginal tax on labour consists of income tax, employee and employer social contributions as a percentage of total labour 
costs of average worker. 
8   The average replacement rate is measured by the average unemployment benefits relative to the average income for three 
different family situations (single, dependent spouse and working spouse) 
9   A. Bassanini and R. Duval (2006), Employment patterns in OECD countries: reassessing the role of policies and institutions, 
OECD Working Paper No. 486, June 2006. 
10   CPB  (2006),  The  trade-induced  effect  of  the  Service  Directive  and  the  country  of  origin  principle,  CPB  document  108, 
February 2006. 
11   World Bank (2006), World Development Indicators, Business Environment database. 
BIS Review 57/2007 
 3
current  EU  Commission  initiative  for  measuring  the  cost  of  existing  legislation  and  reducing  the 
administrative burden on companies with 25 percent by 2012.  
Stimulating further financial market integration 
Economic growth can get an additional boost by more financial market integration. Clearly more needs 
to be done in the equity market. While slowly increasing, only a quarter of the equity portfolio of euro 
area residents consists of equity issued in another euro area country. Home-bias might be one reason 
for lagging integration; high costs for cross-border transactions are another. This partly reflects the lack 
of integration in market infrastructure for equities. Settlement of equities in Europe is divided over 19 
different systems compared to only two in the US12.Since the introduction of the euro, consolidation in 
this sector has failed to take place and barriers continue to hold back cross-border trade. This hampers 
competition, keeps  transaction costs  high  and  weakens  the  opportunity  for  risk  sharing.  If  the  market 
fails to produce satisfying results, than it is up to the public sector to act. Against this background, the 
ECB has recently launched its proposal for a single securities settlement platform. The huge economies 
of  scale  it  aims  to  produce  should  create  scope  for  lower  transaction  costs  and  a  more  efficient 
allocation of savings and investment. 
Another area where further integration is warranted is the retail banking sector. The cost of opening a 
bank  account  and  the  cost  of  transferring  money  from  it  widely  differs  between  euro  area  countries. 
National  discrepancies  in  legislation,  technical  standards  and  procedures  are  obviously  major 
impediments to  further  integration.  Fortunately,  the  right  initiatives  are  underway.  It  already  started  in 
2001, with the Regulation on cross border payments in euro. Better known as the Bolkestein Regulation. 
This  Regulation  paved  the  way  for  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area.  An  ambitious  initiative,  where 
European citizens should by 2010 be able to make payments throughout the euro area from their bank 
account as easily and safely as in their own country today. By creating a pan-European infrastructure 
and identical payment tools, all payments in the euro area essentially become domestic payments. 15 
years ago this goal was beyond imagination. Now it appears within reach. 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, the euro has seen a number of successes: the introduction of a new currency for more 
than 310 million people, price stability, low interest rates and progress in the integration of the goods 
and financial markets. These achievements are remarkable, as they have been realised in a short period 
of time and in a unique political context. Indeed, Europe is the world’s laboratory: we created the first 
supranational  entity  based  on  a  sense  of  solidarity  rather  than  coercion.  Of  course  it  is  not  all  plain 
sailing. In the fields of public finances and the internal market work remains to be done to reap the full 
benefits of the euro. It is therefore important to remain ambitious in the near future. Not ambitious to be, 
but ambitious to do. How Monetary Union will evolve in the future is hard to predict. But if the past 8 
years offer a compass for the future, I am optimistic we find the right answers to our current challenges. 
                                                      
12   G. Tumpel-Gugerell (2007), The competitiveness of European financial markets: an economic framework for effective policy 
making, speech at Washington Economic Policy Conference, 12 March 2007.  
4 
 BIS Review 57/2007
