Ben S Bernanke: Education and economic competitiveness 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  US  Chamber  Education  and  Workforce  Summit,  Washington  DC, 
24 September 2007. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 When  I  travel  around  the  country,  meeting  with  students,  business  people,  and  others 
interested in the economy, I am occasionally asked for investment advice. Usually (though 
not always) the question is posed in jest. No one really expects me to tell them which three 
stocks they should buy. However, I know the answer to the question and I will share it with 
you today: Education is the best investment.  
Here at the U.S. Chamber Education and Workforce Summit, I don’t really need to convince 
you that, as an investment, education provides excellent returns, both for individuals and for 
society.  As  executives  accustomed  to  making  hard  cost-benefit  decisions,  you  doubtless 
assign a high priority to the quality of your business’s workforce because you know that a key 
–  perhaps  the  key  –  to  your  success  is  the  capabilities  of  the  people  you  employ.  To  a 
significant extent, those capabilities are the product of education. Here I am speaking not just 
of  education  acquired  formally  in  classrooms  before  entering  the  workforce  but  also  of 
lifelong  learning  that,  yes,  includes  the  formal  classroom  training  that  might  first  come  to 
mind  but  that  also  includes  early  childhood  programs,  informal  mentoring  on  the  job,  and 
mid-career retraining, to name a few examples. And when I speak of capabilities, I mean not 
only  the  knowledge  derived  from  education  but  also  the  values,  skills,  and  personal  traits 
acquired through education, which are as important as, and sometimes even more important 
than,  the  specific  knowledge  obtained.  These  include  such  qualities  as  the  ability  to  think 
critically,  to  communicate  clearly  and  logically,  and  to  see  a  project  through  from  start  to 
finish. 
Today, I would like to offer a broad overview of education and its importance to our economy 
from my perspective not only as an economist but also as a one-time school board member, 
the  spouse  of  a  teacher,  and  the  parent  of  two  young  adults  pursuing  higher  education. 
Although  the  United  States  has  long  been  a  world  leader  in  expanding  educational 
opportunities,  we  have  also  long  grappled  with  challenges,  such  as  troubling  high-school 
dropout  rates,  particularly  for  minority  and  immigrant  youths,  and  frustratingly  slow  and 
uneven progress in raising test scores and other measures of educational achievement. If we 
are to make progress in meeting these challenges, we must be willing to actively debate their 
causes and continually experiment and innovate to find solutions. 
The benefits of education 
Education imparts significant benefits both to our society and the individuals who pursue it. 
Economists have long recognized that the skills of the workforce are an important source of 
economic growth. Moreover, as the increase over time in the returns to education and skill is 
likely the single greatest cause of the long-term rise in economic inequality, policies that lead 
to broad investments in education and training can help reduce inequality while expanding 
economic  opportunity  (Bernanke,  2007).  But  the  benefits  of  education  are  more  than 
economic.  A  substantial  body  of  evidence  demonstrates 
that  more-highly-educated 
individuals  are  happier  on  average,  make  better  personal  financial  decisions,  suffer  fewer 
spells  of  unemployment,  and  enjoy  better  health.  Benefiting  society  as  a  whole,  educated 
individuals are more likely to participate in civic affairs, volunteer their time to charities, and 
subscribe to personal values – such as tolerance and an appreciation of cultural differences 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
–  that  are  increasingly  crucial  for  the  healthy  functioning  of  our  diverse  society  (Glaeser, 
Ponzetto, and Shleifer, 2006; Dee, 2004). 
From a macroeconomic standpoint, education is important because it is so directly linked to 
productivity,  which,  in  turn,  is  the  critical  determinant  of  the  overall  standard  of  living.  The 
Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that, between 1987 and 2006, ongoing improvement in 
the  education  and  experience  of  the  U.S.  workforce  contributed  0.4  percentage  point  per 
year  to  the  increase  in  nonfarm  business  labor  productivity  (U.S.  Department  of  Labor, 
2007),  a  significant  amount.  These  estimates  are  however  conservative  in  that  they  hold 
fixed  other  sources  of  productivity  growth,  such  as  the  accumulation  of  various  forms  of 
capital  and  the  advance  of  technology;  but  workers’  skills  certainly  contribute  indirectly  to 
productivity  growth  by  affecting  these  other  factors  as  well.  For  example,  the  state  of 
technology  is  affected  both  by  the  creativity  and  knowledge  of  scientists  and  engineers 
engaged in formal research and development as well as by the efforts of skilled workers on 
the  shop  floor  who  find  more  efficient  ways  to  accomplish  a  given  task.  Managers  who 
develop  a  new  business  plan  or  find  new  ways  to  use  evolving  technologies  can  also  be 
thought  of  as  adding  to  the  “intangible,”  or  knowledge-based,  capital  of  the  firm,  which  by 
some  estimates  is  comparable  in  importance  to  physical  capital  such  as  factories  and 
equipment (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2006). 
For  individuals,  the  economic  returns  to  education  are  substantial  as  well.  In  2006,  the 
median weekly earnings of college graduates were 75 percent higher than the earnings of 
high-school graduates. In turn, workers with a high-school degree earned 42 percent more 
than  those  without  any  diploma.1  These  differentials  are  large  and  have  been  growing; 
indeed,  they  have  roughly  doubled  in  the  past  twenty-five  years  or  so.  The  source  of  the 
widening  wage  gap  between  the  more-educated  and  less-educated  is  nothing  more 
complicated  than  supply  and  demand.  The  demand  for  more-educated  workers  has  been 
increasing rapidly, partly because the much  more widespread use of  computers and other 
sophisticated  information  and  communication  technologies  in  the  workplace  has  increased 
the reward for technical skills. The supply of highly educated workers has also risen. At the 
start of the 1980s, 22 percent of young adults aged 25 to 29 held a college degree or more; 
by  last  year,  that  fraction  had  moved  up  to  28.5  percent.2  Nevertheless,  the  supply  of 
educated  workers  has  not  kept  pace  with  demand,  thus  generating  an  increased  salary 
premium for education. Because the wages of those at the top of the educational ladder have 
increased the fastest, increasing our investment in education can benefit not only individuals 
and society but also might narrow income gaps. 
Education and the challenges facing America today 
The educational challenges our society faces should be considered in the context of three 
broad  trends:  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation,  the  inexorable  advance  of  the 
technological frontier, and the ongoing globalization of economic activity. 
As  the  baby  boomers,  now  ranging  in  age  from  their  late  40s  to  early  60s,  leave  the 
workforce, their places will be taken by the smaller cohort of workers born in the mid-to-late 
1960s and early 1970s. As a result, the U.S. workforce – as a matter of simple arithmetic – 
will increase more slowly and is likely to become less experienced on average (Jorgenson 
and  others,  2007;  Aaronson  and  Sullivan,  2002).  In  a  broader  sense,  the  ratio  of  working 
people to retirees will decline, meaning that those still working will, in effect, be supporting 
relatively more non-working people. This year, there are about five working-age people (20-
                                                 
1   The data are weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers aged twenty-five and older and are derived 
from the Current Population Survey, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
2   The data are derived from the Current Population Survey, published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
64) for every person aged 65 and older; by 2030, the ratio will be about 3-to-1 (Bernanke, 
2006).  The  slower  expansion  of  the  labor  force,  all  else  equal,  implies  slower  growth  of 
potential output. More schooling for more of the workforce could help cushion the impact of 
this demographic transition on economic growth by boosting productivity growth. 
Continuing  advances  in  technology  also  put  a  premium  on  education.  Which  jobs  will  be 
most  affected  by  technology  is  difficult  to  predict,  although  some  research  suggests  that 
sectors that now use information technology (IT) relatively less intensively, such as health-
care  and  other  service  sectors,  are  likely  to  step  up  their  use  of  software  and  IT  services 
(Mann,  2003).  Regardless,  better-educated  workers  are  likely  better  prepared  to  adapt  to 
new technologies as they develop (Doms, Dunne, and Troske, 1997). 
Ongoing  globalization  of  economic  activity  will  also  lead  to  continuing  changes  in  the 
structure of the U.S. economy – including the composition of our output of both goods and 
services, and thus the structure of our labor force. The world economy is benefiting from the 
expansion  of  trade  and  the  rising  productivity  of  countries  abroad  that  are  making  great 
strides expanding both their infrastructure and the educational attainment of their workforces. 
That  can  be  good  for  them,  and  for  us.  Importantly,  our  ability  to  reap  the  benefits  of 
globalization  will  depend  on  the  flexibility  of  our  labor  force  to  adapt  to  changes  in  job 
opportunities, in part by investing in the education and training necessary to meet the new 
demands (Bernanke, 2004). 
Educational attainment and achievement: where do we stand? 
The  United  States  has  a  long  tradition  of  recognizing  the  significant  social  and  economic 
benefits of providing high-quality education for as many of its citizens as possible. The United 
States  led  the  world,  first,  in  expanding  access  to  high-school  education  and,  then,  in  the 
post-World  War  II  era,  access  to  college  (Goldin,  2001;  Goldin  and  Katz,  1999).  By  1966, 
about  half  of  the  workforce  aged  25  and  older  had  completed  high  school  and  about  10 
percent had completed college. By 2006, more than 90 percent of adults in the labor force 
had  a  high-school  education  and  more  than  20  percent  held  at  least  a  bachelor’s  degree. 
However,  most  of  the  progress  over  the  past  forty  years  occurred  in  the  1970s  and  early 
1980s. Since then, for example, the high-school graduation rate for 25-to-29-year-olds has 
not increased, and the college completion rate has risen only modestly (U.S. Department of 
Education, 2007b). 
One  trend  is  particularly  disappointing:  Both  high-school  and  college  completion  rates  for 
minorities  continue  to  lag.3  Over  the  past  ten  years,  the  high-school  completion  rate  for 
whites aged 25 to 29 hovered above 93 percent, while the rate for blacks of the same age 
stayed near 87 percent; the rate for Hispanics, though trending up over the period, was only 
63 percent last year. The gaps in college completion are wider. In recent years, more than 
one-third of whites aged 25 to 29 had at least a bachelor’s degree, compared with less than 
one-fifth of same-aged blacks and around 10 percent of Hispanics. 
Assessing where we stand in terms of educational achievement (how much students learn) is 
fraught  with  considerably  greater  difficulties  than  assessing  attainment  (how  far  students 
progress in their schooling). And, the results of various metrics highlight both discouraging 
and  encouraging  elements.  The  Department  of  Education’s  National  Assessment  of 
Educational  Progress  shows  the  average  reading  levels  of  our  high-school  seniors  have 
stagnated in recent years; however, our fourth graders continue to improve in reading, and 
both  fourth  and  eighth  graders  have  improved  in  math  (U.S.  Department  of  Education, 
National Center for Education Statistics, 2007b). At the same time, some initial results from 
                                                 
3   The  data  are  derived  from  the  Current  Population  Survey,  March  and  Annual  Social  and  Economic 
Supplement, 1971-2006, published by the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
the adoption of state accountability standards suggest that they have had a positive effect on 
students’  test-score  gains  (Jacob,  2005;  Hanushek  and  Raymond,  2004).  International 
comparisons of student achievement are even more difficult and present a mixed picture.4 
Compared  with  students  around  the  world,  U.S.  students  still  perform  relatively  well  in 
reading and, in the lower grades, at math and science. Older U.S. students, however, show 
less ability to apply math and science skills than their peers in other industrialized countries. 
Lifelong learning can help us meet economic challenges 
In the past, the U.S. education system has responded to the needs of a changing economy, 
and  I  believe  that  as  we  address  such  challenges  as  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom 
generation, advancing technology, and globalization, our education system will again make 
an important contribution to the adjustment process. That means, of course, that we will have 
to  grapple  with  difficult  issues  –  how  to  boost  educational  attainment,  particularly  for 
minorities and immigrant youths; how to make more consistent and noticeable progress in 
raising  academic  achievement;  and  how  to  ensure  that  older  workers  have  meaningful 
opportunities to refresh their skills. 
What can be done so that our educational system will continue to play a significant role in 
supporting economic change? In broad terms, we must begin by recognizing that learning is 
a lifelong process and that we have opportunities to improve education at every point along 
the  way.  Many  of  these  opportunities  lie  outside  the  traditional  route  of  a  kindergarten-
through-twelfth-grade education followed by four years of college. I’d like to comment briefly 
on  what  economists  have  found  about  the  benefits  of  educational  investments  at  different 
points in the life cycle. 
Early childhood education 
Building  the  foundation  for  lifelong  learning  from  the  earliest  ages  is  crucial  (Heckman, 
Stixrud,  and  Urzua,  2006).  Research  suggests  that  the  home  environment  is  especially 
important and that children who start behind find catching up increasingly difficult (Heckman 
and  Masterov,  2007).  Thus,  the  payoff  from  high-quality  pre-school  and  home  visitation 
programs is likely very high, especially for children born into poor or otherwise disadvantaged 
families. Recent research – some sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in 
collaboration  with  the  University  of  Minnesota  –  has  documented  high  returns  from  early 
childhood  programs  in  terms  of  subsequent  educational  attainment  and  in  lower  rates  of 
social  problems,  such  as  crime,  teenage  pregnancy,  and  welfare  dependency  (Burr  and 
Grunewald, 2006).5 But early childhood education is only the beginning. Positive results from 
programs  such  as  Head  Start  dissipate  without  further  high-quality  schooling  at  the 
elementary and secondary levels (Garces, Thomas, and Currie, 2002). 
Elementary and secondary schooling 
Deciding what and how to teach students from kindergarten through high school and then 
evaluating our schools’ effectiveness in preparing students for the workforce and a lifetime of 
                                                 
4   The  results  of  two  prominent  international  assessments  –  The  Trends  in  International  Mathematics  and 
Science Study, conducted under the aegis of the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational 
Achievement, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s Program for International 
Student  Assessment  –  are  summarized  in  the  2006  Digest  of  Education  Statistics  published  by  the  U.S. 
Department of Education (2007a). http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06/ch_6.asp 
5   More information  on the Early  Childhood Research Collaborative and copies  of its research papers  can  be 
obtained from the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, www.earlychildhoodrc.org. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
learning is a daunting task. I will make only a few observations on the goals we should keep 
in mind as we explore ways to improve learning at the elementary and secondary levels.  
First, we should encourage experimentation and innovation. By my reading, the research on 
K-12  education  has,  to  date,  yielded  no  easy  answers  to  the  questions  of  how  to  raise 
academic achievement and how to ensure that students finish high school well prepared to 
move  on  to  more  advanced  study.  A  wide  range  of  approaches  has  been  and  is  being 
explored:  smaller  class  size,  school  choice,  charter  school  programs,  accountability 
standards, flexibility in teacher certification rules, better teacher pay, merit-based pay, year-
round schooling – the list is long and probably will get longer. The size and diversity of our 
country, together with the fact that state and local policymakers retain significant discretion 
over  how  to  structure  their  educational  systems,  provides  us  a  natural  laboratory  for 
assessing  the  effectiveness  of  alternative  educational  strategies.  I  view  the  debate  about 
what  works  and  what  doesn’t  to  be  a  crucial  part  of  discovering  cost-effective  ways  to 
improve our educational system. 
The business community has an obvious interest in how well our schools prepare students 
for a future in the workforce and should actively participate in the debate. But we all have a 
stake. Students at the elementary and secondary levels are being prepared not just for work 
but  for  life.  Such  skills  and  acquired  traits  as  critical  and  creative  thinking,  social  ability, 
persistence,  and  satisfaction  in  accomplishment  make  not  only  good  employees  but  good 
citizens as well. Exposure to the arts and culture and experience in serving the community 
can  help  support  the  development  of  these  broader,  harder-to-measure  skills,  alongside 
more readily measurable cognitive accomplishments in reading, math, and science.  
Second,  teacher  quality  is  critical.  Studies  show  that  student  performance  depends  on 
putting  high-quality  teachers  in  the  classroom  and  retaining  them  as  long  as  possible 
(Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander, 2007; Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain, 2005; Rockoff, 2004). 
Indeed,  many  initiatives  focus  on  linking  students,  especially  disadvantaged  students,  with 
high-quality  schools  staffed  by  high-quality  teachers.  High-quality  teachers  instill  in  their 
young  students  a  desire  to  stay  in  school  and  seek  more  education  later  in  life,  and  the 
evidence suggests that the quality of teaching might have the biggest impact on lower-ability 
students  (Murnane  and  Steele,  2007;  Clotfelter  and  others,  2006;  Hanushek,  Kain,  and 
Rivkin, 2004). Unfortunately, our most disadvantaged communities, the ones most troubled 
by high dropout rates, have difficulty attracting and keeping qualified teachers. 
We must instill a desire among students to stay in school and to seek more education and 
training  over  their  working  lives.  Our  elementary  and  secondary  schools  must  provide 
students  a  strong  foundation  for  a  life  of  learning.  Although  a  wide  range  of  remedial 
education  programs  exist,  research  suggests  that  they  are  more  costly  and  less  effective 
than a solid, sustained course of study through high school. In particular, government training 
programs for disadvantaged youth have a rather disappointing reputation, particularly those 
that  are  less  intensive  and  not  well  tied  to  labor  market  needs  (Martin  and  Grubb,  2001; 
Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999).  
A number of possibilities for improving the education of disadvantaged students seem worth 
exploring.  For  example,  several  experiments  suggest  that  smaller  schools  and  smaller 
classes  may  help  disadvantaged  students  (although  the  benefits  of  such  programs  for  the 
general  student  population  remain  controversial).  Supplemental  education,  including  after-
school and mentoring programs such as Big Brothers Big Sisters, have been shown to boost 
school attendance (Grossman and Tierney, 1998). Increasing school time – either through 
longer school hours or summer school – also has found some support (Jacob and Lefgren, 
2004).  
Higher education 
In  many  ways,  higher  education  represents  the  strongest  part  of  the  U.S.  educational 
system, as demonstrated by the fact that students from all parts of the world come here to 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 5
study. Our institutions of higher learning are extraordinarily varied, ranging from large public 
research  universities  to  small  liberal  arts  colleges  to  community  colleges  and  vocational 
schools. 
The  main  business  of  our  institutions  of  higher  education  is,  of  course,  undergraduate 
teaching.  But  unlike  some  countries,  we  do  not  separate  research  and  undergraduate 
education; our advanced, graduate-level research programs are housed in universities with 
strong undergraduate programs. Thus, our colleges and universities are important sources of 
research and development (National Science Foundation, 2007; Litan, Mitchell, and Reedy, 
forthcoming).  More  than  half  our  basic  research  –  the  foundation  for  breakthroughs  that 
create  new  industries  –  is  conducted  at  universities.  Additionally,  higher  education  has 
embraced the broader mission of translating research into new products and enterprises; our 
colleges  and  universities  account  for  15  percent  of  applied  research  and  development 
(National Science Foundation, 2007). The innovations that begin on campuses are diffused 
to  businesses  through  patents,  start-up  companies,  and  consulting  arrangements  between 
faculty and industry. 
One great challenge in higher education lies in making sure our high-school graduates are 
prepared  for  it  and  have  access  to  it.  With  college  enrollment  rates  having  leveled  off  in 
recent years, much debate surrounds how we can move more students into higher education 
and  keep  them  in  school  until  they  graduate.  Researchers  have  demonstrated  a  strong 
relationship between family income and college attendance. Since 1990, nearly 80 percent of 
high-school  completers  from  high-income  families  (the  top  20  percent  of  income)  have 
enrolled in college the next fall. The proportion of those from low-income families who enroll 
in college the following fall has been moving up gradually, but it remains much lower – just 
over 50 percent.6 This discrepancy holds even for students classified as high achievers: A 
longitudinal study of eighth graders in 1988 found that only 29 percent of those scoring in the 
top fourth of the group in math – but who were from families with low social and economic 
status – had completed a bachelor’s degree or more by 2000, while three-fourths of those 
from  families  with  high  social  and  economic  status  finished  their  undergraduate  degrees 
(Fox, Connelly, and Snyder, 2005).7 Surely, high tuition must be one barrier to attending and 
completing college (Card, 2001; Kane, 1994), but it is not the only barrier (Dynarski, 2005). 
Low-income  students,  in  particular,  are  more  likely  to  come  from  school  and  family 
environments  that  do  a  poor  job  of  preparing  them  for  a  successful  transition  to  college 
(Carneiro  and  Heckman,  2003).  This  suggests  that  supplemental  programs  to  help  under-
prepared  college  students  could  improve  eventual  college  completion  rates;  unfortunately, 
the  research  on  the  benefits  of  such  programs  is  mixed,  which  reinforces  the  need  to 
improve educational achievement in regular high school classes (Bettinger and Long, 2005; 
Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos, 2006). 
Community  colleges  have  made  a  significant  contribution  to  expanding  educational 
opportunities. Offering lower costs and more-flexible schedules, they now enroll almost one-
half of U.S. undergraduates. Attendance at one of these institutions is associated with higher 
wages, even if a degree is not completed. Evidence suggests that each year of credit at a 
community college is worth almost as much, in terms of increased earnings potential, as a 
year  at  a  four-year  college.  The  average  student  who  entered,  but  did  not  complete, 
community college earns 9 percent to 13 percent more than the average for students who 
                                                 
6   These  data  are  derived  from  the  annual  October  Supplement  to  the  Current  Population  Survey.  They  are 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Education’s  Condition  of  Education  2007  available  at 
summarized 
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/2007/section3/indicator 25.asp#info. 
in 
7   Socioeconomic status was measured by a composite score on parental education and occupations and family 
income.  The  study  also  found  that  the  proportion  of  low-scoring  math  students  from  high  socioeconomic 
families  who  completed  at  least  a  bachelor’s  degree  was  30  percent  versus  only  3  percent  for  those  from 
lower socioeconomic families. For those in the middle quintiles of both scores and family characteristics, the 
proportion was 21 percent. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2007
ended their education with high school. Those who completed a two-year associate degree 
earn an even larger premium, 15 percent to 27 percent (Kane and Rouse, 1999). And the 
earnings of graduates who started at two-year schools and transferred to four-year programs 
ultimately  match  those  who  begin  their  post-high-school  education  at  four-year  institutions 
(Gill  and  Leigh,  2003).  Community  colleges  play  a  constructive  role  not  only  for  18-to-22-
year-olds  but  also  for  older  adults,  providing  flexible  programs  for  obtaining  new  skills, 
specialized  training  contracted  for  by  individual  businesses,  remedial  education,  and  adult 
enrichment. 
Adult education 
Today we are increasingly recognizing that education need not, indeed should not, stop at 
the age of 22. Economists have long argued that on-the-job training and learning-by-doing 
are  significant  components  of  the  acquisition  of  human  capital.  Research  shows  that  the 
knowledge and experience gained over time through informal and formal learning on the job 
appear to pay off for workers and accrues particularly rapidly early in their careers (Altonji 
and Williams, 2005; Topel, 1991). An extensive survey of firm-sponsored training a number 
of years ago found that 84 percent of employees received some kind of formal training while 
working for their current employer, and 96 percent received some type of informal training 
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1996). With the advance of technology and the need to attract 
and  retain  skilled  workers,  I  am  certain  that  business-sponsored  training  will  remain  an 
important component of the management toolkit. 
Upgrading skills through continuing education and training outside the job is also important, 
particularly  in  an  environment  in  which  workers  can  face  displacement  from  international 
competition or technological advance. Recognizing this possibility, many workers continue to 
acquire formal education later in life than was once traditional. For example, almost one-fifth 
of  students  at  post-secondary  institutions  of  all  types  are  at  least  35  years  old  (National 
Center for Education Statistics, 2007a). And, for older workers looking to retool their skills, 
classroom instruction has been shown to be effective. For example, classroom training for 
displaced workers is estimated to boost future wages as much as for students of the usual 
school age, although the overall return on investment for displaced workers is lower because 
they have fewer remaining working years than do new entrants to the labor force (Jacobsen, 
LaLonde, Sullivan, 2005). Similarly, studies of a number of welfare-to-work programs have 
reported  long-term  gains  for  those  who  participated  in  intensive  basic  education  and 
vocational  training  (Dyke  and  others,  2006;  Hotz,  Imbens,  Klerman,  2006).  Such  results 
suggest that well-designed programs to assist workers who lose their jobs can contribute to 
cushioning the effects of globalization and technological change. 
Conclusion 
Let me close by reiterating that education – lifelong education for everyone, from toddlers to 
workers well advanced in their careers – is indeed an excellent investment for individuals and 
society as a whole. Education fundamentally supports advances in productivity, upon which 
our ability to generate continuing improvement in our standard of living depends. If we are to 
successfully  navigate  such  challenges  as  the  retirement  of  the  baby-boom  generation, 
advancing technology, and increasing globalization, we must work diligently to maintain the 
quality of our educational system where it is strong and strive to improve it where it is not. In 
particular,  we  must  find  ways  to  move  more  of  our  students,  especially  minorities  and 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds, into educational opportunities after high school. 
To  do  that,  we  must  continually  experiment,  innovate,  and  evaluate  so  that  we  can  make 
rational decisions about what works and what doesn’t in education. Because the quality of 
your workforces is so vital to the success of your businesses, you as business executives 
must  participate  fully  in  this  process,  along  with  other  stakeholders  –  students,  parents, 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 7
teachers,  and  policymakers.  I’m  encouraged  that  you  are  devoting  so  much  energy  and 
thought to this topic at this three-day conference. 
References 
Aaronson,  Daniel,  Lisa  Barrow,  and  William  Sander  (2007).  “Teachers  and  Student 
Achievement in the Chicago Public High Schools,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 25 (no. 
1), pp. 95-135. 
Aaronson,  Daniel,  and  Daniel  G.  Sullivan  (2002).  “Growth  in  Worker  Quality,”  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  Chicago  Fed  Letter,  vol.  2002 
(February),  pp.  1-4, 
www.chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data. 
Altonji,  Joseph  G.,  and  Nicolas  Williams  (2005).  “Do  Wages  Rise  with  Job  Seniority?  A 
Reassessment,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 58 (April), pp. 370-97. 
Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos (2006). “Lead Them to Water and 
Pay Them to Drink: An Experiment with Services and Incentives for College Achievement,” 
NBER  Working  Paper  Series  12790.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, December, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). “Trade and Jobs”, Distinguished Speaker Series, speech delivered 
at 
the  Fuqua  School  of  Business,  Duke  University,  Durham,  N.C.,  March  30, 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2006).  “The  Coming  Demographic  Transition:  Will  We  Treat  Future 
Generations  Fairly?”  speech  delivered  at  the  Washington  Economic  Club,  Washington, 
October 4, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2007).  “The  Level  and  Distribution  of  Economic  Well-Being”,  speech 
delivered  at  the  Greater  Omaha  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Omaha,  Neb.,  February  6, 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents. 
Bettinger, Eric P. and Bridget Terry Long (2005). “Addressing the Needs of Under-Prepared 
Students  in  Higher  Education:  Does  College  Remediation  Work?”  NBER  Working  Paper 
Series  11325,  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  May, 
www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Burr,  Jean,  and  Rob  Grunewald  (2006).  “Lessons  Learned:  A  Review  of  Early  Childhood 
Development  Studies,”  Early  Childhood  Development,  Staff  Study,  Minneapolis:  Federal 
Reserve 
April, 
http://minneapolisfed.org/research/studies/earlychild/lessonslearned.pdf/earlychild. 
Card,  David  (2001).  “Estimating  the  Return  to  Schooling:  Progress  on  Some  Persistent 
Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, vol. 69 (September), pp. 1127-60. 
Carneiro,  Pedro,  and  James  J.  Heckman  (2003).  “Human  Capital  Policy,”  in  James  J. 
Heckman  and  Alan  B.  Krueger,  eds.,  Inequality  in  America:  What  Role  for  Human  Capital 
Policies? Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 77-239. 
Clotfelter, Charles, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor (2006). “Would Higher 
Salaries  Keep  Teachers  in  High-Poverty  Schools?  Evidence  from  a  Policy  Intervention  in 
North Carolina,” NBER Working Paper Series 12285. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, June, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006). “Intangible Capital and 
Economic Growth,” NBER Working Paper Series 11948. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, January, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Dee,  Thomas  S.  (2004).  “Are  There  Civic  Returns  to  Education?”  Journal  of  Public 
Economics, vol. 88 (August), pp. 1697-720. 
Minneapolis, 
Bank 
of 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2007
Doms,  Mark,  Timothy  Dunne,  and  Kenneth  R.  Troske  (1997).  “Workers,  Wages,  and 
Technology,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112 (February), pp. 253-90. 
Dyke, Andrew, Carolyn J. Heinrich, Peter R. Mueser, Kenneth R. Troske, and Kyung-Seong 
Jeon  (2006).  “The  Effects  of  Welfare-to-Work  Program  Activities  on  Labor  Market 
Outcomes,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24 (July), pp. 567-607. 
Dynarski,  Susan  (2005).  "Building  the  Stock  of  College-Educated  Labor,”  NBER  Working 
Paper  Series  11604.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
September, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Fox, Mary Anne, Brooke A. Connolly, and Thomas D. Snyder (2005). Youth Indicators 2005: 
Trends in the Well-Being of American Youth, NCES 2005-050. Washington: Department of 
Education,  Institute  for  Education  Science,  National  Center  for  Education  Statistics,  July, 
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2005/2005050.pdf. 
Garces,  Eliana,  Duncan  Thomas,  and  Janet  Currie  (2002).  “Longer-Term  Effects  of  Head 
Start,” The American Economic Review, vol. 92 (September), pp. 999-1012. 
Gill, Andrew M., and Duane E. Leigh (2003). “Do the Returns to Community Colleges Differ 
Between  Academic  and  Vocational  Programs?”  Journal  of  Human  Resources,  vol.  38 
(Winter), pp. 134-55. 
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer (2006). “Why Does Democracy 
Need Education?” NBER Working Paper Series 12128. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, March, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Grossman, Jean Baldwin, and Joseph P. Tierney (1998). “Does Mentoring Work? An Impact 
Study of the Big Brothers Big Sisters Program,” Evaluation Review, vol. 22 (June), pp. 403-
26. 
Goldin,  Claudia  (2001).  “The  Human-Capital  Century  and  American  Leadership:  Virtues  of 
the Past,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 61 (June), pp. 263-92. 
Goldin,  Claudia,  and  Lawrence  F.  Katz  (1999).  “The  Shaping  of  Higher  Education:  The 
Formative Years in the United States, 1890-1940,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 13 
(Winter), pp. 37-62. 
Hanushek  Eric  A.,  John  F.  Kain,  and  Steven  G.  Rivkin  (2004).  “Why  Public  Schools  Lose 
Teachers,” Journal of Human Resources, vol. 39 (Spring), pp. 326-54. 
Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond (2004). “Does School Accountability Lead to 
Improved  Student  Performance?”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  10591;  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, June, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Heckman,  James  J.,  and  Alan  B.  Krueger  (2003).  Inequality  in  America:  What  Role  for 
Human Capital Policies? Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Heckman, James, J., Robert J. LaLonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith (1999). “The Economics and 
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs,” in Orley C. Ashenfelter and David A. Card, 
eds.,  Handbook  of  Labor  Economics,  vol.  3A.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier  Science  and  North-
Holland, pp. 1865-2097. 
Heckman,  James  J.,  and  Dimitriy  V.  Masterov  (2007).  “The  Productivity  Argument  for 
Investing  in  Young  Children,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  13016.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, April, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and 
Noncognitive  abilities  on  Labor  Market  Outcomes  and  Social  Behavior,”  Journal  of  Labor 
Economics, vol. 24 (July), pp. 411-82. 
Hotz,  V.  Joseph,  Guido  W.  Imbens,  and  Jacob  Alex  Klerman  (2006).  “Evaluating  the 
Differential  Effects  of  Alternative  Welfare-to-Work  Training  Components:  A  Re-Analysis  of 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 9
the  California  GAIN  Program,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  11939.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, January, www.nber.org/new_archive. 
Jacob, Brian A. (2005). “Accountability, Incentives, and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes 
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 89 (June), pp. 761-
96. 
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren (2004). “Remedial Education and Student Achievement,” 
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (February), pp. 226-44. 
Jacobson, Louis, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel Sullivan (2005). “The Impact of Community 
College Retraining on Older Displaced Workers: Should We Teach Old Dogs New Tricks?” 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 58 (April), pp. 398-415. 
Jorgenson,  Dale  W.,  Richard  J.  Goettle,  Mun  S.  Ho,  Daniel  T.  Slesnick,  and  Peter  J. 
Wilcoxen  (2007).  “U.S.  Labor  Supply  and  Demand  in  the  Long  Run,”  prepared  for  “Labor 
Supply in the New Century,” the 52nd Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Boston, Boston, Mass., June 18-20, www.bos.frb.org/economic/conf/conf52. 
Kane, Thomas J. (1994). ”College Entry by Blacks Since 1970: The Role of College Costs, 
Family  Background,  and  the  Returns  to  Education,”  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  102 
(October), pp. 878-911. 
Kane,  Thomas  J.,  and  Cecilia  Elena  Rouse  (1999).  “The  Community  College:  Educating 
Students at the Margin Between College and Work,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 
13 (Winter), pp. 63-84. 
Litan,  Robert  E.,  Lesa  Mitchell,  and  E.J.  Reedy  (forthcoming).  “Commercializing  University 
Innovations: A Better Way,” in Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 8. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press. 
Martin, John P., and David Grubb (2001). “What Works and For Whom? A Review of OECD 
Countries’  Experiences  with  Active  Labour  Market  Policies,”  Swedish  Economic  Policy 
Review, vol. 8 (Fall), pp. 9-56. 
Mann,  Catherine  L.  (2003).  “Globalization  of  IT  Services  and  White  Collar  Jobs:  The  Next 
Wave of Productivity Growth,” International Economics Policy Briefs PB03-11. Washington: 
Peterson 
December, 
for 
www.iie.com/publications/pubs.cfm. 
Murnane, Richard J., and Jennifer L. Steele (2007). “What Is The Problem? The Challenge of 
Providing Effective Teachers for All Children,” Future of Children, vol. 17 (Spring), pp. 15-43, 
www.futureofchildren.org. 
National  Science  Foundation  (2007).  “U.S.  R&D  Increased  6.0%  in  2006  According  to  the 
NSF  Projections,”  NSF  Report  07-317.  Arlington,  Va.:  Division  of  Science  Resource 
Statistics, National Science Foundation, April, www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf07317. 
Rivkin,  Steven  G.,  Eric  A.  Hanushek,  and  John  F.  Kain  (2005).  “Teachers,  Schools,  and 
Academic Achievement,” Econometrica, vol. 73 (March), pp. 417-58. 
Rockoff,  Jonah  E.  (2004).  “The  Impact  of  Individual  Teachers  on  Student  Achievement: 
Evidence  from  Panel  Data,”  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  94  (May,  Papers  and 
Proceedings), pp. 247-52. 
Rolnick,  Art,  and  Rob  Grunewald  (2003).  “Early  Childhood  Development:  Economic 
Development with a High Public Return,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fedgazette, 
vol. 2003 (March), http://minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/03-03/earlychild.cfm. 
Topel,  Robert  (1991).  “Specific  Capital,  Mobility,  and  Wages:  Wages  Rise  with  Job 
Seniority,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99 (February), pp. 145-76. 
International 
Economics, 
Institute 
10 
 BIS Review 106/2007
U.S.  Census  Bureau  and  U.S.  Department  of  Labor,  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  (2007). 
Current Population Survey. Washington: Census Bureau, www.census.gov/cps. 
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education 
Statistics  (2007a).  Digest  of  Education  Statistics:  2006.  Washington:  Department  of 
Education, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d06. 
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education 
Statistics  (2007b).  The  Condition  of  Education  2000-2007.  Washington:  Department  of 
Education, http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe. 
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1996). “BLS Reports on the Amount of 
Formal  and  Informal  Training  Received  by  Employees,”  press  release,  December  19, 
www.bls.gov/news.release/sept.nws.htm. 
U.S.  Department  of  Labor,  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  (2007).  “Preliminary  Multifactor 
Productivity Trends,” press release, May 24, www.bls.gov/news.release/prod3.nr0.htm. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 11
