Paul Tucker: Central banking and political economy – the example of the UK’s 
Monetary Policy Committee 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the 
Bank  of  England,  at  the  Inflation  Targeting,  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Transparency 
Conference, Cambridge, 15 June 2007. 
 Over the next couple of days, this conference will take forward debates on many of the strategy issues 
preoccupying  monetary  economists  and  policy  practitioners.  The  role  of  inflation  targets  and 
communication in anchoring inflation expectations. The place of money in central bank analysis and 
policy  frameworks.  Whether  to  be  transparent  about  any  expectations  policymakers  form  about  the 
path of their policy rate. 
After more than a decade in which monetary authorities across the world have generally succeeded in 
maintaining price stability, it is hard to know whether these continuing debates – and, more important, 
the variations in central bank practices that underlie them – are vital or peripheral. Time will tell. Some 
architectural  features  of  monetary  regimes  are  plainly  important  and,  unsurprisingly,  are  broadly 
shared:  central  bank  independence;  a  definition  of  price  stability  that,  with  credibility,  can  act  as  a 
nominal  anchor;  a  forward-looking  “reaction  function”.  Within  that  broad  canvas,  the  remaining 
variance in central bank practice may owe something to differences in the governance structure for 
their decision taking, and to the genesis of those differences. 
Alan Blinder has deftly set out1 a spectrum of decision taking structures ranging from one individual, 
the Governor; through committees that are more or less collegial, with either a clear leader or a more 
collective  approach;  to  committees,  such  as  the  Bank  of  England’s  MPC,  that  are  individualistic. 
Blinder  and  others  identify  advantages  in  a  committee  approach  of  some  kind,  essentially  on  the 
grounds, based on analysis or experiment,2 that committees will generally make better decisions. 
That may leave out something rather important. Which is that in some countries a committee structure 
has  been  a  pre-condition  for  achieving  central  bank  independence  in  the  first  place.  And  that  is  a 
useful  reminder  of  the  political  economy  conditions  in  which  monetary  regimes  are  constituted  and 
operate. Context matters, including possibly to some of the issues on your conference agenda. The 
UK’s post-war journey to monetary credibility illustrates that rather neatly. 
Environmental preconditions for independence: ideas and values 
For a long time, price stability simply was not the core objective of macroeconomic policy. A Bank of 
England piece in the late 1960s3 described government’s twin goals as having been to improve trend 
growth  and  maintain  high  employment,  to  which  was  subsequently  added  balance  of  payments 
sustainability. When, in the mid-1970s, the UK suffered the indignity of having to borrow from the IMF, 
the Cabinet split over the Fund’s stability-oriented programme.4 And the Thatcher government, elected 
shortly afterwards, failed to command broad-based support for a medium-term framework for reducing 
inflation explicitly founded on “monetarism”, which became a loaded term, widely perceived across UK 
society as part of an ideology. In other words, sound money or price stability was not viewed as an 
objective that could be shared across the democratic political spectrum.5
                                                      
1   See Chapter 2 in Blinder, A. S., 2004, The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press. 
2   Lombardelli, C., J. Proudman and J. Talbot (2005), “Committees versus individuals: an experimental analysis of monetary 
policy decision making”, International Journal of Central Banking, May 2005. 
“The operation of monetary policy since the Radcliffe report: text of paper presented at a conference “Radcliffe – ten years 
after”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, volume 9, number 4, 1969. 
3  
4   Burk, K. & and A. Cairncross, 1992, "Goodbye, Great Britain": the 1976 IMF crisis, Yale University Press. 
5 
I  say  democratic,  because  enemies  of  democracy  have  seen  debauching  the  currency  as  a  means  to  their  ends.  For 
example,  “The  best  way  to  destroy  the  capitalist system  is  to  debauch  the  currency”  is  attributed  to  V.  I.  Lenin  by  J.  M. 
Keynes in The Economic Consequences of the Peace, 1920, p. 235. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 1
This was, perhaps, apparent in the famous 1981 letter of the 364 economists which stressed that “the 
time  has  come  to  reject  monetarist  policies”.6  Whatever  the  merits  or  demerits  of  its  conjunctural 
points,  the  letter  made  no  mention  of  an  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  or  of  the  fiscal 
sustainability that is a precondition for monetary stability. Indeed, it is striking that, in this country, price 
stability was not energetically promoted by the mainstream academy. Rather, the case was made by 
what  seems  to  have  been  a  relatively  small  group  of  public  intellectuals,7  together  with  a  few 
academics and officials. Drawing on the work of US macroeconomists, UK policymakers reached four 
broad conclusions that have endured: that macroeconomic policy should not assume that there was a 
long-term  trade  off  between  inflation  and  output;  that  microeconomic  policy should  be  assigned  the 
task  of  improving  the  supply  side  of  the  economy;  that  only  monetary  policy  could  achieve  and 
maintain price stability; and that medium-term fiscal discipline was needed for any monetary regime to 
be credible.8 Elements of that were controversial at the time. And views within the official sector on the 
acceptable rate of inflation covered a broad spectrum. By the early-mid 1980s, some were apparently 
prepared  to  settle  for  inflation  of  around  5%,  or  at  least  were  concerned  about  the  output  costs  of 
further  disinflation.  Others,  notably  Eddie  George,  argued  that  inflationary  expectations  could  be 
stabilised  effectively  only  if  inflation  were  lowered  below  that.9  Whilst  affirming  a  commitment  to 
reduce inflation further,10 politicians did not resolve these debates by articulating a medium-term goal 
for  inflation.  Money  was  believed  to  be  more  controllable  than  inflation  so,  during  this  period, 
objectives,  targets/indicators  and  instruments  tended  to  be  considered  together,  a  monetary  target 
being  expected  to  deliver  all  three.  Ministers  were,  in  consequence,  drawn  into  highly  technical 
debates, rather than focusing primarily on articulating high-level macroeconomic objectives. But both 
money  targeting  and,  subsequently,  exchange-rate  targeting  failed  in  the  UK.  That  meant  that 
attempts by politicians to deliver effective monetary policy by binding themselves to a policy rule based 
on an intermediate target had failed. So attention gradually turned to broader institutional solutions, 
leading ultimately to “operational independence” for the Bank. 
In terms of the political economy, there were perhaps two crucial developments during the first half of 
the  1990s.  First,  there  was  much  greater  transparency.  An  inflation  target  was  announced  by 
government, making the objective clear and performance in achieving it easy to monitor. The Bank’s 
analysis of the inflation outlook was published in the quarterly Inflation Report; and its advice to the 
Chancellor on the level of interest rates was published in the minutes of the “Ken and Eddie Show”. 
This  revolution  helped  to  establish  the  legitimacy  of  what  the  monetary  authorities  were  trying  to 
achieve; helped to demonstrate the Bank’s competence; and showed that differences of view about 
the level of interest rates could be disclosed without the ceiling coming down. 
Second,  a  lot  more  was  done,  by  the  Bank  and  others,  to  establish  support  for  the  goal  of  price 
stability – not as a political tenet but as a technical prerequisite for a well-functioning economy. This 
ran  through  the  speeches  of  Robin  Leigh-Pemberton,  Eddie  George  and  Mervyn  King  in  the  late 
1980s and early 1990s, as well as in Bank research. Analytically, energised by the current Governor 
when  Chief  Economist,  the  Bank  put  resources  into  analysing  the  costs  of  inflation,  and  into 
contributing to the so-called time-consistency literature on the central importance of mechanisms to 
underpin trust in a monetary authority’s declared commitments.11 And in more public spheres, Eddie 
George’s  speeches  in  the  early  1990s  repeatedly  stressed  the  emergence  of  a  consensus, 
domestically and internationally, about macroeconomic policy goals and means. Price stability was not 
                                                      
6   See Letter to The Times from 364 Academic Economists, April 1981. 
7   Notably  Samuel  Brittan  and  Peter  Jay.  See,  for  example,  Sir  Samuel  Brittan’s  1981  paper  “How  to  end  the  “monetarist” 
controversy: a journalists reflections on output, jobs, prices and money”, London: IEA. 
8   See Lawson, N., 1984, “The British Experiment”, The Fifth Mais Lecture at City University Business School, June. 
9   These differences of emphasis emerged during the review of macroeconomic policy objectives and instruments discussed in 
Chapter 36 of Lord Lawson’s book “A View from Number Eleven”. 
10   See Nigel Lawson’s 1984 Mais Lecture, op. cit.. 
11   In 1992, Governor Leigh-Pemberton gave a lecture entitled: “The case for price stability”. As well as reviewing the costs of 
inflation, the lecture reprised the early-1980s debate on the rate of inflation the authorities should settle for (see Note 9), in a 
section entitled “Why not settle for 5%?”. These issues were also the centrepiece of the Bank’s tercentenary conference in 
1994 on the future of central banking. See Fischer, S, “Modern Central Banking”, in Capie F., C. Goodhart, S. Fischer and 
N. Schnadt (eds.), 1994, The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England, Cambridge 
University  Press.  See  also  Briault,  C.,  1995,  “The  costs  of  inflation”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  February.  And 
Haldane, A. (ed.), 1995, Targeting Inflation: a conference of central banks on the use of inflation targets organised by the 
Bank of England, March. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2007
just  an  end  in  itself  but  a  precondition  for  macroeconomic  stability  more  generally:  for  sustainable 
growth  in  output  and  employment  and,  thus,  for  the  “good  things  in  life”.  A  precondition,  but  not  a 
sufficient condition. The Bank took care to stress that, however effective, monetary policy could not 
deliver economic prosperity on its own. It was a necessary condition. And it could avoid the costs of 
inflation, including random and unacceptable redistributions of wealth between savers and borrowers 
resulting from unexpected surges in inflation caused by the authorities choosing to loosen monetary 
conditions. 
Two observations might be made about the case the Bank was making. First, there is a conviction that 
the long-term health of the real economy is affected by the monetary regime. In the jargon, money 
neutrality but not “superneutrality” which, put broadly, holds that monetary regimes are irrelevant to the 
long-run performance of the real economy.12 The way I think about this is that low and stable inflation 
can bring two (related) benefits to the real economy. Relative price signals will be clearer, aiding the 
efficient  allocation  of  resources.  And  greater  macroeconomic  stability  will  reduce  risk,  reflected  in 
lower  risk  premia  and  so  in  a  lower  effective  cost  of  capital  for  firms  and  households,  as  well  as 
possibly in longer investment horizons. 
Second, some of the arguments might have seemed to shade into a “moral” case for price stability, 
which  has  recently  been  excoriated  by  Willem  Buiter13  on  the  grounds  that  it  has  typically  come 
packaged  with  central  bankers  presenting  themselves  as  akin  to  spiritual  leaders  who  are  above 
needing  to  explain  their  actions  to  the  public.  Well,  I  don’t  think  we  had  much  truck  with  central 
banking as religion, and from the early 1990s the Bank could reasonably claim to have been in the 
vanguard  of  transparency.  But  there  did  run  through  our  corridors  a  sense  of  outrage  that  homes, 
livelihoods and businesses could be destroyed by quite unnecessary lurches from boom to bust; and 
that  the  economy’s  progress  was  being  arrested  by  the  lack  of  sustained  and  credible  nominal 
stability. In other words, central bankers seemed not to believe research results suggesting that the 
welfare benefits of macroeconomic stabilisation were small.14 Caring passionately about the benefits 
of price stability is part of what makes us – a bunch of “conservative central bankers”15 – suitable for 
the job. 
Environmental conditions for independence: institutions 
One might think that would be it; that independence would follow from a consensus being established 
around those ideas and values. Not at all, and for good reasons in the UK context. 
I  recall16  various  arguments  being  advanced  through  the  1980s  and  into  the  1990s  against 
independence for the Bank. 
Mostly, they had their roots in the Bank comprising unelected officials, without a democratically elected 
minister as its head. Thus, the then Governor was told in the very early 1990s that if the Bank ever 
combined responsibility for bank supervision with monetary policy it would be “an overmighty citizen”. 
More important, a number of commentators argued that it was a real obstacle to independence that 
                                                      
12   O. Blanchard and S. Fisher in “Lectures on Macroeconomics”, MIT Press 1989, state that “money is said to be neutral if 
changes in the level of nominal money have no  effect on the real equilibrium. It is said to be superneutral if changes in 
money growth have no effect on the real equilibrium.” (note 8, page 207). Given the relationship between money growth and 
inflation in the very long run, that means that the rate of inflation has no effect on the real equilibrium. In practice, high rates 
of inflation have proved highly variable, injecting uncertainty into the economy, which can have real effects. 
13   Buiter,  W.  H.,  2006,  “How  Robust  is  the  New  Conventional  Wisdom  in  Monetary  Policy?  The  surprising  fragility  of  the 
theoretical  foundations  of  inflation  targeting  and  central  bank  independence”,  paper  presented  at  the  2006  Central  Bank 
Governors’ Symposium “Challenges to Monetary Theory”, at the Bank of England. 
14   For example, Lucas, R. E., 1987, “Models of Business Cycles, 1985 Yrjö Jahnsson Lectures, Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 
15   For the genesis of this term in the literature, see Rogoff K., 1985, “The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate 
monetary target”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, volume 100, number 4. 
16   From  the  vantage  point  of  being  Private  Secretary  to  Governor  Leigh-Pemberton  (1989-1992),  and  later  as  an  official 
implementing policy and then heading the Bank’s Monetary Assessment and Strategy Division. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 3
the  Bank  would  not  be  able  to  account  for  its  monetary  stewardship  on  the  Floor  of  the  House  of 
Commons. In a Parliamentary system of democracy, it is Ministers who are accountable.17
Those  circumstances  are  specific  to  the  UK.  Other  conditions  and  histories  act  as  constraints 
elsewhere. For example, in Germany, the institution that became the highly independent Bundesbank 
was established as part of the country’s reconstruction after WWII and so before its new democracy 
was embedded. It had “goal independence”. And in the US, while there is hesitation over giving the 
Federal  Reserve  an  inflation  target,  as  great  weight  is  placed  by  Congress  on  the  “dual  mandate”, 
there is not concern about the scope or mechanics of the FOMC’s accountability to Congress. Every 
member of the executive arm of the government is unelected except the President. The central bank is 
no outlier.18 But in the UK it really was a novelty – in a way, a constitutional departure, foreshadowed 
perhaps  only  by  the  judiciary19  –  to  give  such  a  politically  sensitive  lever  to  a  body  of  unelected 
technicians. 
The institutional obstacles to Bank of England “independence” therefore needed institutional solutions. 
Responsibility for bank regulation was transferred from the Bank in 1997. The pathway to resolution of 
the “democratic deficit” problem had potentially been opened up in the 1980s by the St John Stevas 
reforms  of  Parliamentary  Committees  which  led,  over  time,  to  a  Treasury  Committee  with  a  high 
reputation  and  standing,  supported  by  access  to  expert  advice.  In  the  1997  reforms,  the  sphere  of 
politics  was  carefully  delineated.  The  goal  of  price  stability  is  set  by  Parliament  in  legislation;  and, 
within  that  framework,  the  Chancellor  of  the  day  sets  the  Bank  its  target  for  inflation.  So  the 
democratically  elected  executive  arm  of  government  is  accountable  to  Parliament  for  the  policy 
regime; and the Bank is accountable to the government and to the Parliamentary Select Committee for 
its operation of that regime. Hence, “operational independence”, not goal independence. 
The goal was chosen to be a symmetric point inflation target, providing reassurance to the country that 
the  Bank  would  not  pursue  a  bias  towards  disinflation.  And  the  credibility  of  the  regime  was 
underpinned by a framework for fiscal policy designed, amongst other things, to maintain a prudent 
debt/GDP ratio, and so avoid making inflation a tempting prospect down the road. 
There  was  one  other,  vital  element of  the  system’s design,  also  addressing  the  problem  of  interest 
rates being decided by unelected officials at the Bank. As Eddie George and Mervyn King have now 
both  disclosed,  in  the  run  up  to  the  May  1997  election,  the  Bank  pulled  together  its  thoughts  on  a 
possible  new  monetary  regime.20  The  Bank’s  hope  was  that  it  might  be  granted  independence  if  a 
Committee established to advise the Chancellor on interest rates, which had featured in the Labour 
Party Manifesto, was seen to do a good job. In the event, the incoming government did not need the 
intermediate stage of an advisory committee. It created the MPC. The appointment to the Committee 
of  four  outside  experts  ensured  that  daylight  would  be  brought  into  the  Bank,  and  underlined  the 
architectural role of democratically elected ministers.21 It also meant that the Committee would reach 
its decisions on a “one person/one vote” basis, with that going for the five Bank executive members 
too. 
                                                      
17   Thus,  a  whole  chapter  of  Lord  Roll’s  pamphlet  on  the  case  for  independence  was  devoted  to  solutions  to  this  problem. 
“Independent and accountable: a new mandate for the Bank of England”, report of an independent panel chaired by Eric 
Roll, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1993. 
In another example, Ulrich Kohli has discussed how the SNB’s consensual approach to monetary policy making is “to do 
with” the culture flowing from Switzerland’s multi-cantonal federal political structure. See Kohli, U., 2005, Comment on “The 
monetary  policy  committee  and  the  incentive  problem:  a  selective  survey”  by  Fujiki,  H.,  at  conference  on  “Incentive 
Mechanisms for Economic Policymakers”, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, May. 
18 
19   The parallel with the judiciary was made in the early 1990s in a speech by Governor Leigh-Pemberton, drawing on work by 
Ralph Dahrendorf. 
20   See transcript of interview on 1 May 2007 of Mervyn King by C. Giles and S. Daneshku for the The Financial Times on the 
occasion  of  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  operational  independence  (published  11  May  2007);  and 
transcript of interview on 30 March 2007 of Lord George by C. Giles and S. Daneshku for the The Financial Times on the 
occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Bank of England’s operational independence (published 4 May 2007). As a further 
gloss on that piece of history, I should perhaps disclose that, working to Eddie, Mervyn and the then DG , Howard Davies, I 
was the Bank official who “held the pen” during that work. 
21   As stated in Balls, E and G. O’Donnell, 2002, Reforming Britain’s Economic and Financial Policy, “The role of the Chancellor 
in appointing the four outsiders was part of the delicate constitutional balance that was struck in a move towards a legitimate 
model of central bank independence consistent with British-style accountability to Parliament.” (page 99) 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2007
This is what I have been leading up to: an “individualistic” committee was a necessary condition for 
operational independence in the UK. 
In terms of solving the time-consistency problem and establishing credibility, the UK system does not 
rely on handing monetary policy, lock, stock and barrel, to a group of “conservative central bankers”; in 
terms  of  the  literature  familiar  to  this  conference,  the  system  is  as  much  Walsh  as  Rogoff.22  The 
regime  is  based  on  combining  an  objective  set  by  democratically  elected  politicians,  with  clear 
accountability mechanisms. One of those mechanisms was triggered for the first time recently when 
CPI inflation rose to 3.1% in March, requiring the Governor, on behalf of the Committee, to write an 
open letter to the Chancellor about what we thought was going on and what we planned to do to get 
inflation back to our target of 2%. As well as providing transparency to commentators and the markets 
who are in the business of forming views about our future actions, the letter has proved a useful focus 
for  public  debate,  which  has  almost  universally  underlined  UK  society’s  continuing  commitment  to 
price stability. The “open letter” mechanism is important to the political economy of monetary policy in 
the UK. 
A one member/one vote committee 
The open letter was an instance of the MPC acting as a collective, represented by the Governor. Much 
of  the  time,  most  obviously  when  reaching  our  monthly  decisions  on  Bank  Rate,  we  are  in  one 
person/one vote mode. 
Although  now  well  established,  a  committee  that  truly  adheres  to  one  person/one  vote,  and  at  the 
same time pursues its mandate with dedication and integrity, needs nurturing and skilful maintenance. 
After  all,  four  of  the  MPC’s  nine  members  also  have  executive  duties  for  which  they  report  to  the 
Governor  of  the  day.  And  the  four  other,  “external” members expect  to  renew  their careers  outside 
central banking after a few years of service to the MPC, and so might be thought to have an interest in 
maintaining an appropriate profile. But – maybe alone amongst central banks, I’m not sure – no one 
doubts that the MPC does decide Bank Rate by a free vote. That this should be so owes a great deal 
to the culture of the Committee itself; a culture engendered by its first Chairman and his successor as 
Governor, but also by the rest of the membership. This is buttressed by the way in which the Bank’s 
Court  of  nonexecutive  directors  approaches  its  statutory  responsibility  of  reviewing  the  MPC’s 
processes, involving annual bilateral meetings with each MPC member. And, externally, it is similarly 
underpinned  by  the  Treasury  Select  Committee  holding  us  individually  accountable  for  our  monthly 
votes, which are published as part of the minutes of our meetings. 
This establishes very powerful incentives for each member to reach their own considered view. There 
is no free-riding in the MPC; and our policy debates are full and free. That lies at the very heart of the 
MPC’s operation, performance and communications. 
Indeed, it might be wondered whether the tone of some of the public scrutiny could set up incentives 
to cast minority votes with the aim of demonstrating independence of thought and action.23 That, of 
course, would be perverse. Each member wants their individual decisions to matter – to the current 
Bank Rate, and to the expected path of policy and so the monetary conditions embodied in the money 
market yield curve. One votes in a minority when one disagrees with the immediate decision and the 
strategy it might convey. Occasionally, doing so, with the reasons disclosed in the minutes, can be an 
effective way of influencing monetary conditions. 
The make-up of the MPC’s majorities and minorities shifts around over time. There are no “blocs” on 
the Committee. And there is no distinction between “internals” and “externals” in that respect. Indeed, 
apart from the defining characteristic that the internals have full-time executive responsibilities at the 
Bank,  the  main  distinction  to  date  is  that  internal  members  tend  to  serve  for  longer;  an  average  of 
around five and three quarter years, compared with just over three years for the external members.24 
                                                      
22   Walsh, C. E., 1995, “Optimal contracts for central bankers”, American Economic Review, volume 85, number 1, sets out 
how  a  contract  between  government  and  the  monetary  authority  can  give  the  latter  the  incentive  to  pursue  society’s 
macroeconomic goals in a time-consistent manner. Rogoff’s “conservative central banker” relies on the central bank being 
more averse to inflation than society as a whole. 
23   See Gerlach-Kristen, P., 2003, “Insiders and outsiders at the Bank of England”, Central Banking, volume 24, number 1. 
24   To date, the time on the Committee served by externals has ranged from a minimum of 1.4 years to a maximum of 8.9 
years. For internals, the corresponding range is from 2.25 years to 11 years. These ranges are calculated by including the 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 5
That seems to me to be consonant with the political economy considerations behind the design of the 
Committee.  The  internal  members  provide  a  bedrock  of  accumulated  policy  expertise  and 
commitment. The externals, coming from outside the Bank and turning over more frequently, keep the 
debate and the process fresh. 
Three issues around the communication of monetary strategy 
Against that background, how does the MPC’s constitution, and in particular our one person/one vote 
decision-making structure, affect our approach to some of the issues on your conference agenda? 
Communication of decisions: how individualistic should we be? 
The  MPC  has  employed  four  main  communication  mechanisms:  the  announcement  of  our  monthly 
decision on Bank Rate; the minutes of those meetings, including details of our individual votes; the 
quarterly  Inflation  Report,  containing  projections  for  output  and  inflation;  and  public  testimony,  to 
Parliament and via speeches, interviews etc. 
This differs in various respects from the practice of some other, more consensual central banks.25 For 
example, we do not routinely include an explanatory statement in the notice of our monthly decision, 
preferring  to  do  so  only  when  Bank  Rate  changes  or  when  we  judge  that  the  reasons  for  a  “no 
change” decision cannot wait until the minutes are published a fortnight later. And when we do include 
an explanatory statement, it is kept as short and simple as possible. That is obviously different from 
the ECB and, in degree, from the FOMC. 
These choices reflect different circumstances and structures; in the MPC’s case, our “one person/one 
vote” governance. I can assure that members of the committee, including the chairman, do not know 
what we will decide until it is decided. Ours is not a system that lends itself to the tabling of a draft 
statement  around  which  views  will  coalesce.  Rather,  any  statement  has  to  be  crafted  to  reflect  the 
view of the majority that emerged at that particular meeting, not an easy task at speed. 
We are, in fact, very conscious of the distinction between collective and individual statements. We try 
to be clear about which communications are collective, on behalf of a majority or the Committee as a 
whole, and which are made by an individual member speaking for themselves. The Inflation Report 
projections,  for  example,  represent  a  “best  collective  view”  or  centre  of  gravity  in  the  Committee, 
admittedly  not  a  well  defined  term.  Individual  views,  when  departing  from  that  best  collective  view, 
have  occasionally  been  published.  At  the  Inflation  Report  press  conference,  the  Governor,  Charlie 
Bean and I are speaking for the Committee, not for ourselves. By contrast, we speak as individuals 
when we give testimony to Parliament or set out our views in speeches. 
That  this  should  be  understood  is,  of  course,  terribly  important  given  that  the  effectiveness  of  the 
regime  depends  on  the  Committee  decisions  and  “policy  reaction  function”  that  emerge  from  our 
individual deliberations. Conscious of the need to maintain a delicate balance between centripetal and 
centrifugal  forces,  most  past  and  current  members  –  including  me  –  have  opposed  incorporating 
individually labelled paragraphs into the minutes. To do so would put beyond doubt each month where 
each of us stands, but it would also affect the dynamic interactions amongst Committee members. My 
reluctance  to  go  down  that  route  stems  from  a  concern  that  we  would  slip  towards  a  degree  of 
individualism  where  members  were  no  longer  listening  to  each  other.  It  would  not  be  possible  for 
members to polish their statements after the meeting, as they would then be able to tweak their text, 
ever  so  slightly  of  course,  in  the  light  of  the  market  reaction  to  our  decision  and  so  on.  So  highly 
polished statements would be brought to the meeting, with perhaps even a degree of competition in 
the  depth  of  the  analysis  or  the  beauty  of  the  prose.  But  the  very  point  of  a  committee  is  that  we 
should listen to each other, and then make up our own minds.26 That includes trying to persuade one’s 
                                                                                                                                                                      
unexpired parts of the terms of existing Committee members, but do not include the terms of Howard Davies and David 
Walton. 
25   For example, Weber, A., 2007, “Monetary policy strategy and communication”, speech at the Deutsche Bundesbank/Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland conference on “Monetary policy strategy: old issues and new challenges”, Frankfurt, May 2007. 
26   See section on “Does discussion help?” in Lombardelli, Proudman and Talbot, op. cit., page 199. 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2007
colleagues. Over the years,27 I have definitely seen occasions where individual members have altered 
their position during the course of a meeting. 
In  summary,  the  political  economy  case  for  one  person/one  vote  does  not  entail  the  equivalent  of 
postal  voting,  which  I  believe  would  impair  the  quality  of  our  discussions  and  so,  probably,  of  our 
decisions. 
Communication of the Committee’s reaction function: whether to publish an expected path of 
Bank Rate 
Central bankers know that expectations matter. So they know that delivering their goals requires more 
than being able to set the overnight money market rate from one policy meeting to the next. It matters 
where agents – businesses, households, financial markets – expect the policy rate to be set in the 
future.  More  than  that,  it  matters  that  agents  have  a  broad  understanding  of  how  the  monetary 
authority will react to unforeseen developments in the economy; their “reaction function”. 
That being so, some central banks have started publishing their expected future path of rates, or a 
range for the future path. 
This could have advantages. For example, absent a clear agreement and statement of the strategy 
being  pursued  by  the  Committee,  differences  amongst  members  about  the  monthly  decision  can 
occasionally stem from judgments about how the precise timing of Bank Rate changes would affect 
perceptions of the Committee’s future course and so monetary conditions. 
But in my book, there are two reasons for not publishing a planned policy path – both related to the 
political economy context in which the MPC operates. 
First, in a one person/one vote system, I very much doubt that a sufficiently stable majority could be 
relied upon to exist to vote, as a majority, for the entire future path of rates (and then to stick to it if 
conditions  had  not  changed).  And  I  am  not  convinced  that  communication  would  be  aided  by 
publishing  a  path  made  up  of  segments  supported  by  majorities  comprising  different  groups  of 
members.  In  those  circumstances,  it  would  be  hard  to  make  sense  of  how  individual  statements 
related to the supposedly collective expected path. 
Second,  any  such  statements  would  be  conditional  on  a  whole  host  of  judgments  about  what  was 
going  on  in  the  economy  and  about  how  the  economy  works.  I  doubt  that,  in  the  UK,  our 
communication with the public and Parliament would be judged a success if we announced a path, 
only to have to explain that we had departed from it because conditioning assumptions A, B …. or X 
and Z had been invalidated by the passage of time. Getting across the conditionality might be hard, 
but also very important: there could be disquiet if the public felt that it had been misled. There is a 
premium, in our polity, of keeping the debate focused on the outlook for inflation. 
As I have said to the Select Committee,28 I would not myself say “never”. I think we must learn from 
experience elsewhere. 
But that does not mean sitting on our hands. The real need is to convey our reaction function, which 
publishing a path for Bank Rate would not obviously accomplish. We need to communicate how we 
are likely to react to the different types of shock that can drive the economy away from its steady state 
path. A complete specification is not feasible. We do not have a 100% correct model of the economy. 
And policy cannot sensibly be described by a simple mechanical rule but, rather, is determined by the 
judgment of policy makers, with the composition of the one person/one vote committee evolving over 
time. But at any particular time, some possible shocks – and so sources of risk to the inflation outlook 
– seem more important than others. As the Governor has announced,29 the MPC is therefore planning 
to do more to explain our collective assessment of risks. 
                                                      
27  Before I was a member of the MPC, I was on the secretariat, so I have attended nearly every MPC meeting since 1997. 
28   See  response  to  question  285  in  oral  evidence  to  the  House  of  Commons  Treasury  Select  Committee  inquiry  on  “the 
Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: Ten years On”, April 2007. 
29   King, M. A. 2007, “The MPC ten years on”, lecture to the Society of Business Economists, May. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 7
Communications about the transmission mechanism, and the place of money within it  
Grasping our reaction function requires an understanding of how we think the economy works. 
In  its  early  years,  the  MPC  published  a  collective  document  on  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism.30  And,  as  part  of  its  evidence  to  the  Select  Committee’s  “Ten  Years  On”  enquiry,  we 
recently submitted a collective document on how the economy has developed over the past decade.31
Much of it is uncontroversial. One issue has, though, come to the fore recently: money. Money is a 
good example of how the political economy context affects the outward form of policy regimes. In the 
euro area, it was vital for the ECB to do what it could to inherit the credibility of the Bundesbank, and 
so it was understandable that the special place of money in the Buba’s communication strategy was 
adopted by the ECB. I had first hand evidence of this when I was a member of the Monetary Policy 
Sub-Committee of the EMI during the mid-late 1990s (and so before the UK had decided not to join 
EMU). A colleague from one of the national central banks said to me after one of the deliberations, “Of 
course  you  guys  have  the  better  arguments  about  monetary  strategy,  but  we  will  back  the 
Bundesbank.  Their  policy  record  has  been  outstanding  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  Yours  has  been 
good since 1992, around five years, which just isn’t long enough”. 
In  the  UK,  it  was  almost  the  other  way  round  given  the  series  of  failed  attempts  to  base  monetary 
policy on a money target during the 1980s. Not only in terms of the substance but also in terms of 
building and maintaining support for the regime, the UK has been much better served by an objective 
expressed in terms of a target for inflation. It is easier to explain. 
But that leaves open the question of what role money should play in our analysis. Some commentators 
want money to be important in the transmission mechanism because, after all, inflation is a monetary 
phenomenon;  others  feel  that  it  can  be  placed  to  one  side  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  essentially 
endogenous and, after all, the dual of the quantity of money – interest rates – is in our models (more 
or less). This is an area where, given our individualistic governance structure, views on the Committee 
cannot be expected to be monolithic. 
My own view is that it is useful to recover the concept of shifts in the supply of broad money.32 But 
such shifts do not have much in common with the proverbial helicopter drop; households and firms are 
not forced to hold the extra money, but respond to the terms and conditions on deposits offered by 
banks.  The  consequences  for  the  macroeconomic  outlook  therefore  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
underlying  shock.  For  example,  if  a  shock  –  say  to  the  monetary  regime  –  caused  perceptions  of 
macroeconomic risk to decline, there could plausibly be shifts in both the supply of and demand for 
credit. Other things being equal, bank balance sheets – and so broad money – would expand, but it 
might be hard to judge the extent of any inflationary impulse coming through a “shock” to the supply of 
broad money over and above that stemming from a relaxation in credit constraints and higher asset 
prices. Also, although a “counterparts” approach to the monetary aggregates would incline one to think 
that  shocks  to  the  supply  of  credit  would  flow  into  broad  money,  changes  in  the  “technology”  of 
banking and financial intermediation might in some conditions make the connection tenuous. After all, 
the intermediation of credit occurs via capital markets and not just across bank balance sheets. That 
could matter, for example, if an increase in the supply of credit happened to occur at much the same 
time  as  an  increase  in  incentives  or  the  means  for  banks  to  securitise  –  ie  sell  –  the  loans  they 
originate. In the limiting case, a big positive shock to the supply of credit could coincide with shrinking 
bank balance sheets and so negative broad money growth. That is, of course, not at all what we have 
seen recently.33 But the thought experiment underlines two things. 
First, we need to attend carefully to the underlying drivers. As part of that effort, the Bank has recently 
launched  a  new  Credit  Conditions  Survey,  which  should  enrich  our  grasp  of  what  is  going  on. 
Reflecting changes in the structure of the financial system, we have included questions on demand for 
                                                      
30   “The transmission mechanism of monetary policy”, a paper by the Monetary Policy Committee, April 1999. 
31   “The Bank of England’s submission regarding the economic context”, memorandum submitted in evidence to the Treasury 
Select Committee inquiry on “The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: Ten years On”, April 2007. 
32   See Goodhart, C. A. E., 2007, “Whatever Became of the Monetary Aggregates?”, Peston Lecture at Queen Mary College, 
London, and King M. A. K., 2007, “The MPC ten years on”, lecture to the Society of Business Economists, May. 
33   See Tucker, P. M. W., 2006, “Macro, asset price and financial system uncertainties”, Roy Bridge Memorial Lecture to the 
ACI  –  The  Financial  Markets  Association,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  Spring  2007,  page  127  for  discussion  on 
growth in financial sector money holdings, and page 129 for discussion of the composition of balance sheets of large banks. 
8 
 BIS Review 66/2007
credit from hedge funds and structured finance vehicles, as well as on the terms and conditions on 
bank lending to households and firms. Second, we need to be careful in distinguishing the implications 
of credit conditions and asset prices from any extra role played by the rate of growth in banking sector 
liabilities (broad money). It is plausible that we are capturing all that we need to via the incorporation of 
asset prices – and so, at one remove, credit conditions – in mainstream macreconomic models and 
analysis. But we cannot be sure, not least because banking intermediation does not feature in those 
models, and now do risk premia. As I have said before,34 we must look at money, as it can be an 
“amber  light”,  but  analysis  of  the  monetary  aggregates,  which  means  the  analysis  of  the  banking 
sector  balance  sheet,  often  needs  to  be  especially  detailed.  Sitting  at  the  juncture  of  the  real  and 
financial economies, central banks should be especially well placed to undertake that analysis. 
To be clear, those are my individual views. Our governance structure provides constructive incentives 
for each of us to reveal our views on issues of this kind – to each other, and in public. 
Conclusion 
Much  of  the  world  economy  has  been  enjoying  a  period  of  sustained  macroeconomic  stability. 
Reforms under a series of governments to enhance the flexibility of product and labour markets have 
helped our economies to absorb shocks. But few people doubt that stability requires credible monetary 
institutions. 
The practice and theory of monetary policy has travelled a long way over the past 15 years or so. As 
performance has improved, so more refined questions have emerged about the optimal conduct and 
communication of policy. Many of those issues will feature in this conference. My purpose this morning 
has been to cast those questions in the context of the political economy conditions in which individual 
central  banks  are  constituted  and  operate,  using  the  UK’s  MPC  as  an  example.  Central  bank 
independence is a solution to a political economy problem – time inconsistency. Precisely how that 
problem is resolved may legitimately vary from country to country. In the UK, it was achieved only after 
democratically elected politicians had done some of the politically contentious heavy lifting in bringing 
inflation down, and after a period in which the case for price stability had been made. The monetary 
regime introduced in 1997 was necessary to embed credibility. Its detailed design properly reflected 
UK circumstances. Circumstances elsewhere differ, and so details in central banking practices vary. 
But  not  every  central  bank  practice  everywhere  may  be  optimal,  and  what  is  feasible  for  each 
country’s  monetary  system  alters  over  time.  We  therefore  need  to  learn  from  each  other,  without 
imagining that all design features travel safely: learning without proselytising. Academic research plays 
a huge role in keeping us intellectually honest, and so in progressing those debates. 
                                                      
34   See Tucker, P. M. W., “Reflections on operating inflation targeting”, speech at the Graduate School of Business, University 
of Chicago, July 2006. 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 9
