Lucas Papademos: Financial integration in Europe – March 2007 
Introductory remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the 
ECB  press  conference  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  publication  of  the  report,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
28 March 2007. 
 Introduction  
I. 
On behalf of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank (ECB), I would like to welcome you to 
this press conference on the occasion of the publication by the ECB of a new yearly report, entitled 
“Financial Integration in Europe”.  
The main purpose of this report, which we expect to publish towards the end of March every year, is to 
contribute towards the advancement of European financial integration and to raise public awareness 
of the Eurosystem’s role in supporting the financial integration process. 
Before I focus on the content of the report, let me first explain why we decided to regularly prepare and 
publish this report.  
The  Eurosystem  has  a  keen  interest  in  the  integration  and  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
system in Europe, particularly in the euro area, given their relevance to the fulfilment of our core tasks.  
In particular, financial integration is of key importance for the conduct of the single monetary policy, as 
a well-integrated financial system enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy 
impulses  throughout  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  financial  integration  is  highly  relevant  to  the 
Eurosystem’s  task  of  contributing  to  safeguarding  financial  stability.  It  is  also  fundamental  to  the 
Eurosystem’s  task  of  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems  which  also  relate  to  the 
safe and efficient functioning of securities clearing and settlement systems. Finally, in accordance with 
the Treaty establishing the European Community, the Eurosystem supports, when this can be done 
without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the general economic policies of the Community 
which  aim,  inter  alia,  at  “sustainable  and  non-inflationary  growth”.  Financial  integration,  which 
increases  the  efficiency  and  fosters  the  development  of  the  financial  system,  helps  to  raise  the 
economy’s potential for stronger non-inflationary economic growth. 
The ECB and the entire Eurosystem fully support the efforts of the private sector as well as those of 
the  European  Commission,  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  of  Ministers  to  enhance  the 
integration and development of the European financial system. 
In this respect, let me emphasise that in the area of financial integration the ECB works in very close 
and effective co-operation with the European Commission which has a primary responsibility in this 
field.  As such,  the  new  ECB  report complements,  the work  of  the  Commission  aimed at  enhancing 
European financial integration.  
Summary of the content of the report 
II.  
Let me now turn to the content of the report and draw your attention to some of the principal findings.  
Our report is structured into three chapters. The first sets out the ECB’s assessment of “The state of 
financial  integration  in  the  euro  area”.  This  assessment  is  based  on  a  set  of  quantitative  indicators 
developed by the ECB.1 The second chapter, entitled “Special Features”, contains in-depth analyses 
of selected issues relating to financial integration. The third chapter, “Eurosystem activities for financial 
integration” provides, an overview of the contribution of the Eurosystem towards a more integrated and 
developed financial market in Europe.  
                                                      
1   From now on, this report will contain the indicators that previously appeared in the ECB report on “Indicators of financial 
integration in the euro area”. The most recent edition of that report was released in September 2006. The indicators will 
continue to be updated bi-annually on the ECB’s website. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
Indicators in the state of financial integration 
II.1 
The ECB’s assessment of the state of financial integration in the euro area covers the money, bond, 
equity and banking markets, as well as market infrastructures. The evidence confirms that the degree 
of integration varies by the market segment and that it is generally more advanced in those market 
segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, especially the money market. The unsecured 
money market has been fully integrated since the introduction of the euro, and the repo market is also 
highly  integrated.  The  full  integration  of  the  large-value  payment  systems  has  been  instrumental  in 
achieving this result. Government bond markets have become considerably integrated and similarly 
the  corporate  bond  market  received  a  major  boost  with  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  has 
subsequently achieved a high degree of integration.  
Progress has also been made in the integration of euro area equity markets, where equity returns are 
increasingly determined by factors that are common to the euro area countries rather than country-
specific ones. 
However,  in  other  areas,  financial  integration  needs  to  be  enhanced.  For  example,  the  euro  area 
securities infrastructure that underpins both bond and equity markets is not yet sufficiently integrated. 
Similarly, retail banking markets continue to be less integrated than other banking market segments. 
This situation is also reflected in the fragmented European retail payment systems and is addressed in 
more detail in one of the special features.  
Special features 
II.2 
The second chapter, “Special Features”, comprises in-depth assessments of selected issues relating 
to financial integration. In each edition of the report, these special features will typically address major 
policy issues, but may also contain analytical articles on the subject of financial integration. The topics 
are mainly selected on the basis of their importance to the EU’s financial integration agenda and their 
relevance to the pursuit of the ECB’s tasks. 
This  first  report  covers  the  following  three  topics:  “Monetary  Policy  and  financial  integration”, 
“Strengthening  the  EU  framework  for  cross-border  banks”,  and  “The  SEPA  initiative  and  its 
implications for financial integration”. 
The first special feature, “Monetary policy and financial integration”, focuses on the impact of financial 
integration on the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Deeper  integration  broadens  the  range  of  financing  sources  and  investment  opportunities  and  it 
creates economies of scale. It allows economic agents to share risks more effectively, thus improving 
their ability to mitigate or even offset the consequences of idiosyncratic shocks that might affect the 
individual economies within the euro area. A well integrated financial system is, therefore, crucial for 
the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  as  it  enhances  the smooth  and  effective  transmission  of 
monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area. 
For example, in a well-integrated financial sector, cross-country differences in the way banks adjust 
their  interest  rates  to  changes  in  policy  rates  should  be  very  limited.  Indeed,  thanks  to  increased 
financial integration, such differences have diminished over time, and this has contributed to the fact 
that  the  transmission  mechanism  operates  in  a  broadly  similar  way  across  euro  area  countries. 
However,  some  discrepancies  in  the  interest  rate  pass-through  across  countries  seem  to  persist, 
which may reflect, in addition to the different structures of financial institutions and markets, a lack of 
sufficient financial integration.  
Similarly,  the  level  and  the  type  of  indebtedness  of  households and  non-financial corporations both 
play a role in the transmission of monetary policy. Our analysis shows that some of the differences 
across  countries  could  be  related  to  the  degree  of  integration  and  development  of  the  respective 
financial systems. It should be emphasised, however, that the significant changes that have occurred 
in  the  financial  sector  since  the  start  of  Monetary  Union  have  increased  the  choice  of  financial 
products  and  available  finance,  generating  tangible  benefits  for  households  and  non-financial 
enterprises. 
Overall, we can conclude that the process of financial market integration that is underway, while not 
yet  complete,  is  conducive  to  the  smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  the  euro  area. 
Nevertheless, greater financial market integration could eliminate some of the remaining differences 
and therefore facilitate further the transmission of the single monetary policy within the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
The second special feature, “Strengthening the EU framework for cross-border banks”, focuses on the 
importance of cross-border banking in fostering integration in the banking sector. While cross-border 
banking is first and foremost a market-driven process, the public sector can play an significant role by 
providing a policy framework that is adequate to support cross-border activities. This special feature 
provides an overview of recent developments in cross-border banking in the euro area and reviews the 
related EU policy framework. 
A  number  of  indicators  point  to  an  increased  degree  of  cross-border  banking  activities  in  the  euro 
area, such as the growing cross-border share in the financial holdings of banks, the increasing cross-
border mergers & acquisitions, and the rising market share of major cross-border banking groups.  
In  this  context,  it  is  also  important  that  the  EU  policy  framework  ensures  equal  market  access  and 
supports the efficient operation of banks across countries.  
Various  prudential,  legal  and  fiscal  measures  to  strengthen  the  EU  framework  for  cross-border 
banking  have  already  been  adopted  or  are  currently  under  preparation.  The  special  feature  briefly 
reviews  these  measures  and  provides  an  overview  of  the  efforts  to  enhance  convergence  and 
cooperation  in  the  supervision  of  cross-border  banks.  According  to  our  assessment  the  EU 
supervisory arrangements have already been substantially enhanced by two significant measures: the 
introduction  of  the  Lamfalussy  approach  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  adoption  of  the  revised 
regulatory  framework  for  home-host  country  interaction  under  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive. 
Additionally, several initiatives are underway to ensure that the benefits of this improved institutional 
setting can be fully reaped and various EU fora monitor the progress made in this field. At the same 
time, some discussion has emerged on whether or not it may be beneficial to move over time towards 
more integrated supervisory arrangements. 
Our analysis concludes that the findings of the broad-based review of the EU supervisory framework 
by  the  end  of  this  year  will  permit  the  evaluation  of  the  overall  functioning  of  the  institutional 
arrangements and an assessment of whether there is a need for further action. 
The third special feature, “The Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) and its implications for financial 
integration”,  considers  the  European  banking  industry’s  initiative  to  enhance  the  integration  of  retail 
payment  systems  in  Europe.  The  Eurosystem  supports  this  initiative  and  acts  as  a  catalyst.  The 
introduction of a single retail payment system is the natural complement to the introduction of the euro 
banknotes and coins and it is a necessary step towards the further integration of the retail payment 
market. 
The  aim  of  the  SEPA  project  is  to  enable  customers  to  make  more  efficient  cashless  payments 
throughout the euro area from a single account, irrespective of their location. SEPA will, in particular, 
define the technical standards and access conditions to the market. By creating a level playing-field, 
SEPA will ensure that participants are treated equally. 
This special feature concludes that, while the banking industry has made substantial progress towards 
a  more  integrated  retail  payment  market,  committing  itself  to  introducing  SEPA  instruments  and 
procedures from January 2008 and to migrating a critical mass of its customer payments by end-2010, 
some issues, such as transparency and interoperability, still need to be finalised. 
Eurosystem activities for financial integration 
II.3 
The report’s third chapter, “Eurosystem activities for financial integration”, provides an overview of the 
main  Eurosystem  activities  in  2006.  This  chapter  shows  that  the  ECB  and  the  whole  Eurosystem 
contribute in a number of ways to financial integration and development, building on their expertise 
and  special  nature  as  public  institutions  which  are  both  active  in  the  market  and  have  intense 
relationships with market participants. 
We  generally  distinguish  four  activities  in  this  contribution:  (i)  giving  advice  on  the  legislative  and 
regulatory framework for the financial system and direct rule-making; (ii) acting as a catalyst for private 
sector activities; (iii) enhancing knowledge, raising awareness and monitoring the state of European 
financial  integration;  and  (iv)  providing  central  bank  services  that  also  foster  European  financial 
integration. 
I will now provide an example of each of these four activities. 
With respect to the shaping of the financial system’s legislative and regulatory framework, I would like 
to  mention,  as  an  example,  the  EU  securities  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure.  Its  current 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
fragmentation represents a major obstacle to the further integration of European securities markets. 
Greater integration of securities clearing and settlement systems will be crucial to lowering the post-
trading costs of cross-border securities transactions, to exploiting the potential economies of scale and 
to  establishing  a  European  level  playing-field.  Moreover,  the  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure 
directly affects the performance of the major tasks of the ECB, pertaining to the implementation of its 
monetary  policy  via  the  framework  for  the  collateralisation  of  monetary  policy  (and  intraday  credit) 
operations,  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability  and  the  promotion  of  the  smooth  operation  of 
payment systems. 
Several  public  sector  initiatives  aim  to  achieve  an  efficient,  safe  and  integrated  post-trading  market 
infrastructure in the European Union. The ECB is closely involved in this work through its participation 
in  the  Clearing  and  Settlement  Advisory  and  Monitoring  Expert  Group  (CESAME)  and  in  the  Legal 
Certainty  Group.  Let  me  also  mention  here  –  as  an  important  development  in  2006  –  that,  at  the 
European Commission’s request, the European industry associations for exchanges and post-trading 
infrastructures and their members signed a “European Code of Conduct for Clearing and Settlement” 
last  November.  The  ECB  also  participates  in  the  related  Monitoring  Group  that  is  chaired  by  the 
Commission. 
I now turn to the function that we describe as “acting as a catalyst for private sector activities”. By this 
we  mean  that  in  areas  such  as  standard-setting  and  the  establishment  of  common  infrastructures, 
cooperation between private agents of the financial sector is as necessary as competition. However, 
cooperation  may  fail  to  materialise  without  the  support  of  a  catalyst.  The  ECB  and  the  entire 
Eurosystem can  play such  a  role,  on account  of  the  competence  and  objectivity  and  the numerous 
contacts with market participants. 
The  Short-Term  European  Paper  (STEP)  initiative  promotes  the  development  of  a  pan-European 
short-term paper market through market players’  voluntary compliance with a core set of standards 
encompassed in the STEP Market Convention. This Convention was signed on 9 June 2006. Since 
then, 32 STEP-compliant programmes, amounting to EUR 166 billion, have been launched under the 
STEP label.  
The ECB has supported the STEP initiative since its inception in 2001. During the preparatory phase, 
the  ECB  facilitated  coordination  among  market  players,  contributed  to  the  STEP  Task  Force  of  the 
Financial Markets Association ACI and provided legal assistance. 
The Eurosystem’s ongoing contribution to the STEP market focuses on two main activities. First, until 
June 2008, the ECB and nine of the Eurosystem’s NCBs will provide technical assistance to the STEP 
Secretariat  concerning  the  STEP  labelling  process,  whereby  the  ultimate  responsibility  for  granting 
and  withdrawing  the  STEP  label  fully  rests  with  the  STEP  Secretariat.  Second,  the  ECB  regularly 
produces  statistics  on  yields  and  volumes  in  the  STEP  market  and  publishes  them  on  its  website. 
From  next  week  onwards,  daily  statistics  will  be  made  available.  Following  the  publication  of  these 
yield statistics, the STEP market will be accepted as a non-regulated market for collateral purposes in 
Eurosystem credit operations.  
Turning to research and monitoring activities, I would like to mention the ECB-CFS Research Network 
on “Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe”, which was set up in 2002 by the ECB and 
the  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  in  Frankfurt.  The  current  research  focuses  on  three  areas:  (i)  the 
relationship  between  financial  integration  and  financial  stability;  (ii)  EU  accession,  financial 
development and financial integration; and (iii) financial system modernisation and economic growth in 
Europe.  The  network  has  organised  a  series  of  conferences  attended  by  academics,  market 
participants  and  policymakers,  such  as  the  one  hosted  in  September  2006  by  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank entitled “Financial System Modernisation and Economic Growth”. Furthermore, I would 
like to mention that, every year, the network awards five “Lamfalussy fellowships” to promising young 
researchers who undertake projects in the field of financial integration. 
Finally, with respect to the provision of central banking services that are also conducive to financial 
integration,  as  an  example  I  choose  our  wholesale  payment  system,  TARGET  and  its  further 
development into TARGET2. After the rapid integration of the euro area money markets, which was 
closely related to the establishment of the TARGET system, the planned launch of the single technical 
platform, TARGET2, later this year will promote further integration in the financial markets affected. 
This will be achieved, in particular, through a harmonised service level, a single price structure, and a 
harmonised set of cash settlement services in central bank money for all “ancillary” systems, such as 
retail payment systems, clearing houses and securities settlement systems.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
In November 2006 the Eurosystem published its third progress report on TARGET2, informing market 
participants  about  the  Eurosystem’s  decisions  on  pricing  and  legal  issues,  contingency  procedures, 
and testing and migration activities. The report also confirmed that 19 November 2007 would be the 
starting date for TARGET2.  
With a view to maximising the benefits from the establishment of TARGET2, the Eurosystem started in 
2006  to  explore  the  possibility  of  providing settlement  services  in  central  bank  money  for  securities 
transactions  in  euro.  The  objective  of  the  new  service  –  the  so-called  TARGET2-Securities  (T2S) 
project  –  is  to  harmonise  the  settlement  of  securities  transactions  and,  ultimately,  to  process  both 
securities and cash settlements on a single platform through common procedures. In early March of 
this year, the Governing Council concluded that it is feasible to implement TARGET2-Securities on the 
basis of a detailed feasibility study and a blueprint – both of which have since been published on our 
website. We therefore decided to go ahead with the next phase of the project, namely the definition of 
user requirements on the basis of market contributions. The scope of the project will be determined by 
taking into account the results of a public consultation. The Governing Council will then decide on the 
subsequent development phase by early 2008. 
Conclusion 
III.  
This brings me to the end of my presentation and I would like to conclude with the following remarks.  
From my  presentation,  you  may  have noticed  the many  different  facets  that,  together, contribute  to 
financial integration and shape the European financial system. Since central banks are at the core of 
financial systems, they closely follow developments which can foster their integration. The ECB and 
the  entire  Eurosystem  devote  a  substantial  amount  of  resources  to  this  task  because  we  are 
convinced that this is an important area of progress for the European economy, within the framework 
established  by  the  Lisbon  agenda.  Indeed  the  progress  made  so  far  towards  the  integration  and 
development  of  the  European  financial  system  is  a  European  achievement,  and  the  creation  of  the 
euro has made a decisive contribution. 
Finally, I should also like to stress that, while financial integration is an important driver for increasing 
the efficiency of a financial system, financial efficiency also depends on other factors. Among those 
are  the  degree  of  financial  development  and  the  quality  of  the  fundamental  determinants  of  the 
framework conditions of the financial market, such as the efficiency of the legal system. To capture 
more  aspects  of  financial  efficiency,  we  envisage  widening  the  report’s  scope  over  time  in  order  to 
encompass such factors as well. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
