David Dodge: A clear case for transparency 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canada-UK Chamber 
of Commerce, London, UK, 12 September 2007.  
 It has been about 26 months since I last spoke to you here in London and certainly, much 
has  changed  in  the  world  since  then.  We  have  seen  a  remarkable  continuation  of  robust 
global  growth,  fuelled  by  increases  in  international  trade  and  facilitated  by  the  continuing 
evolution and expansion of capital markets. Domestic demand began to grow more strongly 
in Europe and Asia and to slow in the United States, and this began to ease some of the 
concerns related to global imbalances that I spoke about during my last visit.  
However, credit spreads continued to narrow, and lending standards loosened through the 
early  part  of  2007,  while  the  growing  use  of  structured  financial  products  increased  the 
distance between investors and underlying credits. Although central bankers raised concerns 
over  the  past  18  months  or  so  about  the  pricing  of  credit  and  whether  it  appropriately 
reflected risk, it was not until the late spring of this year that spreads on risky assets began to 
widen, triggered largely by concerns related to the market for U.S. subprime mortgages. In 
August, concern turned into consternation, as investors in structured products – especially 
asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) – "discovered" that U.S. subprime mortgages might 
be included in the assets underlying their products. Compounding this consternation was the 
worry  that  counterparties  might  be  in  a  weaker  financial  state  than  previously  anticipated, 
because of their own exposure to these assets. This led to a tightening of conditions and to 
dislocations in money markets more generally. 
One  key  factor  behind  the  recent  troubles  in  the  money  markets  was,  I  believe,  a  lack  of 
transparency.  Transparency  can,  of  course,  mean  different  things  in  different  contexts.  In 
terms  of  financial  markets,  I  am  referring  to  the  ability  –  as  well  as  the  willingness  –  of 
participants  to  obtain  and  use  full  and  timely  knowledge  of  market  activity,  including  the 
precise  nature  of  what  is  being  traded.  It  was  living  through  the  events  of  August,  in 
combination  with  ongoing  efforts  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  strengthen  the  functioning  of 
international financial institutions, that has led me to use my remarks today to make a clear 
case  for  transparency.  In  doing  so,  I  will  not  limit  my  comments  to  financial  markets. 
Transparency is an underlying theme that pervades much of what policy-makers should do, 
both domestically and internationally. 
So,  I  will  begin  my  remarks  with  a  discussion  of  financial  markets  and  how  a  lack  of 
transparency  has  contributed  to  the  market  dislocations  that  we  have  seen  recently.  I  will 
then return to a theme I spoke about when I was last here – the importance of strengthening 
our  international  financial  institutions  and  increasing  the  transparency  of  their  advice  and 
operations. Finally, I'll say a few words about the health of the Canadian economy.  
Financial markets: the need for transparency 
Let  me  begin  my  remarks  by  recalling  the  2005-06  period,  when  many  central  bankers  – 
including me – were becoming concerned with what appeared to be an excessive easing of 
credit conditions, or what was described as a "wall of liquidity" building up around the globe. 
What was creating this wall of liquidity? Well, as I mentioned the last time I was here, at its 
very  base  was  a  global  excess  of  desired  savings  relative  to  desired  investment.  These 
excess savings were acting to drive down real longer-term interest rates, even during a time 
when many central bankers were raising policy interest rates.  
As  longer-term  interest  rates  declined,  investors  intensified  their  search  for  better  returns. 
This  search  for  yield  led  to  a  narrowing  of  spreads  on  risky  assets.  As  well,  there  was  a 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 1
loosening of lending standards in some markets, as lenders became more willing to take on 
risk. It also provided the opportunity for an increase in the issuance of structured products. 
Packaging and selling loans with a structure that allowed higher-risk assets to take on the 
qualities  of  a  lower-risk  loan  fuelled  the  demand  for  higher-risk  assets  and  embedded 
significant  leverage.  This  financial  engineering  was  a  factor  that  spurred  merger  and 
acquisition activity, including corporate takeovers by private equity firms, as well as lending in 
markets such as the market for subprime mortgages in the United States.  
In  many  cases,  these  structured  products  have  become  increasingly  complex  and  more 
difficult for investors to understand. The securities often made use of leverage and contained 
layers  of  derivatives  on  top  of  various  types  of  assets;  assets  that  were  packaged  and 
repackaged,  sold  and  resold,  in  a  myriad  of  forms.  In  this  complex  process,  transparency 
about the underlying credit was often lost. Because the originators of the loans intended to 
securitize them rather than leaving them on their balance sheets, they lacked the incentives 
to  carefully  assess  the  creditworthiness  of  the  borrower.  And  investors  often  lacked  the 
ability,  or  did  not  make  the  effort,  to  see  through  the  complexity  of  the  instrument.  Thus, 
investors were unaware of the creditworthiness of the root asset and the potential difficulties 
with  the  liquidity  of  the  instrument  itself.  Compounding  the  problems  was  the  fact  that  the 
models  upon  which  these  structured  products  were  valued  assumed  that  they  could  be 
readily traded in a liquid market. In August, that assumption was tested and found not to be 
fully warranted. 
I do want to emphasize that there were significant benefits to the development of these new, 
complex  instruments.  They  provided  the  ability  to  separate  different  types  of  risk,  such  as 
credit or market risk. This promoted better risk management and allowed these risks to be 
borne by those best able to do so. Both banks and non-banking institutions created different 
types  of  loans  that  could  be  packaged  and  sold  to  different  investors  across  the  global 
economy.  And  taking  many  loans  off  balance  sheets  enhanced  the  ability  of  the  banking 
sector to originate new loans while remaining well capitalized.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  central  bankers  had  been  worried  for  quite  some  time  that  credit 
spreads  were  not  appropriately  reflecting  risk.  So,  we  welcomed  the  re-pricing  of  risk  that 
began in the spring of this year. Indeed, by  May, we saw spreads on high-yield corporate 
bonds and emerging-market bonds beginning to widen to levels closer to historical norms. 
We also saw a re-pricing of U.S. subprime mortgages to reflect rising delinquency rates. This 
process meant that some people who had taken on a great deal of risk had to face losses. 
But  in  general,  the  necessary  re-pricing  of  risk  was  proceeding,  and  markets  were 
functioning properly.  
In August, however, the process hit a fairly major bump in the road. To begin with, we saw 
that the spread of the risks inherent in structured products also meant a wide dissemination 
of  any  underlying  problems  associated  with  the  assets  at  the  root  of  these  instruments. 
Moreover, the complexity and lack of transparency in many of the structured products added 
to the market dislocations. It was extremely difficult for investors to peel back the layers of 
these securities and derivatives to determine, with confidence, both the creditworthiness of 
the  assets  backing  a  particular  security  and  the  market  value  of  the  security  itself.  Even 
supposedly sophisticated investors became extremely uncertain and that, in turn, led to fear. 
Such  fear  made  markets  less  liquid  –  the  money  market  in  particular  –  and  the  "wall  of 
liquidity" evaporated under the summer sun. Investors sought shelter and security in the least 
risky, shortest-term, and most transparent assets. 
The  re-pricing  of  credit  risk  is  an  ongoing  process.  Unfortunately,  it  may  take  somewhat 
longer than in previous periods, because of the opacity and legal complexity of so many of 
these  structured  products.  All  of  this  implies  that  it's  too  early  to  draw  any  definitive 
conclusions  from  the  current  experience.  But  one  lesson,  which  I  hope  will  be  clear  to 
everyone,  is  the  absolute  importance  of  transparency  if  markets  are  to  function  properly. 
Vendors  of  financial  instruments  need  to  structure  these  investments  in  such  a  way  that 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2007
market players can clearly see what they are buying. Credit-rating agencies need to clearly 
indicate  that  their  ratings  for  highly  structured  products  should  not  be  used  with  the  same 
degree of certainty as their ratings for conventional, single-name issuers. At the same time, 
investors will have to take on more responsibility for diligent research, so that they can better 
understand the nature of their investments and demand greater transparency where it is now 
lacking. Investors should not rely simply on the pronouncements of rating agencies to deliver 
their  seal  of  approval!  Instead,  they  must  do  their  own  homework  and  make  a  concerted 
effort to understand what they are buying. However, this process can be successful only if 
they have access to all the information they need.  
Now I want to spend just a few minutes discussing the role of central banks, and the Bank of 
Canada in particular, during August. As liquidity dried up, central bankers in many parts of 
the  world  quite  appropriately  became  involved.  Many  central  banks  injected  short-term 
liquidity into money markets where required, fulfilling two fundamental roles.  
First,  it  is  absolutely  normal  and  proper  that  central  banks  should  provide  liquidity  when 
banks that are quite solvent are faced with markets that have become illiquid – a point that 
Walter  Bagehot  recognized  more  than  a  century  ago.  Banks  need  to  know  that  they  can 
access  the  central  bank's  liquidity  facilities  when  required.  At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  our 
Standing Liquidity Facility is available at the end of day, and can be accessed at a penalty 
rate of 25 basis points above our target for the overnight rate, by institutions that can pledge 
a  broad  range  of  easily  priced  securities  as  collateral.  Following  the  onset  of  the  market 
dislocations,  we  increased  our  supply  of  settlement  balances  as  we  normally  do  when  we 
see increased demand for cash balances. 
Our second very fundamental role is to conduct our monetary policy in a transparent way to 
keep  our  policy  interest  rate  close  to  its  target,  in  order  to  control  inflation.  The  events  of 
August put strong upward pressure on the key overnight rate that we use in the conduct of 
monetary policy. And so we carried out open market buyback operations to inject liquidity in 
order to maintain that rate. We also temporarily expanded the list of securities eligible for use 
by market participants in these buyback operations.  
All told, our actions in these roles were effective in improving the functioning of the overnight 
money  market.  So  we  have  now  restored  our  original  list  of  securities  eligible  for  use  in 
buyback operations, and we have gradually reduced the level of settlement balances. 
I want to be absolutely clear on one point: The actions that we took to provide liquidity to 
support the smooth operation of financial markets did not in any way signal a change in our 
monetary policy. In fact, it was a step in maintaining our monetary policy stance by keeping 
our target for the overnight rate at 4 1/2 per cent, which we judged appropriate for keeping 
inflation on target over the medium term.  
But while the overnight market in Canada is well on its way back to normal operations, this 
does not mean that all of the problems in money markets have been resolved. Term funding 
remains  somewhat  expensive,  and  the  yield  spread  between  bankers'  acceptances  and 
treasury  bills  remains  abnormally  wide.  With  respect  to  the  market  for  asset-backed 
commercial paper, Canada – like other countries – has seen some problems. One specific 
segment of the Canadian ABCP market – the market for third-party, or non-bank-sponsored, 
structured  finance,  asset-backed  commercial  paper  –  has  had  particular  problems.  This 
represents roughly one-third of Canada's about $120 billion ABCP market. At the core of the 
difficulty  are  the  guarantees  of  liquidity  behind  these  securities,  which  differ  from  the 
guarantees provided in the United States and Europe. Canadian third-party ABCP tends to 
include a clause that guarantees liquidity only in the event of a "general market disruption." 
Many, but not all, of the liquidity providers have declined to step in as this paper has come 
due, essentially saying that the continued operation of some parts of the commercial paper 
market  indicates  that  there  has  not  been  a  general  market  disruption.  Efforts  to  resolve 
problems in the market for third-party ABCP are under way. Discussions between investors 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 3
and liquidity providers – most of whom are international banks – are continuing in Montréal. 
And I remain hopeful that, over time, we will see useful results. 
The  balance  of  Canada's  ABCP  is  composed  of  conduits  sponsored  by  Canada's  major 
banks. These banks have agreed to provide global-style liquidity support to their  conduits. 
But they have not been immune to both global and local problems. As a result, the banks' 
conduits  have  been  rolling  over  at  shorter  terms  and  higher  interest  rates  and,  in  some 
instances,  the  banks  have  been  taking  some  maturing  paper  onto  their  balance  sheets. 
Nevertheless, the major banks appear to be well placed to deal with the current dislocations. 
In a joint statement last month, these institutions said that their commitment to support the 
ABCP market is underpinned by the strength of their financial positions, their confidence in 
the  underlying  assets,  and  their  ongoing  commitment  to  provide  liquidity  for  their  conduits 
upon maturity. Further, data published by Canada's Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
show  that  our  domestic  banking  sector  is  well  capitalized.  At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we 
welcomed this effort to help re-establish well-functioning money markets in Canada. And we 
are  confident  that  our  banks  have  the  capacity  to  continue  to  support  their  conduits  as 
necessary. 
Institutional transparency 
I said earlier that one of the lessons of the events of August is the absolute importance of 
transparency if debt markets are to function properly. But the importance of transparency is 
not  limited  to  money  markets  and  debt  instruments.  In  my  view,  there  is  a  clear  case  for 
transparency more generally in the operation of all financial markets. In most countries there 
are fairly clear rules requiring transparency in the operation of mutual funds, so investors can 
tell what they are purchasing. Hedge funds, by their nature, are less transparent. But there is 
also,  I  believe,  a  clear  case  for  increased  transparency,  at  least  with  respect  to  their 
objectives, operating procedures, and governance. 
The objective of accounting standards is also to increase transparency. But it is very difficult 
for firms to put a precise value on complex instruments for reporting purposes. For many of 
these  instruments,  there  is  no  well-established  market  against  which  they  can  be  marked. 
And  the  models  against  which  these  instruments  are  valued  are  simply  that  –  statistical 
models  that  can  only  generate  estimates  of  value  within  what  is  often  a  wide  range.  This 
means  that  it  is  very  important  for  firms  to  be  transparent  about  the  methods  used  to 
estimate values and about the range of possible values around these estimates. 
Let  me  now  say  just  a  few  words  about  the  importance  of  transparency  in  government-
sponsored institutions, whether domestic or international. I will begin with a few words about 
sovereign  wealth  funds,  which  control  increasingly  large  amounts  of  money  and  are 
significant global financial forces. Some of these funds, such as the public pension funds in 
Canada, already adhere to very high standards of transparency. But in other cases, there is 
often  insufficient  transparency  in  the  operation  of  these  funds.  Too  often,  the  objectives 
behind these funds are not clearly defined, and this can lead to misconceptions about their 
motives,  particularly  those  that  have  their  origins  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  As  is  the 
case  with  private  pools  of  capital,  high  standards  of  transparency  for  reporting  and 
governance, as well as objectives, would be helpful for these public pools of capital. 
Finally, I would note that the same need for transparency applies to our international financial 
institutions. In this vein, we at the Bank of Canada, along with our colleagues at the Bank of 
England,  have  been  working  to  promote  a  strengthening  of  the  surveillance  capacity  and 
governance  practices  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  As  work  continues  to 
improve surveillance, we must also be expanding our efforts to help to make the IMF a truly 
representative  institution  for  countries  around  the  world,  by  ensuring  that  emerging-market 
economies have an appropriate voice within the institution. As well, we must ensure that the 
Fund  is  governed  in  a  transparent  way,  and  that  the  Managing  Director  and  staff  are 
accountable for the work that they do. 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2007
Canada's economic health 
Before concluding, let me say a few words about Canada's economic situation. Canada has 
enjoyed  roughly  15  years  of  sustained  economic  growth,  with  low  and  stable  inflation  and 
increasingly  healthy  public  finances.  Our  unemployment  rate  is  the  lowest  it  has  been  in 
about 30 years, and a greater proportion of the population is now working than ever before. 
At least part of the credit for our continued economic performance should go to our sound 
framework  for  macroeconomic  policy,  which  includes  the  transparent  monetary  policy  of 
inflation targeting that I mentioned earlier, as well as a sound fiscal policy.  
Over the past five years, robust global demand – particularly for energy and other primary 
products – has been a key contributor to solid economic growth in Canada and a significant 
improvement in our terms of trade. Overall, the Canadian economy has been adjusting well 
to  changing  relative  prices,  supported  by  our  flexible  exchange  rate  regime.  Labour  has 
shifted  from  areas  and  sectors  where  there  is  less  demand  to  those  where  demand  is 
greater. For about the past three years, the Canadian economy has been operating near, or 
above, its production potential. Strong economic growth has led to rising incomes across the 
country.  The  market  for  skilled  labour  is  tight  throughout  Canada,  but  especially  in  the 
western  provinces.  In  these  circumstances,  there  has  been  some  upward  pressure  on 
inflation.  Against  this  backdrop  of  rising  incomes  and  employment,  it  is  not  surprising  that 
housing  sales  and  prices  have  continued  to  rise,  despite  Canada's  more  conservative 
mortgage-lending practices.  
What do we see as we look ahead? The Bank's last full economic projection was conducted 
for  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update  that  we  published  in  the  middle  of  July.  In  that 
document,  we  projected  continued  strong  economic  growth  outside  North  America  and 
somewhat slower growth in the United States over the next several quarters. In that context, 
our base-case projection for Canada was for average annual economic growth of about 2 1/2 
per cent through 2009, slightly below our estimate for the growth rate of potential. This would 
allow  the  economy  to  return  to  its  production  potential  in  2009.  Inflation  was  projected  to 
return to its 2 per cent target by early 2009. 
Recent developments suggest that the near-term economic prospects for the United States 
are weaker than earlier expected. It now seems likely that the adjustment in the U.S. housing 
sector  will  be  more  pronounced  and  more  protracted,  exacerbated  by  the  dislocations  in 
financial markets. This implies weaker demand for Canadian exports than had been earlier 
expected. However, economic growth in Canada in the first half of this year turned out to be 
stronger than we had projected. And so at our fixed announcement date last week, we said 
that  the  Canadian  economy  now  appears  to  be  operating  further  above  its  production 
potential than we had estimated in July. Domestic demand remains robust, buoyed by our 
continued  strong  labour  market  and  higher-than-expected  increases  in  housing  sales  and 
prices.  But recent  developments  in  financial  markets  have  led  to  some  tightening  of  credit 
conditions  for  Canadian  borrowers,  which  should  temper  the  growth  of  domestic  demand. 
Against  this  background,  we  judged  that  the  current  level  of  our  target  for  the  overnight 
interest rate – 4 1/2 per cent – is appropriate. 
However, there are significant upside and downside risks to the outlook for inflation. On the 
upside,  there  is  a  possibility  that  household  demand  in  Canada  could  be  stronger  than 
anticipated, while on the downside, the ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector could 
be  more  severe  and  spill  over  to  the  U.S.  economy  more  broadly.  In  addition,  there  is 
uncertainty  about  the  extent  and  duration  of  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  in  Canada 
and, hence, about the tempering effect this will have on the growth of domestic demand. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Dislocation in financial markets is not easy to deal with, and it is certainly 
not  welcome.  But  if  we  can  learn  and  retain  the  extremely  valuable  lessons  from  these 
BIS Review 100/2007 
 5
events, particularly in terms of the critical importance of transparency, then global financial 
markets can emerge from these events stronger and more efficient than before, to the benefit 
of us all. 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2007
