Jean-Claude Trichet: Productivity in the euro area and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, for the Special 
Lecture  at  the  22nd  Annual  Congress  of  the  European  Economic  Association,  Budapest, 
27 August 2007. 
 Introduction 
I would like to start with a thank you to the organisers and to the President of the European 
Economic Association for inviting me to participate in this conference. It is a privilege for me 
to be here today, to discuss the recent productivity developments in the euro area and their 
implications  for  monetary  policy.  I  know  that  you  represent  la  crème  de  la  crème  of  the 
profession. As an open-minded practitioner in front of so many distinguished scholars, I am 
looking forward to learning a lot from your comments on my talk. 
The slowdown in productivity growth in recent years represents one of the most important 
economic  developments  in  the  euro  area,  a  matter  for  concern  for  economic  policy  in 
general, but also an important feature of the environment in which monetary policy operates. 
I  am  going  to  begin  my  talk  with  an  illustration  of  key  elements  of  the  European 
developments since the mid-1990s, which are disappointing especially when viewed against 
the benchmark of the strong U.S. performance over the last ten years. Various hypotheses 
have been put forward to explain the missing productivity acceleration in Europe, in spite of 
the  similar  diffusion  of  new  technologies,  especially  Information  and  Communication 
Technologies,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  I  will  discuss  some  of  these  tentative 
explanations. Next, I will review the most recent productivity developments in the euro area, 
which in the eyes of some might signal the possibility of an inversion of trend. Nevertheless, 
the  future  remains  shrouded  in  uncertainty  and  future  developments  are  ultimately  what 
matters  for  monetary  policy.  In  the  last  part  of  my  talk  I  will  discuss  the  challenges  that 
monetary policy faces in this context and the important role that other economic policies must 
play.  
Productivity growth: past trends 
The facts 
When comparing European and U.S. labour productivity growth over the post-WWII period, 
measured by real GDP per hour worked, three phases can be identified (Figure 1).  
In  the  first  phase,  immediately  following  the  War,  productivity  growth  was  strong  in  both 
economic  areas,  but  especially  so  in  Europe  where  it  remained  on  average  almost  3 
percentage points above the 2.4 percent level in the U.S.. Thanks to this prolonged period of 
catching-up growth, the large negative productivity gap separating the European economies 
from the U.S. immediately after the War was substantially eroded in a couple of decades.  
This  period  of  strong  growth  in  both  output  and  productivity  was  interrupted  in  the  early 
1970s after the occurrence of – and according to some because of – the first oil shock. Once 
again,  however,  the  slowdown  was  a  common  trend  across  the  Atlantic,  and  Europe 
continued  to  perform  better  on  average,  with  labour  productivity  growth  rates  of  almost  3 
percent over the period from 1974 to 1994, compared to just over 1 percent in the U.S.. As a 
result, the catching-up process continued and the productivity gap was almost closed in the 
first half of the 1990s, according to available estimates.  
Over the past decade, however, euro area productivity growth has been disappointing. From 
an average of 2.7% in the 1974-1994 period, it declined to just 1.3 percent in the years from 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 1
1995  until  2006.  At  the  same  time,  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  in  the  U.S.  increased 
strongly,  from  1.4%  to  2.1%,  boosting  significantly  overall  economic  growth  in  the  same 
period.  
By construction, labour productivity growth is the difference between the rates of growth of 
output and the labour input. Euro area real output growth remained approximately constant 
at around 2.2% between the 1974-1994 and the 1995-2006 periods, while U.S. output growth 
rose  from  2.9%  to  3.3%.  In  light  of  the  unchanged  real  output  growth,  the  decline  in  euro 
area average labour productivity growth is mainly due to a switch in the growth rate of total 
hours worked from -0.4% in the 1974-1994 period to +0.9% in the years from 1995 to 2006. 
This contrasts with a decrease in the growth rate of U.S. total hours worked from 1.6% in the 
former period down to 0.9% in the latter. Faster output growth and slower labour input growth 
have jointly contributed to increase measured labour productivity growth in the U.S.. 
These  recent  developments  are  in  stark  contrast  to  the  rest  of  the  post-WWII  experience. 
First,  they  represent  a  break  in  the  process  of  European  catching-up  and  a  resumed 
widening  of  the  productivity  gap  with  the  U.S..  Second,  the  broad  tendencies  across  the 
Atlantic are no longer aligned, so we cannot explain them with the occurrence of a worldwide 
adverse shock, such as oil in the 1970s. The roots of the European productivity slowdown 
must be found within Europe. 
I will discuss three main hypotheses. The first one is that European firms are not sufficiently 
present in high-tech sectors. The second one is that firms in all sectors have not exploited 
the benefits of the new technologies to their full extent. The third one is that the aggregate 
euro area picture is misleading, because important differences exist across countries.  
Before  going  into  further  details,  however,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  difficulties  of 
measuring productivity developments exactly and of comparing them across countries. Most 
of the data I will discuss for the euro area have recently been made available in the so-called 
EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts database, which was published on 15 March 
2007. This database includes the first results of a two-year collaborative effort by researchers 
based at 16 institutions across the EU to produce long and internally consistent time series 
for  output  growth,  employment,  capital  formation  and  total  factor  productivity,  or  TFP,  at  a 
disaggregated  industry  level.  This  database,  together  with  others  developed  under  the 
leadership of the Groningen Growth and Development Centre, provides extremely valuable 
information for assessing structural trends in real output and labour productivity growth.  
Nevertheless,  the  database  remains  subject  to  a  number  of  caveats,  as  suggested  by  the 
fact  that  it  has  not  yet  been  clearly  endorsed  by  national  statistical  institutes.  More 
specifically,  international  comparability  across  some  dimensions  remains  difficult,  for 
example concerning measures of hours worked in the total economy. These difficulties are 
magnified  when  discussing  TFP,  whose  measurement  is  uncertain  due  to  data  limitations 
which  concern  all  factors  of  production,  but  are  particularly  severe  for  the  capital  input. 
Measurement difficulties should be kept at the back of our mind when drawing conclusions 
from the data. 
First remark: Europe has less innovative firms 
Given that the U.S. productivity performance has been ultimately linked to rapid technological 
progress  and  the  role  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies,  the  first 
hypothesis to entertain as an explanation of the disappointing European performance is that 
firms in the old continent have been lagging in the development of new technologies. In other 
words,  the  U.S.-Europe  difference  in  productivity  should  be  found  mainly  in  the  ICT-
producing  sectors,  which  have  been  driven  by  technological  improvements  at  breakneck 
pace in the U.S., and characterised by less innovative firms in Europe.  
This  hypothesis  has  some  intuitive  appeal.  After  all,  industry  giants  such  as  Microsoft  and 
Google  are  in  the  U.S..  U.S.  firms  such  as  Apple  are  often  viewed  as  epitomising 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2007
innovation,1 and the U.S. hosts some of the world’s best brains in its top universities. There 
is also evidence that, in spite of its small share in total production, the IT-producing sector in 
the  U.S.  did  contribute  to  a  non-negligible  extent  to  the  post-1995  increase  in  aggregate 
labour productivity growth, due to its double digit productivity growth rates.2  
On a more general note, there are other signs of a worse innovation performance of average 
EU countries compared to the U.S.. The European Commission, under the Lisbon Strategy, 
has  been  monitoring  the  innovation  performance  of  the  EU  Member  States,  compared  to 
other countries, for a number of years. Innovation performance is summarised in a composite 
indicator, called Summary Innovation Index, which includes inputs ranging from the structural 
conditions required for innovation and investment in R&D activities, to measures of results 
achieved in terms of successful know-how. The latest report does indicate Danish, Finnish, 
German  and  Swedish  firms  as  world  innovation  leaders,  with  both  high  and  fast-growing 
scores in terms of the Summary Innovation Index.3 The performance of U.S. firms is slightly 
below the leaders and at par with other European countries including France and Belgium. 
That being said, on average EU countries do lag behind both the U.S. and Japan. And this is 
true  also  in  terms  of  a  number  of  other  crucial  indicators.4  For  example,  Japanese 
expenditure in R&D in 2004 was, in percent of GDP, twice as big as in the EU; in 2003, the 
share  of  population  with  tertiary  education  was  38  percent  in  the  U.S.,  compared  to  23 
percent in the EU and 30 percent in the Scandinavian countries; venture capital investments, 
again as percentage of GDP, were in the U.S. in 2002 more than three times larger than in 
Europe in 2005; finally, both the U.S. and Japan show a vastly superior performance in terms 
of number of patents granted compared to the EU. 
Nevertheless,  differences  in  the  ICT-producing  sectors  appear  to  be  insufficient  to  explain 
the bulk of the cross-Atlantic gap in aggregate productivity growth. There is a view, which I 
will turn to next, that ICT-using sectors have also played a fundamental role in determining 
productivity improvements in the US.  
Second remark: U.S. firms are better able to exploit new technology 
Over the years from 1996 to 2004, the labour productivity differential between the euro area 
and  the  U.S.  has  characterised  above  all  the  standard,  non-ICT-producing  manufacturing 
sector, and especially market services, including distribution, financial and business services 
(Figure 2-3). These are also the sectors driving the decline in labour productivity growth in 
comparison with the 1980-1995 period. 
In the U.S. case, the increase in labour productivity growth over the 1996-2004 period was 
more broad-based. With a few exceptions, most U.S. sectors show labour productivity growth 
rates that are very significant, above 2% per year, and higher than in the 1980-1995 period. 
This  evidence  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  hypothesis  that  information  and  communication 
technologies have the largest impact on productivity growth indirectly, namely by sparkling 
further innovations in managerial processes, procedures and organizational structures, and 
by  facilitating  complementary  innovations.  For  example,  ICT  reduces  communication  costs 
                                                 
1   See The Economist, 7th June 2007. 
2   Various  authors  have  emphasised  to  different  degrees  the  role  of  the  IT-producing  sector  in  the  U.S. 
productivity revival. See e.g. R.J. Gordon (2000), “Does the new economy measure up to the great inventions 
of  the  past?”,  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  14,  p.  49-74;  S.D.  Oliner  and  D.E.  Sichel  (2000),  “The 
resurgence  of  growth  in  the  late  1990s:  is  information  technology  the  story?”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 14, p. 3-22; K. Stiroh (2002), “Information technology and the U.S. productivity revival: what to 
the industry data say?”, American Economic Review 92, pp. 1559-1576. 
3   European innovation scoreboard 2006, available from http://www.proinno-europe.eu/inno-metrics.html. 
4   The innovation scoreboard figures refer to the EU-25 composition. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 3
and  allows  for  more  flexible  and  decentralized  organizational  structures.  However,  the  full 
benefits of the availability of new technologies can only be reaped if computers are adopted 
as  part  of  mutually  reinforcing  organizational  changes.5  One  of  the  slogans  of  the 
organisational  reengineering  wave  of  the  U.S.  in  the  1990s  was:  “Don’t  Automate, 
Obliterate”, to convey the need for breaking away from old business processes, rather than 
just trying to speed them up.6
These effects are particularly difficult to measure at the aggregate level, but some studies 
have  suggested  that  the  contribution  from  the  use  of  information  technology  capital  – 
including computer hardware, software and communication equipment – accounts for almost 
50  percent  of  U.S.  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990’s.7  This 
contribution is associated with both increased real investments and declines in their quality-
adjusted prices.  
The  crucial  role  of  ICT-using  sectors  is  also  confirmed  by  the  analysis  of  TFP,  which  in 
theory represents a pure measure of disembodied technological progress associated with the 
use of all factor inputs. Table 1 reports a decomposition of euro area and U.S. value added8 
growth for the market economy concept.9 The key factor behind the increase in real output 
growth over the 1996-2004 period, compared to the years from 1980 to 1995, is in fact TFP 
growth. In the 1980-1995 period, euro area annual TFP growth, at 0.4%, was not markedly 
below  the  0.7%  level  in  the  U.S..  The  gap  became  much  larger  in  the  1996-2004  period, 
when euro area TFP growth increased only marginally to 0.5%, while U.S. TFP growth rose 
dramatically  to  1.6%.  The  euro  area  sectors  in  which  TFP  growth  has  declined  most, 
between  the  1980-1995  and  1996-2004  periods,  are  manufacturing  (excluding  electrical 
industry),  distribution  services,  and  financial  and  business  services.  The  ICT-producing 
sector is one of the few in which TFP growth exhibited a better performance in 1996-2004 
compared with 1980-1995.  
Third remark: it is important to analyse cross-country differences 
The euro area is a large economic area made of many different countries. One may therefore 
conjecture  that  the  aggregate  figures  I  have  discussed  so  far  conceal  important  cross-
country  differences,  which  should  be  taken  into  account  for  a  correct  interpretation  of  the 
facts. 
Once again, the EU-Klems project provides valuable information in this respect (Table 2). At 
least with reference to the largest four euro area economies, namely Germany, France, Italy 
and  Spain,  one  can  gauge  to  what  extent  developments  in  individual  countries  have 
contributed to the labour productivity slowdown in the euro area as a whole. 
Labour productivity growth for the total economy slowed down significantly in all four of these 
euro area economies over the 1996-2004 period compared to the years from 1980 to 1995. 
Over  the  1996-2004  period,  annual  labour  productivity  growth  ranged  from  a  maximum  of 
1.7% in Germany and France to a minimum of 0.3% in Spain, but it remained in all cases 
significantly  below  the  2.4%  level  in  the  U.S..  This  downward  trend  has  been  particularly 
marked in Italy and Spain, where labour productivity grew significantly below the euro area 
                                                 
5   P.  Milgrom  and  J.  Roberts  (1990),  “The  economics  of  modern  manufacturing:  technology,  strategy  and 
organization,” American Economic Review 80, pp. 511-528. 
6   M. Hammer (1990), “Reengineering work: don’t automate, obliterate,” Harvard Business Review, July-August, 
pp.104-112. 
7   S.D. Oliner and D.E. Sichel (2000), Op. cit.. 
8   The notion of real value added differs from real GDP because the latter includes the contribution of taxes less 
subsidies on products. 
9   The market economy is defined as total economy excluding health, education and government sectors. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2007
average.  When  looking  at  the  two  components  of  labour  productivity  growth  –  real  gross 
value added and total hours worked – the figures reveal additional cross-country differences. 
In  Germany,  the  productivity  slowdown  has  been  driven  by  a  significant  reduction  in  real 
output  growth,  while  in  France  it  mainly  reflects  a  rise  in  labour  input  growth.  In  Italy,  the 
productivity downturn has been driven by both a significant drop in real gross value added 
growth  and  a  strong  increase  in  labour  input  growth.  In  Spain,  the  slower  pace  in  labour 
productivity growth has been dominated by a stronger increase in labour input growth than in 
real output growth. 
By  and  large,  while  different  EU  countries  have  had  somewhat  different  experiences,  the 
overall pattern is common. This conclusion remains valid looking at a sectoral breakdown. 
For  example,  the  labour  productivity  differential  in  favour  of  the  U.S.  has  been  larger  in 
market services than in manufacturing, even if in the case of France the deceleration was 
rather modest, with annual labour productivity growth in manufacturing over 1996-2004 even 
slightly exceeding that observed in the U.S. (3.3% in France compared to 3.1% in the U.S.). 
The  tendency  towards  a  labour  productivity  slowdown  in  distribution services  and  financial 
and  business  services  is  also  common,  although  the  deceleration  was  mild  in  the  former 
sector in the case of Germany – still exhibiting a labour productivity growth rate above 2% in 
1996-2004  period.  The  ICT-producing  industries  in  Germany,  France  and  Italy  failed  to 
exhibit a decline in labour productivity growth over the years from 1996 to 2004 compared 
with 1980-1995 period, but a slowdown did occur in Spain.  
Similar  observations  can  be  made  for  national  developments  in  TFP,  whose  deceleration 
between  the  1980-1995  and  1996-2004  periods  was  broad-based  across  the  four  largest 
euro area economies, even if more noticeable in Italy and Spain, where TFP growth turned 
negative in recent years.  
Possible interpretations 
Overall,  many  causes  probably  contribute  to  explain  the  disappointing  labour  productivity 
growth performance in euro area economies in comparison to the U.S.. A gap is visible in the 
ICT-producing  sectors,  where  U.S.  productivity  growth  has  increased  at  an  especially  fast 
pace.  However,  the  particularly  poor  labour  productivity  and  TFP  growth  performances  of 
some ICT-using sectors, such as distribution services, and financial and business services, 
appear to play a crucial role in determining aggregate outcomes.  
Given the broad diffusion of ICT hardware and software in Europe, this evidence suggests 
that the presence of structural rigidities prevents, or slows down the process of exploitation of 
all the advantages of the new technologies in the lagging industries. Conversely, the more 
flexible  structural  characteristics  of  the  U.S.  economy  –  a  more  flexible  labour  market,  a 
higher degree of competition in product markets and lower barriers to entry for new firms as 
well as a more efficient capital market – have proved to be better suited for the challenges 
and opportunities of technological innovation.  
This intuition has been confirmed by a few studies of sectoral developments using a set of 
indicators  that  measure  differences  in  the  regulatory  restrictions  of  non-manufacturing 
sectors  of  OECD  countries.10  By  and  large,  these  studies  find  that  highly  regulated 
environments  tend  to  be  associated  with  lower  investment  and  productivity  growth.11  A 
                                                 
10   P.  Conway  and  G.  Nicoletti  (2006),  “Product  market  regulation  in  non-manufacturing  sectors  in  OECD 
countries: measurement and highlights,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 530. The authors are 
designed to “measure to what extent competition and firm choices are restricted in industries and areas where 
there  are  no  a  priori  reasons  for  government  interference,  or  where  regulatory  goals  could  plausibly  be 
achieved by less coercive means.” 
11   For  example,  A.  Alesina,  S.  Ardagna,  G.  Nicoletti  and  F. Schiantarelli  (2005),  “Regulation  and  investment,” 
Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association  3,  pp.  791-825,  find  that  regulatory  reforms  have  had  a 
significant  positive  impact  on  capital  accumulation  in  the  transport,  communication  and  utilities  sectors, 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 5
simple way to illustrate the link is to relate differences between rates of growth of productivity 
pre and post 1995 in various countries to an index of regulatory reforms. An obvious choice 
is  to  focus  on  the  OECD’s  “inward  oriented”  index  of  product  market  regulation,  which 
includes information on the degrees of “state control” and “barriers to entrepreneurship,” but 
abstracts from “barriers to trade and investment” (Figure 4). This simple, aggregate analysis 
is  nevertheless  suggestive  of  the  association  between  an  anti-competitive  regulatory 
environment and poor labour productivity growth. More sophisticated studies based on these 
data point out that the negative impact of regulation on productivity growth comes through 
distortionary  effects  on  investment  and  innovation,  rather  than  merely  through  the 
administrative costs it may entail. 
We can therefore conclude that the degree of market regulation plays an important role to 
explain the euro area performance. However, there are indications that it does not provide a 
complete explanation. For example, it is not immediately consistent with evidence that firms 
placed  in  the  same  regulatory  environment  have  superior  productivity  performance,  when 
U.S.-owned.12  More  importantly,  the  evidence  of  a  negative  influence  of  regulation  on 
productivity  growth  may  appear  to  be  inconsistent  with  a  number  of  basic  facts:  a  more 
regulated  environment  did  not  prevent 
the  superior  European  productivity  growth 
performance  prior  to  the  mid-1990s;  the  recent  trend  in  Europe  has  been  towards 
deregulation;  some  of  the  countries  which  do  not  register  an  outstanding  productivity 
performance, such as the UK, have reached a stage of deregulation comparable to that of 
the United States.  
I believe that these apparent inconsistencies can be reconciled if we realise that the recent 
productivity  decline  is  a  peculiar  result  of  the  coexistence  of  regulation  and  technological 
innovation. While regulation has probably become less stringent in more recent years, it has 
become more costly for firms in an era of rapid technological progress driven by ICT. Studies 
have  found  a  strong  negative  correlation  between  anti-competitive  regulation  and  the 
contribution  of  ICT-using  services  to  productivity  growth.13  The  effect  could  come  through 
larger  barriers  to  entry,  which  reduce  competition  and  the  incentive  of  incumbents  to 
innovate.14  
Regulation  may  also  have  interacted  with  the  tax  system.  An  influential  view  on  the  poor 
European performance builds on the observation I made at the beginning of my talk, that the 
productivity slowdown is mostly associated with a sharp increase in the growth rate of hours, 
for  an  unchanged  growth  rate  of  output.  The  rise  in  hours  worked  since  1995,  and  its 
previous  decline,  have  been  relate  to  gradual  increases  in  labour  taxes  until  1995,  and  to 
reductions over the more recent period. According to this view, lower taxes on labour and the 
introduction of labour market reforms since the mid-1990s have provided incentives for firms 
to hire a larger number of lower skilled workers.15 This hypothesis would also help explain 
the  faster  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  European  Union  until  1995  in  spite  of  the  high 
regulatory environment. 
                                                                                                                                                      
especially  in  the  long  run.  G.  Nicoletti  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2003),  “Regulation,  productivity  and  growth,” 
Economic Policy, April, find that various measures of anticompetitive product market regulations significantly 
reduce TFP-growth at the industry level. 
12   N.  Bloom,  R.  Sadun  and  J.  Van  Reenen  (2007),  “Americans  do  I.T.  better:  U.S.  multinationals  and  the 
productivity miracle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13085. 
13   G.  Nicoletti  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2005),  “Regulation  and  economic  performance:  product  market  reforms  and 
productivity in the OECD,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 460. 
14   E.g.  P.  Aghion,  N.  Bloom,  R.  Blundell,  R.  Griffith  and  P.  Howitt  (2005),  “Competition  and  innovation:  an 
inverted U relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, pp. 701-28. 
15   I.  Dew-Becker  and  R.  J.  Gordon  (2006),  “The  slowdown  in  European  productivity  growth:  A  tale  of  tigers, 
tortoises  and  textbook  labor  economics”,  presented  at  NBER  Summer  Institute  Macroeconomics  and 
Productivity Workshop. 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2007
Despite  the  large  number  of  papers  published  in  recent  years,  more  research  efforts  are 
needed  to  better  understand  the  sources  of  the  European  productivity  performance  in  the 
past decade. These difficulties are magnified when trying to gauge future trends. 
Productivity growth: current trends 
In  conjunction  with  the  cyclical  recovery,  euro  area  labour  productivity  growth  per  person 
employed has been gradually increasing since 2005. From a trough of 0.2% year on year in 
the first quarter of 2005, it slowly climbed to 1.2% in the third quarter of 2006, then to 1.7% in 
the first quarter of 2007. A notable feature of these recent developments is that the increase 
in  productivity  growth  occurred  at  the  same  time  as  an  increase  in  employment,  which 
contrasts with the average experience of the 1995-2006 decade and might, in the eyes of 
some, be a first sign of structural improvement.  
At the sectoral level, the recent, favourable labour productivity performance has been mainly 
driven  by  positive  cyclical  developments  in  industry  excluding  construction.  In  this  sector, 
labour productivity growth has steadily increased since 2004, reaching 4.1% year on year in 
the  first  quarter  of  2007.  In  contrast,  annual labour  productivity  growth  in  services has  not 
improved as much, even if it also rose slightly.  
These encouraging signs must be weighted against the fact that data based on productivity 
per hours worked show a less spectacular improvement in 2006. Since only yearly data on 
hours are available for the euro area, we will need time to understand whether changes in 
working time distort the interpretation of quarterly data on productivity per employed person.  
The  problem  at  this  point  in  time  is  to  determine  whether  the  recent  improvements  in 
productivity  growth  do,  or  do  not,  represent  the  beginning  of  an  inversion  of  the  declining 
trend  observed  of  the  last  decade.  Let  me  just  note,  incidentally,  that  once  again  these 
developments are taking place out of phase compared to the U.S., where the growth rate of 
labour productivity in the non-farm business sector has since 2004 been slowing down from 
the  exceptionally  rapid  pace  of  the  previous  decade.  In  spite  of  its  deceleration,  however, 
labour productivity seems to have  continued to benefit importantly from investment in new 
technologies,  even  if  the  contribution  from  capital  deepening  has  been  smaller  in  recent 
years than it was during the capital investment boom of the late 1990s. This is one of the 
reasons  suggesting  that  the  recent  U.S.  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  may  be,  at  least 
partly, a cyclical response to the moderation in the pace of economic activity in 2006, rather 
than a meaningful downshift in the longer-run trend.  
Recent developments: structural or cyclical? 
Identifying  changes  in  trend  productivity  growth  is  always  difficult  in  the  midst  of  an 
expansion, because productivity growth is well-known to be subject to cyclical variations: it 
tends  to  be  below  its  longer-term  trend  when  the  economy  is  contracting  and  above  that 
trend when the economy is in the early stages of an expansion. 
This property can be described more concretely with reference to the euro area experience 
during the cyclical upswing of year 2000. After years of sluggish performance compared to 
the U.S., many conjectured that the euro area economy would also experience a revival in 
trend productivity growth. These conjectures led international institutions to revise upwards 
their estimates of potential output growth in the euro area.  
With  hindsight,  that  assessment  was  overoptimistic.  The  revisions  in  the  first  available 
projections  for  the  years  1999  to  2004,  typically  published  one  to  two  years  ahead  by  the 
OECD and the European Commission and one to five years ahead by the IMF, were always 
negative and on average equal to between -0.3% and -0.4%. Moreover, for 1999 to 2002, the 
ranges of first available projections published by the Commission, the IMF and the OECD do 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 7
not overlap with the ranges of the latest estimates by the same international organisations 
(Figure 5). 
From the viewpoint of this recent experience, it is only natural to be cautious about the future. 
After all, we attribute a lot of the discrepancy between the European and U.S. performance in 
labour  productivity  growth  to  different  rates  of  growth  of  TFP,  namely  of  an  unobservable 
factor whose evolution over time is particularly difficult to forecast. Are the structural reforms 
carried out in past years sufficient to at least stop the European productivity decline, if not to 
foster  a  technological  revival?  Have  European  firms  learned  to  exploit  the  potential  of  the 
ICT-revolution to its full extent?  
At the same time, one should not extrapolate the recent past indefinitely and fail pray of the 
view that the European countries are ultimately doomed, because definitely unable to cope 
with  the  challenges  of  globalisation  and  technological  innovation.  After  all,  the  U.S. 
productivity revival appeared late in the cycle, years after the beginning of the expansion of 
the 1990s. The overall expansion did not appear to conform to previous cyclical norms. The 
rate of growth of GDP and investment in non-residential structures increased very slowly in 
the initial years of the 1990s compared to previous, prolonged expansions, in the 1960s and 
1980s. Investment in information technology also took a while to accelerate, even if it then 
reached levels far above those of other European countries.16  
In  practice,  we  base  the  real-time  assessment  of  trend  versus  cyclical  components  in 
productivity  growth  on  a  wide  set  of  indicators,  including  time-series  techniques,  which 
attempt to filter from the data the unobservable time-varying trend in productivity growth, and 
other relevant information. 
All  methods  tend  to  suggest  that  the  recent  pick-up  in  productivity  growth  is  probably  not 
erratic. It has proved to extend also to the services sector, which had remained particularly 
sluggish in the past. Survey measures also appear to be supportive of the hypothesis of a 
somewhat improved outlook for future productivity growth, even if their results have turned 
less optimistic over 2006.17  
At the same time, the recent rate of growth of labour productivity is not exceptionally high 
compared  to  previous  cycles.  Similar  growth  rates  were  observed  during  cyclical  peaks  in 
1997-98 and in 2000. Recent estimates of TFP-growth are also not particularly buoyant and 
the contribution to labour productivity growth from capital deepening has been non-negligible 
over the 2004-2006 period. This pick-up in investment activity is often interpreted as a sign in 
favour  of  the  view  that  the  improvement  in  labour  productivity  growth  is  associated  with 
cyclical developments.  
According to time-series estimates, the trend component of the rate of growth of output per 
hour  stabilised  in  the  last  few  years,  after  a  steady  decline  from  the  high  levels  of  the 
seventies. There are, however, no clear signs of improvement in the trend, and one needs to 
bear in mind that these measures are surrounded by considerable statistical uncertainty. 
At  this  stage,  all  taken  into  account,  my  provisional  assessment  would  be  that  the  most 
recent pick up in labour productivity remains of a cyclical nature and that it is too early to 
judge whether, on top of this cyclical improvement, we are starting to observe a structural 
change that will be sustained over many years to come. That is not to say that I exclude this 
possibility: the creation of the single market for goods and services, the implementation of 
                                                 
16   A. Colecchia and P. Schreyer (2002), “ICT investment and economic growth in the 1990s: is the United States 
a unique case? A comparative study of nine OECD countries,” Review of Economic Dynamics 5, pp. 408-442. 
17   The  survey  based  PMI  indicator  of  productivity  growth  from  the  Purchasing  Managers’  Survey  (PMI)  in  the 
euro area private sector provides timely information about the direction of productivity growth in the euro area, 
i.e.  whether  productivity  is  increasing  or  decreasing,  but  not  on  the  precise  quantitative  productivity  growth 
rate. 
8 
 BIS Review 94/2007
financial integration, the completion of the reforms that are part of the Lisbon agenda and the 
pursuit  of  the  reengineering  of  production  processes  associated  with  ICT  investments  and 
globalisation should all foster labour productivity and total factor productivity in the euro area. 
They should! But we do not have evidence yet that substantiates this hypothesis.  
Policy implications 
I have so far discussed possible determinants of past trends in euro area productivity growth 
and  the  outlook  for  future  productivity  developments.  Yet,  to  what  extent  are  these 
developments relevant for monetary policy?  
At  the  European  Central  Bank  we  can  provide  a  very  clear  answer.  Our  mandate  is  to 
maintain price stability over the medium term and we have clarified that price stability is to be 
interpreted as a rate of increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro 
area below but close to 2 percent. Hence, developments in productivity growth are relevant 
for the monetary policy of the ECB to the extent that they have an influence on medium term 
deviations from price stability in the HICP for the euro area.  
What  are  the  potential  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  coming  from  productivity 
developments?  Some  would  give  very  simple  and  straightforward  replies.  One  view  would 
suggest  that  the  simple  quantity  equation  tells  us  that  trend  money  growth  should  be 
adjusted so as to accompany the changes in output growth, whether up or down, triggered 
by  the  change  in  productivity  developments.  All  other  things  equal,  the  monetary  policy 
stance should be, according to this view, looser if there is an increase in trend productivity 
growth and tighter in the reverse case. 
Another view would stress that standard growth theories tell us unambiguously that, in the 
long  run,  equilibrium  real  interest  rates  move  proportionally  to  trend  productivity  growth. 
Assuming that long run inflation expectations are firmly anchored, changes in equilibrium real 
rates should spill over one-to-one into changes in the equilibrium nominal interest rate. Other 
things equal, the policy interest rate will eventually move up, if there is an increase in trend 
productivity growth, and down in the reverse case. 
A  naïve  interpretation  of  the  suggestions  for  policy  action  stemming  from  these  two  views 
would  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  somewhat  contradictory.  Let  us  see  how  we 
should reason as a policy maker in practice. 
Monetary policy implications of a known change in productivity growth 
As is often the case in economics, matters become particularly complex when we move to 
analyse  higher  frequencies.  In  the  short  run,  whether  productivity  developments  exert 
positive  or  negative  pressure  on  inflation  will  depend  on  their  net  effect  on  aggregate 
demand and aggregate supply.  
A productivity slowdown will in fact tend to produce two competing effects. The first effect, 
which  can  be  denoted  as  supply  effect,  derives  from  the  lower  potential  output  growth 
associated with the productivity slowdown. For a given level of aggregate demand, the fall in 
potential output will tend to be such that actual output exceeds potential, leading to a positive 
output gap and upward pressure on inflation.  
The second effect of the productivity slowdown is to reduce individuals’ wealth, due to the 
impact  of  lower  productivity  on  expected  future  income  and  on  profitable  investment 
opportunities. For given potential output growth, the wealth effect would give rise to excess 
aggregate supply, thereby leading to downward pressure on inflation.  
Whether  inflation  tends  to  increase  or  fall  in  response  to  a  productivity  slowdown  will 
therefore  depend  on  which  of  these  two  effects  dominates.  In  theory,  there  is  no  general 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 9
result.  The  net  effect  will  depend  on  specific  features  of  the  productivity  shock  and  of  its 
transmission throughout the economy. 
The  supply  effect  will  tend  to  dominate  when  aggregate  demand  adjusts  more  slowly.  For 
example, this may happen when productivity shocks are perceived to be short-lived. In this 
case, wealth, and aggregate demand, would react little, given the knowledge that the shock 
will quickly be reabsorbed. At least in case of positive productivity developments, the wealth 
effect  should  also  be  small  if  households  are  credit  constrained,  thus  unable  to  use  their 
expected future wealth as collateral to bring forward consumption.  
In  practice,  the  supply  effect  has  often  been  emphasised  in  the  U.S.  policy  debate  in  the 
1990s, with the implication that monetary policy could afford to be more expansionary given 
the increased trend rate of productivity growth. The argument has typically been made using 
a Phillips curve relationship, where an increased trend output growth – or a fall in the NAIRU 
–  would  lead  to  significantly  lower  inflationary  pressures.18  According  to  this  view,  the 
Federal Reserve realised that potential output growth increased over the 1990s and, despite 
a  booming  economy  and  record-low  unemployment,  tightened  monetary  policy  less  than 
would  be  implied  by  the  gap  between  actual  output  growth  and  previous  estimates  of 
potential  growth.  For 
the  euro  area,  where  productivity  developments  have  been 
disappointing, this view would imply that the policy stance should be tighter than it would be 
in the absence of the productivity slowdown. 
The wealth effect will dominate instead when aggregate demand adjusts quickly. This may 
be  the  case,  for  example,  when  productivity  developments  are  perceived  to  be  very 
persistent,  or  permanent.  A  perceived  “gloom  and  doom”  scenario  of  permanently  lower 
productivity  growth  would  probably  generate  an  immediate  and  strong  wealth  effect, 
including a stock market decline, which may exceed the fall in aggregate supply and lead to 
negative  pressure  on  inflation.  Similarly,  the  wealth  effect  will  tend  to  prevail  when 
technological innovations – for example the invention of the microchip – lead to widespread 
beliefs of large future productivity improvements, but the improvements are slow to diffuse 
through the production processes.  
Monetary policy implications of uncertainty on trend productivity growth 
The monetary policy implications of productivity developments are therefore far from obvious. 
Opposite policy implications can be drawn depending on the perceived nature of the shocks 
and on other features of the economic environment through which they are transmitted. Any 
economic model aiming to provide useful guidance for policy should therefore include at least 
two, and probably three, ingredients. 
First,  it  must  acknowledge  that  productivity  growth  can  be  driven  by  shocks  with  various 
degrees of persistence. This is a simple way to capture the evidence I reviewed in the first 
part  of  my  talk.  In  practice,  there  is  a  continuum  of  possibilities  from  purely  transitory,  to 
transitory but persistent, until truly permanent changes in the rate of productivity growth. The 
key empirical feature, however, is that transitory shocks tend to explain most of short-term 
dynamics of labour productivity growth, which is very volatile on a quarterly basis. Persistent, 
or perhaps permanent shocks, occur more rarely and appear to be smaller.  
Second,  perceptions  as  to  the  persistent  nature  of  productivity  shocks  must  be  allowed  to 
change  over  time.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  in  real  time  the  nature  of  any  observed 
productivity development and it is only normal to revise one’s opinions as new information 
arrives. The drop in U.S. stock market prices in 2001-2002 may have been partly the result of 
a correction of private agents’ opinion on the strength of the economy. Similarly, economic 
                                                 
18   R.J. Gordon and I. Dew-Becker (2005), “Where Did the Productivity Growth Go? Inflation Dynamics and the 
Distribution of Income,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2. pp 67-127. 
10 
 BIS Review 94/2007
and market analysts regularly revise their assessment of trend productivity and output growth 
as new data become available. A simple way to capture these effects can be to assume that 
underlying productivity shocks are unobservable, so that economic agents must assess over 
time the persistent nature of observed developments.19
The third desirable ingredient is that economic agents must be forward looking to a certain 
degree,  so  that  perceived  future  productivity  developments  must  be  allowed  to  impact  on 
their current decisions.  
Based on research conducted at the ECB and elsewhere, a few conclusions emerge from 
these analyses.20 First, given that the variance of persistent productivity shocks was in the 
past small, relative to the variance of temporary shocks, the safest bet in interpreting current 
developments is to assume that they are most probably driven by temporary shocks. It would 
be  in  case  new  information  points  persistently  in  the  same  direction,  that  the  assumption 
should  be  revised  in  favour  of  the  persistent  shock  hypothesis.  If  the  true  underlying 
developments  are  in  fact  permanent  since  the  beginning,  we  must  be  aware  that  this  can 
lead to very persistent discrepancies between actual and perceived trends in productivity.  
Given  that  revisions  of  our  perceptions  of  productivity  developments  are  unavoidable  and 
frequent, policy should react gradually to perceived developments. To the extent that shocks 
will normally be perceived as temporary by all economic agents, one might expect the wealth 
effect to be small, and the supply effect to prevail. Over time, however, as new data releases 
may lead to changes in perceptions of the nature of shocks, individual behaviour and policy 
can be readjusted accordingly. These results highlight the importance of detailed analyses to 
understand the determinants of observed productivity developments, and to gauge how long 
a productivity slowdown would last. 
At the same time, policy should take for granted that trend productivity growth is particularly 
prone to measurement errors and adopt an approach which is robust to mismeasurement. 
One  of  the  proposed  explanations  of  the  so-called  U.S.  Great  inflation  of  the  1970s  relies 
exactly on the hypothesis that a major misperception of the economy’s productive capacity 
occurred  at  the  time.21  An  improved  ability  to  deal  with  output  gap  misperceptions  can  be 
used to provide an alternative interpretation of the U.S. experience in the 1990s. 
In  any  case,  the  possibility  of  large  measurement  errors  for  real  economy  data  calls  for  a 
significant degree of measure in the policy response. When measurement errors occur, too 
strong  a  policy  response  to  mismeasured  economic  activity  can  induce  undesirable 
fluctuations in the economy. A strong focus on price stability is robust to these measurement 
errors and reduces the extent to which they are allowed to spill over into excess volatility of 
the policy interest rate. This implies, in particular, that monetary policy should be gradually, 
but  persistently  adapted  when  inflation  dynamics  tend  to  become  inconsistent  with  the 
definition of price stability.  
Finally, I would very strongly stress that it is of paramount importance for a central bank to 
ensure that inflation expectations remain well-anchored. Financial markets and the public at 
large must have a good understanding of the systematic and conditional conduct of monetary 
policy,  so  that  expectations  about  future  price  developments  and  the  path  of  policy  rates 
remain in line with the central bank’s mandate. For these reasons, the ECB has striven to be 
                                                 
19   R.M. Edge, T. Laubach and J. Williams (2007), “Learning and shifts in long-run productivity growth,” Journal of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
20   G.  Amisano  and  O.  Tristani  (2007),  “Uncertain  productivity  developments  and  the  natural  rate  of  interest”, 
mimeo, European Central Bank; R. Edge, T. Laubach and J. Williams (2003), “Monetary policy and the effects 
of a shift in the growth rate of technology”, mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
21   A. Orphanides (2003), “The quest for prosperity  without inflation”, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 633-
663. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 11
as transparent as possible, communicating clearly, and by a variety of means, its definition of 
price  stability,  its  two-pillar  monetary  policy  strategy,  its  assessment  of  the  economic 
situation, and its view of the outlook for price stability and associated risks. 
Implications for structural policies 
So far, I have discussed the implication of trend productivity growth for monetary policy, but I 
would  like  to  close  with  special  emphasis  on  the  implications  of  monetary  policy  on  trend 
productivity growth. Here we have a very simple result, as robust as one can hope to find in 
economics. Monetary policy has to do with nominal variables and productivity is an ultimately 
real  phenomenon.  Monetary  policy  has  no  effect  on  trend  productivity  growth.  Structural 
policies  must  take  the  responsibility  to  create  conditions  conducive  to  better  productivity 
performance in the euro area. 
Despite  significant  progress  in  some  areas,  structural  reforms  have  not  made  enough 
progress in easing market regulation. Some of the labour market measures adopted over the 
last decade or so are in part responsible for the success in raising participation rates, thereby 
contributing to the higher labour input and real output growth observed. This notwithstanding, 
the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  has  been  until  now  too  slow,  thereby  calling  for 
further  efforts  –  as  advocated  in  the  renewed  Lisbon  strategy  –  in  order  to  facilitate  the 
reallocation  of  resources  to  their  most  productive  uses  while  fostering  labour  productivity 
growth and technological advance. 
It is clear that major structural reforms are not easy to achieve, but there is today a unique 
opportunity for Europe and the euro area to take advantage of the present favourable growth 
developments. I have discussed elsewhere some of the key priorities for reform in three main 
areas22 and I would like to briefly recall them here. 
The  first  is  to  get  more  people  into  work.  Low  participation  rates  in  Europe  are  probably 
triggered  by  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  tax  systems  and  social  institutions. 
Necessary measures to increase labour utilisation or labour supply include the reform of tax 
and  benefit  systems  in  order  to  increase  incentives  to  work.  At  the  same  time,  high 
unemployment  rates 
in  particular  unacceptable  high  youth 
unemployment  rates  suggest  the  need  to  spur  not  only  labour  supply  but  also  labour 
demand. There is a need to reduce labour market rigidities which restrict wage differentiation 
and flexibility. Adjustments should be made to employment legislation where it impedes the 
hiring of younger and older workers in particular. 
The second priority for reform is to increase competition further. Some progress has been 
made in this regard. For example, several network industries, like telecommunications, are 
now fully or largely open to competition. A lot remains to be done, however: the extension 
and deepening of the EU internal market remains a priority in particular as regards further 
financial market integration, the pursuit of effective competition in the energy market and the 
implementation of the Services Directive. Let me also briefly mention labour mobility, which is 
still limited in the euro area. Labour mobility is an essential element of the Internal Market 
and an important component of adjustment mechanism in a context of monetary union. Any 
barriers  to  cross-border  labour  mobility  should  be  removed.  Following  the  principle  of  “an 
open  market  economy  with  free  competition”  is  pivotal  to  fostering  long-term  economic 
growth. 
Finally,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  I  just 
mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  support  innovation  and  technological 
changes.  These  include,  inter  alia,  the  unlocking  of  business  potential  by  creating  an 
the  euro  area  and 
in 
                                                 
22   J.-C. Trichet (2007), “The need for structural reforms in Europe,” Jean Monnet Lecture to the Lisbon Council, 
Brussel, 4 June. 
12 
 BIS Review 94/2007
entrepreneurial-friendly  economic  environment,  measures  to  support  innovation  through 
higher  investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D)  and  policies  aimed  at  improving 
human capital.  
In this context, the academic world has an important role to play. To make these measures 
most effective, they need to be accompanied by efforts to improve the labour force’s level of 
education  and  expertise.  Meeting  the  challenges  of  innovation  and  its  diffusion  as  well  as 
ensuring  the  labour  force’s  employability  and  flexibility,  requires  that  human  capital  is 
continuously adjusted to labour market needs through improved education and training, as 
well as lifelong learning. 
The  last  decades  have  already  brought  about  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of 
educational attainment. So far, however, investment in human capital in Europe is still clearly 
inadequate for a “knowledge-intensive” economy. In 2003, the U.S. annual expenditure on 
higher  education  institutions  represented  2.9%  of  GDP,  while  in  the  euro  area  it  only 
represented  1.2%.23  The  gap  is  mainly  a  result  of  greater  private  funding.  European 
universities  could  be  allowed  and  encouraged  to  seek  complementary  private  sources  of 
funding and legal, and other barriers to public-private partnerships between universities and 
businesses  should  be  removed.  Many  European  countries  also  need  more  incentives  for 
innovative research and an active and regular quest for synergies with the private sector. A 
more  effective  education  system,  as  estimated  by  some  research  of  the  European 
Commission,  might  bring  about  a  significant  contribution  to  the  annual  EU  GDP  growth 
rate.24  
Concluding remarks 
What makes trend productivity developments particularly difficult to factor in is the fact that 
they are extremely hard to gauge in real time and subject to recurring changes. Twenty years 
ago,  the  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives  published  the  proceedings  of  a  symposium  on 
“The slowdown in productivity growth”.25 The main focus was on the poor U.S. performance 
in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Who  could  have  at  that  time  expected  that  a  very  significant, 
positive jump in trend productivity would be observed seven years later? 
A lot of good research is suggesting that we are not wrong in thinking that what happened in 
the  US  is  due  to  the  generalisation  of  the  full  reengineering  process  associated  with  new 
technologies – and not necessarily only ICT – in the context of a highly flexible economy. If 
indeed this is true, then there are good reasons to think that the progressive completion of 
the  European  single  market  for  goods  and  services  and  the  active  implementation  of 
European structural reforms aiming at more flexibility in all markets will eventually permit the 
euro area and the European Union to experience a kind of productivity jump similar to the US 
one ten years ago. 
If  the  President  of  the  European  Economic  Association  is  kind  enough  to  invite  again  the 
President of the ECB in the future, I consider it likely that the time will come when the speech 
of the ECB President will concentrate in explaining the consequences of the upward jump in 
total factor productivity and labour productivity in Europe. I regret not being able to do that 
right now, but I am confident that it will happen, provided the reforms that are overdue are 
actively implemented. 
                                                 
23   OECD (2006), Education at a Glance. 
24   European Commission (2003), The EU economy: 2003 review, Chapter 3: Education, training and growth. 
25   Journal of Economic Perspectives 1988, Volume 2, Number 4. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 13
Annex 
Table 1: Gross value added growth and contributions, 1980-2004 
(annual average percentage growth rates) 
A. Euro area (*) 
  VA 
(1) 
=(2)+(5)+(8)
L  K 
(5) 
=(6)+(7) 
(2)
KIT  KNIT  TFP
(6)  (7) 
(8) 
1.6 
1980-1995 
MARKET ECONOMY 
Electrical machinery, post and communication 3.6 
Manufacturing, excluding electrical 
1.2 
-0.6 
Other goods producing industries 
2.5 
Distribution Services 
Finance and business services 
3.3 
1.5 
Personal and social services 
  
  
1995-2004 
MARKET ECONOMY 
Electrical machinery, post and communication 5.5 
1.2 
Manufacturing, excluding electrical 
1.2 
Other goods producing industries 
Distribution Services 
2.1 
2.8 
Finance and business services 
Personal and social services 
1.6 
 
2.0 
0.1 1.1 
0.4  0.7  0.4 
-0.4 1.5 
-1.0 0.8 
-1.2 0.9 
0.5 0.9 
2.4 1.7 
1.8 0.8 
  
 0.6  0.9  2.5 
0.2  0.7  1.4 
0.2  0.6 
-0.3
0.3  0.6  1.1 
0.7  1.0 
-0.8
-1.3
0.2  0.6 
  
  
 0.4 1.1 
0.5  0.7  0.5 
-0.7 1.2 
-0.3 0.6 
-0.3 0.7 
0.5 1.1 
1.7 2.2 
1.2 0.9 
0.6  0.6  4.9 
0.2  0.4  0.8 
0.1  0.6  0.7 
0.4  0.7  0.6 
-1.0
1.2  1.0 
0.2  0.7 
-0.6
14 
 BIS Review 94/2007
B. United States 
  VA 
(1) 
=(2)+(5)+(8)
L  K 
(5) 
=(6)+(7) 
(2)
KIT  KNIT TFP
(6)  (7) 
(8) 
3.0 
1.2 1.1 
0.5  0.6  0.7 
0.1 1.9 
0.1 0.6 
0.7 0.7 
1.3 1.2 
2.9 1.8 
2.5 0.5 
  
1.0  0.9  4.6 
0.3  0.3  0.9 
0.2  0.5 
-0.7
0.6  0.6  1.3 
-0.3
1.0  0.9 
0.2  0.3 
-0.2
  
  
1980-1995 
MARKET ECONOMY 
Electrical machinery, post and communication 6.6 
1.7 
Manufacturing, excluding electrical 
0.7 
Other goods producing industries 
Distribution services 
3.9 
4.4 
Finance and business services 
Personal and social services 
2.8 
  
  
1996-2004 
MARKET ECONOMY 
Electrical machinery, post and communication 8.9 
Manufacturing, excluding electrical 
0.7 
1.6 
Other goods producing industries 
4.7 
Distribution services 
Finance and business services 
4.9 
Personal and social services 
2.6 
Source: EU KLEMS database. 
 
*)Excludes Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal and Slovenia. 
Key: VA = Real gross value added growth; L = Contribution of labour input growth; K = Contribution of 
capital input growth; KIT = Contribution of ICT capital; KNIT = Contribution of non-ICT capital; TFP = 
Contribution of Total Factor Productivity growth. 
1.5  0.9  6.8 
0.4  0.3  1.1 
0.2  0.6 
-0.3
1.0  0.4  2.8 
1.2  0.7  0.9 
0.4  0.6  0.0 
-0.3 2.5 
-1.1 0.7 
1.0 0.9 
0.5 1.4 
2.0 2.0 
1.7 1.0 
0.8  0.6  1.6 
0.7 1.4 
3.7 
  BIS Review 94/2007 
 15
Table 2. Sectoral Labour Productivity Growth in the 4 Largest Euro Area Economies, 
1980-2004 
(annual average percentage growth rates) 
Source: EU KLEMS database. 
Key: VA = Real gross value added growth; LP = Labour productivity growth.  
 16 
 BIS Review 94/2007
Figure 1: Productivity Growth and Productivity Averages for the U.S. and the euro 
area. 
 
Source:  "The  Conference  Board  and  Groningen  Growth  and  Development  Centre,  Total  Economy 
Database, January 2007. 
Note: Data for the euro area are based on GGDC data for output (total GDP, in millions of 2005 U.S.D, 
converted at “GK” purchasing power parities) and total hours worked for all member countries from 
1968 onwards, while from 1960 to 1967 the data are for all member countries excluding Austria. 
Figure 2: Labour Productivity Growth in the Euro Area(*) 1980-2004 
(average annual percentage growth rates) 
BIS Review 94/2007 
  17
Source: EU KLEMS database. 
*) Excludes Slovenia. 
Key:  TOT  =  total  economy;  ELECOM  =  electrical  machinery,  post  and  communications  sector 
(representing  the  ICT-producing  industries);  MexElec  =  Manufacturing,  excluding  electrical  industry; 
OtherG  =  other  industrial  production  (i.e.,  mining  and  quarrying;  electricity,  gas  and  water  supply; 
construction;  agriculture,  hunting,  forestry  and  fishing);  DISTR=wholesale  and  retail  trade;  sale, 
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles; retail sales of fuel; FINBU=finance and business service 
sectors,  except  real  estate  (includes  financial  intermediation);  PERS=personal  services  (including 
hotels  and  restaurants;  other  community,  social  and  personal  services,  employees  of  private 
households);  NONMAR=non-market  services  (public  administration,  education  and  health)  and  real 
estate activities. 
Figure 3: Labour Productivity Growth in the U.S., 1980-2004 
(average annual percentage growth rates) 
Source: EU KLEMS database. 
Key:  TOT  =  total  economy;  ELECOM  =  electrical  machinery,  post  and  communications  sector 
(representing  the  ICT-producing  industries);  MexElec  =  Manufacturing,  excluding  electrical  industry; 
OtherG  =  other  industrial  production  (i.e.,  mining  and  quarrying;  electricity,  gas  and  water  supply; 
construction;  agriculture,  hunting,  forestry  and  fishing);  DISTR=wholesale  and  retail  trade;  sale, 
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles; retail sales of fuel; FINBU=finance and business service 
sectors,  except  real  estate  (includes  financial  intermediation);  PERS=personal  services  (including 
hotels  and  restaurants;  other  community,  social  and  personal  services,  employees  of  private 
households);  NONMAR=non-market  services  (public  administration,  education  and  health)  and  real 
estate activities. 
 18 
 BIS Review 94/2007
Figure 4: labour productivity growth and regulatory restrictions 
Source:  "The  Conference  Board  and  Groningen  Growth  and  Development  Centre,  Total  Economy 
Database, January 2007, and OECD. 
Note: the equation displays the coefficients of a regression of the change in labour productivity growth 
on the inward-oriented policy index with standard errors in parentheses. 
Figure 5: Revisions in estimates of euro area potential output 
 Source: European Commission, IMF, OECD and ECB calculations. 
Note: For the EC, calculations are based on trend growth projections and estimates. 
 
 BIS Review 94/2007 
 19
