Ranee Jayamaha: Budget 2007 – a path ahead 
Speech  by  Dr  Ranee  Jayamaha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  a  seminar 
organised by the Society for International Development, Colombo, 21 November 2006. 
 Let  me  first  elucidate  the  key  themes  underlying  the  budget  and  identify  the  strategies  and  future 
directions as announced in the budget. I will then try to outline the macro-economic policy framework 
highlighted in the budget focusing on the need for closer coordination. 
Underlying themes 
First, the govt. intends to achieve sustainable development, in particular, a growth around 8-10% in 
the  medium  term  by  focusing  on  productivity  increases  through  enhancement  of  infrastructure 
investments,  provision  of  support  facilities,  diversion  of  funds,  where  possible,  from  recurrent 
expenditure to capital expenditure and clearing any administrative impediments. 
Second, the 2007 budget attempts to reduce income disparities in different regions and provinces by 
improving island-wide infrastructure facilities which includes roads, rail roads, port services, airports, 
telecommunication, etc. and address poverty and unemployment issues. 
Third, the budget aims to improve the service economy to promote Sri Lanka as a trading and service 
hub in South Asia. 
Accordingly, sustainable development through investments in infrastructure (Rs 735 bn), the 
attainment of an equitable growth and improving the service economy  are three key themes 
underlying the 2007 budget. 
The strategy and way forward or the path ahead 
The year 2007 budget sets out a 10-year horizon within which a medium term plan is presented for the 
period 2006 - 2009. Therefore, the budget has to be viewed as a forward looking medium to long term strategy. 
The sustainable development strategy rests on the following: 
Regional and provincial development with focus on rural roads, housing, electricity, water supply and 
livelihood development; Human resource development programmes; and Other sectoral programmes. 
The  infrastructure  development  will  expand  economic  activity,  address  capacity  constraints  and 
bottlenecks.  To  sustain  growth  momentum,  it  is  planned  to  increase  investment/GDP  ratio  to  about 
30%. 
Diversification of exports, relocation of export ventures and provision of support services will address 
regional  disparities  and  unemployment  issues.  The  budget  also  plans  to  improve  human  resource 
skills and enable youth to further their career paths. The skills imbalance will be addressed through the 
university  curricula  and  the  universities  will  be  persuaded  to  improve  research  skills  and  talents  of 
undergraduates to cater to the demands made by the business community. 
Through infrastructure improvements, such as ports, airports and financial services, it is proposed to 
make Sri Lanka a service hub in South Asia and a part of the global supply chain. Many firms in East 
Asia and India have already linked themselves to the global supply chain and there lies an opportunity 
for  Sri  Lanka  to  establish  such  links  now.  In  this  regard,  sub-contracting,  outsourcing,  encouraging 
business  processes,  back  office  functions,  strategic  partnerships,  franchising,  promoting  off-shore 
insurance businesses, and the provision of logistical support will be promoted. This move would also 
help to attract foreign direct investments to the country. 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 1
Other strategies include the following: 
Improvements to public service 
• 
     addresses  issues  relating  to  public  service  and  improve  the  delivery  mechanism.  About 
15%  of  govt.  revenue  has  been  provided  for  administrative,  regulatory  and  other 
services  and  improvements  to  the  public  service  delivery  programme  to  make  it  more 
responsive  to  public  needs.  In  delivering  public  services  the  budget  advocates  to  use 
e-governance structures which are speedier than the present rule based structures. 
promotes productivity and request public service to eliminate waste and duplication while 
encouraging  to  complete  activities  which  have  already  begun  by  spending  agencies 
before venturing into new areas. To further facilitate the completion of unfinished work, the 
budget enables the roll over of all unspent provisions of previous years to the ensuing year. 
addresses the welfare issues of selected community groups and measures to extend the 
safety nets. 
Reopening of closed factories and revival of failed businesses 
In the 2007 budget, the fiscal arm has been extended to promote the re-opening of closed factories, 
abandoned  companies  and  business  entrepreneurs which  can  be  revived  through  provision  of  debt 
relief,  3  year  tax  holidays  and  an  exemption  from  economic  services  tax  for  a  period.  The  budget 
proposes to grant Rs. 2 bn. to Lankaputhra Development Bank which will provide equity or debt to 
such factories on the basis of solid restructuring plans. These efforts will also increase employment 
throughout the country. 
Let me now deal with how the budget has linked the key policy areas within a well-coordinated 
Macro Policy Framework 
2007 budget very explicitly articulates a well-coordinated medium term macro policy framework, which 
includes fiscal policy, monetary policy, reserve management and investment policy. 
Through fiscal policy measures, it is intended to: 
• 
promote economic growth beyond 8% and provide impetus to ensure sustainability of growth 
over the long term 
enhance  productivity  through  value  addition  with  particular  focus  on  industrial  and  agro-
processing ventures. 
Where  there  is  a  high  content  of  value  addition  in  local  businesses,  BOI  approval  will  be 
granted on the basis that duty free imports of related material will be limited for raw material 
which  are  not  available  locally.  Such  BOI  projects  will  also  be  granted  a  VAT  deferment 
facility for the purchase of material from local industries. 
permit local input supplying companies to open foreign currency accounts to enable them to 
receive payments in foreign currency from BOI enterprises. 
In  summary,  the  2007  budget  through  fiscal  measures  proposes  to  reduce  expenditure,  increase 
revenue,  provide  incentives  for  savings  and  investments,  pay  attention  to  potential  growth  sectors 
such as SMEs, entreport trade in selected industries and promote effective delivery of public service. 
Calls for effective monetary policy and prudent lending by financial institutions 
The  budget  recognizes  the  impacts  of  inflation  generated  through  excess  liquidity  and  credit 
expansion and highlights the need for using monetary policy measures efficiently to contain inflation. 
While recognizing that a desirable credit growth is necessary to encourage domestic production and 
diversification  of  the  economic  structure,  the  2007  budget  clearly  sets  out  the  need  to  curb  credit 
expansion towards non-essential items which brings in demand pressures on prices. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2007
Support for financial system stability 
By introducing appropriate measures to encourage the financial community to proceed on a prudent 
lending  path,  the  fiscal  policy  expects  that  the  relevant  authorities  will  maintain  financial  system 
stability. 
The  2007  budget  also  recognized  the  need  to  reduce  high  spreads  and  margins  by  banks  which 
enhance transaction cost to the nation. In this regard, the way forward or the path ahead will be to 
support the potential growth sectors in the economy and reduce transaction cost of financial services. 
This is also aimed at increasing access to finance by all segments of the population. 
Amalgamation of state owned small development banks for greater efficiency 
Consolidation of the state owned, small scale banking institutions to ensure that access to finance by 
SMEs  and  micro  enterprises  will  strengthen  banking  institutions.  Accordingly,  the  6  regional 
development banks, the SME Bank and the Lankaputhra Development Bank will be amalgamated with 
a solid capital base of over Rs. 5 bn. It is planned to increase the consolidated capital to Rs.10 bn. in 
the next 5 years, and rationalize the existing branch network of these banks for a better outreach. 
Expeditious disposal of legal cases 
As a further measure, the budget promotes expeditious disposal of legal cases to facilitate the long 
term viability of banks and financial institutions. To ensure expeditious redress to litigation and avoid 
delays, new provincial high courts will be set up. 
Support for capital market and financial sector policies 
To promote more investments in the capital market and provide assistance to financial innovations, the 
budgetary framework plans to raise revenue to around 19%, reduce the budget deficit to 5% of GDP 
and  national  debt  below  85%  of  GDP  by  2009.  These  measures  are  intended  to  provide  more 
resources to the private sector and deepen the capital market. Already the government has permitted 
foreign investments in Treasury Bonds. 
National Insurance Trust Fund 
The budget 2007 also proposes to develop the insurance market in Sri Lanka by setting up a National 
Insurance Trust Fund which will help to provide risk insurance to affected properties and developing 
the re-insurance market. While transferring the funds available under the Civil Riots and Commotion 
Fund, a mandatory cessation of 50% of all re-insurance businesses to the National Insurance Trust 
Fund is introduced. This too will help save part of the outflow of funds for re-insurance and enhance 
liquidity in the insurance market. 
Support for build up of foreign reserves  
The  budget  has  stipulated  a  minimum  salary  of  Rs  25,000  or  USD  250  for  employment  abroad 
requiring all employment agencies to comply with it. This proposal will enhance worker remittances 
into  the  country  and  help  to  finance  the  widening  trade  deficit  and  maintain  a  positive  balance  of 
payment position. 
The budget reiterates the need for permitting professionals to earn in foreign currency and retain such 
funds in foreign currency accounts within the country. The budget also allows expenditure incurred on 
acquiring international accreditation as a deductible expenditure from taxation. These measures are 
expected  to  enhance  foreign  currency  earnings  and  further  facilitate  the  management  of  foreign 
reserves. 
The down-side risks 
Effective policy coordination is certainly the way forward as set out in the budget 2007 and it is inter-
dependent on action by all policy-making authorities. If one or two policy areas lag behind, then the 
sustainability of achievements over the long term will become an issue. The monetary policy has to 
play its part to bring down inflationary expectations, while the investment policy has to attract FDIs and 
BIS Review 7/2007 
 3
other investment flows. The reserve management policy should attempt to enhance foreign reserves 
through increased worker remittances and other flows. Pushing all these policy fronts to work within 
the open economic policy framework and keeping pace with each other is critical to the success of the 
medium  term  development  plan.  Very  close  coordination  is  essential  for  it  and  it  is  certainly  a 
challenge.  At  the  same  time,  the  fiscal  policy  should  make  all  attempts  to  stick  to  its  revenue  and 
expenditure targets. Any deviation would cause problems on the other policy measures, in particular 
the monetary policy and such a deviation may lead to change the direction and path ahead. If I may 
reiterate, fiscal support is very critical for monetary policy to be effective. 
It is therefore clear that the 2007 budget is a forward looking stage setting document which not only 
has extended the fiscal policy measures to assist sustainable growth in a number of ways but also 
provides  a  way  forward  through  a  well  focused  policy  coordination.  Although  a  temporary  deviation 
from the path ahead may not be crucial, it is essential to closely monitor the program, (preferably on a 
monthly or quarterly basis) to ensure that all actors get back on the track during a shorter period and 
ensure that all are moving towards the right direction. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2007
