Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Basel II and risk management in the Philippines 
Opening remarks by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central 
Bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Eighth  Environmental  Scanning  Exercise:  Basel  II  and  Risk 
Management, Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 6 June 2007. 
 Members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  distinguished  speakers,  colleagues  at  the  Bangko  Sentral,  good 
afternoon.  This  is  the  8th  in  our  series  of  Environmental  Scanning  Exercises  (ESEs).  For  the 
information of our guests, it may be helpful to note that we have been holding ESEs since 2004. 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  expressing  my  appreciation  for  our  speakers  who  will  share  with  us  their 
insights on the topic of Basel II and Risk Management. The implementation of Basel II is expected to 
have significant implications on the stability of the banking system as well as the conduct of monetary 
policy.  In  particular,  the  new  capital  adequacy  standards  under  Basel  II  should  lead  to  enhanced 
financial stability as banks are able to: (1) provide capital commensurate to their risk-taking activities; 
(2)  properly  assess  the  risks  they  are  taking  while  supervisors  should  be  able  to  evaluate  the 
soundness  of  these  assessments;  and  (3)  appropriately  disclose  pertinent  information.  In  turn,  the 
greater  resiliency  in  the  banking  system  is  expected  to  increase  the  credit  and  lending  activities  of 
banks and thus contribute to a more efficient transmission of monetary policy actions. 
Our discussion today is meant to provide inputs for the assessment of policies that could help improve 
the  banking  system’s  risk  management  processes  and  efficiency  as  well  as  provide  a  leverage  to 
stimulate the diagnosis of, and improvements in, the supervisory framework.  
I take a special interest in today’s topic for two main reasons. The first reason is that next month will 
mark the beginning of the process of aligning our existing supervisory framework with the standardized 
approach of Basel II by Philippine banks, which is a shift in bank capitalization standards approved by 
the  Monetary  Board  in  June  2006.  This  makes  true  our  expressed  commitment  to  be  among  the 
countries that are expected to implement Basel II between 2007 and 2010 .  
The implementation of Basel II sets a new dimension in the supervision of the financial system. This is 
a major step in the groundwork for the revision of risk-based capital adequacy framework of the BSP, 
some of the initial preparations of which started even before the Asian financial crisis. Moreover, we 
are aware that our effectiveness as supervisor of banks is as important as the skills available in the 
banks to implement Basel II. Hence, we have invested heavily in enhancing our supervisory capacity 
to keep up with the task. This we have done continuously and in line with international best practices. 
Second,  this  new  framework  is  relevant  to  our  aim  of  promoting  and  maintaining  monetary  and 
financial  stability  in  the  country.  As  I  have  stated  earlier,  Basel  II  strengthens  the  link  between 
regulatory  capital  and  risk  management  as  it  will  help  us  ensure  that  banks  will  maintain  capital 
appropriate to their risk-taking activities. Banks are also expected to properly assess and manage the 
risks. Moreover, banks would be required to disclose pertinent information necessary to enable market 
mechanisms  to  complement  the  BSP’s  supervisory  oversight  function.  These  intensified  efforts  to 
deepen  and  accelerate  the  evaluation,  measurement,  and  disclosure  of  risks  under  Basel  II  are 
expected to strengthen the financial system.  
In this regard, risk management is consistent with the greater transparency and forward-looking nature 
of Inflation Targeting (IT), which is the monetary policy framework that the BSP has been using since 
2002.  As  in  the  IT  approach,  a  wider  set  of  information  and  disclosure  requirements  are  used  to 
enhance risk management. There is also more emphasis on anticipation of risks over a longer horizon 
and on greater sensitivity to market views. As a major channel for monetary policy, a stable financial 
system is a necessary condition for inflation targeting to work well in this country. 
Let me now pose some questions that our experts may want to consider for discussion. 
1. 
2. 
What are the key challenges encountered by commercial banks in their preparations? 
What are the implications of the new supervisory framework on intermediation activities of 
banks and their financial stability, government borrowing, investment and capital flows, and 
the conduct of monetary policy?  
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
Will Basel II increase procyclicality as there are arguments that adopters may tighten credit 
standards in response to rising capital requirements in the event of a deterioration in credit 
conditions? Will current  developments such as  reserve  accumulation  and  rising  liquidity  in 
Asia affect the adoption of Basel II in the country? 
Will  the  change  in  the  supervisory  framework  lead  to  further  restructuring  of  the  banking 
system through mergers and consolidations?  
How  extensive  will  be  its  impact  on  bank  lending  for  the  country,  and  for  developed  and 
emerging economies? 
The implementation of Basel II underscores the BSP’s commitment to deep and far-reaching reforms 
to promote the stability and soundness of the banking system. It also reflects our confidence in the 
ability of the banking industry to adapt to new operating standards. The challenges posed by these 
new standards will allow for the transformation of bank practices over time, and thus, provide greater 
financial  resiliency  and  sustainability  in  the  economy.  I  am  confident  that  banks  will,  beyond 
compliance, remain supportive in their stance to facilitate a more collaborative implementation of Basel 
II as we both continue to learn and adapt.  
The issues tabled for discussion for today’s environmental scanning exercise are varied. I am certain 
that we all look forward to a fruitful discussion and exchange of insights with our speakers.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
