Michael C Bonello: Interview with The Times (of Malta) 
Interview with Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, appearing in The Times, 
10 May 2007. 
 You  have  long  argued  for  structural  reforms  and  the  same  message  emerges  from  your 
Statement in the Bank’s recently published Annual Report for 2006. With an election due in the 
coming year or so, is there any point in repeating your plea? 
The Central Bank of Malta has a statutory responsibility to advise the Government on economic and 
financial matters. In performing this advisory role the Bank cannot be conditioned by considerations of 
electoral expediency or feasibility. Central bankers must take a long-term view of the economy’s best 
interests; and it is clear that in the long run the remaining rigidities and inefficiencies which burden the 
Maltese economy are unsustainable. 
Although it is true that the economy has entered a recovery phase, it is also a fact that Malta has not 
benefited to the same extent as other countries at a similar level of development from the favourable 
global conditions of the past three years. This suggests that structural factors prevented the economy 
from responding effectively to the cyclical upswing. That partly explains why per capita GDP in Malta 
has fallen against the EU average, from 74 per cent in 2001 to 72 per cent last year. 
This relative decline cannot be corrected unless productivity growth accelerates. Wage increases have 
been  moderate  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  blamed  for  the  recent  setback  in  competitiveness.  The 
cause is weak productivity growth, averaging just 0.1% between 2001 and 2005, compared with 0.5% 
in the euro area. So that while wage moderation remains essential in today’s competitive environment, 
higher productivity levels are indispensable to sustain economic growth and living standards. 
As  I  emphasized  in  my  Statement,  the  response  to  this  challenge  must,  sooner  rather  than  later, 
include measures designed to influence all the determinants of productivity growth. The needs here 
are well known. Key among them are policies to further improve the quality of human capital and to 
attract even more high-value added foreign direct investment; the need to reorder priorities in public 
spending to align them better with the Lisbon Agenda goals; a more cost-effective delivery of support 
services to exporters by both public and private sector suppliers; the adoption of more efficient work 
practices; and policies to raise the labour participation rate, especially for women. 
In  your  statement  you  also  call  for  means  testing.  Aren’t  you  treading  through  a  political 
minefield? 
It is only a political minefield because we have allowed it to become one. Generations of politicians 
have fostered the belief that governments have the means to provide all citizens, irrespective of their 
financial means, with an extensive range of free services and benefits. 
With expectations rising faster than the ability of governments to meet them out of available resources, 
however, the norms of prudent financial management were put aside and growing resort was made to 
deficit financing. Understandably, politicians are wary of asking citizens to give up any of the rights 
they have acquired in the process, especially on the eve of elections. 
The problem is that there comes a time – and that time is now in Malta as in some older EU members 
– when the financial burden of an extensive welfare system (itself compounded by the effects of an 
aging population) and of a large, and relatively inefficient public sector becomes too heavy to bear. It 
also deprives the economy of both the resources and the flexibility necessary to respond successfully 
to the competitiveness challenge coming from low-cost or more efficient producers. 
This  is  a challenge  which cannot  be  ignored.  The  people  need  to  be  told  that  certain attitudes  and 
practices  are  unsustainable,  and  that  the  only  effective  response  to  the  relentless  march  of 
globalization,  to  EU  membership  and other sources  of competitive  pressures  is  nothing  less  than a 
culture change, a complete break with the past. I believe it is possible to build an alternative, more 
efficient system for managing the economy and which nevertheless reconciles the objectives of social 
cohesion and financial sustainability. 
It is in this broader context that I have often called for a wider application of means testing. It is hardly 
equitable to provide free health care and medicines to all irrespective of income levels. Means testing 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 1
would, moreover, help to ensure that essential health and welfare services could be provided free of 
charge in the years to come to those who truly deserve them. The provision of stipends to all students 
in higher education is even more difficult to justify. For apart from equity considerations, stipends draw 
funds away from other uses, such as the provision of better library and laboratory facilities and the 
recruitment of more full-time teaching staff instead of part-timers. 
I acknowledge that it is not easy to implement means testing fairly because those who under-declare 
their income, and thus evade taxes, would qualify for benefits undeservedly. The answer, however, is 
not to rule out means testing in principle, but to wage a more effective campaign against tax evasion. 
I also recognize that a wider application of such testing might make only a relatively small contribution 
to  the  correction  of  the  fiscal  imbalance.  But  it  would  be  highly  symbolic  in  that  it  would  send  a 
powerful message about the need for change to a citizenry which firmly believes that public goods and 
services can be had for “free”. 
The  truth  is  that  there  is  no  free  lunch  –  somebody  must  pay  for  it!  Let  me  give  you  two  topical 
examples.  First,  take  the  Park  and  Ride  scheme.  The  popular  impression  is  that  it  is  free.  This, 
however, is not correct. What is happening is that people who use the scheme are getting a free ride 
at  the  expense  of  those  who  do  not  use  it.  Had  the  latter  been  consulted,  they  might  well  have 
preferred to see their taxes put to a different use. 
The other example comes from New York. Defending his proposal to introduce a congestion charge 
for vehicles entering Manhattan, Mayor Bloomberg is reported to have said that the question was not 
whether people wanted to pay, but how they wanted to pay: whether through a higher incidence of 
respiratory and other diseases and increased health care costs, or by reducing the number of polluting 
vehicles in the city and using the money collected through the charge to improve public transport. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Malta  raised  its  central  intervention  rate  twice  last  year  and  again  in 
January. Wasn’t this risky for an economy finally showing growth? 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  is  price  stability.  As  is  typical  for  small,  open 
economies,  however,  the  Bank  does  not  target  inflation  directly.  Instead,  the  Bank  pursues  this 
objective by using the exchange rate as its intermediate target and the level of the external reserves 
as  its  operational  target.  In  the  absence  of  capital  controls,  interest  rates  on  the  Maltese  lira  are 
inevitably influenced by those offered by the currency to which it is pegged, the euro. 
It follows, therefore, that in an environment of rising interest rates abroad, domestic rates must also 
rise  in  order  to  maintain  a  premium  over  euro  rates,  and  thus  protect  the  Maltese  lira  by  making 
domestic financial assets more attractive, thus discouraging capital outflows. That is why under fixed 
exchange rate regimes, the state of the economy cannot be a primary consideration. 
Having  said  that,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  two  objectives  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  Indeed, 
since  a  prudent  monetary  policy  stance  contributes  to  macroeconomic  stability,  it  indirectly  creates 
favourable conditions for sustainable economic growth. 
It should also be noted that the recent increases in domestic interest rates – after a long period at 
historically low levels, it must be said – are unlikely to have slowed down the economy unduly. The 
sensitivity of the economy to interest rates is, in fact, thought to be relatively small. Higher rates will 
have some impact on growth and employment only if they are sustained over a long period of time. 
Our  estimates  show  that  a  half-percentage  point  rise  in  interest  rates,  for  example,  will  reduce  the 
GDP by only 0.06% in the first year, reaching 0.1% by the third year. 
At  the  micro  level,  of  course,  higher  interest  rates  raise  borrowing  costs  for  businesses  and 
households. On the other hand, depositors benefit from higher interest income. Once again, however, 
monetary policy decisions cannot be based exclusively on such considerations. Exchange rate stability 
must take precedence over the cost of money in a small, open economy. 
You have implied that higher interest rates were necessary to defend the exchange rate. Has 
the recent declining trend in the Bank’s external reserves been mostly due to the premature 
conversion of Maltese lira to euro? 
With an open capital account and the growing integration of the Maltese financial system with that of 
the EU it is becoming increasingly difficult to clearly identify the impact of the different factors affecting 
movements  in  the  external  reserves.  Some  factors,  moreover,  are  interest  sensitive,  others  less  so 
and yet others not at all. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2007
One major factor belonging to the latter category that has exerted downward pressure on the reserves 
since  the  latter  part  of  2006  has  been  the  improved  prospect  of  euro  adoption  in  2008.  This  has 
induced some firms and individuals who receive foreign income denominated in euro not to convert 
such income into domestic currency. 
Others are converting their Maltese lira deposits into euro deposits. In addition, holders of Maltese lira 
assets,  particularly  cash,  have  been  buying  up  euro  currency  notes.  It  is  significant  that  since  the 
external  reserves  started  to  decrease  in  November,  currency  notes  in  circulation  have  declined  by 
about Lm35 million, almost entirely in the form of Lm10 and Lm20 notes, the preferred medium for 
cash hoarding. At the same time, the importation of euro notes, mainly high denomination notes, has 
increased. 
Movements in the external reserves are also influenced by the performance of the current account of 
the balance of payments. This account has been persistently in deficit, although there was a marked 
improvement in the deficit in 2006 to 6.3% of GDP. In the long run, however, this imbalance needs to 
be further reduced to a more sustainable level. This can only be achieved to the extent that growth is 
driven more by export-oriented activities and less by consumption. 
In view of the large amount of currency in circulation and your interest in ensuring a smooth 
changeover to the euro, what advice would you give to the public in this regard? 
As I said earlier, the amount of currency in circulation has been contracting and there is evidence that 
cash  hoards  and  bank  deposits  are  being  converted  into  euro.  We  are  trying  to  discourage  this 
premature  conversion  because  portfolio  diversification  at  this  stage  is  expensive  and  makes  little 
sense. In the case of Maltese lira bank deposits, these will be converted automatically, and at no cost, 
into euro on the changeover date. 
As for cash conversions, people who are buying euro currency notes from banks and other financial 
institutions  are  having  to  pay  exchange  commissions;  those  who  obtain  euro  notes  outside  the 
banking system are being offered an even more unfavourable exchange rate, besides running the risk 
of  receiving  counterfeit  notes.  These  early  conversions,  moreover,  constitute  a  drain  on  the  Bank’s 
reserves. 
We  are,  therefore,  encouraging  the  public  to  deposit  Maltese  lira  cash  holdings  into  the  banking 
system and retain them in Maltese lira denominated deposits, thereby earning interest. In this regard, 
some of the domestic banks have launched special deposit schemes to attract such funds. Those who 
already hold lira deposits, bonds and similar assets do not need to do anything. Such assets will be 
automatically converted into euro when the changeover takes place, and free of any charges. 
For  those  who  own  Maltese  lira  and  euro  assets  that  represent  income  previously  not  declared  for 
income  tax  purposes,  the  recently  launched  Special  Registration  Scheme  represents  a  timely 
opportunity for such persons to regularize their holdings in terms of the law. 
In summary, therefore, I would say that there is no advantage to be gained by converting Maltese lira 
assets into euro before the changeover date. From that date onwards, there will be an ample supply of 
euro notes and coin to satisfy the needs of the public. More importantly, euro currency will be provided 
at the official conversion rate without any changes or commissions. 
Still on the euro, do you think that people are as worried about inflation as they were? 
According  to  the  Eurobarometer  poll  taken  in  September  2006,  some  70%  of  Maltese  respondents 
said they feared the euro would give rise to inflation and over 80% were afraid of abuses and cheating 
on  prices.  This  fear  is  largely  based  on  sometimes  inaccurate  reports  in  the  local  media  of  what 
happened in some of the countries that introduced the euro in 2002. 
Since then many lessons have been learned and, with the help of the EU Commission, the ECB and 
twinning agreements with Ireland, Austria and France, a big effort is being made by the NECC to avoid 
the repetition of past mistakes. Some four-and-a-half thousand businesses have applied to enrol in the 
FAIR initiative. Dual pricing will become mandatory on July 1, and in fact many sellers have already 
started to display prices in both currencies. 
Consumers, therefore, have reason to feel reassured. At the same time, it must be understood that a 
low-inflation  changeover  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors.  Competitive  pressures  keep  sellers 
honest; but for competition to work, buyers must be vigilant and assertive, taking advantage of dual 
price  displays  and  other  information  material  that  will  be  available.  Moreover,  there  must  be  zero 
inflation on all government-supplied products/services. In fact, the national master plan requires public 
BIS Review 59/2007 
 3
sector  entities  that  want  to  smoothen  monetary  amounts  in  euro  to  submit  a  business  case  to  the 
Ministry of Finance showing that it is to the consumer’s advantage. 
One  advantage  Malta  has  compared  to  a  country  like  Italy,  for  example,  is  that  any  Maltese  lira 
amount will translate into a larger number of euros, and for that reason there will be less justification 
for sellers to round euro prices up. Exact conversions that will leave the cost of living unchanged will 
always be possible, also because very low denomination euro cent coins exist. The one-cent euro coin 
is in fact equivalent to less than the Maltese five mils coin, a unit of such a low value that it is no longer 
in circulation. 
Property price inflation has finally started to slow down but the pace of construction activity 
has not – and there are no indications that it will this year. What are your forecasts? 
The Bank’s residential property price index indeed shows a marked deceleration from a peak of almost 
20% in 2004 to 3% in the first quarter of this year. A major contributing factor is surely the marked 
increase in the supply of residential units, both in the shape of large up-market developments and of 
smaller apartment complexes. Given this situation of over supply, we expect property price inflation to 
remain low in 2007. 
At  the  same  time,  one  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  in  a  country  where  land  is  scarce  and 
substitute locations do not represent a competitive alternative, property remains a popular component 
of  investment  portfolios  because  of  the  widespread  anticipation  of  large  capital  gains.  Developers, 
therefore,  are  willing,  and  indeed  seem  able,  to  hold  on  to  vacant  property  in  the  expectation  of  a 
rebound in prices. This prevents prices from finding their true level. 
Reference is made in your Statement in the Bank’s Annual Report to the independence of the 
institution. Will this change with the entry into the euro area? 
If anything, the importance of the Bank’s independence, which is already enshrined in Maltese law and 
has been duly respected by successive governments, will be even greater once the Bank becomes a 
member of the Eurosystem. First of all, the autonomy of national central banks is mandated by the 
Maastricht Treaty. Reflecting this requirement, the Central Bank of Malta Act now fully guarantees the 
institutional, functional, financial and personal independence of the Bank and of the members of its 
decision-making bodies. 
As for the ECB, it has adopted low inflation as its overriding objective, and its independence helps to 
guarantee  its  ability  to  deliver  on  this  commitment.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  governors  who  sit  on  the 
Governing Council of the ECB do so in a personal capacity and must be guided only by euro-area 
wide considerations. As members of this Council, therefore, governors of national central banks must 
not only be persons of recognized professional competence and personal integrity, but they must also 
be prepared to defend their own bank’s as well as the ECB’s ability to act independently of political 
and other pressures. 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2007
