Stanley Fischer: The banking and financial system in Israel 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to the Knesset Committee of 
Enquiry  on  Bank  Fees,  (within  the  framework  of  the  Knesset  Economics  Committee),  Jerusalem, 
4 June 2007.  
 In recent months the Bank of Israel has conducted professional and comprehensive work into the field 
of competition in the banking system. This work is being held on two plains: 
a) 
In-house  teams  of  economists  are  discussing  recommendations  on  ways  to  enhance 
competition in the financial system in general, and in the banking system in particular. In this 
framework, methods are being examined of bringing in new players into the banking system. 
The Bank of Israel has drafted a legislative bill that would grant the Supervisor of Banks the 
authority that he currently lacks to regulate banking fees. 
b) 
Competition in the banking and financial systems 
The  financial  system  has  undergone  many  changes  since  the  late  1980s.  These  refer  to  the 
government's  cessation  of  massive  intervention  in  the  capital  market;  the  removal  of  barriers  and 
liberalization, changes in the taxation system, and the recent separation of provident and mutual funds 
from the banks (the Bachar reform). These changes were manifold and important. 
However on the retail side, competition between banks should be strengthened. 
At present, as I mentioned, we at the Bank of Israel are examining new ways to boost competition in 
the banking system, with an emphasis on the household sector. 
Why is the level of competition low? In Israel there are only a limited number of banks, and in effect 
two large banks capture most of the banking market. On many occasions I meet international financial 
bodies, including foreign banks, in order to interest them in entering the local retail banking market. 
Foreign  banks  have  operated  in  Israel  for  some  years  now,  but  most  of  their  activities  are  in  the 
corporate  sector.  One  of  the  reasons  for  the  fact  that  the  foreign  banks  almost  entirely  ignore  the 
household sector is that the local banks have a widespread branch network, and the local banks offer 
financial services based on advanced technological systems. This places a high barrier to entry to any 
potential newcomer in the market, whether local or foreign. Furthermore, it is important to remember 
that the fact that the Israeli economy is small, does have an influence on the decision by a financial 
institution to set up in the Israeli market.  
Against this background, we are examining the possibilities of bringing in a new type of player into the 
banking market, for example, an Internet bank, or converting the Postal Bank into a true bank as part 
of the postal privatization. 
Regulating prices, in this case banking fees, is generally not the ideal method and we would prefer not 
to have to take this path. However, as competition in the banking system – and in particular in the 
household sector – is low, and that it could take some time before our efforts to increase competition 
bring results, then we have drafted legislation that would grant the Supervisor of Banks the authority to 
regulate  banking  fees.  We  hope  that  when  competition  strengthens,  and  competitive  prices  follow, 
then there will be no need for this supervision. 
The legislative bill allows the Supervisor of Banks to regulate those fees that reflect an uncompetitive 
price.  The  bill  also  allows  for  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  banking  fees  and  to  create  a  closer 
connection between the fees and the services offered. This bill is currently in discussion in the inter-
ministerial committee on legislative matters and I hope that the bill will shortly be presented before the 
Knesset. 
The need for a strong and competitive banking system 
The Knesset has made several suggestions in this field recently, such as several proposals of private 
legislation  covering  the  regulation  of  banking  fees,  the  supply  of  financial  advice,  the  sale  of  credit 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 1
card  companies,  the  banks'  credit  policy  for  buying  controlling  stakes,  paying  interest  on  checking 
accounts, as well as setting up and operating this committee of enquiry into the subject of banking 
fees.  
I can understand the reasons for these proposals, but I must point out the following two points: 
a) 
The need to allow the relevant supervisors to carry out their specific roles in improving the 
functioning of the financial system, as well as the need for stability in the supervision system 
and the regularization of banking activity. The banks and other financial institutions could not 
operate  efficiently  under  conditions  where  the  legislation,  supervision  and  regularization 
systems keep changing too often. It is important that dealing with this topic remains in the 
hands of the supervisory authorities – the Israel Securities Authority, the Supervisor of the 
Capital Market and Insurance, and the Supervisor of Banks. One could consider making a 
change  here  or  there  in  the  supervisory  structure  of  the  financial  system,  but  it  is  not 
advisable, really not advisable, to transfer regulation – or even part of it – to the Knesset. 
The need for a strong and robust banking and financial system. For the Israeli economy to 
be  able  to  operate  efficiently,  the  banking  system  must  be  stable.  We  must  maintain  a 
healthy banking system through supervision and competition, while understanding that the 
banks operate in order to earn a return on their capital. 
b) 
In this context, I would like to refer to the banks' profits. It is quite natural to regard the banks' profits in 
nominal terms of billions of shekels, but one should also examine the banks' profits in relation to their 
capital, in other words, one should look at their return on capital. In these terms, the return on capital 
for the Israeli banking system is not particularly high, and even low in international comparison. The 
return  on  capital  for  the  banking  system  in  2005,  for  example,  was  14.5  percent,  compared  to  an 
average 15.4 percent globally. 
Finally I would like to ask the Knesset to push forward with government-sponsored legislation on the 
supervision of banking fees by the Supervisor of Banks as soon as the bill is presented, which I hope 
will be soon. This is an important bill, and every effort should be made to have this legislation passed. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2007
