Guy Quaden: Financial sector development and the role of central banks in 
securing financial stability in a globalised economy 
Opening  address  by Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  2007 
International Arab Banking Summit, Brussels, 28 June 2007. 
 Chairmen, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to address the 2007 International Arab Banking summit. I would like to thank the 
Union of Arab Banks and the World Union of Arab Bankers for their invitation and congratulate them 
for  their  excellent  organisation  of  this  important  event.  As  the  issue  of  Euro-Arab  banking  dialogue 
takes centre stage, it is fitting that, after having met in Rome in 2006, you have chosen to meet this 
year in Brussels, capital of the Kingdom of Belgium and also of the European Union (EU). I welcome 
you  in  this  city  on  behalf  of  the  Belgian  authorities  and  more  in  particular  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Belgium, the central bank of our country. 
You come here at a good moment: incoming data have confirmed that economic activity in the EU and 
the eurozone has continued to expand at a strong pace and the outlook for the second part of this 
year  and  next  year  remains  very  encouraging.  Having  regained  more  dynamism,  the  EU  and  the 
eurozone significantly contribute to the needed rebalancing in world economic growth. 
The Arab region is a key partner for the European countries and both sides attach great importance to 
building strong, meaningful relationships. As you all know, the EU and its Mediterranean partners have 
in 1995 created the European-Mediterranean partnership, also known as the Barcelona Process, to 
lay the foundations of a new regional relationship. Also, the European Commission has entered into 
co-operation agreements with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, in 1989, and with Yemen, 
in 1997, thus comprising the whole of the Arabian Peninsula. 
The Eurosystem – namely the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the thirteen 
countries which have adopted the euro – has established a working relationship through central bank 
co-operation,  notably  with  the  members  of  the  Gulf  Co-operation  Council  and  Egypt,  as  well  as 
through  the  organisation  of  an  annual  seminar  with  Mediterranean  central  banks  at  the  level  of 
Governors. 
Experience during  the  last  few  decades  has  learned that  financial  sector  development  is crucial  for 
sustaining economic growth. A modern financial system promotes investment, mobilises savings and 
allows  risks  to  be  diversified,  resulting  in  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  In  this  speech,  I 
would like to briefly touch on two related subjects. Firstly, what reforms seem necessary to stimulate 
financial  sector  development  and,  secondly,  how  can  central  banks  secure  financial  stability  in  a 
globalised economy? These questions are all the more relevant, given the emergence of international 
financial centres in Beirut, Dubai, Qatar and Bahrain, among others. 
The increasing importance of cross-border financial flows means shocks originating in one financial 
market  can  quickly  be  propagated  to  other  markets.  To  avoid  contagion  when  financial  instability 
occurs, national financial systems need to be adapted so as to be able to contain shocks originating in 
their own jurisdictions, while also being capable to weather external shocks. 
The IMF-supported conference on Financial Sector Reforms and Prospects for Financial Integration in 
the  Maghreb  countries  in  Morocco  in  December  2006  concluded  that  over  the  last  decade,  all 
countries concerned have implemented reforms to modernise their financial sectors, allowing financial 
systems to develop and grow more resilient and sophisticated. However, according to the conclusions 
of that meeting, reform efforts should continue in the following areas: 
• 
Firstly  Strengthening  banking  system  soundness  by  reducing  banks’  nonperforming  loan 
portfolios,  ensuring  adequate  loan  classification  and  provisioning,  and  adhering  fully  to 
internationally accepted prudential rules. 
Secondly Enhancing competition in the banking systems by ensuring a level playing field for 
all banks, including through the restructuring of public banks and privatization, if warranted. 
Thirdly Deepening financial markets through strengthening the regulation and supervision of 
securities markets, broadening the investor base, and improving transparency. 
  BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
  financial  sector  oversight  by  allowing  greater  autonomy 
to 
Fourthly  Strengthening 
supervisory  agencies  and  providing  them  with  more  resources  to  hire,  train,  and  retain 
qualified staff. 
Fifthly Bringing financial infrastructure in line with international best practice by establishing 
commercial  courts,  strengthening  corporate  governance,  and  fostering  a  sound  credit 
culture. 
Regional  integration  can  reinforce  the  progress  made  in  financial  sector  reform.  Useful  lessons  on 
regional financial integration can be learned from similar endeavours in other parts of the world. These 
experiences,  particularly  those  of  the  European  Union,  suggest  adopting  a  gradual  approach  and 
underscore  the  importance  of  sound  macroeconomic  frameworks  and  healthy  domestic  financial 
systems for successful financial integration. 
I now turn to the second issue: the role of central banks in securing financial stability in a globalised 
economy. The objective of financial stability requires action on three fronts: prevention, surveillance 
and crisis management. 
Concerning  prevention,  national  and  international  authorities  have  concentrated  on  defining  and 
working-out  rules  and  standards  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructures that are essential for the good functioning of the financial system. This includes not only 
hard  laws,  but  also  codes  of  conduct,  standards  and  best  practice,  mostly  designed  at  the 
transnational  level.  One  of  the  key  objectives  of  the  IMF  financial  sector  assessment  programmes 
(FSAP),  in  which  a  number  of  countries  present  here  have  already  participated,  is  to  assess  the 
observance of those standards and codes by member countries. 
Prevention needs to be accompanied by a surveillance structure aimed at detecting leading signs of 
vulnerability  at  both  the  micro  and  macro  level.  Supervision  at  the  micro  level  seeks  to  avoid  the 
collapse  of  individual  financial  institutions  in  order  to  assure  a  high  level  of  consumer  protection. 
Central banks complement surveillance of individual institutions through a wide-ranging surveillance of 
the whole financial system, in order to avoid systemic, global crises that could slow down or disrupt 
economic activity. 
Such  crises  can  be  the  result  of  the  breakdown  of  infrastructure  that  assures  essential  linkages 
between financial institutions. They could spread through a succession of defaults or because a large 
number of financial market participants all want to liquidate certain positions simultaneously. 
Even  preventative  measures  coupled  to  an  efficient  surveillance  system  cannot  guard  against  all 
eventualities, throwing up the question of what role central banks have to play when a financial crisis 
erupts, especially in their capacity as lender of last resort. 
Priority  must  be  given  to  private  sector  solutions  in  order  to  avoid  moral  hazard,  i.e.  market 
participants  should  not  be  led  to  expect  a  rapid,  even  automatic,  intervention  by  the  authorities  to 
solve problems before they grow any larger. 
Intervention by authorities cannot be excluded altogether, but it must be viewed as a last resort aimed 
at  limiting  systemic  risks.  In  any  case,  such  intervention  must  be  guided  by  the  principle  that  the 
financial implications of any crisis resolution package must be borne, to the fullest degree possible, by 
the institutions in trouble, their management, stockholders and, the case being, their creditors. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the challenges facing financial sector decision makers posed by globalisation 
are significant and manifold. However, they are not insurmountable. If handled skilfully, globalisation 
offers the prospect of increased prosperity for our economies. Co-operation and co-ordination among 
national authorities in the EU, the Mediterranean and the Middle East, as well as continued reforms to 
make financial systems more resilient to internal and external shocks seem to be two key elements of 
our response to these challenges. 
I wish you all very fruitful discussions over the coming days. Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
