Frederic S Mishkin: Globalization and financial development  
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, to the New Perspectives on Financial Globalization Conference, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington DC, 26 April 2007.  
 In the United States and many other countries, students learn that the key to success is hard work. Yet 
when we look at many developing countries, we see people who work extremely hard for long hours. 
Their wages are low, and so they remain poor. And as a whole, their countries remain poor. If hard 
work does not make a country rich, what does? 
The right institutions are essential. Nobel laureate Douglass North defines institutions as the "rules of 
the game in a society, or, more formally, humanly devised constraints that shape human intervention." 
(North,  1990,  p.  3).  Among  the  institutions  that  are  most  crucial  to  economic  growth  are  those  that 
enable  a  country  to  allocate  capital  to  its  most  productive  uses.  Such  institutions  establish  and 
maintain strong property rights, an effective legal system, and a sound and efficient financial system. 
In recent years, the field of economic development has come to the conclusion that "institutions rule" 
and are critical to economic growth.1 An extensive literature focuses on financial development as a 
significant force driving economic development.2  
However, developing good institutions that foster financial development is not easy: It takes time for 
institutions to evolve and adapt to local circumstances. In addition, vested interests in poor countries 
often oppose the necessary reforms because they believe that such reforms will weaken their power 
or allow other people to cut into their profits. How can poorer countries overcome these obstacles? 
How can they change the distribution of power to forge the political will to promote institutional reform? 
The answer is globalization. 
I  should  note  that  the  opinions  I  will  express  today  are  my  own  and  not  necessarily  those  of  my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
Elements of institutional reform 
Before examining the role of globalization in promoting financial development, let’s first look briefly at 
what  steps  must  be  taken  to  build  an  institutional  infrastructure  that  will  ensure  a  well-functioning 
financial system. 
Develop strong property rights 
1.  
Strong  property  rights  are  needed  to  encourage  productive  investment  because  it  will  not  be 
undertaken  if  the  returns  on  investment  are  likely  to  be  taken  away  by  the  government  or  others. 
Hernando de Soto, in his important book The Mystery of Capital, argues that the inability of the poor in 
developing countries to acquire property rights is a central reason that they are unable to gain access 
to capital and so remain mired in poverty. For example, the use of collateral is a crucial tool that helps 
the financial system make loans because it reduces losses when loans go sour. A person who would 
pledge land or capital for a loan must, however, legally own the collateral. Unfortunately, as de Soto 
has documented, legalizing the ownership of capital is extremely expensive and time consuming for 
the poor in developing countries. In one of his many astonishing examples, obtaining legal title to a 
dwelling on urban land in the Philippines required taking 168 bureaucratic steps through 53 public and 
private agencies over a period of 13 to 25 years. 
                                                      
1   A  large  literature  shows  the  importance  of  good  institutions  to  economic  growth.  See,  for  example,  North  and  Thomas 
(1973);  Hall  and  Jones  (1999);  Acemoglu,  Johnson,  and  Robinson  (2001);  Easterly  and  Levine  (2001);  Rodrik, 
Subramanian,  and  Trebbi  (2002);  Easterly  and  Levine  (2003);  Glaeser  and  others  (2004);  and  the  recent  survey  by 
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005). Kaufmann and others (1999) also point to the importance of various aspects of 
good governance. 
2   An  excellent  nontechnical  survey  of  the  extensive  empirical  evidence  on  the  link  between  financial  development  and 
economic growth can be found in World Bank (2001). See also Levine (2004) and Schmukler (2004). 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
Strengthen the legal system 
2. 
A  legal  system  that  enforces  contracts  quickly  and  fairly  is  an  essential  step  in  supporting  strong 
property rights and financial development. For example, lenders write restrictive covenants into loan 
contracts to prevent borrowers from taking on too much risk, but such covenants have value only if 
they can be legally enforced. An inefficient legal system in which loan contracts cannot be enforced 
will prevent productive lending from taking place. If setting up legitimate businesses or obtaining legal 
title to property is too expensive, the poor will never have access to the legal system and will be cut off 
from lending that could help them start small businesses and escape poverty.3 Setting up a simple 
business in the United States generally requires only filling out a form and paying a nominal licensing 
fee. In contrast, de Soto's researchers found that legally registering a small garment workshop in Peru 
required  289  days;  at  6  hours  per  day,  the  cost  was  about  $1,200,  which  was  approximately  thirty 
times the monthly minimum wage. The lack of property rights for all but the very rich, as documented 
by de Soto, is a serious impediment to financial development. 
Reduce corruption 
3.  
Government  is  often  the  primary  source  of  financial  repression  in  developing  countries.  Rapacious 
governments  whose  rulers  treat  their  countries  as  personal  fiefdoms  are  not  uncommon:  We  have 
seen  these  governments  in  Saddam  Hussein's  Iraq,  Robert  Mugabe's  Zimbabwe,  and  Ferdinand 
Marcos's Philippines. Even officials in less tyrannical governments have been known to use the power 
of the state to get rich. Not surprisingly, then, many governments pay lip service to property rights but 
do not encourage a rule of law to protect them.  
Eliminating corruption is essential to strengthening property rights and the legal system. When corrupt 
officials demand bribes, they reduce the incentives for entrepreneurs to make investments. The ability 
to buy off judges weakens the enforcement of legal contracts that enable the economic and financial 
system to function smoothly.4  
Improve the quality of financial information 
4. 
High-quality  financial  information  is  essential  to  well-functioning  financial  markets.  If  lenders  cannot 
figure out what is going on in a firm, they will be unable to screen out good from bad credit risks or to 
monitor the firm to ensure that it does not take on too much risk at the lender’s expense. To make 
reliable and accurate information more accessible, accounting standards must be high enough so that 
prospective lenders can make sense of what is in a business’s books. Rules that require businesses to 
disclose  information  must  be  enforced  to  enable  prospective  investors  to  make  sensible  decisions 
about whether the business deserves to get their hard-earned money.  
Improve corporate governance 
5.  
For  people  to  be  willing  to  buy  stocks,  another  way  to  channel  funds  to  business,  rules  must  be 
established to ensure that the managers of corporations act in the stockholders’ interest. If managers 
find it easy to steal from the corporation, or to use funds for their own personal use rather than for the 
benefit of the company, no one will want to invest in the company. Finding the right balance of control 
between  management  and  stockholders  is  a  challenge  with  which  even  we  in  the  United  States 
continue to struggle.  
Develop sound, prudential regulation and supervision of the banking system 
6.  
Banks are the main institutions that allocate credit in developing countries. The skills necessary for 
bank  officers  to  assess  risks  and  make  good  lending  decisions  are  critically  important  and  often 
scarce. Poor lending policies may cause too much capital to be channeled toward low-return projects 
and  insufficient  capital  to  be  directed  toward  the  high-return  projects  needed  to  propel  income  and 
growth. Moreover, deterioration in banks' balance sheets caused by insider lending or excessive risk-
                                                      
3   A discussion of how the costs of doing business vary across a number of countries is in World Bank (2005) 
4   Research finds that increases in corruption are associated with lower growth (for example, Mauro, 1995). Wei (1997) also 
finds that corruption significantly reduces foreign direct investment, which is generally considered to be beneficial to growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2007
taking that leads to a proliferation of bad loans can cause banks to cut back sharply on lending, with 
negative effects on the economy. If the deterioration in banks’ balance sheets is severe enough, it can 
result  in  banking  and  currency  crises  that  substantially  disrupt  the  economy,  phenomena  that 
unfortunately  have  been  all  too  common  in  developing  countries  over  the  past  several  decades.5 
Preventing banking crises must start with prudential regulation, in which rules set by the government 
ensure that banks have sufficient capital and manage risks well. To guarantee that these regulations 
are enforced, the government must also engage in prudential supervision, in which it monitors banks 
by examining them on a regular basis to ensure that they are complying with government regulations. 
The role of microfinance in developing countries is receiving much attention these days. Microfinance 
is a positive development; it has clearly helped substantial numbers of poor people escape poverty, 
and the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Muhammad Yunus for his pioneering efforts in this area was 
certainly  well  deserved.6  However,  microfinance  is  not  a  substitute  for  the  institution  building  I  am 
talking about here. 
Globalizing to advance institutional reform 
Now that we understand what kinds of institutions are needed to promote financial development and 
economic growth, let’s turn to the question of how developing countries can improve the likelihood that 
these institutions are developed.  
One of the most powerful weapons for stimulating institutional development is globalization. Wealth is 
not something that can be attained by remaining closed off to the rest of the world. Poorer countries 
would do better by embracing globalization – that is, opening their financial markets and their markets 
for goods and services to other nations so that funds, goods, and, often, the ideas that accompany 
them can flow in. Such inflows can help them achieve reforms that build productivity and wealth that 
will  benefit  all  their  citizens.  Of  course,  countries  need  to  take  care  that  the  foundations  of  the 
fundamental institutions discussed above are in place, and they must monitor the pace of reform. 
Opening financial markets 
Now let’s look at how opening financial markets to foreigners promotes financial development. 
Globalizing  the  domestic  financial  system  by  opening  financial  markets  to  foreigners  encourages 
financial  development  and  growth  in  wealth  in  two  ways.  First,  opening  financial  markets  to  foreign 
capital directly increases access to capital and lowers its cost for those with productive investments to 
make.7 We know that labor is cheap in poor countries, and so we might think that capital would be 
especially productive there. Just think of how hugely profitable a factory might be in a country where 
wages  are  one-tenth  of  those  in  the  United  States.  Although  some  of  that  differential  would  likely 
reflect the higher productivity of American workers, capital should, nevertheless, have extremely high 
returns  in  such  countries,  and,  in  principle,  we  should  expect  substantial  flows  of  capital  from  rich 
countries (where the returns on capital should be relatively low) to poor countries (where they should 
be far higher). Such capital flows could lead to substantial benefits for poor countries in the form of 
larger capital stocks, higher productivity, and more rapidly growing incomes. 
In fact, as we well know, at present capital flows are moving, on net, from poor countries to rich ones, 
that is, in a direction opposite to the one we would expect. Many reasons have been proposed for this 
apparent paradox, but one of them certainly is the weakness of financial systems in poor countries, as 
described earlier. This point leads us to a second benefit of financial globalization: Opening markets to 
foreign  financial  institutions  promotes  reforms  to  the  financial  system  that  improve  its  functioning. 
Allowing foreign financial institutions to operate in an emerging-market country brings in expertise and 
                                                      
5   A  survey  of  the  literature  that  links  a  lack  of  sufficient  prudential  regulation  and  supporting  institutions  to  excessive  risk-
taking  and  the  possibility  of  a  subsequent  banking  crisis  is  in  Demirguc-Kunt  and  Detragiache  (2005).  Dell’Ariccia  and 
Marquez (2006) also argue that under certain circumstances lending booms can make the banking system more unstable 
and can lead to a higher probability of a banking crisis. 
6   The literature on microfinance is vast. One thorough discussion is in Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2005). 
7   When stock markets in emerging-market countries are opened to foreign capital, dividend yields fall, average stock prices 
increase,  and  liquidity  goes  up.  See  Levine  and  Zervos  (1998);  Bekaert,  Harvey,  and  Lumsdaine  (2002);  and  Henry 
(2000a,b). 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 3
best practices, such as those designed to screen good from bad credit risks and to monitor borrower 
activities  to  reduce  the  amount  of  risk  they  take.8  Because  of  their  familiarity  with  more-advanced 
financial  systems,  foreign  financial  firms  also  are  likely  to  increase  the  pressure  on  the  domestic 
government to institute reforms that will make the financial system work more effectively. 
As  domestic  financial  institutions  start  to  lose  business  to  better-run  and  more  trustworthy  foreign 
institutions, they will realize the need for a better legal and accounting infrastructure that will make it 
easier for them to make loans to new customers. Domestic financial institutions will then be far more 
likely to advocate for and support the reforms that achieve this result. 
Of  course,  this  is  not  to  say  that  in  a  genuinely  corrupt  and  anticompetitive  environment  financial 
globalization, by itself, can still engender an efficient, dynamic, and modern financial system. Recent 
research has shown that when some countries opened up to international capital markets too soon in 
the  absence  of  some  basic  supporting  conditions,  vulnerabilities  to  sudden  stops  of  capital  flows 
increased. Thus, some preconditions must exist with respect to a minimum level of institutional quality, 
financial market development, and macroeconomic stability before financial globalization can further 
improve  financial  market  and  institutional  development.9  That  said,  given  these  preconditions  and 
some constituency for progress and reform, financial globalization can be a powerful force in support 
of such efforts. 
Opening trade in goods 
Next, let’s consider how opening domestic markets to foreign goods can promote the development of 
better institutions. 
Although  not  immediately  obvious,  opening  domestic  markets  to  foreign  goods,  known  as  "trade 
liberalization,"  can  be  a  key  driver  of  financial  development.  It  can  weaken  the  political  power  of 
entrenched  business  interests  that  might  otherwise  block  institutional  reforms,  a  point  that  is 
emphatically made by Rajan and Zingales (2004) in their book Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. 
Trade  liberalization,  which  promotes  a  more  competitive  environment,  will  lower  the  revenue  of 
entrenched firms so that they will need greater access to external sources of capital. Thus, they will be 
more  likely  to  support  reforms  that  promote  a  deeper  and  more  efficient  financial  system.  In  fact, 
research indicates that a deeper financial sector is positively associated with greater trade openness 
(Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Svaleryd and Vlachos, 2002). 
Free  trade  also  promotes  financial  deepening  by  reducing  corruption.  High  tariffs  breed  corruption 
because importers have incentives to pay customs officials to look the other way when the importers 
avoid  tariffs  by  smuggling  in  goods.  Not  surprisingly,  countries  that  restrict  international  trade  are 
found to be more corrupt (Ades and Di Tella, 1994). 
Even  when  developing countries are  unwilling  to  tear down all  barriers  to  imports  of  foreign  goods, 
they can still generate incentives for institutional reform by removing obstacles that prevent domestic 
producers from engaging in international trade. Facilitating production for overseas markets creates a 
greater need for a well-functioning financial system because, to compete effectively in the international 
arena,  firms need better access  to capital.  If  they  can’t  get  capital,  they  won’t  be  able  to make  the 
investments  they  need  to  increase  productivity  and  price  their  goods  competitively.  Accordingly, 
international trade creates a demand for reforms that will make the financial system more efficient. 
The case of China 
We  are  seeing  how  the  globalization  of  trade  is  driving  financial  reform  in  China.  As  Chinese 
enterprises  increasingly  enter  international  markets,  they  need  a  better  financial  system  that  can 
ensure that the allocation of their high domestic savings is done efficiently and is responsive to market 
developments.  Although  it  has  taken  time,  globalization  is  helping  to  generate  the  demand  for  an 
improved financial system, which is driving the reform process.  
                                                      
8   This argument is made in World Bank (2001) and Goldberg (2004). 
9   An excellent discussion of the literature on financial globalization using a unified conceptual framework is in Kose and others 
(2006). Studies focusing more specifically on the necessary preconditions for, and the appropriate sequencing of, financial 
reforms, macroeconomic policies, and institutional development, on the one hand, and capital account liberalization, on the 
other, include Eichengreen (2001), Alfaro and others (2004), and Klein (2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2007
The Communist leadership recognizes that the old development model must change. The government 
has announced that state-owned banks are being put on the path to be privatized and has allowed 
foreign investment in China’s banking system ($20 billion in 2005).10 The government is also engaged 
in legal reform to make contracts more enforceable. In August 2006, the National People’s Congress 
enacted a new bankruptcy law that gives creditors greater protection if a firm goes bankrupt, and last 
month it approved a law that gives individuals more legal protection for their property.11  
China,  of  course,  is  an  example  of  a  country  that  has  actively  encouraged  exports  as  a  means  of 
propelling its economic growth and development. To some extent, China may have gone too far in its 
use  of  policy  to  promote  export  growth.  Increased  reliance  on  market-determined  prices  will  help 
ensure that the allocation of resources into the export sector does not exceed their efficient use. The 
goal  should  be  to  raise  productivity  toward  world-class  standards  in  all  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Recently China’s authorities have agreed that some rebalancing of the sources of growth away from 
exports  and  toward  domestic  demand  is  in  order.  Among  China’s  East  Asian  neighbors,  the 
importance  of  developing industries  to  meet  demand  for  domestic  uses also  is  receiving  increasing 
attention.  
The problem of export restrictions 
Nevertheless, developing production for exports may still be useful for those countries at the lowest 
rungs  of  the developmental  ladder,  and  it  is  surprising  that  many  of  the  world’s  poorest  developing 
countries still not only do not encourage an export orientation but in fact maintain a regime of taxes, 
restrictions, and other policies that effectively discourage it. This problem remains especially serious in 
some  African  economies  and  may  help  explain  why  their  growth  performance  has  been  so 
disappointing.  
The primary way that governments discourage exports is by imposing large taxes on them. Because 
high  export  taxes  are  one  method  of  obtaining  revenue,  governments  may  be  attracted  to  them  to 
solve their budget problems. They may also use these taxes to punish their political opponents, who 
are  often  involved  in  a  particular  export  industry.  The  government  can  then  distribute  the  resulting 
revenue to their supporters. 
The most pernicious forms of export taxes are those that are hidden through the government’s setting 
a fixed official exchange rate that artificially keeps the domestic currency at a value well above what it 
would be worth in terms of foreign currency (say, U.S. dollars) in a free market. The government then 
makes it illegal to sell dollars for the larger amount of domestic currency that could be obtained in the 
black market. The difference between the official exchange rate and the free, black-market rate (often 
called  the  "black-market  premium")  imposes a  tax  on  exporters  because  they are  forced  to  sell  the 
dollars they earn to the government or to the central bank at the official rate, and thus they receive a 
much lower price for their goods in terms of the domestic currency.  
Although in recent decades a great many countries have abandoned currency controls and dismantled 
their black markets, such controls still exist in some of the poorest economies, especially in Africa. In 
some  countries,  the  tax  from  the  black-market  premium  is  confiscatory.  An  example  from  history 
illustrates this point. In 1982 Ghana had a black-market premium of more than 1,000 percent, and so 
exporters  of  cocoa  (primarily  from  a  tribe  different  from  that  of  the  ruling  government  party)  were 
getting only 6 percent of the world price. Given such a high tax rate, it came as no surprise that cocoa 
exports,  which  had  accounted  for  19  percent  of  Ghana’s  gross  domestic  product  in  the  1950s, 
accounted  for  only  3  percent  by  1982  (Easterly,  2001,  p.  222).  During  the  twenty  years  when  the 
black-market premium was so high, the average income of Ghanaians fell 30 percent. 
Like  many  such  unwarranted  controls  on  economic  life,  high  black-market  premiums  also  breed 
corruption, with all its negative effects, because they create strong incentives to bribe officials or to 
smuggle  goods  to  avoid  paying  the  black-market-premium  tax.  (Indeed,  one  of  the  reasons  that 
governments in poorer countries often use this method of taxation rather than an explicit tax is that it 
allows government officials to get rich from the bribes they receive.)  
                                                      
10   The  four  largest  state-owned  banks,  with  70  percent  of  China’s  bank  deposits,  are  scheduled  to  be  privatized  in  the 
following order: the Construction Bank, the Bank of China, the Industrial and Commercial Bank, and the Agricultural Bank. 
11   The new law becomes effective on June 1, 2007, but reportedly will not apply to state-owned enterprises until 2008. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 5
Other gains from trade liberalization 
Although we have been focusing on how globalization promotes financial development, we shouldn’t 
forget that trade globalization, which involves both trade liberalization and an export orientation, is a 
key driver of economic growth for reasons additional to those already mentioned.12  
The  first  economics  course  that  college  students  encounter  always  teaches  the  concept  of 
comparative advantage: By trading with another country, you can focus your production on what you 
are really good at so that your productivity will be high. This higher productivity then leads to higher 
economic welfare. 
Trade liberalization, more importantly, promotes competition in domestic markets, which in turn forces 
domestic  firms  to  increase  productivity  and  make  better  products,  both  of  which  drive  economic 
growth. If a foreigner produces a better product that can be imported, domestic firms must make a 
better  product  at  a  lower  price  to  keep  selling  their  product  at  home.  One  graphic  example  of  how 
trade promotes competition occurred in India, which up until 1991 had protected its tool industry with a 
100 percent tariff (tax on imports). After the Indian government cut the tariff sharply, Taiwanese firms 
initially grabbed one-third of the Indian market. Over the next decade, however, Indian firms boosted 
their productivity almost to the levels of Taiwanese firms, thereby winning back the domestic market. 
Eventually Indian tool firms became so efficient that they were able to start selling their goods abroad 
and became substantial exporters.13  
Decreasing barriers to imports also helps promote exports. Increased competition from imports lowers 
the profits firms can earn by focusing solely on the domestic market, and so they naturally concentrate 
more  of  their  energy  on  exporting.  Moreover,  trade  liberalization  helps  developing  countries  gain 
access  to  foreign  markets  in  advanced  countries,  as  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  United  States, 
through free-trade agreements, has been more willing to lower tariffs for countries such as Mexico and 
Chile if they do the same for the United States. 
Empirical evidence indicates that trade liberalization has positive effects on productivity and economic 
growth for both importing and exporting countries: It has even been found to be associated with more-
rapid  increases  in  life  expectancy  and  a  reduction  in  infant  mortality.14  Yet,  as  is  often  the  case  in 
economics, empirical evidence is never completely clear cut: Some economists question whether the 
evidence strongly supports a positive link between trade liberalization and growth.15 Nonetheless, the 
logic  of  the  benefits  of  trade  liberalization  and  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  supporting  its 
positive  effects  lead  most  members  of  the  economics  profession,  including  me,  to  the  following 
conclusion:  Trade  liberalization  is  highly  beneficial  not  only  for  the  overall  economy  but  also  for  its 
constituent  sectors.  The  resulting  economic  growth  is  a  rising  tide  that  raises  all  boats  and  is  an 
important tool for poverty alleviation.  
But even if trade liberalization is not adopted, giving domestic producers the opportunity to sell goods 
to rich countries’ markets can be an important engine for growth in the world’s poorest countries. One 
crucial  way  that  governments  in  developing  countries  can  encourage  exports  is  by  providing  the 
transportation infrastructure – ports, roads, and airports – that make it easier for businesses to send 
their goods abroad. Because foreigners don’t have a natural predilection to buy your goods, you have 
to be supercompetitive – your goods have to be better and cheaper than the goods made in foreign 
countries.  Domestic  firms  have  to  focus  even  more  on  being  highly  productive,  and  boosting 
productivity will lead to rapid economic growth.  
                                                      
12   Indeed, almost all economists think that trade liberalization, a key element of globalization, is a good thing. For example, in 
Kearl and others (1979), 97 percent of economists agreed (generally or with some provisions) with the statement that "tariffs 
and import quotas reduce general economic welfare." A typical view advocating trade liberalization is expressed by Jagdish 
Bhagwati, one of the most prominent trade theorists in the world, in Bhagwati (2004). 
13   This example comes from Weil (2005, p. 322) and is described more extensively in Dollar and Collier (2001). 
14  The literature on the effects of trade liberalization on growth and poverty is immense. See the surveys in Temple (1999); 
Bourguignon and others (2002); Winters, McCulloch, and McKay (2004); and Wolf (2004). Earlier studies found that trade 
openness was associated with higher growth rates (Dollar, 1992; Sachs and Warner, 1995; and Edwards, 1998). However, 
because  the  direction  of  causation  from  this  evidence  is  difficult  to  establish,  other  researchers  have  used  instrumental 
variable procedures to establish causality from trade liberalization to growth (for example, Frankel and Romer, 1999). Using 
a different approach to identify the direction of causation, Lee, Ricci, and Rigobon (2004) also find that trade openness has 
a positive effect on growth. 
15   For example, Harrison (1996) and especially Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000). 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2007
Japan’s experience shows what focusing on exporting can accomplish. In the immediate aftermath of 
World War II, Japan was a poor country. Its economic infrastructure had been destroyed by the war. 
To convince Americans and others to buy Japanese products, Japanese firms had to produce goods 
that were cheaper and better than their American-made counterparts. As a result, the export industries 
in Japan became enormously productive and supercompetitive. Productivity grew, and three decades 
after World War II, Japan became one of the richest countries in the world.  
South Korea, one of the great Asian success stories even with its crisis in the late 1990s, had very 
high barriers to trade until the 1990s, and its early development strategy did not include opening its 
domestic market to foreign goods. However, through its export sector, South Korea has participated 
fully  in  global  markets,  and  this  participation  has  been  a  key  to  its  success.  South  Korea’s 
development strategy focused on promoting its export sector, and it is the export sector that led to high 
productivity  and  economic  growth.  Indeed,  all  examples  of  successful  growth  stories  in  developing 
economies (China, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Chile) have involved export sectors that 
met  the  test  of  international  competition,  and  some  of  these  economies  have  also  pursued  trade 
liberalization. 
In almost all the industrializing East Asian economies, future growth will likely have to follow a more 
balanced  path  that  relies  less  on  exports  and  more  on  production  for  the  domestic  market.  Such 
adjustments are needed not only to secure such economies’ further development but also to alleviate 
the pattern of external imbalances around the global economy. It is in the world’s poorest countries – 
especially in Africa and Latin America – that additional participation in global markets has the highest 
priority.  
Only  by  embracing  global  markets  can  developing  countries  raise  living  standards.16  Trade 
liberalization  has  a  critical  role  to  play  in  economic  growth  by  directly  stimulating  domestic  firms  to 
become  more  productive.  And  along  with  financial  globalization,  it  can  also  encourage  emerging-
market economies to develop the institutions that foster financial development. Globalization should be 
one of the highest priorities for developing countries.  
The role of advanced countries 
Can we in the advanced countries help? Yes, we can do so by supporting the opening of our markets 
to goods and services from emerging-market countries. By encouraging these countries to increase 
their participation in global markets, we create exactly the right incentives for them to implement the 
hard measures that will enable them to grow rich. As we have seen, exporters have strong incentives 
to be productive so that they can take advantage of access to our markets, and thus they will make the 
investments  needed  for  growth.  They  also  will  push  for  the  institutional  reforms  to  make  financial 
markets  more  efficient  and  promote  financial  deepening.  By  getting  financial  markets  to  work  well, 
exporters will have access to the capital they need to increase their business. 
Opening  our  markets  to  emerging-market  countries  is  an  important  way  that  those  in  advanced 
countries  can  help  emerging-market  economies  become  successful.  While  providing  aid  to  poor 
countries  can,  in  the  right  circumstances,  help  eradicate  poverty,  it  often  will  not  work  because  it 
usually does not create the right incentives to promote economic growth. A handout is almost never as 
effective as a hand up.  
Some are concerned about the consequences for us if we in the United States allow free competition 
in our markets for goods and services from countries where wages are low. Keeping many countries 
poor and their workers unproductive may seem to be to our benefit. But as shown in the examples of 
post-World War II recovery in Europe and Japan, and in the rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s in 
the newly industrialized economies of Asia, higher standards of living throughout the global economy 
actually  work  to  our  benefit.  Prosperity  in  our  trading  partners  creates  growing  markets  for  U.S. 
exports of high-value goods. And over time, as workers’ productivity abroad rises, so will their wages 
and  incomes.  It  is  true  that  the  changes  brought  about  in  our  economy  by  globalization  impose 
significant  costs  on  some  domestic  workers.  We  need  to  develop  policies  to  help  those  workers 
without  undermining  the  global  trading  system.  The  costs  to  us  of  damaging  that  system  would  far 
                                                      
16   The finding in Jones and Olken (2005) that growth take-offs are primarily associated with large and steady expansions in 
international trade provides further support for this view. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 7
outweigh the benefits that some might gain from protectionist measures. Promoting trade liberalization 
helps us not only do good but also do well. 
References 
Acemoglu,  Daron,  Simon  Johnson,  and  James  A.  Robinson  (2001).  "The  Colonial  Origins  of 
Comparative  Development:  An  Empirical  Investigation,"  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  91 
(December), pp. 1369-1401.  
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2005). "Institutions as the Fundamental 
Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic 
Growth, vol. 1, part 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 385-472.  
Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella (1994). "Competition and Corruption," Institute of Economics and 
Statistics Discussion Paper Series 169. Oxford: University of Oxford. 
Alfaro, Laura, and others (2004). "FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets," 
Journal of International Economics, vol. 64 (October), pp. 89-112. 
Armendariz  de  Aghion,  Beatriz,  and  Jonathan  Morduch  (2005).  The  Economics  of  Microfinance. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2002). "Dating the Integration of World 
Equity Markets," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65 (August), pp. 203-47. 
Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (2004). In Defense of Globalization. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Bourguignon,  Francois,  Diane  Coyle,  Raquel  Fernandez,  Francesco  Giavazzi,  Dalia  Marin,  Kevin 
O’Rourke,  Richard  Portes,  Paul  Seabright,  Anthony  Venables,  Thierry  Verdier,  and  L.  Alan  Winters 
(2002). Making Sense of Globalization: A Guide to the Economic Issues, CEPR Policy Paper Series 8. 
London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July. 
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006). "Lending Booms and Lending Standards," Journal 
of Finance, vol. 61 (October), pp. 2511-46.  
Demirguc-Kunt,  Asli,  and  Enrica  Detragiache  (2005).  "Cross-Country  Empirical  Studies  of  Systemic 
Bank  Distress:  A  Survey  (422  KB  PDF),"  IMF  Working  Paper  Series  WP  05/96.  Washington: 
International Monetary Fund, May.  
de Soto, Hernando (2000). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails 
Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books. 
Dollar,  David  (1992).  "Outward-Oriented  Developing  Economies  Really  Do  Grow  More  Rapidly: 
Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985," Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40 (April), pp. 
523-44.  
Dollar, David, and Paul Collier (2001). Globalization, Growth, and Poverty: Building an Inclusive World 
Economy. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Easterly, William (2001). The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in 
the Tropics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001). "It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth 
Models," World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (2), pp. 177-219.  
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2003). "Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence 
Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (January), pp. 3-39. 
Edwards,  Sebastian  (1998).  "Openness,  Productivity,  and  Growth:  What  Do  We  Really  Know?" 
Economic Journal, vol. 108 (March), pp. 383-98.  
Eichengreen, Barry (2001). "Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?" 
World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15 (3), pp. 341-65.  
Frankel,  Jeffrey  A.,  and  David  Romer  (1999).  "Does  Trade  Cause  Growth?"  American  Economic 
Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99.  
8 
 BIS Review 41/2007
Glaeser,  Edward  L.,  Rafael  La  Porta,  Florencio  Lopez-de-Silanes,  and  Andrei  Shleifer  (2004).  "Do 
Institutions Cause Growth?" NBER Working Paper Series 10568. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, June.  
Goldberg,  Linda  (2004).  "Financial-Sector  FDI  and  Host  Countries:  New  and  Old  Lessons,"  NBER 
Working Paper Series 10441. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. 
Hall,  Robert  E.,  and  Charles  I.  Jones  (1999).  "Why  Do  Some  Countries  Produce  So  Much  More 
Output per Worker Than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114 (February), pp. 83-116.  
Harrison, Ann (1996). "Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for Developing 
Countries," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 48 (March), pp. 419-47.  
Henry,  Peter  Blair  (2000a).   "Stock  Market  Liberalization,  Economic  Reform,  and  Emerging  Market 
Equity Prices," Journal of Finance, vol. 55 (2), pp. 529-64.  
Henry, Peter Blair (2000b). "Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?" Journal of 
Financial Economics 58 (1-2), pp. 301-34.  
Jones,  Benjamin  F.,  and  Benjamin  A.  Olken  (2005).  "The  Anatomy  of  Start-Stop  Growth,"  NBER 
Working Paper Series 11528. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. 
Kaufmann,  Daniel,  Aart  Kray,  and  Pablo  Zoido-Lobaton  (1999).  "Governance  Matters,"  Policy 
Research Working Paper Series 2196. Washington: World Bank, October.  
Kearl, James R., Clayne L. Pope, Gordon C. Whiting, and Larry T. Wimmer (1979). "A Confusion of 
Economists?" American Economic Review, vol. 69 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 28-37.  
Klein, Michael W. (2005). "Capital Account Liberalization: Institutional Quality and Economic Growth: 
Theory  and Evidence,"  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  11112.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National Bureau  of 
Economic Research, February.  
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei (2006). "Financial Globalization: 
A  Reappraisal  (758  KB  PDF),"  IMF  Working  Paper  Series  WP  06/189.  Washington:  International 
Monetary Fund, August.  
Lee, Ha Yan, Luca Antonio Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004). "Once Again, Is Openness Good for 
Growth?" Journal of Development Economics, vol. 75 (December), pp. 451-72.  
Levine, Ross (2004). "Finance and Growth," NBER Working Paper Series 10766. Cambridge, Mass.: 
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  September;  forthcoming  in  Philippe  Aghion  and  Steven  N. 
Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: North Holland.  
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998). "Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development," 
World Development 26, pp. 1169-84.  
Mauro, Paolo (1995). "Corruption and Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (August), pp. 
681-712.  
North, Douglass C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
North,  Douglass  C.,  and  Robert  Paul  Thomas  (1973).  The  Rise  of  the  Western  World:  A  New 
Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rajan,  Raghuram,  and  Luigi  Zingales  (2003).  "The  Great  Reversals:  the  Politics  of  Financial 
Development in the 20th Century," Journal of Financial Economics 69 (1), pp. 5-50. 
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (2004). Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the 
Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.  
Rodriguez,  Francisco,  and  Dani  Rodrik  (2001).  "Trade  Policy  and  Economic  Growth:  A  Skeptic’s 
Guide  to  the  Evidence,"  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  eds.,  NBER  Macroeconomics 
Annual 2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002). "Institutions Rule: The Primacy of 
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development," NBER Working Paper Series 
9305. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November.  
BIS Review 41/2007 
 9
Sachs,  Jeffrey  D.,  and  Andrew  M.  Warner  (1995).  "Economic  Reform  and  the  Process  of  Global 
Integration," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp. 1-118.  
Schmukler, Sergio L. (2004). "Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries (307 
KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Economic Review, vol. 89 (Q2), pp. 39-66. 
Svaleryd,  Helena,  and  Jonas  Vlachos  (2002).  "Markets  for  Risk  and  Openness  to  Trade:  How  Are 
They Related?" Journal of International Economics, vol. 57 (August), pp. 369-95.  
Temple,  Jonathan  (1999).  "The  New  Growth  Evidence,"  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  vol.  37 
(March), pp. 112-56.  
Wei, Shangjin (1997). "How Taxing Is Corruption on International Investors?" NBER Working Paper 
Series 6030. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May.  
Weil, David N. (2005). Economic Growth. Boston: Addison-Wesley.  
Winters, L. Alan, Neil McCulloch, and Andrew McKay (2004). "Trade Liberalization and Poverty: The 
Evidence So Far," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 42 (March), pp. 72-115.  
Wolf, Martin (2004). Why Globalization Works. New Haven: Yale University Press.  
World  Bank  (2001).  Finance  for  Growth:  Policy  Choices  in  a  Volatile  World.  New  York:  Oxford 
University Press.  
World  Bank  (2005).  Doing  Business  in  2005:  Removing  Obstacles  to  Growth.  Washington:  World 
Bank. 
10 
 BIS Review 41/2007
