Marion Williams: Central banking in a global context – promoting both 
national and regional economic gains 
Feature address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, delivered 
at the 35th  Anniversary Conference of the Central Bank of  Barbados, Bridgetown, 10 May 
2007. 
 Mr. Chairman 
Members of the Board 
Deputy Governors 
Distinguished Panellists 
Members of Management and Staff, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted to welcome you to the Central Bank and to the Frank Collymore Hall. Over the 
years,  the  Bank  has  set  itself  the  goal  of  promoting  dialogue  on  topics  of  economic  and 
financial interest. Such an occasion as our 35th anniversary could not therefore pass unless 
we staged such a dialogue on a topic of economic interest. We are delighted to welcome our 
panelists Dr Trevor Farrell, formerly of the University of the West Indies at St. Augustine, Dr 
Gregor Heinrich of the BIS and Dr Jose Blanco of the Latin American Monetary Council. My 
presentation is intended to set the scene for later discussion by our panelists, some of whom 
will share with us the integration experience in other jurisdictions. 
Given the pace and momentum of global change, Central Banks in developing countries are 
often unable to influence global forces. However it is important that we adopt our approaches 
to accommodate to these forces of change. 
The timing of the formation of the Caribbean Single Market & Economy (CSME), coming as it 
does at the turn of the 21st century, is a time when our economies are now more exposed to 
the opportunities and pressures of economic and financial integration than ever before. The 
precise implications are continually unfolding, what we know is that the gains for the region 
have  the  potential  to  be  significant  if  our  responses  are  regional  rather  than  national  and 
sooner rather than later. 
Let  me  focus  first  on  a  few  global  economic  and  financial  developments  which  have 
implications for Central Banks and for the region before turning to regional issues.  
Integration of markets and economic growth 
Compared to even a decade ago, world financial and product markets are significantly more 
integrated. Cross-border flows of real and financial capital have also increased dramatically - 
a reflection of the notable reduction in the degree of home bias in capital markets. Along with 
the  evolving  pattern  of  cross-border  flows,  we  have  also  seen  profound  increases  in  the 
absolute size of current account balances in both industrial economies and emerging market 
economies.  A  more  integrated  world  economy  brings  with  it  the  prospect  of  a  more 
productive,  yet  competitive  world  economy.  The  increase  in  the  ties  between  national 
financial  systems  as  well  as  the  greater  sophistication  of  financial  markets  and  financial 
market instruments allow risks to be shared more broadly and capital to flow to where the 
returns are expected to be the highest.  
The recent spurt in integration has occurred during a sustained period of relatively strong and 
steady  growth  on  a  global  scale  and  of  relatively  stable  and  low  inflation  rates.  These 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 1
improvements in outcomes have surfaced amidst a number of other important changes in the 
environment, including significant technological progress and better economic policies steady 
growth in Latin America and the Caribbean and more stable emerging economies particularly 
in Latin America. But even without being able to assign precise shares to all the contributing 
factors, we know that greater integration and openness are likely to have been particularly 
important in the Caribbean case. 
China through its Central Bank the National Bank of China has become the repository of vast 
foreign exchange reserves principally in US Dollars. China is also competing with many of 
the  international  lending  agencies  for  the  attention  of  many  West  African  countries,  where 
access  to  less  complicated  loans  are  becoming  attractive.  Regional  economic  units  are 
looking to each other and to their central banks for balance of payments support rather than 
to international institutions. Also private credit markets are now accessible to central banks 
and to governments in a way which did not obtain in the past. 
Economic modeling and monetary policy 
All  of  these  developments  have  impacted  on  the  way  in which  central  banks  do  business. 
Many Central Banks in the region are therefore redesigning their policy responses, not only 
in the context of global forces but in the context of adjusting to the fact of greater regional 
economic and financial integration.  
Our  models  however  are  pressed  to  catch  up  with  the  changes.  Economic  theory  is  most 
comfortable  with  fully  integrated  systems  in  which  prices  and  flows  of  goods  and  services 
along with real and financial capital respond continuously and completely to market forces. 
Significantly harder to capture in our models are those factors that do not fully, or quickly, 
adjust to market incentives, or where those incentives are hidden. In the dynamic landscape 
of  the  21st  Century,  economic  modeling  has  therefore  become  the  subject  of  continuous 
adjustment as relationships and responses on which these models are based, change more 
frequently  and  become  less  standardized  as  national  and  regional  flows,  policies  and 
economic decisions accommodate to each other. 
Yet  in  the  world  of  risk  management  instruments  it  is  expectations  that  are  important  and 
margins  of  error  have  to  be  minute  in  order  for  financial  markets  to  be  efficient  and  avoid 
major  losses.  This  is  a  challenge  for  developing  countries  who  need  to  manage  risks  but 
have thin financial markets. 
At the same time traditional armour of central banking is also subject to continual adjustment. 
New  relations  and  responses  have  the  potential  to  alter  the  incentives  of  businesses  and 
investors, and change the accustomed rate and direction of flow of goods, services, labour 
and capital. The lesson here is that in this era of liberalization of capital flows, central banks 
have  to  be  nimble  and  quick  in  their  responses,  less  bound  by  theory  and  more  by 
pragmatism in doing what is in the interest of the economy they serve. 
The pace of progress is in the direction of more openness to capital flows and the ability to 
adjust  to  this  openness,  will  depend  in  part  on  the  pace  at  which  countries  are  able  to 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  domestic  financial  system  and  set  in  place  the  broader 
institutional framework, including real time information systems and regulatory regimes that 
are vital for open economies. In this regard, in almost every central bank in the world bank 
supervision  departments  are  growing  and  new  risk  management  techniques  are  being 
developed. 
Higher reserves 
Globalization  of  markets  and  greater  openness  has  led  to  the  holding  of  higher  levels  of 
foreign  exchange  reserves  by  most  countries  across  the  globe.  Indeed  as  cross-border 
transactions grow there is a worldwide trend towards higher levels of official reserves in most 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2007
emerging  markets.  This  is  not  simply  the  consequence  of  a  desire  for  a  greater  financial 
cushion  against  external  vulnerability,  but  reflects  the  increasing  level  of  interaction  of 
national economies with the regional and global economies. In addition many central banks 
are increasingly diversifying the currencies of their foreign reserves holdings.  
Collective responses 
Another  global  trend  among  regional  groupings  is  a  trend  towards  the  establishment  of 
regional foreign exchange pools. The 1997 the financial crisis in East Asia was a wake-up 
call to governments of developing countries that financial markets and institutions must be 
sufficiently  prepared  to  manage  globalised  capital  flows,  before  there  was  full  market 
liberalisation. Specifically, in South East Asia, financial institutions had to be reformed and 
restructured,  capital  markets  broadened  and  deepened,  and  supervision  and  regulatory 
standards  upgraded.  Most  importantly  the  regional  response  that  followed  encouraged 
governments to consider establishing regional financial facilities in that region. As a result, 
the  Chang  Mai  initiative  by  South  East  Asian  countries  was  established  as  a  buffer  which 
offered greater and quick foreign exchange access. Today, a collective response drawing on 
that  regional  integration  initiative  would  be  possible  as  apposed  to  the  individual  country 
responses  witnessed  in  1997.  This  example  of  repositioning  of  South  East  Asia  is  of 
significant  import  for  Central  Banks  in  other  regional  arrangements  and  other  regional 
groupings are considering the establishment of such pools. 
At  the  same  time,  globalization  and  the  reliance  on  the  market  and  the  decline  in 
discretionary  monetary  policy  has  limited  the  policy  tools  of  central  banks.  Domestic 
monetary  policies  of  national  central  banks  now  face  the  money  flows  from  international 
sources which have the potential for making domestic policy less effective. At the same time 
the wide disparity in interest rates and inflation rates across the globe is narrowing. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
While central banks in this region have multiple goals of ensuring financial stability, executing 
monetary policy and helping to develop a stable economic and financial environments, price 
changes  and  inflation  control  have  not  been  a  major  issue  as  it  has  been  seen  in  Latin 
America  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Also,  in  the  developed  world  inflation  targeting  is  an 
important objective of Central Banks.  Indeed, noted economist Ken Rogoff and others have 
pointed out that to the extent that globalisation increases the degree of competition, it can 
reduce  the  “inflationary  bias”  or,  to  put  it  differently,  it  can  strengthen  the  anti-inflation 
credibility of a central bank. By promoting greater price flexibility, competition lowers gains in 
the short-run to output from an unanticipated inflation. The improved credibility of the central 
bank’s commitment to keep inflation low and stable should, in turn, allow it to deliver better 
inflation  outcomes  with  fewer  short-run  costs  to  what  many  may  consider  as  political 
objectives of economic growth and employment. 
It is however often not quite clear whether the successful control of inflation has been a result 
of  inflation  targeting  policies  or  of  competition  from  South  East  Asia,  China  and  India  and 
other developing countries which has driven prices down. 
However, in the Caribbean inflation targeting has not been the major goal of monetary policy 
up  to  now,  but  rather  a  subsidiary  goal.  And  this  has  been  largely  because  much  of  our 
inflation  has  been  imported.  However,  high  oil  prices,  the  more  rapid  growth  of  regional 
economies in recent years, coupled with expansionary fiscal policies and demand pressures 
of expansion of some regional economies, has brought the spectre of inflation more to the 
fore. This has been so more in the rapidly growing economies elsewhere in the Caribbean, 
but  countries  like  ourselves  have  not  been  exempt.  While  the  monetary  policy  levers  for 
control  of  inflation  may  be  limited,  the  fact  is,  inflation  control  is  likely  to  become  a  more 
central  part of  both  policy  making  than  before  if  oil  prices  remain  high.  This  however  may 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 3
have less to do with regional Central Banks adopting inflation targeting as a goal and more 
with the goal of ensuring that monetary and other policies do not contribute to the imported 
component  of  inflation  over  which  we  are  aware  is  beyond  our  control,  if  we  adopt 
counterbalancing monetary and fiscal policies. Here the trade-off is usually to sacrifice some 
growth for lower inflation. This is not a win- win situation.  
As economies become more integrated, external factors can have a stronger impact on the 
movements  of  some  prices.  Rapid  demand  growth,  commodity  price  volatility,  and  the 
influence of a broad range of global and regional conditions on wages can all trigger large 
changes in relative prices. So central bankers have to be careful not to focus too narrowly on 
one  particular  measure,  or  indeed  in  our  context  to  allow  it  to  be  thought  that  the  Central 
Bank  can  control  inflation.  Having  said  that,  some  central  banks  in  developing  markets  of 
Latin America have adopted inflation targeting. There may however be measures which can 
be taken in terms of controlling money creation which can help to dampen inflation. However 
the levers for control do not all rest with central banks.  
Interest rates were always important but external interest rates are becoming more important 
in the design of monetary policy by central banks. If the prevailing patterns of capital flows 
were  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  and  upward  pressure  on  other  asset 
prices, they would contribute to more expansionary financial conditions than would otherwise 
be the case. When this happens, it can mask the effect of other forces that might otherwise 
have exhibited themselves in risk premia or higher interest rates. 
As the conduct of monetary policy becomes more challenging it also obliges policymakers to 
devote more care to the process of understanding how the changes at the global level affect 
the  balance  between  opportunity,  risk  and  uncertainty,  so  that  we  have  the  flexibility  to 
respond efficiently and in a timely manner to any crisis to the extent that domestic policies 
will allow. 
Transmission mechanism 
Also, our understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, with respect to 
cross border markets will become increasingly important in the globalized world Already, the 
BIS is tracking global flows and probably has access to more comprehensive data on cross 
border financial flows in the Caribbean than we do on the region with respect to our regional 
neighbour’s data. 
Regional 
I will now turn to the regional focus. In the Caribbean context, the efficacy of monetary policy 
can be reduced as a result of long lags and the inability to control the money supply directly.  
As  a  result,  monetary  policy  has  often  played  a  largely  supportive  role  to  fiscal  policy. 
However, a single market and the opening of capital accounts will reduce the effectiveness of 
traditional  monetary  policy  prior  to  implementation  of  a  single  currency  and  while  market 
instruments will help to influence outcomes they will tend to operate at the margin and will 
tend to be more effective in tight liquidity situations and costly for the central bank in excess 
liquidity situations, as a couple of our neighbours can attest. 
A common currency 
Key among the policy choices for monetary implementation in the region will be a common 
currency. The proposal for a single economic space for the Caribbean region is not new. It 
has been suggested from time to time over the last few decades in one form or another, as 
part of promoting regional economic cooperation.  
4 
 BIS Review 86/2007
A common currency represents the ultimate in the economic integration of states and    is 
normally the product of a currency union. It is a zone of countries or a region, where a single 
currency circulates, a single monetary authority or central bank operates, a single exchange 
rate  policy  prevails  and  the  single  monetary  authority  often  maintains  a  common  pool  of 
reserves. The literature identifies the following as key deciding factors for a currency union: 
openness,  high  intra-union  trade,  a  high  degree  of  product  diversification,  similarity  in 
industrial structures, high correlation in economic activities, similar inflation rates, flexibility in 
wages and prices and factor mobility. 
There are many compelling reasons in favour of a common Caribbean currency.  Currently, 
the overwhelming majority of regional trade is conducted using the US dollar which fetches 
vastly different values against the various regional currencies, whether fixed or floating. If we 
do nothing the numeraire currency will be the US Dollar – by default. A single currency for 
the region would lead to elimination of transaction costs and of volatility in exchange rates 
among members of the regional grouping.  
Just as a common language promotes communication among people, a common currency 
could promote trade and investment among countries in the region. These benefits will have 
to be weighed against the likely costs that have to be incurred by the region. These would 
involve  the  costs  of  discontinuing  their  own  independent  currencies  by  replacing  with  the 
common currency, and the loss of seigniorage revenue from printing their own currencies.  
The gains from a currency union, which are in terms of increased efficiency, arise primarily 
from two sources. The first is that a common currency eliminates transaction costs usually 
incurred  when  trade  and  investment  transactions  need  currency  conversion.  Secondly,  a 
common  currency  eliminates  risk  from  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  differences  in 
exchange rates between trading partners. One more gain is that a currency union provides a 
potential for reinforcing fiscal discipline and credibility of monetary policy. 
There are also disadvantages to a common currency. They relate to the loss of two important 
macroeconomic adjustment tools, namely independent monetary and exchange rate policies. 
The member country has to abide by common monetary policy for the union as a whole; and 
it  has  to  relinquish  its  exchange  rate,  an  instrument  for  protecting  itself  from  economic 
shocks. However, the costs are less severe if the shocks affect all member countries in the 
union in a similar fashion, and a common monetary and exchange rate policy vis-à-vis with 
the rest of the world would then be appropriate. In such a scenario the national gains would 
be positive for all. 
On  the  other  hand  if  the  shocks  were  asymmetric  in  nature,  affecting  the  countries  in  a 
dissimilar  manner,  due to  reasons such as different industrial structures, a common policy 
would be less desirable. However, disadvantages of such a nature can be reduced to a great 
extent if prices and wages are flexible and if there is perfect labour mobility between member 
countries. Thus, downward flexibility of wages and prices and labour mobility will enable the 
member countries in a currency union to withstand shocks of asymmetrical nature. 
The important issue here is what the operation of a common currency would imply for the 
conduct of monetary policy in the CSME. A common currency necessitates a single set of 
economic, monetary, financial and fiscal policies which would ensure balance of payments 
viability for the region. Accordingly, all of the countries in the union would have to fall in line 
with the currency’s monetary and exchange rate dictates. No agreement has been reached 
on whether the common currency would be fixed of floating. Also, there would need to be 
harmonized fiscal policies to ensure the success of regional monetary policy.  
Such a single set of policies has better likelihood of success when there is a high degree of 
synchronization of business cycles for all prospective member countries of a currency union. 
According to optimum conditions, countries experiencing common external shocks would be 
better suited to form a currency union because it permits the use of region-wide policies to 
correct  any  imbalances.  The  reality  in  the  Caribbean  is  that  some  of  these  second  order 
conditions  do  not  hold  in  all  respects.  For  example,  while  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  a  major 
BIS Review 86/2007 
 5
producer  of  petroleum,  most  of  its  CSME  partners  are  oil  importers.  Regional  monetary 
policy would have to be fashioned very cleverly and with the utmost sensitivity in order to be 
generally applicable to all the countries in order that gains may be shared both at the national 
and regional level. 
However,  a  currency  union  it  is  argued,  could  help  make  the  shocks  affecting  member 
countries  more  symmetric  in  the  future  and  might  also  expand  intra-regional  trade.  These 
arguments  are  not  different  from  the  observations  made  by  theorists,  when  the  European 
Common  Market  was  born.  It  was  felt  that  common  currency  arrangements  would  by 
themselves reduce dissimilarities among member countries. However, it should be noted that 
the EU member countries did not plunge into a currency union arrangement, as they were 
aware  of  the  pitfalls  and  insisted  on  fulfilling  the  convergence  criteria  contained  in  the 
Maastricht Treaty of 1991 and the requirements under the Growth and Stability Pact of 1996.  
A common currency offers an easy way to economize on the use of foreign exchange since 
all regional transactions would become domestic transactions and would not require foreign 
exchange. This is the single most important area in which regional gains and national gains 
coincide, and an area in which all can benefit. 
Preliminary economic convergence 
Convergence criteria which have been established as conditions for entry to the Caribbean 
Monetary Union are currently often breached without sanction. It is interesting to note that in 
an  article  by  Alexandre  Lamfulussy,  it  is  claimed  that  in  Europe,  among  the  convergence 
criteria  for  accession  to  EMU,  the  fiscal  ones  and  the  inflation  criteria  were  of  critical 
importance in the ultimate success of the European integration efforts. The members of EU 
were also required to open their capital and labour markets by implementing policies towards 
harmonisation of a wide range of commercial and legal standards. Ancillary issues including 
labour mobility and fiscal transfers have far reaching implications and often need their own 
policy focus.  
Monetary union apart, the full implementation of the CSME will bring to the fore a number of 
issues which will require harmonization of macroeconomic policies in the region prior to the 
establishment of a single currency. 
In  the  present  economic  system,  regional  integration  can  at  times  be  a  naturally-occurring 
phenomenon.  Natural  market  integration  is  a  process  characterised  by  progressive 
convergence of economic and social parameters among countries which exhibit increasing 
degrees of interdependence. However, in the early years of CARICOM the Caribbean was 
mostly policy induced, in later years, co-integration has been occurring more naturally with 
greater  movement  of  people  and  capital.  This  formal  policy  co-operation  which  began  in 
1973  with  the  Treaty  of  Chagauramas  to  be  followed  in  1989  with  the  Grand  Anse 
Declaration, set out the roadmap for the formal push towards the CSME. 
There is a particularly extensive post-World War II experience of economic integration. We 
have seen that the most typical starting point of economic integration has been the creation 
of  free  trade  areas,  often  with  the  objective  of  deepening  into  a  common  market  or 
community. In these respects, with the formation of the CSME, our regional direction is no 
different from that of other groups. Financial and monetary cooperation tend to be the last 
bastion as we have seen with the euro and the European Central Bank. 
Structural reforms and global participation  
While central banks in the region will need to be more closely involved in monetary policy 
coordination, the broader need will be to strengthen structural reforms and to enhance the 
capacity to participate in the globalisation process. This can be seen by examining some of 
the  key  objectives  of  the  new  regional  integration  movement,  namely  export  growth  and 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2007
diversification, 
transformation, the promotion of foreign direct investment, and trade liberalisation. 
institutional  modernisation, 
regional  cooperation,  economic 
functional 
Private sector participation 
We  have  already  seen  that  joint  ventures  and  pan-Caribbean  companies  have  been 
expanding briskly in the region and have been using the region as a platform for launching 
into  the  wider  global  environment.  Such  ventures  build  on  the  comparative  endowment  of 
regional countries, promote cooperation in joint production by matching countries that have 
natural  resource  endowments  with  those  that  have  financial  capital  or  other  inputs.  The 
private  sector  should  assume  the  lead  role  in  developing  these  business  arrangements. 
Indeed, the number and frequency of amalgamations, mergers and acquisitions across the 
region  continues  to  grow.  However,  a  study  on  home  –bias  in  Europe,  by  Kho,  Stulz  and 
Warnock point to a preference for investing at home.  This is likely also to be the case in the 
Caribbean. They noted that investors are more optimistic about their home equity markets 
than about foreign markets – even with free movement of capital. This means that interest 
rate differentials need not fully reflect the competitive level needed to keep capital at home. 
Growing  and  mutually  beneficial  economic  interdependence  among  partners  typically 
induces  demands  for  additional  regional  economic  co-operation  to  exploit  more  fully  the 
advantages  of  a  maturing  regional  market.  Success  is  therefore  likely  to  lead  to  further 
success. There may even be some critical point that needs to be reached before take-off. In 
the same manner regional gains will become national gains once this point is reached. 
Non-economic cooperation 
In effect the same forces of trade among partners can be the effective drive towards deeper 
formal  integration  whether  they  were  planned  or  not.  In  short,  many  countries  that  have 
entered into a trade-based integration framework have found that it involves highly complex, 
policy-induced  financial  integration  which,  as  a  result  usually  lags  the  integration  of  goods 
markets. In this case the financial integration entails the liberalisation and harmonisation of 
money  and  capital  markets  to  facilitate  payments  and  investments,  and  this  provides  a 
primary source for medium to long-term securities and debt instruments, which are essential 
for investments in the regional market. The process includes all capital markets’ institutions, 
such  as  commercial  banks,  private  financial  institutions,  investment  funds,  insurance 
companies and of course, central banks. That is, the process usually involves the business 
development first and capital markets after. We have already been moving in this direction, 
as is evidenced with the planned introduction of the Caribbean Exchange Network which is 
the collaboration of the three stock exchanges of Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago. 
That  is  with  growing  direct  investment  capital  market  development  is  likely  to  follow. 
However,  though  the  structures  are  being  put  in  place  to  facilitate  greater  movement  of 
capital cross borders- where foreign exchange risks still exits, there may not be a massive 
movement of funds until the single currency is in place. Such an event would then lead to a 
faster elimination of interest rate differentials in the region and hence lower transactions cost. 
Regional financial integration 
With the drive towards a Caribbean Single Market and Economy, central banks can enhance 
regional  financial  cooperation  in  other  ways.  One  is  through  the  development  of  real  time 
data  sources  on  liquidity  and  interest  rate  movements  shared  with  the  region  on  a  daily 
basis.  Notwithstanding  the  progress  made,  more  can  definitely  be  done  to  bring  regional 
financial  cooperation  to  a  level  that  is  on  par  with  the  region’s  economic  and  financial 
potential.  
BIS Review 86/2007 
 7
Financial cooperation and efficiency 
Financial market efficiency is important in accelerating economic development, and market 
efficiency also contributes to achieving and preserving macroeconomic stability.  In addition 
to  pursuing  sound  economic  and  financial  policies,  the  region  may  need  to  consider 
implementing  its  own  financial  sector  model.  Such  an  arrangement  will  help  ensure  an 
orderly  and  stable  financial  environment  such  that  any  emerging  vulnerabilities  may  be 
spotted  early  and  may  not  pose  serious  risks  to  the  region’s  financial  markets  and 
economies.  Unfortunately  the  more  highly  developed  the  capital  market  the  more  rapidly 
money is able to move and the more volatility exists in the economy. For that reason at least 
one  central  bank  in  Latin  America  –  Chile  –  placed  reserve  requirements  on  inward 
investments. 
Stabilization Fund 
Central Banks in the region have a history of financial cooperation going back to the 1970s, 
when the Central Bank of Barbados made short term loans available to Jamaica and later 
when  Trinidad  and  Tobago  made  loans  available  to  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados.  Also, 
twenty-five  years  ago  there  was  discussion  of  a  regional  Stabilization  Fund  to  provide 
balance of payments support. Three years ago, it surfaced again. On neither occasion did it 
materialize.  Yet  a  financing  facility  that  draws  on  the  region’s  own  financial  strength  and 
resources  can  be  very  important.  With  such  a  facility  in  place,  there  should  be  greater 
confidence amongst  policy  makers and  short  term  stabilization  support could  be  accessed 
without the major conditionalities associated with conventional international institutions – and 
that  such  borrowing  could  be  without  strings  provided  such  needs  are  not  structural.  
Regional  financial  cooperation  should  move  progressively  forward,  with  the  process  being 
further strengthened and should work toward becoming more focused on this important area.  
The  Regional  Stabilization  Fund  was  conceptualized  as  a  short-term  financing  facility  to 
assist  member  countries  in  managing  their  balance  of  payments  shortfalls  at  a  time  of 
financial  distress.  Such  distress  funds  should  continue  to  remain  a  key  pillar  of  regional 
financial cooperation. This is because it is important for the region to have its own liquidity 
arrangement that can be called upon when the need arises. I mentioned earlier the Chang 
Mai initiative in South East Asia. 
It is important to note that the BIS had been doing this for European Central Banks since the 
middle of the 20th century and that even now the European Central Bank does the same by 
way of swap facilities for North American and European banks. Beth Simmons in an article in 
a BIS working paper of February 2006 foresees that this kind of support will become more 
available in Europe. If this is so in Europe how much more so should the Caribbean continue 
to pursue this initiative. 
A Caribbean community 
In recent years – just 8 years after its introduction – the euro has strengthened considerably 
and is increasingly being held as a reserve currency by many central banks. 
It is my firm belief that in the same way that trade drove the closer integration of Caribbean 
economies during the 1970s and 1980s, financial cooperation and cross border flows will be 
the catalysts for the foreseeable future. Like Europe, financial and monetary cooperation will 
be the last bastion. Central banking in the region has a role to play in the new dispensation 
but it must adapt itself to these new paradigms during the adjustment period since continuing 
stability will be important in the new more liberalized environment. In due course and with 
careful staging, regional gains and national gains should coincide.   
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 86/2007
