W A Wijewardena: Central banking nearly six decades after John Exter 
Speech  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka, 
Colombo, 20 August 2007. 
 Nearly six decades have elapsed since John Exter, founding Governor of the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka (then, Ceylon), enunciated his wisdom on and philosophy of central banking. He 
did  so  in  a  report  titled  “Report  on  the  Establishment  of  a  Central  Bank  for  Ceylon” 
which he completed in 1949 as one-man commission on the request of the Government of 
Ceylon.  His  ideas  on  central  banking  could  also  be  found  in  his  speeches  and  press 
conferences during the formative years of the Central Bank. The Report, also known as the 
Exter Report was published by the Government as a Sessional Paper in November, 1949. 
The case for a central bank for Sri Lanka has been presented succinctly and cogently in this 
report.  As  a  mark  of  appreciation  of  his  work  and  in  recognition  of  the  need  for  placing  a 
competent skipper on the newly formed organization, Exter was invited by the Government to 
form the new central bank as its first Governor. Exter is reported to have accepted this offer 
only for a limited period. True to his word, he resigned from the post of Governor in 1953 and 
returned to the States. 
The Exter Report consists of two parts. Part I presents a lucid summary of the significance of 
a central banking system for Ceylon. It is in this part that he argued the case for a central 
bank  for  the  country  in  preference  to  a  currency  board.  Part  II  is  a  draft  bill  for  the 
establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon with explanatory comments. These comments 
have helped to guide generations of central bankers, in the past, what was exactly meant by 
each  section  or  clause  of  the  bill.  It  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future  as  well.  The 
commentaries  presented  were  succinct,  precise  and  to  the  point.  They  testify  to  the  vast 
knowledge which Exter had about the functioning of an economy, his reading of the status 
and  the  direction  of  the  country’s  economy,  the  functioning  of  a  monetary  system  both  in 
domestic and global economies and how a central bank should be organized and operated. 
Hence, to understand Exter Philosophy of Central Banking, there is no better document than 
the Exter Report. 
Nearly six decades after John Exter completed the Exter Report, it would be useful to re-visit 
the  report  and  assess  his  philosophy  of  central  banking  in  the  context  of  the  body  of 
knowledge of central banking today and identify its relevance to central bankers as guidance. 
This paper is an attempt at this exercise. 
The choice between a central bank and a currency board 
Prior to the establishment of a central bank, Sri Lanka was operating under a currency board 
system in which the country’s currency had been backed by 100 percent in foreign reserves 
maintained with the Reserve Bank of India. Hence, the first choice which Exter had to make 
was whether to retain the currency board system or go for a central banking system. In a 
way, he did not have much choice in this regard, because his mandate was “to report on 
the organization and the functions of a Reserve Bank for Ceylon….” If he preferred a 
currency board, he should not have accepted the assignment.  
However, like a true professional, he compared and contrasted the two systems before he 
made  his  recommendation  in  favor  of  a  central  bank.  The  report  demonstrates  that  his 
recommendation was out of conviction rather than the performance of a mere duty.  
His choice of a central bank for Ceylon in preference to the continuation of even a reformed 
currency board system was made on the basis of strong economic arguments.  
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
The  higher  credit  needs  of  a  growing  economy:  Currency  boards  which  are 
restrained  by  the  need  for  maintaining  a  100  %  foreign  reserve  backing  for  the 
currency  cannot  supply  enough  liquidity  to  meet  trade  and  other  requirements 
unless  the  country  continues  to  experience  a  huge  balance  of  payments  surplus 
year after year. Exter argued that it was not only impossible, but also undesirable to 
have such a surplus. Impossible because a country cannot continue to maintain a 
competitive  edge  over  its  competitors.  Undesirable  because  freezing  foreign 
reserves does not help the country to attain higher growth or welfare. 
Inappropriate reserve maintenance: A currency board has to maintain its reserves 
in sterling or in Indian rupee because of the long economic relationship with those 
countries or economic dependence on them. But, both currencies at that time were 
not convertible, due to exchange controls imposed in the UK and India in the post-
war period. 
Adjustment for the future: Ceylon had at that time applied for the membership of 
the  IMF  and  one  of  the  requirements  to  be  met  once  the  country  gained  the 
membership was to express the value of currency in gold  or in a gold-convertible 
currency. Both sterling and Indian rupee were not gold-convertible.  
Limited  activities  of  a  currency  board:  Currency  boards  do  only  the  issue  of 
currency. Hence, they cannot supervise banks or take action for the development or 
the stability of the financial system.  
Inability  to  cope  with  a  wider  definition  of  money:  Demand  deposits  have 
become  an  important  part  of  money  supply.  Currency  boards  do  not  have  any 
instrument  to  control  demand  deposits,  while  a  central  bank  could  do  so  through 
statutory reserve systems. 
Meeting  the  needs  of  financial  institutions:  Financial  institutions  need  liquidity, 
reserves and clearing and settlement facilities. Currency boards cannot meet them. 
Inability  to  tackle  crisis  situations:  Currency  boards  are  “fair-weather”  systems 
and not geared to tackle serious domestic or international crises. For instance, if a 
crisis demands an expansion of liquidity as its solution, currency boards cannot act 
in such situations. 
Lack of instruments to control an inflationary situation: If there is a continuous 
surplus in the balance of payments, a currency board has to necessarily monetize 
the  surplus  at  the  cost  of  building  inflationary  pressures.  But  it  does  not  have 
instruments to contain it and is reduced to the status of a passive spectator.  
In  view  of  the  above  shortcomings  of  a  currency  board  system,  Exter  recommended  that 
Ceylon should establish a central bank with wide powers. 
Exter  could  not  be  faulted  for  making  this  recommendation,  since  this  was  the  accepted 
wisdom at that time. The frustration of the newly independent nations regarding their colonial 
past, the desire to attain economic independence soon to match the political independence 
and the obvious inflexibility of currency board systems to supply liquidity in a growing trade 
and payment era would have contributed to the popular belief at that time that the Currency 
board should be replaced by a central bank. 
However, about two and a half decades later when Singapore had to make the same choice, 
“Dr Goh and the Cabinet chose the path of prudence for Singapore and sought to preserve 
the Currency Board System for its in-built financial discipline” (Prudence at the Helm, 1992, 
p 15). Many nations since then, after devastating experiences with undisciplined monetary 
management,  chose  for  currency  board  systems  to  institutionalize  monetary  discipline  by 
legal means. Ironically, this virtue of a currency board system had not been dealt with in the 
Exter Report, possibly it would not have been foreseen at that time. However, to the credit of 
Exter, many safeguards, checks and balances were added to the law establishing the central 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
bank  to  prevent  such  undisciplined  monetary  management  by  the  new  central  bank.  The 
absence of even a single episode of hyper-inflation or crises of monetary nature during the 
past 57 years of existence of the central bank is testimony to the efficacy of these measures 
added to the law. 
The role of the new central bank 
The mandate given to Exter was, inter alia, to “report on the organization and functions of a 
Reserve Bank with a view to ensuring, within the limits of monetary action, full employment of 
the economic resources of the country, and, if need be, on the promotion of supplemental 
credit institutions in furtherance of this policy…”. The mandate itself had recognized that the 
central  bank  should  facilitate  economic  development  “within  the  limits  of  monetary 
action”. This meant that, though short-term economic stimuli could be provided by raising 
money and credit, the bank should not do that, since it leads to the abandonment of price 
stability.  Any  stimulus  to  be  provided  by  the  central  bank  should,  therefore,  be  practised 
cautiously  and  with  due  regard  to  its  impact  on  price  stability.  While  emphasizing  on  the 
importance  of  money  and  credit  on  an  economy,  Exter  referred  to  this  as  “stable  money 
which is essential to performance under contracts and to the equitable liquidation of debt”. 
Within  that  limitation,  the  Exter  Report  has  highlighted  that  “the  greatest  significance  of 
the  introduction  of  a  Central  Bank  lies  in  the  power  of  the  bank  consciously  to 
influence  the  supply,  availability  and  cost  of  money  in  Ceylon”.  While  this  conscious 
action constitutes monetary policy, it differs from what a currency board does and even from 
a  central  bank’s  creation  of  money  through  similar  action  by  foreign  exchange  operations. 
Foreign exchange operations are compulsory and a central bank has no choice in that. When 
commercial  banks  offer  foreign  exchange  to  the  central  bank,  it  has  to  buy  that  exchange 
and issue local currency. But, a central bank’s credit creation through domestic operations is 
discretionary  and  voluntary.  So,  a  central  bank  is  in  a  position  to  regulate  such  money 
creation  depending  on  the  situation  and  the  credit  requirements  of  the  economy.  Hence, 
Exter  did  not  expect  the  new  central  bank  to  have  an  open  policy  of  creating  money  to 
finance  the  domestic  operations.  He  wanted  such  operations  to  be  conducted  at  the  sole 
discretion of the bank. 
Exter also empowered the central bank to examine and supervise commercial banks in order 
to  strengthen  the  banking  system.  Such  powers  would  prevent  banks  from  engaging  in 
unsound  practices,  protect  the  depositors  against  bank  failures  and,  with  “lender  of  last 
resort” facility, provide liquidity in times of crises. Up to the establishment of the central bank, 
there  was  no  any  attempt  at  regulating  commercial  banks  in  Sri  Lanka.  Hence,  Exter  was 
successful in realizing two objectives in a single operation: price stability and banking system 
stability. While the broad objective of price stability remained unchanged over the years, the 
banking system stability was expanded to cover the entire financial system and, therefore, 
today,  the  central  bank  has  been  charged  with  the  responsibility  for  maintaining  financial 
system stability.  
Exter’s  wish  was  that  the  new  central  bank  would  consolidate,  under  one  umbrella,  all 
financial operations which had been widely scattered at that time. Thus, the central bank was 
expected to encourage the public to make greater use of banks to keep their deposits and 
channel funds to the government securities market by building confidence in same. 
While submitting the draft bill on the central bank, Exter remarked that “good central banking 
is less good law than good practice”. What he meant by this is that a central bank should not 
rely  solely  on  the  legal  powers  given  to  it.  The  strict  application  of  such  legal  powers 
sometimes  leads  to  the  destruction  of  sound  market  relationships.  To  make  central  bank 
policy more effective, it has to make its presence felt by others. Exter advised that it should 
be  done  “through  the  development  of  day-to-day  relations  of  confidence  and 
understanding  between  itself  and  various  banking  institutions  than  through  the 
exercise of all of the powers given it” under the law. In other words, he suggested that 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 3
practicing “moral suasion” would pay more dividends to a central bank than seeking cover 
under the law.  
Caution against the excessive creation of money 
Exter belonged to the old guard of economists who believed that economic prosperity cannot 
be attained by printing money. This was indeed going against the popular tides of the late 
1930s  and  1940s.  At  that  time,  Keynesianism  had  been  accepted  by  the  mainstream 
economists  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  as  a  new  religion.  It  explicitly  advocated  the 
desirability of deficit financing as a strategy for attaining full employment. Exter doubted the 
validity  of  this  claim  both  in  his  public speeches  and  writings.  In  this  respect,  Exter  was  a 
loner  and  belonged  to  the  minority  of  economists  of  the  day.  The  fact  that  there  were  no 
supporters for his views did not prevent him from making public what he believed to be true. 
On the very first day of the establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon, in a press interview 
he gave as its first Governor, Exter warned against the use of the Bank for things it cannot 
fulfill. 
“Today, we can only be filled with high hopes for the future. It would be a mistake to 
expect startling results immediately from the establishment of the Central Bank. There 
is  no  financial  wizardry  by  which  the  Bank  can  suddenly  pull  out  of  a  hat  a  higher 
standard of living for everybody. The Bank’s contribution must necessarily be a long-
run contribution. The Bank does not itself produce goods and services, but it should, 
by creating the right monetary conditions enable the country…” to do so. 
What Exter repeatedly maintained was the Central Bank was only a necessary condition for 
future prosperity. That necessary condition was to be created by maintaining price stability so 
that  the  economic  agents  could  make  economic  decisions  based  on  long-run  economic 
prospects. Since the Central bank does not produce goods and services, it cannot directly 
get involved in economic activities. It is, therefore, the task of the government and the private 
sector to take appropriate measures to create wealth in the society. The only weapon of the 
Central Bank is to print money and such money, by changing the price levels, acts only as an 
illusion.  Hence,  Exter  thought  it  necessary  to  warn  those  who  had  been  advocating  the 
Keynesian type of ideology to raise government expenditure through printed money.  
In  the  Exter  Report,  he  argued  that  higher  income  created  through  money  creation  would 
simply stimulate consumption of imported goods and precipitate serious balance of payments 
difficulties. A similar view has been expressed by Dr Goh Keng Swee, economic architect of 
Singapore, when he clarified why Singapore chose a currency board system in preference to 
a  central  bank.  He  says  that  none  of  his  Cabinet  colleagues  “believed  that  Keynesian 
economic  policies  could  serve  as  Singapore’s  guide  to  economic  well-being”.  Since 
Singapore’s  economy  was  small  and  open,  “financing  budget  deficits  through  Central 
Bank  credit  creation  appeared  to  us  as  an  invitation  to  disaster”  (Prudence  at  the 
Helm, p 33). About 25 years before Singapore used this wisdom, Exter argued that, given 
the underlying domestic production capacity, deficit financing would be an efficacious policy 
in developed countries that were largely dependent on foreign trade. But, it would not be the 
case  with  a  developing  economy.  Hence,  the  Exter  Report  highlighted  that,  “this  should 
serve as a warning to those who might hope that some of the policies growing out of 
Keynesian  economics  can  be  uncritically  adapted  to  Ceylon”.  As  a  safeguard,  a 
provision was included in the Monetary Law Act prohibiting the Central Bank to engage in 
trade  or  otherwise  have  a  direct  investment  in  any  commercial,  industrial  or  other 
undertaking.  In  Exter’s  opinion,  such  interests  would  lead  to  money  creation,  generate 
conflicts of interest and prevent making investment decisions based on hard-core economic 
principles.  As  such,  the  Central  Bank’s  involvement  in  economic  activities  was  considered 
sub-optimal. 
It would be useful to examine whether Exter indeed proposed the necessary legal provisions 
in the draft bill to facilitate the new central bank to carry on business as per the advice given 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2007
it 
In 
this  respect, 
to  understand 
is  also  pertinent 
that  Exter  made  his 
above. 
recommendations at a time when the whole world had embraced Keynesian type of deficit 
financing as the sole remedy for unemployment problem and central banking with power to 
lend to the government or the economy was the rule of the day. Hence, as he had explained 
in the Exter Report, he had to adopt a pragmatic approach for the issue. He, nevertheless, 
proposed checks, balances and limitations for the central bank’s credit operations with the 
government or with the economy. 
The following are the provisions and limitations he proposed. 
1. 
Provisions have been made in the Monetary Law Act for the Central Bank to grant 
provisional advances to the government to facilitate the latter to meet any liquidity 
shortages in its cash flow. Exter has been criticized for making this provision in the 
Act,  because  it  amounts  to  printing  new  money  and  making  it  available  to  the 
government  to  finance  its  operations.  Such  provisional  advances  create  reserve 
money  and  work  opposite  to  the  price  stability  objective  of  the  Bank.  Any 
neutralization of the adverse effect of such advances has to be done by the Bank 
through  its  open  market  operations.  But  Exter  did  not  propose  to  offer  an  open 
cheque to the government and limited such advances to 10 percent of the estimated 
government  revenue  at  any  time  and  made  them  repayable  within  a  period  of  six 
months. He justified his limitation arguing that “many central banks and national 
economies  have  come  to  grief  because  governments  have  had  too  easy 
access  to  central  bank  credit”.  Hence,  he  argued  that  it  would  be  wise  to  limit 
such  credit  just  to  meet  only  the  very  short  term  cash  requirements  of  the 
government arising from seasonal requirements of funds. This wisdom of Exter was 
not followed and, as a result, provisional advances which were meant to be short 
term credit facilities for six months became permanent credit. As a result, the level 
continued to increase to a new high level in each successive  year with increased 
estimates  of  government  revenue.  It  has,  therefore,  provided  permanent  free 
funding  to  the  government,  almost  similar  to  the  annual  profit  transfer  which  the 
Central Bank makes to the government. 
The  Central  Bank  has  been  authorized  to  acquire  Treasury  bills  from  the  primary 
issues and it, therefore, constitutes another form of lending to the government. The 
Bank has been prohibited to subscribe to primary issues of or, underwrite, the other 
types  of  government  securities,  viz.,  Rupee  securities  or  Treasury  bonds.  Exter 
justified  this  prohibition  on  the  ground  of  the  obvious  possibilities  of  abuse  by 
governments. Even the purpose of investing in Treasury bills was not to finance the 
government  but  to  acquire  the  necessary  liquidity  for  conducting  smooth  open 
market operations. This was explained by Exter as an injunction familiar to central 
bankers and commercial bankers alike that a bank should look to the liquidity of its 
portfolio. 
2. 
An important principle established by Exter has been that the principal use of OMO was to 
offset the effects of surpluses and deficits in the balance of payments. Since the surpluses of 
BOP raises money supply and deficits would do the opposite, it is necessary to counter their 
effects  by  an  equivalent  change  in  the  domestic  assets  of  the  Bank.  Hence,  any  OMO  to 
siphon off the additional liquidity created by the Bank by increasing its domestic assets first, 
i.e.,  by  investing  in  primary  market  Treasury  bills,  is  contrary  to  the  wisdom  expressed  by 
Exter in his report. 
Can Exter be faulted for permitting the Central Bank to lend to the government? Though it is 
completely  contrary  to  the  principles  of  responsible  central  banking  advocated  by  him 
elsewhere in the Report, he should be viewed as a pragmatic person. He argued that “if the 
Government were determined, even in the face of opposition by the Monetary Board to 
make excessive use of Central Bank credit, legal limitations could be relaxed” by the 
government. In such a situation, “the Board being a Government agency would have no 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 5
alternative but to comply”. Thus, legal provisions are not of any use if governments do not 
function responsibly and the civil society is weak in resisting such dangerous moves by the 
governments. He made this point clear in his Report as follows: 
“The danger that a government will make use of the power of a central bank to over-
expand  credit  is  a  real  one  and  might  appear  a  strong  argument  against  having  a 
central bank at all. But, as already indicated, if a government wishes to engage in the 
irresponsible creation of money, it can do so without a central bank. Paper money has 
come to stay. The only real safeguard against its abuse is responsible government”.  
So the blame should not go to Exter. It is the absence of responsible governments that would 
erode the value of money through excessive creation of central bank credit. An example for 
such irresponsibility could be found in a reported statement by Robert Mugabe, President of 
Zimbabwe that, if money is not found for projects, he would print the same, at a time when 
inflation was rising at more than 4500 % in his country. (Time, 13 Aug 2007) 
Elimination of the seigniorage from the books of accounts 
The  issue  of  paper  based  fiat  money  at  a  fractional  cost  of  the  face  value  has  enabled 
sovereigns  to  earn  a  substantial  profit  known  as  the  seigniorage.  Since  there  is  no 
requirement for the issuer to back such money with an equivalent reserve, there is no limit to 
the issue of money by a sovereign. As a result, central banks which have been mandated by 
sovereigns to issue currency grow like an inverted pyramid: with a very low base as capital 
and  reserves  at  the  bottom  and  substantially  high  level  of acquired  assets  through  money 
creation at the top. This pushes a central bank to a very high risk level, when it is viewed 
from the point of solvency, since an overgrown central bank may not have sufficient assets to 
discharge its liabilities in a crisis situation.  
Exter, having known this fundamental risk faced by a central bank, made provisions in the 
Monetary  Law  Act  to  automatically  hide  the  seigniorage.  In  terms  of  these  provisions,  the 
printed currency stock in the vaults of the central bank does not become a part of its assets. 
When  currency  is  issued,  it  becomes  a  part  of  its  liabilities  with  a  corresponding  asset 
created in its books. However, when that asset is liquidated, currency issued earlier comes 
back to the central bank and such currency is taken out of its books by deducting it from the 
currency issue. Thus, the accounting system prescribed in the Monetary Law Act does not 
take  into  account  the  profits  made  by  the  bank  in  its  currency  issue.  The  cost  is  simply 
charged to the income account of the bank and eliminated from the books. 
On the currency issued, the Central Bank makes a seigniorage. However, that seigniorage is 
dispersed among all the assets of the Central Bank and cannot be identified for the purpose 
of paying out to the government. Instead, what is explicitly recorded in the books of accounts 
is  the  interest  income  which  the  Bank  earns  on  the  assets  it  has  created.  All  costs  of  the 
Bank are charged to this interest income and the net surplus is ascertained. That surplus is 
not automatically paid to the government, since Exter has made specific provisions regarding 
the appropriation of the profits of the Bank. 
In terms of these provisions, there is an order of priority for the appropriation of profits of the 
Bank. 
First,  profits  should  be  applied  to  pay  any  outstanding  amount  carried  to  a  Monetary 
Adjustment Account on account of (a) extraordinary currency issue (b) expenses and interest 
payments  on  the  issue  of  Bank’s  own  securities  and  (c)  any  interest  paid  on  commercial 
bank reserves in that unlikely event of the Bank’s raising the statutory reserve ratio to 100 
percent to fight a very high inflationary situation. 
Second,  anything  remaining  after  the  first  appropriation,  a  reserve  should  be  created  to  a 
value of at least 15 percent of the domestic assets of the Bank.  
6 
 BIS Review 92/2007
Third, if any profits are left out after the above two appropriations, the remaining profits can 
be paid to the government. 
In terms of the above provisions, the payment of profits to the government is the third and 
last  priority  on  the  scale.  Exter  argued  that  that  should  be  the  case  because  of  the 
inflationary or deflationary effects which the payment or the non-payment of profits can have 
on  an  economy.  For  instance,  when  the  profits  are  transferred  to  the  government,  the 
reserve money will increase, raising both money supply and creating inflationary pressures. 
Exter argued that such an expansion that would have arisen from the Central Bank’s own 
contribution to inflation by raising its domestic assets should be prevented. Domestic assets 
of  the  Bank  could  go  up  due  to  the  Bank’s  lending  to  the  Government  or  the  commercial 
banks.  If  these  assets  have  increased  too  rapidly,  the  result  would  be  inflation  through  a 
similarly rapid increase in money supply. Exter’s prioritization of the appropriation of profits 
intended to prevent the Bank from paying to the government such profits earned by inflating 
the economy. But, he did not have any objection to the transfer of profits to the government, 
if such profits have been earned on the Bank’s investment of its foreign assets. Since the 
foreign  assets  are  maintained  by  the  Bank  on  behalf  of  the  government,  the  latter  have  a 
right to receive its due rate of return. So, Exter concluded that if the domestic assets have 
not  expanded  (in  other  words,  if  the  Central  Bank  has  not  inflated  the  economy),  “there 
should be no ill-effects from paying out the Central Bank’s profits to the Government, 
especially since in this case the Government could not have been obtaining excessive 
accommodation from the Central Bank”.  
The most important provision relating to the appropriation of profits of the Central Bank is the 
requirement that the Bank should build reserves out of profits to back its demand liabilities, 
viz., currency issue and demand deposits maintained by the Bank. Exter’s recommendation 
was that such reserves should be equal at least to 15 percent of the Bank’s domestic assets. 
Such reserves need not be built up against foreign assets, since those claims on the rest of 
the world would in anyway back the currency and demand liabilities. But, the domestic assets 
which are created by the Bank at its own discretion have no value in the domestic economy 
in a severe crisis. Since the build up of the reserves would prevent the transfer of profits to 
the  government,  Exter  concluded  that  it  would  “prevent  them  from  adding  to  the 
expansion of central bank credit”.  
Given the ever rising provisional advances granted by the Central Bank to the government 
and its permanent nature making such advances another form of implicit profit transfer, it is 
questionable  whether  the  minimum  of  15  percent  is  an  adequate  backing  for  the  Bank’s 
currency  and  demand  liabilities.  For  the  provisional  advances,  there  is  no  any  collateral 
placed  by  the  government  with  the  Central  Bank.  Hence,  they  are  akin  to  unsecured 
overdrafts given by a commercial bank to its customers. Since the risk weights given to such 
unsecured advances exceed even 100 percent, it is necessary for the Central Bank to plan 
for a higher level of reserves than the minimum 15 percent. The Central Bank management, 
having taken this prudential requirement into account, has decided, as a part of the Bank’s 
modernization program, to raise the reserve level up to 100 percent of the domestic assets of 
the Bank. This is being continued by the Bank since 2003 and the reserve level today stands 
closer to 100 percent. However, it would be prudential to revisit even this percentage today in 
terms of its adequacy in view of the level of ever rising unsecured provisional advances and 
Exter’s warning that the profits earned by inflating the economy should not be distributed. 
The build up of reserves by the Central Bank to be equal to its domestic assets has another 
monetary  dimension.  On  the  liability  side  of  Bank’s  Balance  Sheet,  it  has  liabilities  on 
account  of  currency  issue  and  demand  deposits  maintained  by  commercial  banks.  These 
liabilities  are  known  as  monetary  liabilities,  since  they  constitute  the  reserve  money  of  the 
system.  All  other  liabilities,  including  the  capital  and  reserves,  are,  therefore,  called  non-
monetary liabilities. When reserves are built-up to be equal to the Bank’s domestic liabilities, 
its monetary liabilities would vary exactly in accordance with the movement of the Bank’s net 
foreign  assets.  When  the  Bank  raises  its  net  foreign  assets,  monetary  liabilities  or  the 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 7
reserve  money  would  increase  by  an  equivalent  amount.  When  the  opposite  takes  place, 
reserve money would fall. This is similar to the operation of a partial currency board system 
on a voluntary basis in Sri Lanka. 
It  is  considered  a  partial  currency  board  system  because  it  backs  both  the  currency  issue 
and the demand deposits of commercial banks by an equal amount of foreign assets. In a 
currency board system, only the currency issue has to be backed with foreign assets in this 
manner. Since the system voluntarily practiced by Sri Lanka provides a wider backing than 
the currency issue, it could be considered as a more prudential system than even a currency 
board  system,  provided  that  net  foreign  assets  always  remain  a  positive  number.  If  they 
become  negative  due  to  the  fact  that  Bank’s  foreign  liabilities  are  greater  than  its  foreign 
assets, it poses the bank to a new type of a risk. The risk becomes very much material in a 
situation where there are continuous balance of payments deficits and if the Bank is required 
to raise foreign loans to meet the emerging foreign exchange requirements. In this situation, 
the  backing  of  the  monetary  liabilities  by  foreign  exchange  reserves  would  sever,  making 
monetary  liabilities  highly  vulnerable  to  emerging  market  developments,  specifically  what 
would happen to the net domestic assets of the Bank. 
When the net foreign assets are negative, it exerts pressure for domestic assets to increase 
in  a  compensatory  manner,  for  otherwise,  there  would  be  a  huge  liquidity  crunch  in  the 
economy adversely affecting all the economic activities. Such a sudden and rapid increase in 
domestic  assets  would  reduce  the  ratio  of  capital  and  reserves  to  the  domestic  assets  to 
unacceptable levels. The corollary would be that both the foreign assets and reserves would 
fail  to  back  the  Bank’s  monetary  liabilities.  To  mitigate  this  risk,  it  may  be  necessary  to 
maintain the reserve level greater than the value of the domestic assets of the Bank. In other 
words, capital and reserves of the Bank should be higher than 100 percent of the domestic 
assets of the Bank. 
The independence of the central bank 
Central  banks  have  been  created  by  societies  to  issue  the  medium  of  exchange  and 
preserve its value. The power given to central banks as sole issuers of currency is similar to 
nationalization  of  money  supply.  This  is  an  extraordinary  monopoly  power  vested  with  a 
central bank. Hence, there is the possibility that this power can be abused by the masters 
who  have  given  the  power  to  a  central  bank.  Since  the  history  is  full  of  examples  of 
governments’ abuse of this power, the question of the independence of central banks has 
come to the focus. Noble Laureate, F.A, Hayek, arguing that inflation throughout the history 
has largely been engineered by the governments, made even the suggestion that the central 
banks should be dissolved and money supply should be de-nationalized (Denatinalisation 
of  Money,  Hobart  Paperback  No  70,  1978).  Some  have  even  cynically  referred  to  central 
banks  as  “necessary  evils”.  Against  this  background,  the  issue  of  the  independence  of 
central banks is of crucial importance. In this regard, the independence of the Central Bank 
of Sri Lanka has been raised by many at numerous public fora. 
The question of Bank’s independence has come to limelight due to the Secretary of Ministry 
of  Finance  sitting  as  a  vote  carrying  member  of  the  Monetary  Board,  the  highest  policy 
making  body  in  the  Central  Bank.  The  critics  have  argued  that,  since  he  is  a  government 
official,  he  would  steamroll  all  other  members  of  the  Board  and  get  the  Central  Bank  to 
comply with government wishes. 
Many  have  found  fault  with  Exter  for  making  the  Secretary  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  a 
member of  the Monetary Board. The criticism is that the Secretary, acting in his own self-
interest, would get the Central Bank to fund the government budget through money creation, 
thereby permitting the fiscal policy to override the monetary policy. It has been equated by 
some critics to the case of permitting a child to put his hand into a cookie jar as many times 
as he wishes. While these criticisms may have some validity, Exter’s wisdom was to create 
an  environment  for  both  the  government  and  the  Central  Bank  to  have  a  peaceful  and 
8 
 BIS Review 92/2007
amicable  cohabitation.  Exter  argued  in  his  report  that  “….there  are,  however,  many 
important problems of monetary policy, especially those relating to fiscal policy, on 
which a central bank should work in close harmony with the government”. Accordingly, 
a degree of independence has been afforded to the Central Bank unlike other governmental 
bodies.  This  independence  extends  to  the  budget  of  the  Bank,  job  security  of  key  central 
bank  officials  and  power  to  make  monetary  policy  without  consulting  the  government.  The 
wisdom  of  Exter  was  that  the  Central  Bank  should  as  far as  possible work  in  consultation 
with the government, rather than in isolation. He believed that the true independence of the 
Central  Bank  could  be  preserved  only  through  that  consultative  process.  In  the  words  of 
Exter,  “the  ideal  is….one  in  which  there  will  be  continuous  and  constructive  co-
operation between the Monetary Board and the government. The principal instrument 
for achieving this co-operation should be the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of 
Finance whose membership on the Board will ensure at all times that his Minister’s 
views will be known to the other members of the Board”. However, Exter did not expect 
this  arrangement  to  be  effective  at  all  times.  Hence,  he  made  the  proviso  that  “it  would 
depend  on  the  men  occupying  the  key  positions”  and  not  on  any  legal  formula.  He 
argued  quite  correctly  that  such  complex  and  delicate  relationships  cannot  be  established 
full-blown by a piece of legislation. It must be the result of years of experience and the slow 
growth of political conventions.  
Exter  Report  testifies  to  the  fact  that  the  independence  of  the  Central  Bank  should  be 
attained and maintained by people in both the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance and 
working  with  a  “moral  consciousness”  regarding  the  well-being  of  the  whole  society  rather 
than narrow self-interest objectives. 
transformation.  The  onslaughts  of  new 
Conclusions 
Six decades is a long period during which a society should necessarily undergo tremendous 
political,  social  and  economic 
technology, 
globalization and advancements in fast communication systems have changed the ideals of 
the people of all societies throughout the globe. Hence, one may tempt to question whether 
the ideals expressed by Exter more than a half a century ago are still valid and relevant. 
Though the ideals of societies have changed, the core principles that are embodied in the 
philosophy  of  central  banking  have  not  changed  over  the  time.  In  fact,  they  have  become 
much more hardened today than 60 years ago. Nations throughout the world have gone for 
price  stability  as  a  necessary  prerequisite  for  continuous  prosperity.  Hence,  the  hands  of 
central  bankers  have  been  strengthened  much  more  today  in  all  parts  of  the  world  to 
facilitate central banks to function independently and make appropriate policies for monetary 
stability. The wave of modernization that has swept over almost all central banks in 1990s 
and in the new millennium is a testimony to this new trend. Hence, John Exter still lives in the 
core of the hearts of central bankers throughout the world and will continue to do so in the 
foreseeable future as well. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 9
