Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – regulatory and supervisory framework 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Institute  of 
International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington DC, 5 March 2007. 
 Introduction  
I. 
Pakistan’s  financial  sector  has  undergone  a  phenomenal  structural  change.  Key  elements  of  this 
change are:  
(i) 
Privatization of banking industry which only 6  years or so back was 90% in public sector-
privatization was accompanied by significant debt and labor resolution and restructuring,  
Free  and  flexible  entry  of  foreign  banks  raising  foreign  shareholding  to  almost  half  of  the 
banking sector assets,  
Development of a strong banking system as capital base has strengthened and the ratio of 
Net  NPLs  to  Net  Loans  today  is  at  an  all  time  low  of  1.8%  for  all  banks  and  1.3%  for 
commercial banks.  
Enhancement in financial depth and private credit ratio – there is however considerable room 
for further expansion of these indicators,  
Substantial  credit  diversification  at  sector  levels  which  is  helping  support  broad  based 
economic activity,  
Strengthening of regulatory and supervisory framework along with the stricter enforcement 
by a vigilant and strong central bank that is fully independent and accountable to its Board, 
and  
Changed  perception  and  approaches  to  safety  net  for  depositors  and  prompt  corrective 
actions.  With  most  banking  system  now  in  private  hands,  the  government’s  implicit 
guarantee for deposit no longer exists and now the owners and the Board of Directors as 
wells  as  top  management  of  a  bank  are  liable  for  their  actions.  Notwithstanding,  central 
banks  surveillance  system  plays  a  key  role  in  identification  of  the  problems,  e.g.  threat  to 
capital, liquidity crisis at the earliest stage, and execution of prompt corrective action – the 
objective being to curb the problem at the onset, and if required appointing official liquidators 
for settlement of depositors’ claims in a timely manner, in cases where the corrective actions 
result in liquidation/restructuring of the bank. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
The trends and performance of banking sector has been influenced by a variety of factors, in particular 
higher  and  sustainable  economic  growth  supported  by  effective  macroeconomic  management  and 
comprehensive  and  sophisticated  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  (PRS)  framework.  In 
designing PRS, central bank has been realistic and rigorous, while recognizing need for flexibility so 
critical given the characteristics, structure and state of financial sector and the prevailing governance 
and market practices. Adopted effective January 2004, the PRS has since continuously been updated 
substantively  to  respond  to  the  emerging  developments  in  the  sector  and  to  conform  to  the 
International standards.  
Pakistan’s PRS aims to: promote and preserve financial sector stability, encourages banks to function 
purely  on  market  principles  and  operate  in  a  fair  and  efficient  manner  guided  by  high  standards  of 
corporate  governance  with  emphasis  on  complete  disclosure  and  transparency.  To  ensure 
effectiveness of this framework, central bank has now put in place an elaborate framework of banking 
surveillance and supervision.  
In setting this PRS, the main challenge has been to evolve and develop a well balanced PRS which 
allows for (i) an open, liberal and competitive neutrality of regulatory framework that promotes financial 
sector  growth,  diversification,  and  innovation,  (ii)  healthy  competition  and  risk  taking  to  ensure  a 
sustainable and aggressive income stream, and (iii) opportunities for enhancing the franchise value of 
banks. On the other hand, it is critical for regulatory framework to recognize the need for augmenting 
more  prudent  behavior  and  ensuring  effective  risk  management  especially  critical  in  fast  expanding 
financial  markets  and  also  safeguarding  social  obligations  and  consumer  interests.  By  and  large 
Pakistan’s PRS is now market friendly and all credit and lending cum deposit rate prescriptions and 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 1
dictates  have  been  withdrawn  and  banks  are  now  free  to  operate  as  long  as  they  comply  with 
regulatory framework.  
Regulatory framework 
II. 
Recognizing  the  ground  realities,  Pakistan’s  financial  regulatory  framework  at  this  stage  restricts 
banks from engaging in non-related commercial activities to avoid conflicts of interest between banks 
and diverse businesses such as securities and insurance underwriting, and real estate investment etc. 
This is largely done to avoid at this stage the complexities emerging from cross ownership and large 
conglomerates.  Except  in  case  of  multilateral  borrowings,  banks  are  generally  prohibited  from 
assuming any obligation or guarantees on behalf of Non-bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs).  
Banks  and  development  finance  institutions  (DFIs)  exposure  to  equity  market  is  governed  by  a  PR 
which  disallows  exposures  against  the  security  issued  by  the  bank  itself  or  those  by  prospective 
borrowers  themselves  or  provide  unsecured  credit  to  finance  the  floatation  of  securities  or  take 
exposure against non-listed securities and sponsor directors’ shares. Banks investment in any single 
scrip is limited to 5% of their own equity with total investment in listed shares is capped at 20%. The 
margin  requirement  against  the  security  of  shares  of  listed  companies  has  been  set  at  30%. 
Notwithstanding these broader restrictions banks are allowed to set up or take higher stakes in their 
subsidiaries that can be formed for specified purposes like asset management, brokerage, etc.. This 
allows banks to diversify their business interests but operating as a separate business entity.  
Consistent with normal practices, the regulatory framework for banks is all encompassing and covers 
a  broad  spectrum  of  elements  which  can  be  classified  in  six  different  categories  defining;  (i)  entry 
requirements,  (ii)  risk  management  guidelines,  (iii)  corporate  governance  framework,  (iv)  industry 
specific guidelines, (v) operational guidelines and (iv) anti money laundering regime. 
Bank entry and licensing requirements. SBP has the sole authority to set criteria and approve or 
transfer ownership of bank licensing. Presently, banks/DFIs are required to, in a phased manner, to 
meet capital requirements which have reached $50 million as of December 2006 and will be doubled 
to  $100  million  by  31  December  2009.  Among  others,  higher  capital  requirements  are  intended  to 
accelerate the process of banking sector consolidation. Of 39 institutions, 32 banks are well on their 
way to meeting stipulated capital requirements with 8 banks already complying with the 2009 capital 
requirements. To the extent capital of banks is being enhanced through M&A process it has facilitated 
a degree of consolidation among conventional banks. 
SBP  has  now  for  few  years  invoked  partial  suspension  of  issuance  of  new  bank  licenses.  After  a 
period of liberal licensing, SBP is no longer issuing conventional bank licenses in order to encourage 
sector  consolidation.  Responding  to  this,  market  has  been  dynamic  as  evident  from  the  wave  of 
aggressive 25 odd mergers and acquisitions some of them led by strategic foreign banks.  
Foreign  interest  in  Pakistani  banks  is  driven  by  strong  business  prospects  given  thus  far  financial 
penetration ratio has been considerably low and there exists large potential untapped retail market as 
well as high profitability with return on equity close to 25%. Foreign banks can either conduct business 
in branch mode or set up a wholly owned locally incorporated subsidiary provided they are member of 
a regional group or association or if foreign banks have a global tier-1 paid up capital of US$5 billion or 
more. Other than these categories a foreign corporate/ body desirous of conducting banking business 
in Pakistan should set up local subsidiaries with a maximum of 49% share holding. Currently of the 39 
banks  in  the  country,  almost  14  have  foreign  shareholding  with  few  of  them  either  fully  or  partially 
foreign  owned  or  other  smaller  strategic  stakes.  Foreign  interest  in  banking  system  has  been 
substantial and since 2002 cumulatively has attracted foreign capital inflow of over $2 billion (including 
funds  raised  and  expected  to  be  raised  from  GDRs  floatation  of  banks  in  international  markets). 
Standard Chartered Bank acquisition of mid size Union bank itself has mobilized significant proceeds. 
Besides,  ABN-Amro,  Citibank,  HSBC,  Saudi  American  Bank  and  Temasak  all  have  an  interest  in 
expanding  businesses  and/or  acquiring  domestic  stakes,  while  three  banks  are  offering  GDRs  in 
international  markets.  Foreign  interest  in  Islamic  banks  is  quite  strong  with  four  of  six  banks  being 
foreign owned. 
Not  only  is  entry  easy  through  M&As  in  Pakistani  banking  sector,  but  license  are  being  issued  for 
Islamic  banks  as  well  as  microfinance  banks  –  two  areas  which  hold  phenomenal  prospects  for 
augmenting 
the 
underserved segments of population. Thus far 6 Islamic banks and 6 microfinance banks have been 
allowed  with  former  expected  to  constitute  at  least  10%  of  total  banking  sector  by  2010  and 
the  development  needs  particularly 
financial  penetration,  while  serving 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2007
microfinance  reach  to  enhance  to  additional  3  million  customers.  Evading  licensing  restrictions,  the 
Government has continued to set up bilateral government-to-government joint venture-DFIs.  
Risk management. Banks are allowed to take appropriate and diversified individual, group and sector 
risk exposures, while nurturing effective governance standards that would ultimately set the stage for a 
more  stable  and  mature  financial  market,  which  can  then  be  allowed  greater  flexibility.  Aside  from 
standard limits on single and group exposures ( limited to 30% and 50% (including 20% and 35% fund 
based exposure), respectively), banks exposure on contingent liabilities cannot exceed 10 times of its 
own equity. Likewise, clean lending to single persons is limited to Rs0.5 million and in aggregate it 
cannot  exceed  the  equity  of  the  banks.  Furthermore,  Banks/DFIs  exposure  to  a  company  cannot 
exceed 10 times of borrowing entities’ equity and the entities current ratio cannot be lower than 1:1. 
Corporate’s subordinated loans are included in their equity determination. Banks are required to obtain 
CIB reports for loan transaction above a limit (currently set at Rs500,000) and audited balance sheet 
from borrowers whose transactions value exceeds Rs10 million.  
Since  consumer  financing  is  still  relatively  an  emerging  area,  SBP  lays  down  an  elaborate  risk 
management framework for it. Although banks are allowed clean lending for personal and consumer 
loans within limits (Rs 500,000), these loans cannot be used for real estate purchase or subscription of 
IPOs. New entrants in the first and second year are not allowed to lend more than 2 and 4 times their 
bank equity, respectively. For subsequent years, so long as classified loans under consumer finance 
are 3%, banks can offer up to 10 times their equity and if these classified loans rise up to and above 
10% the limits is scaled down to 2 times the equity of bank. Banks are expected to develop effective 
MIS  reporting  and  risk  management  system  for  consumer  financing.  Subject  to  adequacy  of  these 
system  and  experience  in  consumer  financing,  SBP  has  relaxed  the  exposure  limits  on  consumer 
financing.  However,  banks  not  meeting  these  requirements  or  illustrating  poor  track  record  of 
consumer financing could face restricted exposure limits. Banks have adapted well to these prudential 
norms and NPLs related to consumer loans have been low (3% of total NPLs) despite the share of 
consumer financing in total outstanding advances has risen to about 14%.  
These stringent PRs were instituted to ensure prudent risk behavior, however, in cases where justified, 
central bank can relax these exposure limits for temporary period, if financial strength of company’s 
balance sheet is expected to improve or there is need to finance a strategic project backed by public 
sector guarantees. Banks are free to extend loans against hypothecation of stocks and/or receivables 
and to set margin financing requirements on financing facilities keeping in view risk profile of borrower.  
Classification and provisioning for assets conforms to international norms. Loans overdue by 90 days 
are subject to 25% provision (up from 10%) – effective 31 December 2006 and those overdue by 180 
days require 50% provisioning and those above 360 days have to be fully provisioned for.  
Corporate  governance.  A  recent  World  Bank  study  on  South  Asia  “Access  to  Finance”  ranked 
Pakistan corporate governance standards highest among South Asia. This is further supplemented by 
the  2005  ROSC  assessment  of  corporate  governance  standards  which  have  given  higher  points, 
relative to the world average, to Pakistan on majority of its principles.  
Among  other  efforts,  this  is  an  outcome  of  effectiveness  of  an  elaborate  Corporate  Governance 
Framework laying down specific corporate governance guidelines for banks which further has infused 
greater discipline among bank-finance dependent corporate sector. Besides the legislative stipulations 
of  Banking  Companies  Ordinance  (BCO),  1962  that  provide  rules  for  fit  and  proper  criteria  of 
Management  and  Board  of  Directors  (BoD)  as  well  as  their  appointments/dismissal,  disclosure  of 
share ownership, dividend policy, and appointments of external auditors etc., SBP has introduced a 
Handbook of CG for Banks which, among others, defines the role and responsibilities of BoDs; the fit 
and proper test criteria prescribed for Chief Executive Officers, Board members and key executives; 
restriction on shareholdings by the director; dealings of the banks with directors; and requirement of 
credit rating.  
Furthermore SBP, in collaboration with the ICAP (the premier accounting body of the country) and the 
commercial banks, has facilitated adoption of International Accounting standards (IAS) by the banks. 
In  2006  (Feb)  the  reporting  formats  were  revised  to  incorporate  the  significant  regulatory 
developments and the modifications in the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). With 
these changes, the quality of disclosure by banks in their annual accounts is at par with international 
best practices.  
To ensure the quality of external auditors for banks SBP requires an audit firm to be approved from 
SBP  Panel  of  Auditors.  The  firm  is  classified  in  categories  A,  B,  and  C  depending  on  a  criterion 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 3
further 
loan  size  of  Rs150,  000.  SBP  has 
developed  internally  and  the  criteria  takes  into  account  the  number  of  qualified  accountants, 
international affiliation, quality review by ICAP, and past experience. The classification also prescribe 
the size of the bank a firm can audit, e.g. large banks can only be audited by firms in category A. 
Industry-specific  PRs.  Replacing  all  prescribed  sector  ceilings  or  subsidized  lending,  SBP 
encourages competition amongst banks to meet the diverse set of development requirements. Given 
the  gap  in  supply  and  demand  for  credit  delivery,  SBP  has  formed  consultative  groups  to  identify 
issues  impeding  the  outreach  of  financial  services  for  agriculture  and  rural  sector,  SME  and 
microfinance sectors. Agriculture sector financing has more than doubled over the last few years, but 
remains below the overall credit requirements of the sector. Commercialization of agriculture financing, 
crop  loan  insurance  program  and  improvements  in  land  registration  and  passbook  system  in  rural 
areas  have  been  found  to  be  more  effective  mechanisms  to  retail  agriculture  credit,  though  flow  of 
non-farm credit has remained low.  
Recognizing  commercialization  of  microfinance  businesses  is  key  to  its  financial  and  social  sector 
sustainability; SBP has set up a regulatory regime for Microfinance banks (MFBs). Currently about 6 
MFBs are governed and regulated by the MFIs Ordinance, 2001 that encourages a paradigm shift in 
microfinance  industry,  while  laying  foundation  for  systematic  growth  of  the  sector.  MFBs  capital 
requirements are set lower than commercial banks (Rs250 million) and they are required to maintain 
equity  equivalent  to  at  least  15%  of  its  risk-weighted  assets.  Under  PRs,  MFBs  are  required  to  set 
10% of deposit liabilities in liquid assets and transfer 20% of its annual profits after tax into reserve 
fund until it reaches equivalent to its capital base after which this allocation is reduced to 5%. MFBs 
have  to  set  up  Depositors’  Protection  Fund  or  scheme  for  the  purpose  of  mitigating  risk  of  its 
depositors, to which MFB/MFI shall credit not less than 5% of its annual profit after taxes. MFBs have 
to  set  aside general  provision  of  2%  besides  other  stringent  provision  requirements.  MFBs  need  to 
lend  maximum 
issued  NGOs/Rural  Support 
Programs/Cooperative Transformation guidelines for their upgradation to MFBs. Fit and proper criteria 
have  been  laid  down  for  CEOs  and  Management  of  MFBs.  Guidelines  have  been  issued  for 
commercial banks interested in engaging in microfinance business. SBP unique and rich regulatory 
framework offering a model of development of MF.  
Under SBP regulatory framework, banks can offer new financing schemes and innovative products to 
meet  the  financial  requirements  of  SMEs,  while  providing  themselves  a  viable  and  growing  lending 
outlet. Under PRs, banks are encouraged to extend cash flow based lending and they can take clean 
exposure secured only against personal guarantees of SMEs owners for up to Rs 3 million, however, 
clean funded exposure should not exceed Rs 2 million. For eligibility SMEs ought to declare that it has 
not  availed  clean  facilities  from  any  other  bank/DFI.  The  maximum  exposure  of  a  bank  /  DFI  on  a 
single SME shall not exceed Rs 75 million. The total facilities (including leased assets) availed by a 
single SME from the financial institutions should not exceed Rs 150 million provided that the facilities 
excluding leased assets shall not exceed Rs 100 million. 
Operational instructions. Supplementing its PRs, SBP has issued guidelines on risk management, 
business continuity plan, internal controls, and stress testing. Both PRs and guidelines form the basis 
of  our  regulatory  framework  that  enables  SBP  to  carry  out  a  proactive  role.  As  the  business  is 
expanding  and  banks  are  positioning  themselves  to  take  advantage  of  emerging  opportunities,  the 
technology adoption becomes imperative to get a competitive edge to deliver services in an efficient 
and cost effective manner. Accordingly, almost all the banks in Pakistan have embarked upon major IT 
projects that will improve their operational efficiency and strengthen internal controls.  
Anti-money  laundering  and  Combating  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT).  Pakistan  like  other 
jurisdictions has adopted a comprehensive set of PRs to enhance its vigilance on money laundering 
and  terrorist  financing.  PRs  for  AML  require  banks  to  ensure  Know-your-customers  (KYC)  before 
establishing  banking  relationships,  conduct  due  diligence  on  an  ongoing  basis,  identify  and  provide 
Suspicious  Transaction  Reports  (STRs),  ensure  maintenance  and  retention  of  records,  and  fulfill 
specific requirements for compliance officers and wire transfers etc. In July 2006, SBP updated and 
strengthened these PRs and aligned them further with FATF recommendations. 
Under KYC-PRs banks have to: ensure true identity of prospective account holders, ascertain nature 
of  the  business,  obtain  introduction  of  account  holder  and  determination  of  beneficial  ownership  of 
accounts  while  enhanced  due  diligence  is  carried  out  for  high  risk  customers.  At  the  same  time, 
regulation facilitate interception of transactions, which are, prima facie, associated with money derived 
from  illegal  activities  by  ascertaining  customer’s  status  and  source  of  earnings  and  investigating 
transactions  that  deviate  from  account  history.  Banks  are  required  to  retain  information  about  each 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2007
account  for  a  minimum  period  of  five  years,  of  all  records  of  transactions,  both  domestic  and 
international along with the records on the identification data obtained through KYC/ CDD (NIC, driving 
license, passport etc.) and record of STR has to be maintained for longer period and can be destroyed 
only with the prior permission of State Bank.  
Banks/  DFIs  are  prohibited  to  establish  correspondent  banking  relationship  with  institutions  whose 
KYC/CDD practices  are not  in  order or  who  are  located  in  jurisdiction  identified  by Financial  Action 
Task  Force  (FATF)  as  “non-cooperative  countries  and  territories.”  Banks/  DFIs  have  been  alerted 
against misuse of correspondent account by third parties e.g. payable through accounts. Approval for 
establishing  new  correspondent  relationship  has  to  be  taken  from  senior  management.  Banks  are 
expected to investigate unusually large transactions and all unusual patterns of transactions to identify 
any suspicious transaction that is required to be reported to concerned authorities. The information to 
be  reported  by  banks/  DFIs  include  title,  type  of  account,  numbers  of  accounts  involved,  detail  of 
transactions,  reasons  of  suspicion.  The  employees  of  banks/  DFIs  are  strictly  prohibited  from 
disclosing  the  fact  to  any  person  that  certain  transaction  has  been  or  is  being  reported  for 
investigation. 
SBP has established an AML/CFT unit to deal with the issues of money laundering and CFT. This unit 
monitors  and  investigates  STRs  An  AML  law  is  under  consideration  and  its  promulgation  will 
strengthen further the legislative and institutional framework for AML. Under the Law, SBP will house a 
Financial Monitoring Unit (FMU) which will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating all activities 
related  to  AML  in  the  financial  system.  Oversight  of  AML  will  further  benefit  as  linkages  and 
information exchange among countries is enhanced.  
Banking supervision  
III. 
Like other central banks and supervisory authorities, SBP conducts regular onsite inspections of all 
financial institutions under its jurisdiction. This involves assessment of banks overall financial health, 
evaluation of quality of management and role of Boards and sponsors and verification of compliance 
with legal and regulatory requirements. The inspections are conducted on CAMELS-S methodology 
whereby inspection team assesses and rates each component viz. Capital Adequacy, Assets Quality, 
Management, Earning, Liquidity, Sensitivity to Other Risks and Systems and Controls. Increase in size 
and  complexity  of  financial  sector  and  introduction  of  new  and  innovative  financial  products,  has 
required SBP to enhance the sophistication of approach and methodology of its inspections. Capacity 
building  is  being  launched  to  develop  SBP  skills  in  risk  management,  Islamic  Banking,  treasury, 
foreign exchange, IT etc. In addition, work is underway to strengthen further its capacities for oversight 
of Basel 2.  
Off-site supervision & surveillance. In response to changing realities, lessons learnt and peculiar 
financial conditions, the off-site monitoring system at SBP has undergone substantive changes since 
its  introduction  in  1997.  The  off-site  monitoring system  (i)  monitors  the  overall  and  individual  banks 
financial health, (ii) helps in early problems detection for appropriate corrective action, and (iii) focuses 
on-site supervisory resources to high risk areas or activities. Off-site monitoring is conducted based on 
periodical  returns  of  banks.  On  line  submission  of  the  Report  of  Chart  of  Accounts  will  enhance 
efficiency  and  quality  of  offsite  supervision.  SBP  is  to  start  building  capacities  for  more  integrated 
supervision where industrial groups and NBFIs relationship with banks is growing. At this stage, SBP 
is coordinating with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (capital market supervisory 
agency) for exchange of information of transactions that cut across sectors and involve both banks 
and NBFIs. 
Institutional  Risk  Assessment  Framework.  Driving  inspiration  mainly  from  the  Supervisory 
Framework  Rating  Assessment  criteria  of  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions 
(OSFI)  of  Canada,  SBP  has  introduced  an  Institutional  Risk  Assessment  Framework  (IRAF)  to 
enhance its supervisory vigilance by integrating and consolidating the information collated through its 
regular  supervisory  and  surveillance  mechanisms.  IRAF  engenders  a  risk  rating  taking  into 
consideration the information available regarding a bank from various sources. It not only embraces 
the offsite and onsite feedback, it also takes management of banks on board, to establish their rating 
regarding  their  compliance  with  standards,  codes  and  guidelines  issued  by  SBP.  To  make  the 
supervisory  process  an  all-inclusive  exercise,  market  information  regarding  the  health  of  banks  has 
also been incorporated in the framework.  
BIS Review 26/2007 
 5
The  supervisory  process  of  onsite  inspection,  offsite  surveillance  and  IRAF  culminates  into 
enforcement  actions.  The  enforcement  actions  that  can  be  taken  by  SBP  range  from  imposition  of 
pecuniary penalties to removal of management, board of directors and cancellation of banking license. 
The results of stringent enforcement actions taken have been encouraging as majority of the banks 
have displayed extraordinary operational performance over the past five years.  
Emerging challenges and Issues 
IV. 
The  increasing  growth  and  complexity  in  banking  sector  have  now  given  rise  to  new  issues  and 
challenges.  While  initially  preoccupied  with  their  own  primary  business  of  banking,  the  banks  have 
now  cross  ownership  where  industrial  and  brokerage  companies  own  banks  and  banks  own 
subsidiaries and associate companies that handle asset management, brokerage, insurance, housing 
and  telecommunications  businesses.  These  close  linkages  and  cross  ownership  structure  among 
corporate  and  FIs  expose  the  banks  to  related  party  transactions  risks.  At  the  same  time,  growing 
foreign acquisition and entry of new regional and global players as well as growing domestic banks 
presence oversees requires SBP to deal with home and host regulator issues. Responding to these 
structural changes in financial sector, SBP is positioning and equipping its inspection and supervision 
department to deal more effectively with the emerging supervisory challenges.  
Consolidated  and  cross  border  supervision.  Besides  developing  in-house  capacities  for  joint 
conglomeration and consolidated supervision, SBP is developing greater interface with other central 
banks  and  has  signed  about  15  Memorandum  of  Understandings  (MoUs)  with  various  central 
banks/supervisors. These MoUs have a wide variation in scope, ranging from provisions for exchange 
of information to sharing license criteria, on-site inspection, supervisory cooperation, combating money 
laundering, nature of action to be taken in case of any irregularity etc. Even where MoUs are not in 
existence,  SBP  shares  information  with  the  host  country  supervisors  as  and  when  necessary. 
However, there is scope for greater effective relationship among regulators.  
Complexities  of  implementing  effective  risk  management.  SBP’s  elaborate  risk  management 
framework  has  helped  contain  effectively  all  sources  and  types  of  risks.  To  monitor  resilience  of 
banking system towards shocks to risk factors, SBP calibrates alternate scenarios subject the overall 
banking system and individual banks to different degrees of credit, market and liquidity shocks. This 
stress testing is conducted every quarter. Based on September 2006 data, all banks were generally 
found to be resilient to credit risks and after shock capital adequacy ratio was found to remain above 
11%. For one bank, capital adequacy would decline below these levels if either benefit of forced sale 
value is withdrawn due to banks exposure to mortgage collateral and for couple of banks shocks to 
credit quality of consumer portfolio may increase consumer sector NPLs and impact capital adequacy. 
Banks  were  equally  resilient  to  interest  rate  shocks  for  movement  upto  200bp  and  equity  price 
movements in the range of 20%. Liquidity coverage ratio would come down in case of 10% decline in 
liabilities.  In  case  of  exchange  rate  depreciation  banks  are  found  to  actually  gain  as  their  foreign 
currency assets are in excess of foreign currency liabilities.  
While  stress  testing  results  offer  broader  comfort  about  banking  sector  strengths,  there  is  need  to 
recognize  that  there  remain  some  areas  of  concerns.  For  example,  banks  do  face  (i)  maturity 
mismatches, of special concern in the rising interest rate scenario; (ii) potential risk of loan defaults in 
the  backdrop  of  rising  consumer  finance  portfolios  and  equity  markets  exposure  of  the  banking 
system; and (iii) risks posed by weaknesses in internal control system and lack of effective mechanism 
for containing operational risks. Commercial banks are launching substantive efforts to address these 
problems and adoption of technological solutions and connectivity of all branches with headquarters of 
banks will help in this area.  
Implementation  of  Basel  II  Accord.  Pakistan  adopted  a  road  map  for  implementation  of  Basel  II 
Accord. Under this, banks will be adopting the standardized approach from January 2008 based on 
the spade work conducted since July 2006. There are number of issues in adoption of standardized 
approach. First, only a small proportion of corporate sector is rated by the rating agencies. In absence 
of  the  rating  of  borrowers,  banks  may  end  up  allocating  more  capital  than  warranted.  To  ensure 
coordinated  approach  to  Basel  II  implementation,  SBP  has  set  up  a  Working  Group  under  the 
guidance of SBP to remove obstacles in its smooth implementation. Effective preparation for Basel II 
requires  development  of  allied  and  support  infrastructure  that  facilitates  need  for  strengthening  and 
enhancing  role  of  credit  rating  agencies  and  development  of  internal  controls  and  IT  systems.  In 
absence  of  credit  rating  agencies,  Pakistan  is  developing  further  role  of  private  sector  Credit 
Information Bureaus, and independent debt/financial advisories etc. The gaps in the rating agencies 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2007
are of particular concerns for SBP, given its heavy reliance of Standardized approach under Basel II. 
SBP  has  to  further  upgrade  its  capacity  for  supervisory  review  (Pillar  II)  and  a  core  group  of 
supervisors will be trained in this shortly. 
Lastly,  there  is  need  for  more  intensive  capacity  building  of  industry  and  SBP.  Greater 
international  cooperation  in  strengthening  the  capacities  of  developing  markets  in  risk  management 
and  emerging  supervisory  approaches  would  be  key  to  enhancing  effectiveness  of  vigilance  and 
oversight both at bank and central bank level.  
Conclusion.  Being  autonomous  and  effectively  empowered  under 
the  Banking  Companies 
Ordinance, 1962 SBP has adopted a rigorous but flexible regulatory framework which helps to keep 
banks  exposure  within  tolerable  range,  while  allowing  them  opportunities  to  enhance  and  diversify 
their businesses. Banking sector has played a key role in supporting real sector development whose 
performance and macroeconomic stability have together re-inforced banking sector performance. All 
time high profitability and structural transformation of banking sector has attracted substantial foreign 
capital  in  banks  which  given  its  innovations  and  practices  will  augur  well  for  strengthening  and 
sustaining banking sector performance. Proper enforcement of regulatory framework has been helped 
by a strong SBP’s independent supervisory and surveillance mechanism and validation process of the 
external auditors. Effective oversight has induced banks to enhance their corporate governance and 
compliance  with  laws  and  regulations  that  also  follow  international  accounting  and  disclosure 
standards.  Despite  these  achievements,  both  central  bank  and  banks  have  to  continue  with 
broadening  and  deepening  of  structural  reforms  to  help  enhance  financial  services  penetration  and 
address the outstanding vulnerabilities in the system, while facilitating industry smooth adoption of risk 
measurement and management systems advocated under Basle II. 
BIS Review 26/2007 
 7
