Lars Nyberg: Credit derivatives – risks and opportunities 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting at StartegiTorget 
Bank, Finans & Försäkring, Stockholm, 13 March 2007.  
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak  about  the  risks  and 
opportunities  offered  by  credit  derivatives.  Credit  derivatives  may  appear  complicated,  but  the 
principles as to how they work are essentially simple. They are a type of insurance, nothing else. 
A person who owns a house runs the risk that the house may burn down. A person lending money 
runs the risk that the borrower will not pay back the loan. The house-owner usually wants to sign a 
home  insurance  policy  covering  the  risk  of  fire  and  is  happy  to  pay  a  premium  for  this.  The  bank 
lending money may correspondingly – although banks are actually specialised in managing credit risk 
– wish to sign a credit insurance to dispose of the credit risk, wholly or partly. The bank then also has 
to pay an insurance premium. A credit derivative is quite simply a modern form of credit insurance, 
adapted for trade in the financial markets. 
Trade  in  credit  derivatives  has  expanded  enormously  in  recent  years,  which  of  course  implies  that 
credit derivatives offer advantages to their users. At the same time, a debate on the potential risks for 
the  financial system has arisen and  interest  from  the  supervisory  authorities and central  banks  has 
increased. If the credit risks disappear from the banks, where do they go? 
Today I intend to speak a little bit about the risks involved in credit derivatives, which so far mainly 
concern the international market. Here in Sweden the use of credit derivatives is still limited, although 
increasing. Then I intend to mention the opportunities I see in Sweden. But let me first run through 
how credit derivatives are used and how the market has developed in recent years.1  
How do credit derivatives work? 
A  credit  derivative  is  a  financial  contract  between  two  parties.  It  insures  the  buyer  of  the  contract 
against the credit suffering a credit event during a predetermined period. The credit event quite simply 
defines  what  the  insurance  covers,  in  roughly  the  same  way  as  the  conditions  in  a  normal  home 
insurance. I shall return to this shortly. 
Take, for instance, a company like TeliaSonera. Then imagine a bank that has loaned money to this 
company. This may involve a lot of money as TeliaSonera is a large company. Although Telia’s ability 
to pay is good when the loan is taken, the bank is exposed to the risk that it may deteriorate in the 
long  term.  If  the  bank  considers  the  credit  risk  to  be  too  high,  it  may  choose  to  "sell"  part  of  it  to 
another investor. Then the bank can use the credit derivatives market. 
For the bank, which in this case is the seller of credit risk, the credit derivative functions roughly like a 
normal insurance. The buyer of the credit risk (the insurance provider) commits itself to compensating 
the bank if TeliaSonera does not fulfil its obligations in some way during the contract period. The bank 
pays a regular premium for this, which is determined when the contract is signed. The definition of 
failing to fulfil its obligations is made clear in the contract between the bank and the investor. This is 
what is known in the jargon as a credit event. It could mean, for instance, that TeliaSonera doesn’t pay 
the interest as agreed, that it defaults on payment of the outstanding debt or that it goes bankrupt. The 
premium the bank has to pay to the investor reflects the market’s assessment of the risk that such an 
event will occur. The greater the probability, the higher the premium. 
Most  companies  for  which  credit  derivatives  are  traded  also  have  bond  loans  issued  on  the 
international  market  for  corporate  bonds.  How  much  an  investor  is  willing  to  pay  for  these  bonds 
depends  of  course on  how  he assesses  the  probability that  the  company will  default  on  its  interest 
payments or perhaps even go bankrupt – that is to say, that a credit event will occur.  
                                                      
1   A more detailed description of the credit derivatives market is provided in the article “Trading activity in credit derivatives and 
implications for financial stability” in the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Report 2006:2. 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 1
The premium that is to cover the risk of a credit event corresponds to the premium the corporate bond 
commands  over  a  government  bond  without  credit  risk.  The  prices  of  the  credit  derivatives  are 
therefore strongly related to the prices of the bonds issued by the company. In actual fact, the market 
for credit derivatives is often more liquid than the market for the underlying bonds. In this case the 
prices of the company risks are determined in the credit derivatives market rather than the market for 
the underlying corporate bonds. 
The most common credit derivatives are called Credit Default Swaps, abbreviated as CDS. A swap is 
usually an exchange of payment flows and one might wonder what is being exchanged in this case. It 
concerns what happens if the insurance needs to be used, that is, if a credit event occurs. Then the 
bank (the insurance policy owner) would have to sell a bond corresponding to the credit amount to the 
insurer at a nominal value. This is despite the fact that the bond has become worth much less or even 
worthless as a result of the credit event. The bank thus swaps the bond for a cash payment.2 This is 
no stranger than a house-owner swapping his burnt down house for cash if he has paid his insurance.  
Why are credit derivatives so popular? 
The example using TeliaSonera illustrates some of the properties that have made credit derivatives so 
popular.  The  bank  can  sell  its  credit  risk  on  the  company,  entirely  or  partially,  without  needing  to 
cancel the loan or to have any discussion at all with the company.  
At the same time, the buyer of the credit risk (the seller of the credit derivative) does not need to tie up 
more  than  a  fraction  of  the  capital  that  would  have  been  required  to  take  over  the  credit  directly. 
Moreover, the buyer of the credit risk can in turn easily sell the risk to another party, wholly or partially. 
Reinsurance thus becomes both simpler and cheaper to manage than with regard to traditional credit 
insurance. 
Large  investors  such  as  mutual  fund  companies  and  insurance  companies  often  want  to  have  a 
particular amount of credit risk in their portfolios. The credits can actually reduce their total risk, as the 
prices of the credits do not have such large covariation with other prices, for instance, the prices of 
shares  and  real  estate.  A  certain  share  of  credits  provides  a  more  diversified  portfolio,  which  gives 
lower risk for a given expected return.  
Credit derivatives also makes it possible to divide up credit risks into small parts and to trade these 
parts at a low cost. This is not possible with traditional credit insurances. As the trade is so extensive, 
the pricing of credit risk becomes much improved. 
From the economy’s point of view, it is essentially positive that the credit risk is spread to institutions 
outside of the bank system. Although the banks are specialists in assessing credit risk, they are also 
sensitive to shocks. Deposits are liquid, while loans are in practice often tied for long periods. If the 
depositors suddenly want to withdraw their money, it may be difficult as the bank cannot as quickly call 
in all its loans for payment. In addition, the banks are of vital importance for ensuring that payments in 
the economy function. The fact that credit risks are spread to other institutions with significant equity, 
such as insurance companies, may thus reduce the risks in the financial system. 
How has the credit derivatives market developed? 
Since  its  start  in  the  mid-1990s,  international  trade  in  credit  derivatives  has  expanded  enormously. 
Developments have been particularly dramatic over the past five years. The outstanding volume in the 
credit derivative market has in round figures doubled every year since 2002 and amounted to almost 
USD 12,000 billion at the end of 2005. This incredibly large figure can be compared, for instance, to 
the total value of the world’s stock markets, which at the same time amounted to just over USD 40,000 
billion. Market growth has remained high since 2005 and shows no sign of slowing down. Perhaps the 
most  important  explanation  for  the  large  expansion  in  recent  years  is  that  the  market  has  become 
increasingly standardised. This has made trading at a larger scale easier. 
                                                      
2  
If the bank does not own the bond in question it can buy one on the market. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2007
Underlying assets 
The  underlying  assets  largely  consist  of  corporate  bonds;  these  account  for  around  80  per  cent. 
However, there are other types of credit, such as traditional bank loans and various forms of sovereign 
debt.  
The corporate bonds market currently covers more than USD 6,000 billion in global terms. This means 
that the outstanding volume in credit derivatives is more than twice as large as the total amount of 
outstanding corporate bonds. The reason for this is that credit risks are resold on the market through 
new derivative contracts. This is not actually any stranger than insurance companies selling part of 
their  risks  by  reinsuring  themselves,  but  it  may  be  good  to  bear  this  in  mind  when  looking  at  the 
statistics. 
Today, credit risk is priced on thousands of corporate credits through credit derivatives, although most 
of the trade is still in a few hundred very large companies. Companies in all types of industries and 
with different credit ratings are traded. Communication, such as the example of TeliaSonera, is one of 
the most traded sectors, together with the automobile industry and finance. The credit quality of the 
underlying bonds is generally very high. But appetite is increasing for underlying assets with low credit 
ratings. The standardised maturities have also increased in number with time and there is a tendency 
for longer maturities, five to ten years, to be traded more.  
Market participants and products 
The market for credit derivatives attracts a large number of market participants who have not been 
active  in  the  credit  market  earlier.  The  most  important  buyers  of  credit  risk  are  large  institutional 
investors such as insurance companies and pension funds. Hedge funds are also large actors. The 
main  sellers of  credit  risk are  banks  and  other  credit  institutions who want  to  relieve  themselves  of 
parts of their credit risk, for instance to meet capital adequacy requirements from authorities or merely 
to use their capital more efficiently.  
In practice, the credit derivative market is centred on a few globally-active banks, which function as 
brokers in the trade. The ten largest counterparties on the market account for a good 85 per cent of 
the  total  volumes  traded  and  are  represented  by  large  investment  banks  such  as  Morgan  Stanley, 
Goldman Sachs and UBS. 
At the same time as the volumes have increased, the products have developed. The largest growth is 
currently  in  the  new  products,  including  what  is  known  as  index  products.  Somewhat  simplified,  a 
typical index product reflects a portfolio of credit risks in different companies, instead of reflecting the 
credit risk in a single company3. The index products increase the investors’ opportunities to spread 
their investments in the credit market. 
In this context,  I would also like to mention that there are alternative credit insurance methods that 
have likewise developed strongly. One of these is traditional syndicated loans. A syndicated loan is a 
loan where a bank sells parts of the loan to other banks; this is usually done internationally. These 
loans, like credit derivatives, have the advantage of spreading the risk in a large credit exposure over 
many  hands,  but  are  not  traded  so  actively  in  the  market.  Another  means  of  selling  risk  is  to  put 
together a number of credits to form a portfolio and then finance this portfolio by issuing bonds. This is 
called  securitisation.  The  portfolio  is  often  sliced  up  into  different  risk  tranches,  and  the  bonds 
corresponding to each tranche are sold to different investors, depending on what risk the investors are 
willing to bear – and to what price. These products in themselves are sufficient material for a whole 
speech – so let me just note that credit derivatives are not unique when it comes to trading in credit 
risk. 
Where are the dangers in the market? 
I  have  now  gone  through  a  number  of  advantages  with  credit  derivatives  and  described  their 
remarkable growth. But at the same time, they have brought with them a number of risks. These are 
mainly  related  to  the  market  being  new  and  relatively  untested.  There  is  a  possibility  of  "teething 
                                                      
3   For example, iTraxx Europe consists of the 125 most liquid company names in the CDS market in Europe. The 125 CDS 
contracts weighted equally in the index. 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 3
problems”.  Let  me  therefore  comment  one  at  a  time  on  what  I  regard  as  the  four  major  causes  of 
concern with regard to the credit derivatives market. 
Operational and legal risks 
1.  
The  most  concrete  source  of  concern  is  how  the  trade  is  conducted  in  practice.  The  existing 
infrastructure in the market has not managed to keep up with the rapid development. Because of the 
explosive increase in the number of contracts, routines and handling procedures have lagged behind. 
The back-office functions at the largest counterparties have not been able to confirm all of the deals in 
time.  This  has  entailed  a  risk  of  problems  if  "large”  credit  events  were  to  suddenly  occur.  In  these 
situations there could be confusion as to which deals have been completed and which positions are 
actually held, and these paves the way for legal disputes. The large number of outstanding contracts 
also makes the settlement process particularly sensitive. If many contracts have to be settled at the 
same time, there may be disruptions. The credit risk in one and the same bond may have been resold 
through a large number of derivative contracts. Problems can arise in this type of chain, particularly if 
the underlying bonds need to be delivered physically.  
But much has already been done to reduce the problems in this area. The market participants have 
themselves  made  large  investments  to  reduce  the  number  of  confirmations  ending  up  in  a  queue. 
Today  there  are  automatic  systems  for  confirmations  and  these  now  process  most  contracts. 
Experiences have  also shown  that  the settlement process can be  managed  smoothly  even  when a 
large number of contracts are settled at the same time. An increasing number of contracts are also 
being settled in cash rather than through delivery of an underlying bond. 
On  the  legal  side,  there  is  always  the  fear  of  disputes.  Will  the  person  taking  over  the  credit  risk 
actually pay when a credit event occurs? It is not unusual for major disputes to arise in the insurance 
market regarding the interpretation of policy terms. But the problems of unclear rules and practice that 
existed when the market was new now seem to have been resolved for the most part. This is because 
they  use  almost  exclusively  international,  standardised  contracts.  However,  the  possibilities  for 
completely standardised solutions are still limited. There are so many different types of more or less 
complex credit derivatives. According to the market participants themselves, the legal risks in credit 
derivative trading have not been completely removed. 
Counterparty risks 
2.  
The second source of concern is risk management. A bank that buys credit protection through credit 
derivatives will get rid of the credit risk, but instead expose itself to counterparty risk, that is, the risk 
that  the  party  selling  the  credit  protection  cannot  pay.  Counterparty  risks  exist  in  most  financial 
agreements, but as the credit derivatives market is so young and growth is so rapid, there is particular 
reason to be aware of them. There is insufficient statistical data available and it is difficult to assess 
where the risks will end up. 
At the same time, risk management within banks has developed significantly over the past ten years or 
so. Banks that trade in credit derivatives normally have strict routines for checking and evaluating their 
counterparties. Moreover, the sellers of credit derivatives are often insurance companies and pension 
funds, and have large equity capital to deal with potential credit losses. I would also like to point out 
that the large trading volumes I mentioned earlier should not be translated directly into risks. It is, of 
course, very unlikely that a seller of credit protection would need to compensate the entire credit risk in 
his  portfolio.  For  this  to  happen,  all  of  the  companies  concerned  would  have  to  go  bankrupt  at  the 
same time, and with zero recovery. To return to the example of house insurances, this would mean 
that  all  houses  insured  by  a  particular  insurance  company  would  simultaneously  burn  down  to  the 
ground.  This  is  a  worse  scenario  than  any  town  fire  in  our  history.  But  one  should  not  forget  that 
various shocks in the economy can lead to substantial total credit losses. Bank crises around the world 
have proved this. 
Liquidity risks 
3.  
Thirdly, there is reason to be aware of possible liquidity risks. Problems may arise if the market actors 
rely on the market always being liquid and assume this when making their deals. What would happen, 
for instance, if several credit events were to occur simultaneously? Perhaps there would suddenly be 
only  sellers  and  no  buyers  in  the  market.  Then  prices  will  plummet.  This  was  the  case  during  the 
Russian debt crisis in 1998, for instance, when the LTCM hedge fund suffered problems. A crisis of 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2007
this  nature  risks  spreading  rapidly  to  other  financial  markets  and  possibly  threatening  the  lending 
banks. 
Such situations do not last particularly long, as buyers always appear when prices fall. This was also 
the case after the LTCM crisis. 
Remember also that the credit derivatives market and the market for the underlying bonds are tightly 
interwoven. If the premiums on credit derivatives increase substantially, this will mean that at the same 
time  the  return  on  the  underlying  bonds  increases.  Unless  something  important  has  happened  that 
affects  the  credit  rating  of  the  company  that  has  issued  the  bonds,  it  will  sooner  or  later  become 
profitable to buy them – or to buy the credit derivatives. Several large-scale credit events in recent 
years, such as the downgrading of Ford’s and GM’s credit ratings last spring, have also shown that 
more or less serious problems could be solved without liquidity in the market being affected to any 
great extent. 
Risk of mispricing 
4. 
Finally, I would like to bring up the risk of mispricing, a risk that in many respects is closely related to 
the liquidity risk. During the same period as the volumes of credit derivative have grown most, interest 
rates have gradually fallen and credits have increased. There have been unusually few bankruptcies. 
The  interest  rate  differences  between  high-risk  and  low-risk  bonds  have  therefore  declined,  that  is, 
credit  spreads  have  shrunk.  The  price  of  credit  derivatives  has  fallen  correspondingly.  The 
compensation for risk has thus reached a level far below the historical average.  
The  question  is  what  will  happen  when  economic  activity  shows  a  downswing  and  the  number  of 
bankruptcies begins to increase again. If investors have in general underestimated the credit risk, we 
may see a substantial adjustment in risk premiums. This will also lead to a fall in prices of corporate 
bonds and credit derivatives. In this situation, individual actors with large net exposures in credit risks 
may be affected by significant losses.  
But I would like to emphasise that this is a general line of reasoning. If risk premiums rise, this would 
have  effects  on  most  markets.  There  is  no  particular  reason  to  assume  that  the  credit  derivatives 
market would be hit harder than others. 
My opinion is that each of these risks should be taken seriously. But they are nevertheless not so large 
that they risk bringing about a serious systemic crisis in the international financial system. 
I have now discussed the credit derivatives trade in the international market. Here in Sweden trade in 
credit derivatives is still very limited. But let me nevertheless round off with a few comments on the 
Swedish market and its potential. 
How are credit derivatives used in Sweden? 
As you may know, Sweden currently has one of the world’s most developed derivative markets. This is 
seen in relation to the size of the economy and the turnover on the stock market.  
But when it comes to credit derivatives, the situation is different. Here the trade is much more limited. 
This is primarily due to our corporate bond market being so small. And without corporate bonds, it has 
been difficult to trade in credit derivatives.  
The major Swedish banks base their core activities on long-term customer relations. Credits to small 
and medium-sized companies are predominant. The banks’ exposures to companies traded actively in 
the credit derivatives market are relatively small. Moreover, the banks have had plenty of capital and 
the need to sell credit risk to outsiders has been limited. The number of deals in credit derivatives has 
increased in recent years, but the total exposures remain small, on the whole. The major part of the 
trade has been on behalf of customers. This means that the banks mediate deals for customers, for 
instance, insurance companies, which for various reasons want to buy or sell credit risk. 
If we look ahead, there is reason to believe that credit derivatives will gain increased significance. This 
is  partly  related  to  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules,  Basel  II.  The  Basel  rules,  the  old  and  the  new, 
regulate how much capital a bank needs to cover the risks in its credit portfolio. The risks depend, for 
instance, on how well-diversified the credit portfolio is. The more concentrated it is to certain industries 
and countries, the greater the capital requirement. A portfolio where the risks are well spread instead 
reduces the total risk in the portfolio and thereby the capital requirement. This means that the banks 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 5
may  have reason  to sell some  of  the risks  that  arise  in  their  own credit  granting  and  to buy  others 
instead.  The current  rules do  not  allow the  banks  to reduce  their capital  very  much when  they  use 
credit derivatives. Basel II increases the opportunities here. 
It is also likely that the credit derivatives market will to a greater degree develop to include traditional 
loans. It is already possible to obtain prices for credit derivatives for companies that do not have bonds 
issued on the bond market. This is on condition that the loan documentation meets the predetermined 
requirements. It increases the opportunities for Swedish banks to use credit derivatives to sell parts of 
their own credit risk. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me round off. My assessment is that the advantages of credit derivatives exceed the risks for the 
economy. They have revolutionised the trade in credits in important aspects. The problems related to 
the market infrastructure are being dealt with successfully and there are many indications that the risks 
in this field are declining as the market matures. The financial sector has also improved its routines for 
risk control over the past ten years. 
I am therefore not particularly worried that the situation in the credit derivatives market could cause 
serious  problems  for  financial  stability.  The  important  thing  is  that  the  systemically-important  banks 
manage  exposures  to  their  counterparties  –  that  is,  that  they  take  sufficient  collateral,  they  have 
sensible limits and they are capable of managing potential liquidity problems. But the Riksbank will, of 
course, continue to follow developments and act to ensure that the risks I have mentioned today are 
managed properly. 
With regard to Sweden, the direct impact of credit derivatives on risk in the bank sector is currently 
small. But I assume that we will see increased activity among the Swedish banks, partly because the 
banks’ customers are calling for it and partly to manage the risks in their own balance sheets. The new 
capital  adequacy  rules  may  well  contribute  to  this.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  Swedish  banks 
report their management of credit derivatives in a way that makes both the trade and the total credit 
risk transparent. Here there is room for further development. 
So don’t forget credit derivatives – they will continue to increase in importance. And don’t forget that 
they are essentially insurances, neither simpler nor more complicated than a normal home insurance. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2007
