Rundheersing Bheenick: Towards the African Monetary Union  
Opening address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 6th Meeting 
of  Governors  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks,  Eastern  Africa  Sub-Region,  Port  Louis, 
9 May 2007. 
 A very good morning to all of you. 
And  a  very  warm  welcome  to  my  Fellow  Governors,  former  governors,  central  bankers  and  other 
overseas visitors who are with us this morning. 
I feel very privileged and honoured to address you this morning at the opening ceremony of this Sixth 
meeting of Governors of the Eastern Africa chapter of the Association of African Central Banks. 
For my colleagues and me at the Bank of Mauritius, this meeting assumes even greater significance 
as we prepare to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Bank in three months’ time. 
It  is  just  twelve  weeks  since  I  was  appointed  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  I  am  acutely 
conscious  that  I  am  very  much  the  new  boy  on  the  block.  It  makes  me  understandably  nervous  to 
address such an august assembly of governors and high officials of central banks from the region. The 
novice in central banking that I am does, however, claim a passing familiarity with regional cooperation 
and regional integration, which constitute the backdrop for our meeting. 
My  involvement  in  regional  integration  dates  back  to  the  days  when  I  was  Director-General  of  the 
Ministry  of  Economic  Planning  and  Development.  With  the  assistance  of  a  few  very  dedicated 
colleagues,  I  was  able  to  position  my  former  Ministry  to  play  a  leading  role  in  various  aspects  of 
regional integration. It was under our impulse that Mauritius successively became a member of PTA, 
the  Preferential  Trade  Area  which  was  the  precursor  of  the  present  COMESA,  the  Indian  Ocean 
Commission  of  which  I  was  a  founder-member,  SADC,  the  Cross  Border  Initiative  and  the  Indian 
Ocean Rim-Association for Regional Cooperation. Indeed, I was instrumental in getting two of these 
agencies to set up their headquarters here in Mauritius. 
Between  1997  and  2000,  when  I  served  as  Minister  of  Economic  Development,  Productivity  and 
Regional  Cooperation,  I  had  the  privilege  of  chairing  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  the  IOR-ARC,  the 
COMESA  Council  of  Ministers,  and  the  CBI,  which  actually  became  the  Regional  Integration 
Facilitation Forum under my chairmanship. Somewhere along the line, I was also associated with the 
African Economic Research Consortium and, more recently, I got roped in to advise the East African 
Community on benefits asymmetry. I thought I should fill you in on this as regional cooperation looms 
large in the African Monetary Cooperation Programme that you have embarked upon. 
Today, all countries – rich or poor, big or small – are confronted with the various challenges thrown up 
by globalisation. Smaller countries face bigger challenges and even greater risks, as we know only too 
well. We have to reckon with unpredictable external shocks, such as oil price hikes, drop in the export 
price  of  our  commodities,  or  of  our  manufactured  exports.  How  should  we  react  in  the  face  of 
globalisation? Should we, like one Latin American country did last week, pull out of the IMF and the 
World  Bank?  It  would  be  disastrous  to  envisage  such  a  scenario  on  our  continent  as  most  of  our 
countries  are  still  indebted  to  these  institutions,  which  for  all  their  imperfections,  have  done  a 
creditable job. Of course, we are not denying that there is considerable scope for achieving a better 
and more equitable international financial architecture more suited to the needs of our region. 
Faced with the challenges stemming from globalisation, we have to build greater economic resilience 
into  our economies.  Turning  our  back on  globalisation  is  not  an option.  Protecting our  markets  and 
insulating our labour force from competition can buy short-term peace and create the illusion of growth 
and  welfare.  Sustainable  growth  does  not  lie  in  that  direction.  Burying  your  head  in  the  sand  was 
never  a  good  strategy.  Nations  across the  world  are  integrating  their  economies  with  those  of  their 
neighbours,  to  create  larger  and  more  competitive  regional  economic  groups,  and  to  engage  in 
international  trade  –  not  as  individual states  but as regional  powers.  In  Africa,  now  more  than  ever 
before,  regional  economic  cooperation  and  integration  has  become  a  necessary  condition  for  long-
term sustainable development. It is in this context that we must focus on the objectives of the African 
Monetary Cooperation Programme. 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
This Programme requires us to adopt collective policy measures to achieve a harmonised monetary 
system and create a common management institution. The harmonisation of the monetary cooperation 
programmes of the various sub-regional groupings constitutes the first stage. These will then serve as 
building  blocks  for  the  single  African  monetary  zone,  which  we  expect  by  the  year  2021,  with  a 
common currency and a common Central Bank. To move in this direction, the AACB has adopted a 
set  of  quantitative  macroeconomic  convergence  criteria,  that  should  be  observed  by  at  least  51 
percent of AACB members, before we can launch the African Monetary Union. 
There are some encouraging signs. Growth performance during the last three years in Sub-Saharan 
Africa  has  been  the  best  in  more  than  three  decades,  and  higher  oil  revenues  and  increased  debt 
relief have been used to make progress toward the Millennium Development Goals. Despite spending 
pressures, most countries have managed to preserve macroeconomic stability with policies intended 
to support and sustain the region's higher growth. However, while current growth rates in Africa are 
high by historical standards, they are not sufficient to have a decisive effect on poverty and help Africa 
attain the Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty by 2015. 
One of the primary convergence criteria in terms of the African Monetary Cooperation Programme is 
the maintenance of an annual inflation rate of less than 3 per cent. The achievement of this inflation 
target  is  indeed  a  heroic  challenge  for  many  of  our  countries.  Here  in  Mauritius,  inflation  has  just 
nudged up into the very lowest of double digits, at 10.5 percent for the current fiscal year, for the first 
time in fifteen years. It is exercising our mind and causing some discomfort all round. We can hardly 
imagine what it must be like to grapple with quadruple-digit inflation, which is currently confronting a 
Fellow-Governor  on  the  continent.  This  four-digit  inflation  rate  certainly  makes  us  extremely 
uncomfortable and underlines the need for continued vigilance in the fight against inflation. It is also a 
stark reminder of the very long road we still have to travel before we achieve our common vision of the 
African Monetary Union. 
To paraphrase Lao-Tse, the longest journey begins with but a short step. We have taken many steps 
and we are well on our way. And, in our sub-region, we have made great strides since Governors last 
met. We are aware that much remains to be done to make a bigger dent on poverty and to raise living 
standards. We need to accelerate growth through more trade, more private sector development, more 
effective use of public resources and a deepening of our respective financial sectors. 
There are wide disparities in the financial sector across Africa. Middle-income countries have a larger 
financial sector and broader institutional coverage than low-income countries. The latter typically have 
a narrow range of institutions. Many people do not even have access to basic payment services or 
savings  accounts  and  cannot  obtain  credit.  This  inevitably  handicaps  economic  transactions  and 
impedes growth. 
In low-income countries, banking transactions form the bulk of financial activity. In contrast, middle-
income countries have a more diversified financial sector. This would normally include an insurance 
sector, a stock market, non-bank financial intermediaries and microfinance institutions. A country with 
a  less  diversified  financial  sector  is  more  vulnerable  to  credit  risk.  A  fall  in  commodity  prices,  with 
adverse  impact  on  exports,  can  rapidly  impair  bank  loans.  Hence,  the  need  to  have  a  high  capital 
adequacy  ratio  and  prudential  ratios  on  exposure  to  any  single  customer.  Another  characteristic  of 
banks  in  our  region  is  the  high  operating  costs  and  high  net  interest  margins.  This  reflects  low 
efficiency. Banks with high operating costs need a high spread to cover these costs. 
What  can  we  do  to  make  our  financial  sector  more  resilient?  First  and  foremost,  macroeconomic 
stability  should  be  consolidated.  If  this  is  lacking,  there  is  no  growth,  no  rise  in  incomes  and  no 
reduction  in  the  incidence  of  poverty.  An  increase  in  investment  is  also  required.  Gross  domestic 
investment as a share of GDP is very low in Africa. We attract only a marginal share of world FDI to 
Africa, and it tends to go into extractive industries. Global investors will only be interested in the rest of 
our  countries  in  Africa  if  we  can  offer  peace,  stability,  good  governance,  the  rule  of  law  and  the 
absence  of  corruption.  Africa  needs  to  strengthen  its  financial  systems.  Weak  banks  should  be 
restructured through measures to address the stock of nonperforming loans and accumulated losses. 
Bank regulation and supervision should be improved through greater compliance with the Basel Core 
Principles for Effective Bank Supervision. Help is at hand as our own experience in Mauritius shows. 
The  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  initiated  by  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank,  aims  at 
strengthening  financial  systems  and  providing  a  comprehensive  framework  for  identifying  strengths 
and weaknesses in a country’s financial system. I can confirm that we have used the FSAP to good 
effect to achieve institutional strengthening and to build a more robust financial and banking sector. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
To stay within the theme of financial systems and financial stability, allow me to share with you some 
preliminary  thoughts,  not  to  say  emerging  preoccupations,  on  the  quality  of  FDI.  The  volume  of 
Foreign Direct Investment flowing into Mauritius has increased very fast in recent years, and stood at 
Rs 6.4 billion in 2006, having risen more than sixfold since 2002. We are doing nicely on this score 
and  I  certainly  do  not  want  to  sound  like  a  carping  critic.  Normally,  one  would  have  expected  the 
Central Bank to busy itself with ways and means of sterilising these inflows. But – and I am not here 
talking only about Mauritius – I am getting increasingly concerned on the economic repercussions and 
the systemic risk implications of unbalanced and poorly-conceived foreign direct investment policies. 
With the elimination of trade preferences in an increasingly global economy, countries sharing similar 
characteristics  as  Mauritius  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  compete  for  foreign  direct  investment  in 
traditional sectors. 
In  these  circumstances,  FDI  in  the  property  and  real  estate  sector  can  be  a  rather  interesting  and 
viable  alternative.  However,  policy-makers  and  regulators  have  to  perform  a  fine  balancing  act 
between, on the one hand, the imperatives of economic and financial sector growth and, on the other, 
concerns  about  a  potentially  disruptive  speculative  property  bubble  which  could  defeat  the  very 
purpose  the  policy  was  meant  to  fulfil.  Specifically,  we  have  to  reckon  with  the  fact  that  poor 
implementation of such policies can lead to an increase in banks’ exposure should foreign investors 
have recourse to domestic bank financing instead of bringing in their own funds. Should this happen, 
the host country could eventually not only end up with lower-than-expected foreign exchange inflows 
but also find itself stuck with an unbalanced investment programme heavily skewed towards a sector 
with a very limited capacity to sustain growth. Still another negative fallout from increased lending to 
high-net-worth foreigners would be its crowding-out effect on domestic investment, either denying local 
investors adequate access to bank finance, or hardening their terms. It is abundantly clear that the 
quality  of  FDI  does  matter.  FDI  should  be  strongly  linked  to  local  enterprise  development  and  not 
confined  to  small  enclaves  as  the  benefits  of  FDI  do  not  accrue  automatically  and  are  not  uniform 
across  sectors  and  countries.  Experience  shows  that  the  authorities  need  to  go  beyond  traditional 
liberal FDI policies. They need to pay more attention to the broad set of regulatory and institutional 
frameworks  conducive  to  an  enabling  environment  both  for  foreign  investment  and  for  domestic 
entrepreneurship. 
Perhaps a few words about the local banking and financial sector could provide some useful context. 
Ours  is  a  small  middle-income  economy,  with  a  population  of  only  1.2  million,  but  we  have  an 
economy  which  is  fully  monetised.  Financial  intermediation,  overwhelmingly  banks  and  NBFIs’,  will 
make up nearly 11 percent of GDP this year. Let us pause a moment to reflect on this percentage 
contribution.  It  is  higher  than  almost all  the  real sectors.  It  is  higher  than  the  tourism sector,  where 
Hotels and Restaurants are expected to contribute a little less than 9 per cent of GDP. It is higher than 
the Export Processing Zone, which will account for 7.4 per cent. And it is of course much higher than 
the sugar sector, whose contribution to GDP is forecast at 3.3 per cent. 
How  has  the  sector  come  to  occupy  such  an  important  place  in  the  local  economy?  How  is  it 
structured  to  play  such  a  leading  role?  There  are  19  banks  and  13  non-bank  financial  institutions 
licensed to transact deposit-taking business. Three new banks should open by the end of this year as 
the banking licenses granted at the end of last year are operationalised. There are currently nearly 
160 branches and 329 ATM’s, which leads some observers to jump to the erroneous conclusion that 
we are overbranched and overbanked. 
The sector is marked by a very high degree of market dominance, with the two largest banks, both 
domestically-owned, controlling around 70% of rupee deposits, with the next two, both among the top 
ten  international  banks,  accounting  for  slightly  above  20%.  There  are  also  many  other  international 
banks who are relatively new to Mauritius, and who have brought in their own special expertise and 
financial  sophistication,  and  are  busy  carving  out  a  lucrative  niche  for  themselves  in  this  allegedly 
overbanked country. They are playing a very welcome role. They increase competition. They give the 
established players a run for their money. This is good for the domestic consumer. It dampens any 
tendency  towards  cartelisation  which  could  otherwise  be  encouraged  by  the  market  dominance  I 
referred  to  earlier,  with  the  smaller  players  slipping  comfortably  into  “follow-the-leader”  mode. 
Internationally,  the  presence  of  these  foreign  banks  raises  the  profile  of  the  country,  enhances  its 
reputation and reinforces its role as an offshore financial centre. I look forward to the three new bank 
licensees  entering  this  dynamic  financial  landscape,  with  their  own  business  models  and  their 
complementary financial products and services. All in all, we should have a very interesting year! 
Let me now touch briefly on how the Mauritian economy is coping with the challenges of globalisation 
and adapting to life in the post-Lome and post-Cotonou world. A less resilient country would no doubt 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 3
have  been  tottering  under  the  impact  of  the  triple  shocks  that  have  hit  the  economy,  namely  the 
dismantling  of  the  preferential  price  for  our  sugar  exports  under  the  Sugar  Protocol,  the  erosion  of 
trade preferences in textiles, and the surge in oil prices. The factor-intensive, export-oriented growth 
strategy, based on comparative advantage and fuelled by trade preference, with sugar, textiles and 
tourism  as  the  three  main  pillars  of  the  economy,  has  given  way  to  a  new  strategy.  We  are  now 
building competitive advantage in targeted sectors. The new strategy is based on 
• 
the  development  of  a  high-tech,  innovative  financial  and  business  services  hub,  with  new 
activities such as ICT, BPO, biotechnology, as well as financial and medical services, 
manufacturing activities such as printing and publishing and light engineering and  
restructuring and consoliding the existing sectors, which can adapt to the Brave New post-
WTO World. 
 The strategy also provides for the development of Mauritius into a regional platform for a variety of 
activities,  ranging  from  the  storage,  processing  and  distribution  of  seafood,  and  the  repair  and 
maintenance of fishing vessels, to warehousing and distribution. 
As regards the traditional sectors, their restructuring is in full swing. The sugar industry, hit by a 36 per 
cent  cut  in  the  price  of  sugar  exported  to  the  European  Union,  is  undergoing  a  complete 
transformation into a “cane cluster” producing special sugars, bagasse for electricity generation, and 
molasses  for  distillation  into  ethanol  and  value  added  spirits.  The  dismantling  of  the  Multifibre 
Agreement in 2005 forced the textile and apparel sector to downsize. This sector now revolves around 
a  core  of  firms  that  have  invested  heavily  in  sophisticated  design  and  fabrication  machinery  which 
enable Mauritian products to reposition away from the commodity end of the market. As for tourism, 
which was always built on its underlying competitive strength, the strategy is to double its bed capacity 
to capitalise on the liberalisation of air access. The objective is to attract two million tourists in the next 
10 years. This multi-pronged strategy is expected to inject still greater resilience into our economy to 
enable us to face further external shocks that are beyond the horizon. 
Allow me to dwell briefly on monetary policy in Mauritius. Over the years, the Bank of Mauritius, like 
most central banks on the continent, went through a phased programme of monetary policy reforms. It 
switched  from  direct  to  indirect  monetary  control.  This  was  in  line  with  the  general  move  towards 
increased reliance on market forces, economic liberalisation and regulation and away from directives, 
controls  and  subsidies.  Exchange  controls  disappeared  more  than  twelve  years  ago.  After  using 
Reserve Money Programming and liquidity forecasting as its framework for the conduct of monetary 
policy  for  more  than  ten  years,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  framework  in  December  last  year.  The 
Lombard  Rate  was  replaced  by  the  Repo  Rate  as  the  key  policy  rate  to  signal  changes  in  the 
monetary policy stance of the Bank. 
Just  over  two  weeks  ago,  I  had  the  privilege  of  launching  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  as  a 
statutory  committee  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  in  the  presence  of  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister,  and 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development.  This  marked  the  start  of  a  new  era  in  monetary 
policymaking in Mauritius. It was the culmination of a long reforming process that began nearly four 
decades ago. I am looking forward to the next meeting of the MPC which should take place in the 
second fortnight of June, just after the Deputy Prime Minister has handed down his budget. 
So  much  for  monetary  policy!  Let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  Bank’s  involvement  in  regional 
integration  activities.  I  can  vouch  that  it  dates  back  at  least  to  the  early  1980’s  when,  wearing  a 
different hat, I managed to persuade the then Governor to support our economic and trade overtures 
to Madagascar. In the early 1980’s, when exchange controls had yet to be dismantled, we entered into 
a bi-lateral agreement with Madagascar which provided for payments settlement in respect of bilateral 
trade between the two countries to be effected through a compensatory mechanism agreed between 
the central banks of the two countries. 
Subsequently,  the  Bank  hosted  in  succession  a  Meeting  of  the  Preferential  Trade  Area,  followed 
immediately by a Meeting of the AACB. When we joined SADC in August 1995 – after some private 
behind-the-scenes bargaining with my friend Kaire Mbuende who was then the Executive Secretary – I 
requested the Finance and Investment Sector to be allocated to us. Had our request found favour, the 
Finance and Investment Sector Coordination Unit would have been located in Mauritius. However, the 
decision was taken to reallocate the Tourism sector away from Lesotho to us while the Finance and 
Investment Sector went to South Africa. In 1998, the Bank hosted the 6th Meeting of the Committee of 
Central Bank Governors of SADC. The Bank has just participated in the 24th Meeting of the CCBG in 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2007
Tanzania last month (April 2007) and, at that meeting, we have been assigned the Permanent Chair of 
the SADC Committee of Banking Supervisors. 
To  conclude,  let  me  assure  all  of  you,  Fellow-Governors,  that  we  are  firm  believers  in  regional 
cooperation and integration. We go further; we believe that economic salvation for small countries like 
ours lies definitely in that  direction. The African Monetary Cooperation Programme, and its ultimate 
objective of the African Monetary Union, hold considerable appeal for us. On what better note could I 
end my address than by re-dedicating the Bank of Mauritius to this noble cause? 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 5
