Mario Draghi: Employment and development – the legacy of Giorgio Gagliani 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Colloquium in honour of Giorgio 
Gagliani, University of Calabria, Rende, 26 March 2007. 
 Giorgio Gagliani’s contribution to economic thought 
Giorgio Gagliani liked to cross interdisciplinary borders, sallying into economic history and sociology. 
His output was penetrating, original, not voluminous, never complaisant towards passing fashions. His 
interest  in  economics  lay  in  the  determinants  of  long-term  tendencies,  in  the  factors  underlying 
economic  development.  The  keystone  references  were  the  works  of  Arthur  Lewis  on  development 
economics and Simon Kuznets on the characteristics of economic growth and its relation with income 
distribution. In a profound, wide-ranging review-article published in the Annual Review of Sociology, 
Gagliani  critically  surveyed  thirty  years  of  research  on  “Kuznets’s  inverted  U-curve”,  the  hypothesis 
that income inequality increases during the transition from an agricultural to an industrial economy and 
then  gradually  decreases  as  society  progresses  towards  more  mature  stages  of  development.  He 
concluded that the hypothesis was not borne out by the data, drawing a conclusion that others would 
reach a decade later or more. His scepticism had immediately led him to discern the fragility of the 
statistical bases of the studies he was reviewing. This attention, uncommon in the profession, to the 
quality  of  statistical  data  and  their  comparability  over  time  and  space  was  a  hallmark  of  Gagliani’s 
research. 
As with Kuznets, the fulcrum of Gagliani’s analysis was the evolution of the sectoral and occupational 
structure  of employment over  the  stages  of development.  At  the time  Giorgio was writing,  Italy  had 
completed the transition from agriculture to industry and was aligned with the other advanced nations. 
Subsequently,  however,  the  convergence  of  the  Italian  economy  halted  and  in  some  periods  even 
went into reverse. According to OECD estimates, between 1991 and 2004 per capita national income 
went from 77 per cent to 69 per cent of that of the United States at purchasing power parity, falling 
back to levels not recorded since the mid-1970s. In the past decade the gap between our economy 
and the US and other advanced economies has widened. 
Growth accounting 
In  these  years  the  growth  rate  of  productivity  declined  and  eventually  turned  negative.  A  rapid 
increase in productivity is a prerequisite for the Italian economy’s return to a path of stable growth. The 
most recent developments – the faster-than-expected growth of output, the expansion of exports in the 
last year – are promising signs for the future but not yet decisive. 
Unquestionably, this is the main factor slowing the Italian economy, but it is not the only one. There 
are two other elements to consider: the labour force participation rate and the demographic structure. 
In the ten years 1997-2006 per capita GDP grew by 1 per cent per year. Labour productivity gains 
accounted  for  0.5  percentage  points  of  this  annual  growth  and  another  0.8  points  came  from  the 
improvement in the employment rate, i.e. the ratio of the number of people in work to the population 
aged 15 to 64, while the rise in the demographic dependency rate – the ratio of those under 15 or over 
64  to  the  working-age  population  –  subtracted  0.3  percentage  points  per  year  from  the  growth  in 
output. 
The repercussions of population ageing have already begun to be felt in our labour market. Deaths 
have outnumbered births in every year since 1993 except for 2004. The years ahead will see a further 
sharp contraction in the working-age population, which only immigration flows much larger than those 
now  projected  would  be  able  to  offset.  According  to  Istat’s  latest  demographic  projections,  which 
assume a net migratory inflow of some 150,000 per year, the Italian population will fall to 56 million in 
2050 and only just over half will be of working age. If the labour force participation rates by sex and 
age group remained unchanged, the labour force would shrink by about 25 per cent compared with 
today,  that  is,  by  more  than  6  million  people,  with  an  average  negative  impact  on  per  capita  GDP 
growth of about 0.5 percentage points per year for the next forty years. The need not only to sustain 
the growth of productivity but also to raise the employment rate is evident. 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 1
Employment in Italy has increased significantly since the second half of the 1990s, considerably more 
than could be expected on the basis of the slow growth of output. Between 1996 and 2006 the total 
number of full-time equivalent workers rose by nearly 10 per cent, or by 2.2 million. An essential boost 
to employment came from immigrants, who now account for more than 5 per cent of the employed 
resident population. 
Despite the recent progress, however, Italy’s employment rate is still one of the lowest in the advanced 
world. In 2005 it stood at 57.6 per cent, against an EU average of 63.8 per cent; only Hungary, Poland 
and Malta had lower figures (Figure 1). The gap is especially wide for women (Figure 2). 
In Italian society, then, there is no lack of unutilized human resources. A comparison of employment 
levels with the other advanced countries shows that the number of potential workers is a good deal 
higher than that of persons who on the basis of the rigorous international definitions are classified as 
“seeking employment” in the official statistics. Especially in the Mezzogiorno and among women, there 
are many who would be willing to work if they had the opportunity but have ceased looking for jobs 
because they are discouraged.1
It is up to economic policy to devise the measures that can mobilize these unutilized human resources, 
a  necessary  condition  not  only  for  raising  the  potential  rate  of  GDP  growth  but  also  for  ensuring  a 
fairer  division  of  resources.  Attention  must  focus  above  all  on  female  employment,  where  the 
disadvantage with respect to the rest of Europe is greatest. 
Female employment 
The employment rate has been rising steadily since the mid-1990s for women of all age groups except 
the youngest, where we see the effects of longer school attendance (Figure 3). Convergence with the 
European levels is nevertheless still far from accomplished. In 2005, 45.3 per cent of women aged 15 
to 64 were employed in Italy, 11 points below the EU average, higher only than Malta’s figure and far 
short of the 60 per cent target set in the Lisbon Agenda. The gap is due only in part to the different 
characteristics  of  the  population;  in  particular,  it  cannot  be  ascribed  to  differences  in  the  level  of 
schooling. The disparity remains very great between the regions of the Centre and North and those of 
the South and Islands (Figure 4). 
The failure of women to re-enter the labour market after having children is one of the factors that set 
Italy apart from many other European countries. In 2005, 41 per cent of Italian women between the 
ages of 25 and 54 with a child less than seven years old were not in the labour force, compared with 
the EU average of 35 per cent. The fact that many women do not return to work after giving birth to 
their first child may reflect the choice to concentrate on caring for their offspring, but it may also stem 
from the difficulty of reconciling work with maternity. The loss of human resources is plain. About a 
quarter of Italian women between the ages of 25 and 45 with a secondary schooling do not participate 
in  the  labour  market,  compared  with  8  per  cent  for  men.  Nor  is  this  lesser  presence  of  women 
accompanied by a greater propensity to have children: the fertility rate in Italy, together with Spain and 
Greece, is significantly below the European average. 
There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  part-time  employment  opportunities  and  adequate  childcare 
structures are effective instruments to encourage women to enter and remain in the labour market. 
Italy  is  on  a  par  with  the  most  advanced  countries  in  its  availability  of  nursery  schools  and 
kindergartens  for  children  between  three  and  six  years  old,  but  there  is  an  acute  shortage  of  day 
nurseries,  especially  in  the  South  and  Islands.  The  estimates  available  indicate  that  increasing  the 
number of places in day nurseries could have a positive effect both on women’s decision to work and 
on  their  decision  to  have  children.  In  the  absence  of  public  and  private  structures  for  very  young 
children,  home  care  provided  by  relatives  or  babysitters  becomes  essential.  An  indirect  sign  of  the 
importance of this form of assistance is given by the positive correlation between the percentage of 
immigrants in the population at province level and the propensity of better-educated women aged 25 
to 45 with pre-school children to participate in the labour market, particularly in the part-time segment. 
In general, improving the design of policies in support of dependent family members would have the 
twofold effect of raising female labour force participation and assisting the choice to have children. 
                                                      
1   See A. Brandolini, P. Cipollone and E. Viviano, “Does the ILO definition capture all unemployment?”, Banca d’Italia, Temi di 
discussione, no. 529, 2004; now in Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, vol. 4, pp. 153-79. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2007
The share of self-employment 
Gagliani saw women’s low labour force participation as a symptom of Italy’s development delay. He 
identified a second aspect of this lag in what he called the “considerable anomaly” of the Italian case: 
the  large  share  of  self-employed  workers  in  nonfarm  employment.  According  to  the  labour  force 
survey,  in  2005  self-employment  accounted  for  27  per  cent  of  total  employment,  against  an  EU 
average of 15 per cent (Figure 5). Among European countries, only Greece had a higher percentage. 
What are the causes of this disparity? Self-employment is a composite phenomenon. It includes high-
income  entrepreneurial  activities  and  professions,  but  also  marginal  activities  comparable  to  payroll 
jobs but with lower pay and less protection. Institutional regulation of the product and labour markets 
influences  self-employment  in  many  ways,  including  by  creating  barriers  that  protect  rents  and 
generating incentives to evade the rules. 
Independence and entrepreneurship are significant factors in the choice of many workers to engage in 
self-employed  activities.  Often,  they  are  the  drivers  of  the  capacity  for  innovation  that  has  enabled 
Italian  industry  to  gain  and  hold  a  role  in  important  sectors  of  world  trade.  In  many  other  cases, 
however,  self-employment  is  the  fruit  not  of  a  choice  but  of  the  impossibility  of  finding  salaried 
employment.  The  anomaly  that  Gagliani  underscored  lay  in  this:  the  multiplication  of  formally 
independent but de facto subordinate employment positions, which he traced to the excessively large 
social  contributions  wedge  and,  more  in  general,  to  “administrative  inefficiency,  the  tax  regime  and 
broadly political protective acquiescence” (2000, p. 82). In short, he viewed the hypertrophy of self-
employment as an imbalance to be corrected. In 2000 he wrote: “A reversal of trend could come from 
(a) a strong and efficient public stimulus to innovation; (b) the opening up of retailing to large-scale 
distribution; and (c) the application to self-employment of effective tax treatment similar to that found in 
Italy’s partner countries” (2000, p. 90). 
Gagliani drew this conclusion from a structural analysis of development processes and comparison of 
the Italian experience with that of the countries that had industrialized earlier. His works did not contain 
an econometric test, but we can say today that his insight was correct. A comparative analysis on time 
series for 25 countries and 6 sectors shows that in countries where there is above-average tolerance 
of  tax  evasion,  high  tax  and  social  contributions  rates  go  together  with  a  high  share  of  self-
employment.  Furthermore,  this  share  is  greater,  the  more  intrusive  is  product  market  regulation, 
especially  if  it  is  aimed  at  maintaining  a  fragmented  supply  structure,  for  example  a  traditional 
distribution  network.2  The  removal  of  administrative  barriers  and  restrictions  can  stimulate  better 
exploitation  of  economies  of  scale  and  the  growth  of  firms,  above  all  in  the  service  sector.  Recent 
studies on the structure of retailing show that these barriers reduce productivity, brake the adoption of 
the new information technologies and increase profit margins, leading to higher consumer prices.3
Conclusion 
As  Gagliani  suggested,  a  careful  analysis  of  the  composition  of  employment  and  comparison  with 
other countries can show us where Italy’s distinctive features constitute a problem and where they are 
a strength. Creating an environment in which productivity will return to rapid growth and increasing the 
employment rate are necessities imposed by our country’s demographics if we are to create wealth 
and avert inequity. They are also the path to stronger social cohesion, because holding a job not only 
implies income creation but also generates respect and people’s awareness of their role as citizens. 
Gagliani ended his essay on the relationship between growth and inequality with the following words: 
Development can only occur via extensive restructuring and relocation of activities 
and  occupations.  The  faster  the  process,  the  lower  the  proportion  of  relocations 
deferred  to  the  next  generation,  and  the  higher  the  number  of  persons  affected 
during  their  lifetime  who are  unable  to adjust.  These  persons  are  those who are 
negatively  affected  by  development  and  who  should  receive  compensation  until 
they  find  new  jobs.  Helping  them  to  satisfy  their  basic  needs  is  a  moral  duty. 
                                                      
2   See  R.  Torrini,  “Cross-country  differences  in  self-employment  rates:  the  role  of  institutions”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di 
discussione, No. 459, 2000; now in Labour Economics, 2005, vol. 12, pp. 661-83. 
3  See E. Viviano, “Entry regulations and labour market outcomes: Evidence from the Italian retail trade sector”, Banca d’Italia, 
Temi di discusione, no. 59, 2006, and F. Schivardi and E. Viviano, “Entry barriers in Italian retail trade”, Banca d’Italia, Temi 
di discussione, no. 616, 2007. 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 3
Helping  them  to  bequeath  their  old  jobs  to  descendants  may  be  harmful  to  the 
latter. (1987, pp. 329-30). 
Gagliani’s conclusion has a more general validity, not limited to the initial phases of development. The 
evolution  of  economic  systems,  changing  technological  paradigms  and  the  integration  of  world 
markets  require  radical  alterations  in  the  structure  of  production  and  employment;  they  impose 
significant costs on those who will bear the burden of these adjustments. Italy is now going through 
one such phase. It would be vain to seek to stem the changes under way, and the consequences of 
such an attempt would be paid by the future generations. The answer lies in implementing instruments 
that will compensate the “losers” in the process of economic development and enable them to find a 
place in the new productive system. The context in which Giorgio Gagliani wrote was different, but his 
conclusions remain just as valid for us today. 
334-50. 
vol. 85, nos. 3-4, pp. 267-305. 
economiche, no. 1, pp. 97-102. 
Note economiche, no. 4, pp. 18-60. 
European Economic Review, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 209-20. 
Francia, Germania, Inghilterra e Italia (1948-1974)”. Note economiche, nos. 5-6, pp. 57-70. 
Writings of Giorgio Gagliani 
1971  Disoccupazione involontaria e curva di Phillips. Milan: Giuffrè. 
1973  “Note sulle imprese multinazionali e l’occupazione”. Bancaria, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1081-89. 
1975  “Commercio internazionale e disoccupazione: note di teoria”. Ricerche economiche, no. 4, pp. 
 
1977  “Le  occupazioni  privilegiate  nella  teoria  economica”.  Rivista  internazionale  di  scienze  sociali, 
 
1977  “L’andamento  della  distribuzione  del  reddito  da  lavoro  dipendente  tra  salari  e  stipendi  in 
 
1977  “Wages,  Salaries  and  Female  Employment  in  U.K.  Manufacturing”  (with  P.  Antonello). 
 
1978  “Osservazioni  sulle  misure  delle  disuguaglianze  nei  redditi  tra  due  gruppi”.  Ricerche 
 
1980  “Andamento  e  determinanti  della  distribuzione  del  reddito  dal  lavoro  dipendente  tra  salari  e 
stipendi in alcuni paesi europei”. In Interdipendenza e integrazione nella Comunità economica 
 
europa, edited by P. Guerrieri, pp. 159-216. Turin: Einaudi. 
 
1981  “La  distribuzione  funzionale  del  reddito  nello  sviluppo:  i  problemi delle  economie  ritardatarie”. 
 
1981  “How Many Working Classes?”. American Journal of Sociology, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 259-85. 
1985  “Long-Term Changes in the Occupational Structure”. European Sociological Review, vol. 1, no. 
 
1987  “Distribuzione  personale  del  reddito,  modifiche  nella  struttura  dell’occupazione  e  sviluppo 
economico”  (with  A.  Tarsitano).  In  Strutture  economiche  e  dinamiche  dell’occupazione: 
 
l’interazione tra fattori di domanda e offerta, edited by C. Cazzola and A. Perrucci, pp. 246-61. 
 
 
Rome: La Nuova Italia Scientifica. 
1987  “Income Inequality and Economic Development”. Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 13, pp. 313-
 
1992  “Distribuzione  del  reddito  e  sviluppo:  utilità  di  un  indice  di  asimmetria  a  supporto  del  Gini”. 
 
1997  “La struttura dell’occupazione  nel  lungo  periodo. Un  confronto  internazionale”.  In  Mercato  del 
lavoro: analisi strutturali e comportamenti individuali, edited by R. Brunetta and L. Vitali, pp. 37-
 
 
86. Milan: Angeli. 
1999  “L’aritmetica  delle  modifiche  occupazionali  nello  sviluppo”.  In  Saggi  di  politica  economica  in 
onore  di  Federico  Caffè,  vol.  III,  edited  by  N.  Acocella,  G.M.  Rey  and  M.  Tiberi,  pp.  315-24. 
 
 
Milan: Angeli. 
2000  “Nota su cause e prospettive di un’anomalia italiana: l’occupazione indipendente”. Studi e note 
 
Politica economica, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 101-28. 
di economia, no. 2, pp. 75-92. 
3, pp. 183-210. 
34. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2007
2003  “Terziarizzazione precoce e sentieri di sviluppo delle regioni italiane nel secondo dopoguerra: 
 
 
un’ottica internazionale”. Rivista economica del Mezzogiorno, vol. 17, nos. 1-2, pp. 181-208. 
   5
 BIS Review 39/2007 
    6 
 BIS Review 39/2007
 BIS Review 39/2007 
 7
