Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Legal & Shariah issues in the Islamic financial services 
industry 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Third IFSB 
Seminar  on  Legal  Issues:  Surveys  on  Legal  &  Shariah  Issues  in  the  Islamic  Financial  Services 
Industry, Kuala Lumpur, 28 March 2007. 
 Professor William Blair QC, Chairman of the International Monetary Law Committee of the 
International Law Association (MOCOMILA), 
Professor Rifaat Ahmed Abdel Karim, Secretary General, Islamic Financial Services Board, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  join  Professor  Rifaat  in  welcoming  you  to  this  3rd  IFSB  Seminar  on  Legal  Issues.  I 
would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  a  special  welcome  to  the  many  of  you  who  have 
travelled long distances to join us for this important event.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A strong legal and Shariah framework as a pillar to Islamic finance 
The need to continually strengthen the legal framework for the financial services industry is imperative 
given  the  powerful  forces  of  change  continually  transforming  the  functioning  of  the  global  economy 
and the international financial system. A legal framework which is aligned with market developments 
lends  certainty  and  predictability  to  financial  transactions  and  innovative  products  and  instils  public 
confidence in the financial system. 
The legal and Shariah framework is a vital pillar in the sustainable development of Islamic finance. It 
provides  the  legislative  framework  that  unambiguously  defines  the  conduct  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions. It also gives due protection to the consumers of Islamic finance, ensures the enforceability 
of Islamic financial contracts and provides an effective mechanism for legal redress. 
The legal framework for Islamic finance also needs to address any specific elements that could result 
in a comparative disadvantage to the industry. More specifically, in a world in which finance has long 
been defined by conventional practices and laws, the features that are unique to the requirements of 
Islamic finance need to be taken into account to ensure neutrality of treatment. 
In  Malaysia,  the  rapid  evolution  of  Islamic  finance  has  been  supported  by  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive legal infrastructure. A series of legislation since 1983 has provided the foundation for a 
regulatory regime for Islamic banks, takaful operators, the Shariah Council for Islamic finance, Islamic 
finance windows in conventional banks and the various forms of bond and money market instruments. 
In  addition,  the  corporate,  securities  and  insolvency  laws  and  guidelines  are  compatible  with  the 
Shariah. These legislation have been reinforced by the establishment of a dedicated High Court bench 
to  provide  a  comprehensive  adjudicative  system  to  deal  with  disputes  involving  Islamic  finance.  In 
addition,  the  new  Islamic  Finance  Arbitration  Rules  of  the  Kuala  Lumpur  Regional  Centre  for 
Arbitration  provides  a  customised  mechanism  for  the  resolution  of  disputes  in  the  Islamic  financial 
services sector.  
The development of an efficient and vibrant Islamic financial market 
Equally important to the development of Islamic finance is not only the financial intermediaries but also 
the Islamic financial markets. The demand for Islamic financial products and instruments is expanding 
at increasingly significant rates in predominantly Muslim countries in the Middle East and Asia as well 
as in the non-Muslim economies in the West. The rapid growth of the Islamic financial markets has 
seen  the  development  of  a  wide  range  of  products  including  money,  debt  and  capital  market 
instruments. Such markets are important for the effective management of investment portfolios and for 
the diversification of risks.  
BIS Review 35/2007 
 1
Today, the global demand for Islamic capital market products is served by the existence of the Dow 
Jones  Islamic  Index  whose  market  capitalisation  now  exceeds  USD  10  trillion.  About  350  Shariah-
compliant funds have already been established across the globe.  
In Malaysia, the sukuk market has been a leading segment of growth in the domestic bond market 
accounting for half of our domestic bond market and two thirds of the total global outstanding sukuk. A 
wide  range  of  new  Islamic  financial  instruments  has  been  developed  including  the  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  Sukuk  Ijarah,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  Monetary  Notes,  the  Islamic  residential  mortgage-
backed securities and most recently the Commodity Murabahah Programme for managing short-term 
liquidity in the inter-bank money market. 
While Islamic finance practitioners and scholars continue to draw from the source of fiqh muamalat to 
create  new  and  innovative  instruments,  the  legal  framework  however,  needs  to  be  further 
strengthened to ensure continued acceptance and utility of the financial instruments. In Malaysia, the 
progress in this area has been facilitated by the common law which forms the foundation of the legal 
system. More specifically, the concept of "trust" under the common law has facilitated the issuance of 
Islamic securities such as sukuk and Islamic Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT). Since "trust" as an 
inherent notion embedded in the common law system is not generally found in the jurisprudence of 
civil law, some civil law countries have enacted specific legislation to provide for the introduction of 
trust so as to align their legal systems with the requirements of Islamic finance. 
The challenges brought by the integration of Islamic finance with the international financial 
system 
While  legal  issues  within  a  domestic  financial  system  can  be  resolved  by  the  home  regulators  and 
Shariah authorities, the integration of Islamic finance with the international financial system brings with 
it many challenges. There is a need for mutual recognition of financial standards and products across 
jurisdictions. The progressive harmonisation of Shariah, in this respect, needs to be viewed as a driver 
towards greater international financial integration. 
Such  a  convergence  and  harmonisation  can  only  happen  with  greater  engagement  among  the 
regulators,  practitioners  and  scholars  in  Islamic  finance  in  the  international  community.  The  Annual 
International Shariah Scholars' Dialogue that has been taking place since 2005 is aimed at achieving 
this  objective.  This  Dialogue  has  served  to  promote  interactions  between  Shariah  scholars  from 
around the world contributing towards greater understanding and international convergence. 
In Malaysia, the efforts to enhance the international dimension of our Islamic financial system have 
been  intensified  in  the  more  recent  period  to  facilitate  greater  international  trade  and  cross-border 
investment  flows.  The  new  initiatives  that  have  been  announced  allow  the  establishment  of  new 
International Islamic financial institutions that will be permitted to offer the full range of Islamic financial 
services to residents and non-residents in international currencies. These initiatives also aim to serve 
as  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  the  domestic  financial  markets  as  well  as  the  development  of 
talent and knowledge in Islamic finance. Collaboration with other emerging regional centres in Islamic 
finance  will  be  an  important  part  of  this  process  that  will  contribute  towards  greater  international 
financial integration. 
The  establishment  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  in  2002  represents  a  major  structural 
enhancement in building the international financial architecture for Islamic finance. The achievements 
thus far by the Islamic Financial Services Board in developing the prudential standards that can be 
universally  applied  have  been  very  encouraging.  The  efforts  represent  a  testimony  of  the  collective 
capacity for greater international collaboration which has contributed towards strengthening the fabric 
of Islamic finance. 
While the legal framework and rules are constantly being reviewed to ensure that they remain relevant 
for  the  new  areas  of  financial  activity,  it  should  not  only  be  undertaken  for  the  domestic  Islamic 
financial system but also in the context of the international financial system. 
Conclusion 
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Islamic Financial Services Board for 
commissioning the "Surveys on Legal and Shariah Issues in the Islamic Financial Services Industry". 
The  survey  findings  represent  an  important  contribution  towards  augmenting  the  literature  on  the 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2007
existing  legal  and  Shariah  framework  across  different  jurisdictions.  It  serves  as  a  useful  source  of 
reference  for  countries  that  are  interested  in  establishing  a  legal  and  Shariah  framework  for  their 
Islamic  financial  system.  Deliberation  on  the  survey  results  and  the  exchange  of  views  and 
experiences  among  lawyers,  Shariah  scholars  and  Islamic  finance  practitioners  will  be  important  in 
contributing to increasing the efficiency in Islamic finance and facilitating its robustness as an integral 
component in the global financial system.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 35/2007 
 3
