Lim Hng Kiang: Brief review of recent financial and economic developments in 
Singapore 
Congratulatory  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  Deutsche  Bank's  35th  Anniversary,  Singapore, 
13 Feb 2007. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good Evening, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  with  you  this  evening  to  celebrate  Deutsche  Bank's  35th  Anniversary  in 
Singapore. I am very glad to note as well that today's celebrations is also marked by Deutsche Bank's 
move  to  One  Raffles Quay,  the  newest  address  in our  financial district.  It  is  testimony  of Deutsche 
Bank's continued commitment to Singapore.  
Set  up  in  1972,  we  have  seen  Deutsche  Bank  Singapore  grow  in  size  over  the  years.  It  has  also 
witnessed  and  participated  in  the  economic  transformation  of  Singapore,  from  a  trading  hub  in  the 
1970s,  to  a  major  metropolis  today.  We  are  indeed  heartened  that,  35  years  on  Deutsche  Bank 
continues to see opportunities to deepen its roots here.  
Just last week, Deutsche Bank announced its group performance for 2006 and I must congratulate Dr 
Ackermann and your team, for registering yet another record year for Deutsche Bank.  
Today Deutsche Bank is represented in many of Asia's financial markets. We are indeed pleased that 
Deutsche Bank had made Singapore the hub for your regional operations. We noted that some 1600 
people are involved in a broad scope of activities including trading, treasury and investment banking 
here. To accommodate this, I understand that Deutsche Bank's trading floor in this building is one of 
the largest in Singapore. 
Singapore's  economic  growth  for  2006  continues  to  stay  strong  at  7.7%,  with  almost  170,000  jobs 
created last year. Our market indices have breached the 3,000 point mark and our GDP per capita has 
exceeded US$30,000. We are also witnessing the strong growth of Asia propelled primarily by the two 
economic  powerhouses  of  India  and  China.  The  economies  in  South  East  Asian  have  seen  a 
resurgence with countries like Vietnam rushing forth and is one of the fastest growing economies in 
the region. 
Trade and investments among Asian countries, and between regions including the Middle East and 
Asia, have increased substantially. We have also seen substantial wealth creation in the Middle East 
and  Asia.  Asia  is  estimated  to  have  about  2.4  million  High  Net  Worth  Individuals  with  assets  over 
US$7.6 trillion and comprise almost 20% of global High New Worth wealth. This is projected to grow 
annually  by  about  6.5%  to  about  US$10.5  trillion  by  2010.  All  these  represent  substantial  financial 
sector opportunities for Deutsche Bank in Asia, including trade & infrastructure financing and wealth 
management.  
Singapore, being at the heart of Asia, provides global financial institutions a unique location to harness 
the  growth  opportunities  from  this  region.  Singapore  offers  a  stable  and  trusted  environment  for 
investments and businesses in the region. Companies in Singapore are supported by a robust network 
of infrastructure as well as an educated workforce, and coupled with open and consistent Government 
policies. We strive to keep our markets pro-business and to keep operating costs competitive.  
Being cost-competitive is not sufficient by itself. We need to make sure that Singapore continues to 
stay  at  the  confluence  of  business  opportunities.  To  facilitate  business  reach  into  major  markets, 
Singapore has signed a series of Free Trade Agreements with many of our trading partners include 
the US, India, Japan, Korea, Vietnam as well as beginning free trade discussions with China and the 
Gulf  countries.  I  am  certain  these  strong  ties  that  Singapore  has  built  can  only  facilitate  Deutsche 
Bank's business expansions in this part of the world. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 1
Conclusion 
On  that  note,  let  me  again  extend  my  heartiest  congratulations  to  Deutsche  Bank  on  its  35th 
Anniversary in Singapore. We appreciate your commitment to Singapore and hope that Singapore will 
continue to play an important role in your growth in Asia and the world.  
Thank you. 
 2 
 BIS Review 15/2007
