European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 July 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since  our  previous  meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to 
increase interest rates in June. It has also confirmed that the medium-term outlook for price 
stability remains subject to upside risks. Given the positive economic environment in the euro 
area, our monetary policy is still on the accommodative side, with overall financing conditions 
favourable, money and credit growth vigorous, and liquidity in the euro area ample. Looking 
ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term 
remains warranted. The Governing Council will continue to monitor closely all developments 
to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise and medium to 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability. Such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make 
an ongoing contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation in 
the euro area. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
The latest data and survey releases have remained broadly positive, supporting the view that 
economic activity in the euro area in the second quarter of 2007 continued to expand at solid 
rates in line with our baseline scenario.  
Looking  ahead,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity  remains  favourable.  The 
conditions are in place for the euro area economy to continue to grow at a sustained rate. As 
regards  the  external  environment,  global  economic  growth  has  become  more  balanced 
across  regions  and,  while  moderating  somewhat,  remains  robust.  External  conditions  thus 
continue to provide support for euro area exports. Domestic demand in the euro area is also 
expected  to  maintain  its  relatively  strong  momentum.  Investment  should  remain  dynamic, 
benefiting  from  overall  financing  conditions  which  remain  favourable,  accumulated  and 
ongoing strong corporate earnings, balance sheet restructuring as well as business efficiency 
gains achieved over an extended period. Meanwhile, consumption should be supported by 
developments in real disposable income, as labour market conditions continue to improve.  
The risks surrounding this favourable outlook for economic growth are broadly balanced over 
the  shorter  term.  At  medium  to  longer  horizons,  the  balance  of  risks  remains  on  the 
downside,  owing  mainly  to  external  factors.  These  relate  in  particular  to  fears  of  a  rise  in 
protectionist  pressures,  the  possibility  of  further  increases  in  oil  prices,  concerns  about 
possible disorderly developments owing to global imbalances and potential shifts in financial 
market sentiment.  
As  regards  price  developments,  as  reflected  in  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  annual  HICP 
inflation  was  1.9%  in  June  2007,  unchanged  from  previous  months.  Looking  ahead,  the 
short-term profile of annual inflation rates continues to be determined largely by current and 
past energy price developments, as last year’s volatility in energy prices leads to significant 
base effects. On the basis of the current level of oil prices and oil price futures, which show 
an  upward  slope,  annual  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  fall  only  slightly  in  the  months  ahead 
before rising again significantly towards the end of the year. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
At the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, risks to the outlook for price stability remain on 
the  upside.  These  risks  relate  notably  to  the  domestic  side.  In  particular,  as  capacity 
utilisation  in  the  euro  area  economy  is  high  and  labour  markets  continue  to  improve, 
constraints  are  emerging  which  could  lead  in  particular  to  stronger  than  expected  wage 
developments.  In  addition,  pricing  power  in  market  segments  with  low  competition  may 
increase in such an environment. Such developments would pose significant upward risks to 
price  stability.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned  meet  their  responsibilities. 
Wage agreements in particular should be sufficiently differentiated to take into account price 
competitiveness  positions,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many  economies  and 
sector-specific productivity developments. The Governing Council stresses the importance of 
avoiding wage developments that would eventually lead to inflationary pressures and harm 
the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. In addition, upside risks to price stability arise 
from increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those anticipated thus far, 
and  the  potentially  procyclical  stance  of  fiscal  policy  in  some  countries.  Finally,  on  the 
external side, upside risks stem from the possibility of further unexpected oil price rises.   
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer horizons. The underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong, in a context of 
already  ample  liquidity.  The  ongoing  strength  of  monetary  expansion  is  reflected  in  the 
continued rapid growth of M3, which increased at an annual rate of 10.7% in May, as well as 
the still high level of credit growth. The strong rate of monetary and credit expansion reflects, 
in part, favourable financing conditions and solid economic growth.  
When identifying and assessing the policy-relevant underlying trends in monetary and credit 
expansion, it is important to look through shorter-term volatility and the effects of changes in 
the slope of the yield curve and external factors that are likely to prove temporary. Taking this 
perspective,  there  are  several  indications  that  higher  short-term  interest  rates  are  now 
influencing monetary dynamics, although they have not, as yet, significantly dampened the 
overall  strength  of  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion.  For  example, 
increases in short-term rates have contributed to a more moderate expansion of the narrow 
aggregate,  M1,  in  recent  quarters.  Equally,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private 
sector has shown some signs of stabilising since mid-2006, albeit at double-digit levels. The 
stabilisation of loan growth is now becoming more broad-based, and is apparent in borrowing 
by both non-financial corporations and households. In the latter case, the stabilisation of loan 
growth also reflects some moderation in house price dynamics, although house price growth 
nonetheless remains at high levels on average in the euro area. 
Given  the  continued  vigour  of  money  and  credit  expansion,  there  are  clear  indications  of 
upside risks to price stability at medium to longer-term horizons. Following several years of 
robust  monetary  growth,  the  liquidity  situation  in  the  euro  area  remains  ample.  In  this 
environment, monetary developments continue to require very careful monitoring, particularly 
against the background of the expansion in economic activity and still strong property market 
developments. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look beyond any short-term volatility in 
inflation  rates.  The  relevant  horizon  for  monetary  policy  is  the  medium  term.  Risks  to  the 
medium-term  outlook  for  price  stability  remain  on  the  upside,  relating  in  particular  to  the 
domestic  side.  As  capacity  utilisation  is  high  and  labour  markets  continue  to  improve, 
constraints are emerging which could lead in particular to stronger than expected wage and 
profit  margin  developments.  Given  the  vigorous  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  an 
environment  of  already  ample  liquidity,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic 
analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price 
stability  prevail  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will 
monitor  closely  all  developments  in  order  to  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium term do not materialise and medium to longer-term inflation expectations in the euro 
area remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. Looking ahead, acting in 
a firm and timely manner to ensure price stability in the medium term remains warranted. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2007
As regards fiscal policy, the Governing Council notes with concern the pressures emerging 
in a number of countries to relax previous fiscal consolidation targets. In the current overall 
benign  economic  environment,  it  is  imperative  that  all  governments  comply  with  the 
provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact on fiscal consolidation in economic “good times” 
and that all the countries concerned honour the commitments they made at the Eurogroup 
meeting in Berlin on 20 April 2007. As agreed in Berlin, taking advantage of the favourable 
cyclical  conditions  would  enable  most  euro  area  countries  to  achieve  their  medium-term 
objectives in 2008 or 2009, and all of them should aim for 2010 at the latest. These pledges 
should  be  reflected  in  the  2008  budget  plans  so  as  to  avoid  repeating  governments’  past 
failure to adjust fiscal balances in economic “good times”. At the same time, the Governing 
Council welcomes the emphasis placed by the ECOFIN Council on measures to improve the 
quality and efficiency of public finances. 
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  fully  supports  all  measures  that 
improve  the  functioning  of  product,  labour  and  financial  markets.  In  the  context  of  the 
Integrated  Guidelines  for  Growth  and  Jobs,  the  EU  Member  States  noted  that  a  well-
functioning  Internal  Market  remains  at  the  heart  of  the  Lisbon  agenda  and  that  its  four 
freedoms will reinforce the European Union’s competitiveness. The completion of the Single 
Market  is  therefore  a  priority  for  Member  States,  in  particular  as  regards  further  financial 
market  integration,  the  pursuit  of  effective  competition  in  the  energy  market  and  the 
implementation of the Services Directive. Increased market competition and a reduction of 
cross-border  barriers  are  beneficial  for  consumers  since  they  lead  to  lower  prices  and  a 
greater choice of products. For firms, they lead to higher efficiency, greater dynamism and an 
enhanced  capacity  to  cope  with  economic  shocks  and  to  face  the  challenges  and 
opportunities  posed  by  globalisation.  Following  the  principle  of  “an  open  market  economy 
with  free  competition”  is  pivotal  to  fostering  long-term  economic  growth  and  job  creation, 
increasing  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  to  economic  shocks  and  facilitating  the 
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  was  confirmed  at  the  last  European 
Council meeting, when the EU leaders agreed to annex a new protocol to the Treaties, in the 
context  of  the  Intergovernmental  Conference.  This  protocol  underlines  the  fact  that  an 
Internal Market which includes a system ensuring that competition is not distorted is indeed 
indispensable for the good functioning of the EU economies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 3
