Y V Reddy: Glimpses of the Indian economy and its financial sector 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Central Bank of the Russian 
Federation, Moscow, 2 July 2007. 
 Chairman Sergey M. Ignatiev and distinguished central bankers of the Bank of Russia, 
I am grateful to Chairman Ignatiev for inviting me to visit your bank and interact with you for mutual 
benefit.  
I have the pleasure of meeting my friend Chairman Ignatiev, almost once a month, in meetings of BIS 
or  G20  or  IMF  or  other  international  seminars.  His  address  in  Buenos  Aires  in  early  June  on  the 
current state of Russian economy was highly appreciated because he gave a glimpse of not only the 
achievements of Russian economy in recent years but also a hint of admirable future for the Russian 
economy.  
We, in India, always had a very special bond with Russia, in technology, trade, culture and diplomacy. 
These are being further strengthened in recent years in terms of cooperation both bilaterally and multi-
laterally.  
At my persistent request, Chairman Ignatiev came to India in January and he delivered an address in 
the Reserve Bank of India. We had a scintillating discussion session where Chairman Ignatiev gave a 
frank and a highly professional response to the searching questions. We hope to get permission of 
Chairman to publish the script of the speech in English in India.  
In my address today, I intend giving brief introduction to Reserve Bank of India, followed by glimpses 
of  the  Indian  economy.  I  will  give  a  more  detailed  account  of  reforms  in  India’s  financial  sector,  in 
particular, the banking sector, and financial markets.  
Introduction to the RBI 
The RBI  was  established under  the Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  on  April 1,  1935 as a  private 
shareholders' bank but since its nationalisation in 1949, is fully owned by the Government of India. 
The Preamble of the Reserve Bank describes the basic functions as “to regulate the issue of Bank 
notes  and  keeping  of  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally,  to 
operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage”. Thus, unlike the current trend 
in many countries, there is no explicit mandate for price-stability or formal inflation targeting, but the 
mandate  appears  to  be  similar  to  that  of  the  Federal  Reserve  of  the  USA.  The  twin  objectives  of 
monetary  policy  in  India  have  evolved  over  the  years  as  those  of  maintaining  price  stability  and 
ensuring adequate flow of credit to facilitate the growth process. The relative emphasis between the 
twin  objectives  is  modulated  as  per  the  prevailing  circumstances  and  is  articulated  in  the  policy 
statements  by  the  Reserve  Bank  from time  to  time.  Consideration  of  macro-economic and  financial 
stability is also subsumed in the mandate. The Reserve Bank is also entrusted with the management 
of  foreign  exchange  reserves  (which  include  gold  holding  also),  which  are  reflected  in  its  balance 
sheet.  
While the Reserve Bank is essentially a monetary authority, its founding statute mandates it to be the 
manager of market borrowing of the Government of India and banker to the Government.  
The  function  of  regulating  and  supervising  of  banks  has  been  assigned  to  the  Reserve  Bank  by  a 
separate  legislation  enacted  in  1949,  while  the  regulation  of  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies 
(NBFCs)  has  been  entrusted  to  it  through  an  amendment  to  the  RBI  Act  recently.  The  powers  for 
regulation of money markets, government securities market, forex market and gold are derived from 
the  RBI  Act  and  the  regulation  explicitly  entrusted  through  government  notifications  under  the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act. 
The regulation of current and capital account transactions of the external sector was assigned to the 
Reserve Bank under another statute in 1999, replacing an earlier one in 1973.  
In addition to the issuance of currency, the Reserve Bank is also entrusted with the responsibilities 
relating to distribution of coins.  
BIS Review 76/2007 
 1
The Reserve Bank has been assigned some responsibilities in several statutory bodies such as public 
sector banks, development finance institutions governing Agriculture, Housing and Deposit Insurance, 
etc.  
The Reserve Bank's affairs are governed by a Central Board of Directors, consisting of fourteen non-
executive, independent directors nominated by the Government, in addition to the Governor and up to 
four  Deputy  Governors.  Besides,  one  Government  official  is  also  nominated  on  the  Board  who 
participates in the Board meetings but cannot vote.  
The Reserve  Bank  has  19  regional  offices  and 4 sub-offices,  mostly  in state  capitals. The  Reserve 
Bank is the debt-manager and banker to State governments (i.e., the provinces constituting the Indian 
federation).  
The Reserve Bank renders advice to the Central and the State Governments, particularly in regard to 
financial sector reforms. 
In brief, the Reserve Bank has been assigned several functions, in addition to monetary management. 
In  performing  each  of  the  functions,  the  statute  as  well  as  the  functional  content,  requires  that  the 
Reserve Bank exercise varying degrees of autonomy and coordination vis-à-vis the government. The 
three over-arching features governing the relations with the Government are autonomy in operations; 
harmony in policies; and coordination in structural transformations.  
Performance of the Indian economy: self accelerating growth with stability 
Sometimes India is described as a re-emerging economy. Since in the 18th century, this geographical 
area had accounted for about a quarter of world output – but that is part of history. The annual growth 
rate of GDP in the geographical area of India in the first half of 20th century is estimated to be around 
an average of 0.9 per cent per annum and per capita income at an average rate of 0.1 per cent per 
annum. The economy of independent India which is of contemporary interest had to be built upon the 
overhang  issues  of  second  World  War,  the  trauma  of  partition,  the  integration  of  princely  states 
numbering  over  500  and  a  low  level  of  GDP.  From  an  annual  average  growth  rate  of  3.5  per  cent 
during 1950 to 1980, the growth rate of the Indian economy accelerated to around 6.0 per cent in the 
1980s and 1990s. In the last four years (2003-04 to 2006-07), the Indian economy grew by 8.6 per 
cent.  In  2005-06  and  2006-07,  it  had  grown  at  a  higher  rate  of  9.0  and  9.4  per  cent,  respectively. 
There is, thus, tangible evidence of self-accelerating growth. 
An important characteristic of the high growth phase of over a quarter of century is resilience to shocks 
and  considerable  amount  of  stability.  We  have  witnessed  one  serious  balance  of  payments  crisis 
triggered  largely  by  the  Gulf  war  in  the  early  1990s.  Credible  macroeconomic  structural  and 
stabilization programme was undertaken in the wake of the crisis. The Indian economy in later years, 
could successfully avoid any adverse contagion impact of shocks from the East Asian crisis, sanction 
like  situation  in  post-Pokhran  scenario,  and  border  conflict  during  May-June  1999.  Seen  in  this 
context,  this  robust  macroeconomic  performance,  in  the  face  of  recent  oil  as  well  as  food  shocks, 
demonstrates the vibrance and resilience of the Indian economy.  
The  average  saving rate  in  India was 10  per  cent  in  the  1950s,  which  rose  to  17.5  per cent  in  the 
1970s and further to 23.4 per cent in the 1990s. The saving rate was 32.4 per cent in 2005-06. The 
strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent increase in 
gross domestic investment rates from 22.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 33.8 per cent in 2005-06. It 
may also be noted that over 95 per cent of investment in the country during this period was financed 
by the domestic savings. 
On the price stability front, India's performance has been fairly good. Since independence, the inflation 
rate, in terms of the wholesale price index (WPI), on an average basis, was above 15 per cent in only 
five out of fifty years. In thirty-six out of fifty years, inflation was in single digit and on most occasions 
high inflation was due to shocks – food or oil. The tolerance level to inflation has been low, relative to 
many developing countries, especially on account of the democratic pressures in the country.  
The inflation rate accelerated steadily from an annual average of 1.7 per cent during the 1950s to 6.4 
percent during the 1960s and further to 9.0 per cent in the 1970s before easing marginally to 8.0 per 
cent in the 1980s. However, the inflation rate declined from an average of 11.0 per cent during 1990-
95 to 5.3 per cent during the second half of the 1990s (1995-2000) and further to 4.9 per cent during 
2003-07.  
2 
 BIS Review 76/2007
More  recently  during  2006-07,  WPI  based  inflation  rate  increased  from  4.1  per  cent  at  the  end  of 
March 2006 to an intra-year peak of 6.7 per cent at end-January 2007 and remained firm in the range 
of  6.1-6.6  per  cent  in  the  succeeding  weeks  before  moderating  to  5.9  per  cent  by  the  end  of  the 
financial year (i.e., as on March 31, 2007). Since then, the inflation has further moderated and as on 
June 16, 2007, the WPI inflation rate was 4.0 per cent.  
In recent period, there has been considerable improvement in the fiscal position. The average gross 
fiscal deficit of the central government as per cent to GDP during the decade of 1980s was 6.8 per 
cent as against 3.8 per cent in the 1970s. The Government of India is pursuing the path of rule-based 
fiscal consolidation from the year 2004-05 under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
Act,  2003  whereunder  time-specific  targets  have  been  mandated.  The  underlying  purpose  of  the 
targets is to reduce the ratio of gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to gross domestic product (GDP) to three per 
cent by 2008-09. Furthermore, the revenue deficit (RD) to GDP ratio has been targeted to touch 0.0 
per cent by 2008-09 so that borrowed resources can be used to meet only capital expenditures. The 
progress  of  targeted  fiscal  consolidation  has  been  satisfactory  so  far  and  GFD/GDP  and  RD/GDP 
ratios are budgeted to reduce to 3.3 per cent and 1.5 per cent, respectively, in 2007-08. The objective 
is to meet the targets under the Fiscal Responsibility Act by 2008-09.  
The average current account deficit since 1950-51 has been around one per cent of the GDP. During 
this  period,  except  for  11  years  when  there  was  marginal  surplus  in  the  current  account,  we  had 
modest deficit during the rest of the years. In the aftermath of the balance of payment crisis in the 
early 1990s, several stabilisation and structural reform measures were undertaken.  
External  sector  indicators  show  considerable  level  of  sustainability  attained  in  the  last  decade. 
Sustained  growth  in  export  of  services  and  remittances  has  continued  to  provide  buoyancy  to  the 
surplus in the invisible account, which has enabled financing a large part of trade deficit. The capital 
flows  have  been  buoyant  leading  to  sustained  rise  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  merchandise 
trade deficit is currently close to 7.0 per cent of GDP; however, the current account deficit is under 1.5 
per cent of GDP, mainly due to receipts from services and the steady support from remittances from 
Indians working abroad  
Prospects for the Indian economy 
In terms of immediate prospects, overall, we expect the real GDP growth in 2007-08 to be around 8.5 
per cent, assuming no further escalation in international crude prices and barring domestic or external 
shocks. For the year 2007-08, the Reserve Bank's policy endeavour would be to contain inflation close 
to  5.0  per  cent.  In  the  medium  term,  in  recognition  of  India’s  evolving  integration  with  the  global 
economy and societal preferences, the resolve, going forward, is to condition policy and expectations 
for inflation in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent.  
The  acceleration  of  growth  in  the  real  sector  has  been  reflected  in  the  upward  shift  in  the  growth 
trajectory  of  credit  extended  by  commercial  banks,  which  in  the  past  three  years  has  been 
unprecedented in the history of the Indian economy. There has been some sign of deceleration in the 
recent period.  
In consonance with the rising capital flows, the reserve money growth has been higher in the recent 
period averaging 17.8 per cent during 2003-07. The rate of growth of reserve money was 23.0 per 
cent as on June 22, 2007 on year on year basis (18.2 per cent a year ago).  
Similarly, the high credit growth in the recent period has led the money supply growth to remain high 
averaging 16.8 per cent during 2003-07. During 2006-07, the money supply grew by 21.3 per cent. As 
on June 8, 2007, the growth in money supply on year on year basis was 21.0 per cent (18.5 per cent a 
year ago).  
Taking into account the high expansion of money supply worldwide, and given the monetary overhang 
of 2005-07, it is important to contain monetary expansion in 2007-08 at around 17.0-17.5 per cent, in 
consonance with the outlook on growth and inflation. The Annual Policy Statement for the year 2007-
08  also  placed  aggregate  deposits  growth  in  2007-08  at  around  Rs.4,900  billion  and  a  graduated 
deceleration of non-food credit to 24.0-25.0 per cent in 2007-08.  
For  the  medium  term,  the  Approach  Paper  for  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  (2007-08  to  2011-12) 
targets  an  average  annual  growth  of  9  per  cent  relative  to  8  per  cent  targeted  by  the  Tenth  Plan 
(2002-03 to 2006-07). This aspiration for growth would require significant acceleration in investment 
from 27.8 per cent in the Tenth Five Year Plan to 35.1 per cent in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
BIS Review 76/2007 
 3
Realising that the growth benefits need to trickle down further, the Eleventh Five-Year Plan is likely to 
provide an opportunity to restructure policies to achieve a new vision based on faster, more broad-
based and inclusive growth. Doubling of agricultural GDP growth to around 4 per cent is particularly 
important in this context. The Approach Paper suggests that this must be combined with policies to 
promote rapid growth in non-agricultural employment so as to create 70 million job opportunities in the 
11th Plan.  
Very recently on May 29, 2007, our Honourable Prime Minister announced a major scheme to double 
the growth rate of agriculture to 4.0 per cent over the 11th Plan period. The Government would provide 
rupees  250  billion  for new  farm  initiatives  launched by  States.  A time-bound Food  Security  Mission 
was also announced to counter rising prices of food products and to ensure visible changes in their 
availability over three years.  
If  these  objectives  are  achieved,  the  percentage  of  people  in  poverty  could  be  reduced  by  10 
percentage  points  by  the  end  of  the  Plan  period.  The  policy  reforms  and  monitorable  targets  as 
indicated in the Approach Paper, particularly on education, health, women and children, infrastructure, 
when  attained,  are  expected  to  benefit  a  larger  chunk  of  population  immensely.  This  will  help  in 
making the Indian growth process more inclusive and durable.  
Financial sector 
The Indian financial system of the pre-reform period, before 1991, essentially catered to the needs of 
planned  development  in  a  mixed-economy  framework,  where  the  Government  sector  had  a 
predominant role in economic activity. Interest rates on Government securities were artificially pegged 
at low levels, which were unrelated to the market conditions. The system of administered interest rates 
was characterised by detailed prescriptions on the lending and the deposit side, leading to multiplicity 
and complexity of interest rates. As would be expected, the environment in the financial sector in those 
years was characterised by segmented and underdeveloped financial markets coupled with paucity of 
financial instruments. Consequently, by the end of the eighties, directed and concessional availability 
of  bank credit  to  certain sectors  adversely  affected  the  viability  and  profitability  of  banks.  Thus,  the 
transactions between the de facto joint balance sheet of the Government, the Reserve Bank and the 
commercial  banks  were  governed  by  fiscal  priorities  rather  than  sound  principles  of  financial 
management and commercial viability. It was then recognised that this approach, which, conceptually, 
sought to enhance efficiency through a co-ordinated approach, actually led to loss of transparency, 
accountability and incentive to seek efficiency.  
Banking 
The banking system in India has undergone significant changes during last 16 years. There have been 
new banks, new instruments, new windows, new opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. 
While  deregulation  has  opened  up  new  vistas  for  banks  to  augment  incomes,  it  has  also  entailed 
greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks.  India  adopted  prudential  measures  aimed  at 
imparting  strength  to  the  banking  system  and  ensuring  its  safety  and  soundness,  through  greater 
transparency, accountability and public credibility. The capital adequacy ratio has increased to 12.4 
per  cent  for  scheduled  commercial  banks  as  at  end  March  2006,  which  is  much  above  the 
international  norm.  Commercial  banks’  net  profits  remained  at  0.9  per  cent  of  total  assets  during 
2004-05 and 2005-06, up from 0.16 per cent in 1995-96. The ratio of NPLs to total loans of scheduled 
commercial banks, which was as high as 15.7 per cent at end-March 1997, declined steadily to 3.3 per 
cent  by  end-March  2006.  The  net  non-performing  assets  declined  to  1.2  per  cent  of  net  advances 
during 2005-06 from 2.0 per cent in 2004-05. According to the preliminary financial results available for 
most of the banks for the year 2006-07, the financial soundness has improved further. 
Our  banking  sector  reform  has  been  unique  in  the  world  in  that  it  combines  a  comprehensive 
reorientation of competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. 
Indeed our banking reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the 
overhang problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign private 
sectors to compete and expand. There has been no banking crisis in India.  
The  Government  took  steps  to  reduce  its  ownership  in  nationalised  banks  and  inducted  private 
ownership but without altering their public sector character. The underlying rationale of this approach 
is  to  assure  that  the  salutary  features  of  public  sector  banking  were  not  lost  in  the  transformation 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2007
process. On account of healthy market value of the banks’ shares, the capital infusion into the banks 
by the Government has turned out to be profitable for the Government.  
An independent Banking Codes and Standards Board of India was set up on the model of the UK in 
order to ensure that comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of customers is evolved and 
adhered to. With a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, since November 2005, all banks need 
to make available a basic banking ‘no frills’ account either with ‘nil’ or very low minimum balances as 
well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of population. Banks were 
urged to review their existing practices to align them with the objective of ‘financial inclusion’. 
There is a scheme of Ombudsman, located in fifteen cities to provide redressal to grievances of the 
bank  customers.  Customer-service  is  accorded  high  priority  in  the  supervisory  evaluation  and 
according regulatory comfort to the Reserve Bank. 
With  a  view  to  strengthening  the  supervisory  framework  within  the  Reserve  Bank,  a  Board  for 
Financial  Supervision  (BFS)  was  constituted  in  1994,  comprising  select  members  of  the  Reserve 
Bank’s  Central  Board  with  a  variety  of  professional  expertise  to  exercise  'undivided  attention  to 
supervision'  and  ensure  an  integrated  approach  to  supervision  of  commercial  banks  and  financial 
institutions.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  instituted  Off-site  Monitoring  and  Surveillance  System 
(OSMOS) for banks in 1995, which provides for Early Warning System as also a trigger for on-site 
inspections of vulnerable institutions.  
Capital adequacy: three-track approach 
In  India,  we  have  84  commercial  banks,  which  account  for  about  81  per  cent  (total  assets)  of  the 
financial sector at end-March 2006; over 3000 cooperative banks, which account for 11 per cent; and 
133 Regional Rural Banks, which account for 3 per cent. Taking into account the size, complexity of 
operations, relevance to the financial sector, need to ensure greater financial inclusion and the need 
for  having  an  efficient  delivery  mechanism,  the  capital  adequacy  norms  applicable  to  these  entities 
have been maintained at varying levels of stringency. One might say that we are adopting a three-
track approach with regard to capital adequacy rules. Given the differential risk appetite across banks 
and their business philosophies, it is likely that banks would ‘self select’ their own approach, which in 
turn, is likely to engender a stabilising influence on the system as a whole. 
On the first track, the commercial banks are required to maintain capital for both credit and market 
risks as per Basel I framework; the cooperative banks, on the second track, are required to maintain 
capital for credit risk as per Basel I framework and through surrogates for market risk; the Regional 
Rural Banks, on the third track, have a minimum capital requirement which is, however, not on par 
with the Basel I framework. Consequently, we have a major segment of systemic importance on a full 
Basel I framework, a portion of the minor segment partly on Basel I framework, and a smaller segment 
on a non-Basel framework.  
The  guidelines  for  Basel  II  implementation  have  been  issued.  According  to  the  schedule,  foreign 
banks  operating  in  India  and  Indian  banks  having  presence  outside  India  are  to  migrate  to  the 
standardised approach for credit risk and the basic indicator approach for operational risk under Basel 
II with effect from March 31, 2008. All other scheduled commercial banks are encouraged to migrate to 
these approaches under Basel II in alignment with them but in any case not later than March 31, 2009. 
interest  rates,  quantitative  ceilings,  statutory  pre-emptions,  captive  market 
Development of financial markets 
Financial markets in India in the period before the early 1990s as I mentioned earlier were marked by 
administered 
for 
government  securities,  excessive  reliance  on  central  bank  financing,  pegged  exchange  rate,  and 
current and capital account restrictions. As a result of various reforms, the financial markets have now 
transited  to  a  regime  characterised  by  market-determined  interest  and  exchange  rates,  price-based 
instruments of monetary policy, current account convertibility, phased capital account liberalisation and 
auction-based  system  in  the  government  securities  market.  A  noteworthy  feature  is  that  the 
government securities and corporate debt markets are essentially domestically driven since Foreign 
Institutional  Investor  and  non-resident  participation  in  these  markets  are  limited  and  subjected  to 
prudential ceilings. 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 5
The Reserve Bank has taken a proactive role in the development of financial markets. Development of 
these  markets  has  been  done  in  a  calibrated,  sequenced  and  careful  manner  such  that  these 
developments are in step with those in other markets in the real sector. The sequencing has also been 
informed  by  the  need  to  develop  market  infrastructure,  technology  and  capabilities  of  market 
participants and financial institutions in a consistent manner.  
The Reserve Bank has accorded priority to the development of the money market as it is the key link 
in  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to  financial  markets  and  finally,  to  the  real 
economy. The Reserve Bank has special interest in the development of government securities market 
as it also plays a key role in the effective transmission of monetary policy impulses in a deregulated 
environment.  
A  qualitative  change  was  brought  about  in  the  legal  framework  by  the  enactment  of  the  Foreign 
Exchange  Management  Act  (FEMA)  in  June  2000  by  which  the  objectives  of  regulation  have  been 
redefined as facilitating trade and payments as well as orderly development and functioning of foreign 
exchange  market  in  India.  The  legal  framework  envisages  both  the  developmental  dimension  and 
orderliness or stability. The legislation provides power to the government to re-impose controls if public 
interest  warrants  it.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  undertaken  various  measures  towards  development  of 
spot  as  well  as  forward  segments  of  foreign  exchange  market.  Market  participants  have  also  been 
provided with greater flexibility to undertake foreign exchange operations and manage their risks.  
Linkage between the money, government securities and forex markets has been established and is 
growing.  The  price  discovery  in  the  primary  market  is  more  credible  than  before  and  secondary 
markets have acquired greater depth and liquidity. The number of instruments and participants has 
increased  in  all  the  markets,  the  most  impressive  being  the  government  securities  market.  The 
institutional  and  technological  infrastructure  has  been  created  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  enable 
transparency in operations and to provide secured payment and settlement systems.  
Current challenges 
In  assessing  short-term  prospects,  say  for  2007-08,  it  is  essential  to  recognise  that  the  impressive 
growth  in  GDP  at  9.4  per  cent  during  the  preceding  year,  reflects  the  contribution  of  both  –  the 
structural and the cyclical factors though their relative contribution is somewhat non-quantifiable. The 
critical  task  before  the  public  policy,  in  general,  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  in  particular,  is  to 
strengthen  the  structural  factors  in  the  economy  but  determinedly  moderate  the  cyclical  and 
excessively volatile elements of the economy.  
There are reasonable grounds for optimism in regard to the prospects for Indian economy, and this 
has  been  globally  recognised.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  remain  guarded  in  matters  relating  to 
economic growth and stability of an emerging market economy in the current global environment of 
high  output-growth,  notable  inflation  pressures,  persisting  global  imbalances,  incipient  signs  of  re-
pricing of risks, and perceived volatility of capital flows.  
We do recognise that relative to most large emerging market economies, we have several significant 
economic strengths but we also have twin deficits – current and fiscal; have a higher component of 
more  volatile  portfolio  flows  on  capital  account,  and  severe  policy  challenges  in  managing  capital 
flows.  
In view of the proven success of our overall approach to reform over the last fifteen years, there is 
considerable merit in pursuing the gradualist, participative and harmonious approach towards further 
reforms  in  financial  and  external  sectors.  Since  it  is  generally  accepted  that  financial  and  external 
sectors in India are reasonably strong and resilient, high priority is being accorded for further reforms 
in fiscal sector, agriculture, physical infrastructure, especially in power and urban areas, and delivery 
of public services such as water, health and education. Progress in these sectors will help, over the 
medium term, enhance competitiveness and accelerated reforms in financial and external sectors, in a 
harmonious  and  non-disruptive  manner,  thus,  reinforcing  self-accelerating  growth  with  assured 
stability.  
Let me conclude by thanking Chairman Ignatiev of  Bank of Russia for his kind invitation and warm 
hospitality.  We  hope  to  further  strengthen  our  bilateral  co-operation  in  matters  relating  to  central 
banking, since we realise that we have much more in common than we were aware of. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2007
