Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Importance of corporate governance for the banking and 
financial sector 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
9th South Asia Management Forum, Dhaka, 24–25 February 2007. 
 What is governance and why have governance? 
Governance  may  be  said  to  be  all  about  effective,  transparent  and  accountable  administration  of 
affairs of an institution by its management, while protecting the interests of its stakeholders including 
shareholders, creditors, regulators and the public. 
Modern Corporate Governance practices have evolved over time and different codes of best practice 
on  Corporate  Governance  have  been  developed  by  various  organisations.  E.g.  the  OECD  code  of 
Corporate Governance, the Basel code of Corporate Governance for banks and financial institutions, 
etc. At the same time, several fundamental Corporate Governance Principles have now evolved and 
have  received  worldwide  acceptance,  and  guidelines  under  each  such  principle  have  been 
comprehensively  developed  by  Corporate  Governance  activists,  practitioners,  researchers,  and 
others. 
These  principles  generally  relate  to  the  responsibilities  of  the  Board,  Directors,  Chairmen,  CEOs, 
senior  management,  Board  appointed  committees,  auditors,  shareholders  and 
regulators. 
Accountability, internal controls, related party transactions, conflicts of interest, information disclosures 
have also been extensively dealt with and targeted in the formulation of these principles. 
Corporate  Governance  principles  had  its  origins  in  the  19th  century  although  the  term  Corporate 
Governance itself came into vogue in the latter part of the 1980s. The need to focus on good practices 
of  Corporate  Governance  mainly  arose  as  a  response  to  the  separation  of  ownership  and  control 
following  the  formation  of  joint  stock  companies.  The  owners  or  shareholders  of  these  joint  stock 
companies, who were not involved in day to day operational issues, required assurances that those in 
control  of  the  company,  the  directors  and  managers,  were  safeguarding  their  investments  and 
accurately reporting the financial outcome of their business activities. Thus, directors were the original 
targets of Corporate Governance, and practices and principles were designed to protect the interests 
of  the  shareholders  from  misdemeanours  of  directors.  However,  current  thinking  recognizes  a 
company’s obligations to society more generally in the form of all stakeholders, and it has been this 
new thinking that has driven the study and practice of good Corporate Governance to the levels it has 
reached  today.  Perhaps  it  is  also  such  thinking  that  accounts  for  the  hectic  pace  at  which 
developments have taken place and are taking place in the practice as well. 
Since the latter part of 2001, the very lively and often controversial debate on Corporate Governance 
became an even more turbulent debate as a result of the massive corporate scandals and failures that 
rocked the business world, namely Enron and WorldCom. Almost as a knee-jerk reaction, new laws, 
e.g. the Sarbanes – Oxley Act in the USA and similar laws and/or regulations all over the world were 
quickly introduced in a possible attempt to prevent such scandals and failures in future, and to soothe 
the  nervous  minds  of  investors,  both  local  and  international.  But,  while  the  “big  stick”  was  being 
brandished  and  freely  wielded,  the  modern  thinking  and  realization  that  has  been  quickly  but  firmly 
evolving simultaneously has been that, achieving an outcome of good corporate behavior needs more 
than just a long list of rules, regulations, and big sticks.  
In fact, we all have now begun to learn and understand that corporate scandals and failures are a bit 
like the flu. Regulators, researchers and stakeholders regularly “discover” or “invent” new vaccines to 
combat the menace, but the virus mutates and surfaces again in a different form or under a different 
strain.  In  the  same  way,  notwithstanding  many  initiatives  of  the  1990s  and  the  early  2000s,  after 
several  rounds  of  corporate  scandals  around  the  globe,  from  Enron  to  WorldCom  to  Parmalat  to 
Daewoo  to  so  many  others,  new  vaccines  and  treatment  methods  had  to  be  quickly  researched, 
hastily prescribed, and widely administered. After the dust has settled however, we now find, when we 
pensively  reflect,  that  some  treatment  may  have  been  too  strong  or  has  been  causing  too  many 
adverse  side-effects.  Some  pills  may  have  been  too  bitter.  Some  tablets  may  have  been  too 
expensive.  Some  disease  management  techniques  may  even  have  been  more  harmful  than  the 
disease! Nevertheless, in our collective endeavour to pump the patient with as many drugs and tests 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 1
we  could  possibly  administer  (may  be  because  we  could  avoid  law  suits  relating  to  professional 
negligence by doing so!), a plethora of new rules and regulations have been churned out and these 
keep being churned out at regular intervals. But, with all that frenzied activity, the vexed question that 
keeps on haunting stakeholders is: Will today’s regulations suffice to inoculate companies from crises 
in the future and keep them healthy? Will these rules help to maintain and sustain investors’ trust in 
companies? Will these laws and regulations help to stimulate institutions instead of stifling them? Will 
these efforts actually build trust and confidence in the overall system? Of course, we have to readily 
admit that if not for the quick responses in the aftermath of Enron and others, the damage could have 
been  too  much  to  bear.  The  repercussions  and  loss  of  confidence  could  have  been  too  serious  to 
contemplate. But, at the same time, a painful truth has also emerged. i.e., that laws, rules, regulations 
and Codes, by themselves do not ensure good corporate behavior. However powerful and strong the 
new vaccines appear to be, however effective the treatment seems to be, however professional and 
keen the doctor tries to be, new diseases will emerge. Some may be minor. But, ever so often, new 
strains will occur, that will place the system under severe threat.  
Arising  from  this  realization,  another  fundamental  realization  has  also  dawned.  i.e.,  good  corporate 
behavior is ensured when companies and stakeholders genuinely believe that it is in their own best 
interests to act ethically and to act according to best governance practices. Enforcement is important. 
But we have to admit that enforcement by itself will not keep bad actors out of the theatre. We will 
sometimes observe that some actors are bad, only after they have performed for some time. In the 
same way, there cannot be a set of laws or regulations that are complete in every way so as to be able 
to  deal  with  every  risk  prevalent  in  the  market.  Many  are  the  instances  where  market  participants, 
especially those driven by short term self interest, look for regulatory loopholes and lacuna to further 
their  interest  without  being  unduly  bothered  by  the  underlying  prudence  of  their  actions.  Therefore, 
regulators  have  begun  to  acknowledge  that  they  alone  cannot  guarantee  that  all  companies  will 
continue to advance in a safe and sound manner. Regulators have also, albeit painfully, realized that 
all  competing  parties  cannot  be  simultaneously  fully  satisfied.  Unfortunately  however,  it  is  in  this 
turbulent, and sometimes even chaotic environment that we have to search for solutions.  
Corporate Governance is also increasingly acknowledged as being an important instrument to address 
“ownership issues” as well. With the current practices that are available worldwide which can hide the 
identities of true owners, it is now almost impossible for regulators to only rely on ownership limits to 
deal  with  undue  influence,  or  be  assured  that  seemingly  unrelated  parties  are  not  actually  related! 
Consequently,  markets  are  increasingly  looking  towards  the  application  of  good  Corporate 
Governance practice to overcome any ill-effects that may arise out of ownership concentration and it is 
generally believed that if good governance is in place, concentrated ownership, known or unknown, 
may  not  adversely  affect  the  risk  management  process  of  the  institution.  In  the  case  of  banks 
especially, regulatory limits on ownership in banks are prescribed in a number of countries to prevent 
banks from being controlled by a single owner or a group of connected owners. However, a majority of 
countries in the world still do not have such regulations. In fact, according to a World Bank survey of 
157  countries  in  2003,  112  did  not  have  regulations  on  ownership  limits.  Nevertheless,  in  many 
countries, indirect regulations such as limits on related-party transactions and fit and proper tests for 
bank  directors  and  executive  officers  are  in  place  to  promote  this  aspect  of  good  Corporate 
Governance, and I think, regulators genuinely believe that such practices would increasingly ensure 
the better risk management of banks, thereby leading to a more sound system. 
All in all, as of today, Codes of Best Practice on Corporate Governance set out principles within which 
values  and  governance  rules  should  be  set  by  the  management  of  the  institution,  and  in  the  final 
analysis, good Corporate Governance is looked to as being a key tool to be used in the overall risk 
management of institutions, irrespective of the nature of the business carried out by the institution. 
Why is good governance in the banking and financial system more important than any other 
sector? 
The  Banking  and  financial  sector  is  easily  distinguishable  from  the  others.  A  few  distinguishing 
features stand out: 
• 
Unlike normal business entities which are funded mainly through shareholders’ funds, banks’ 
business  involves  funds  raised  mainly  through  deposits.  The  business  of  raising  public 
deposits  places  greater  fiduciary  responsibilities  on the  institution and  its  managers,  since 
depositors’ funds need to be safeguarded in a special way. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2007
   Banks perform as financial intermediaries by lending and investing the funds mobilized and 
funding economic activities of others. 
Banks are the agents of the payments system where they facilitate payments domestically 
and  internationally,  through  various  instruments  such  as  bank  accounts,  fund  transfers, 
credit cards, etc. 
Banks are able to undertake all such business operations as a result of public trust and faith 
in  the  stability  and  soundness  of  the  banks  in  particular  and  the  system  in  general.  The 
history on bank failures in many countries indicates that loss of public confidence in banks 
could be contagious and could easily lead to systemic banking crisis situations. 
Overall,  the  banking  business  is  the  key  for  monetary  conditions  in  a  country.  Bank  deposit  and 
lending  business  determines  the  supply,  cost  and  availability  of  money.  Money  is  created  by  the 
banking  system  through  the  legal  tender  issued  by  the  Central  Banks  and/or  Monetary  Authorities. 
Since sight money created is payable by banks at any time through legal tender and technically, the 
banking system does not have funds adequate for meeting all such created money at any particular 
point  of  time.  Banking  business  thus  casts  a  huge  responsibility  on  the  monetary  authorities  to 
facilitate, regulate, and protect the banking and payments system. 
Weak Corporate Governance (CG) can contribute to financial instability and that would increase the 
risk profile of companies in the corporate sector and expose the banks and financial institutions to a 
greater  risk.  In  a  more  direct  sense,  weaknesses  in  CG  arrangements  in  banks  and  financial 
institutions reduce their capacity to identify, monitor and manage their business risk and that can result 
in  poor  quality  lending  and  excessive  risk-taking  by  the  financial  institutions.  Depending  on  the 
resilience of the financial institutions and markets, these risks have the potential to spread across the 
wider  financial  system.  Needless  to  say  that  inadequate  CG  can  also  lead  to  a  poor  credit  culture, 
excessive exposure concentration, poor management of interest risk/exchange risk and inadequacies 
in the management of connected exposures. Some of these risks, singularly or collectively, can lead to 
potential insolvency and financial instability. 
In more recent times, the regulators world over have introduced prudential norms on single borrower 
exposures, group exposures and concentration of credit risks. The underlying principles of such norms 
indicate  some  degree  of  compulsion  on  the  observance  of  CG  principles.  To  further  augment  such 
prudential  norms,  regulators  may  even  consider  introducing  mandatory  disclosures  by  banks  and 
financial institutions. 
Where does good governance fit in this scenario? 
Obviously, Corporate Governance is now identified and acknowledged as a powerful tool to generate 
trust  and  confidence  in  an  institution.  In  that  context,  good  Corporate  Governance  is  essentially 
important for banks, because such institutions (a) deal with funds raised from the public; (b) are likely 
to encounter greater risks including frauds and failure; and (c) if such frauds or failures occur in such 
institutions, it may pose issues relating to public confidence in the financial system stability itself.  
All  these  reasons  have  led  to  Banks  tending  to  depend  upon risk  management  practices  based  on 
principles of prudence rather than complying with only minimum requirements.  
It is also as a result of such realization that many stakeholders and regulators are now consciously 
looking towards good Corporate Governance, as one of the prime instruments in its overall effort to 
maintain financial system stability. In Sri Lanka, the CBSL has already issued a voluntary code of best 
practice on Corporate Governance to banks. This was prepared by a Task Force consisting of persons 
from  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  But,  we  now  believe  that  the  time  has  come  for  us  to  move 
towards more stringent application of Corporate Governance Codes and therefore we are now in the 
process of drafting and issuing a new code of best practices on Corporate Governance to be made 
mandatory for banks.  
What are the challenges that face regulators in dealing with the Banks? 
Over  the  past  few  decades,  the  activities  in  the  field  of  banking  have  been  increasing  rapidly  and 
today  a  large  number  of  new  areas  have  been  added  to  the  traditional  list  of  services  provided  by 
Banks. An examination of such lists would clearly indicate that Banks of today are performing many 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 3
services  that  were  hitherto  provided  by  other  service  providers.  We  now  see  that  the  conventional 
difference between banking and other financial businesses, i.e., insurance and securities trading, has 
almost disappeared. In the meantime, the rapid development of debt securities markets too, has been 
posing  new  challenges  to  the  traditional  intermediation  business  of  banks.  All  this  has  blurred  the 
customary boundaries and there are many overlaps that have been created. Naturally these trends 
lead to new challenges to the Regulators of banks who now have to deal with these new multi-faceted 
conglomerates,  instead  of  the  traditional  deposit  taking/money  lending  institutions  that  were  once-
upon-a-time  called  “bank”.  Therefore,  today,  a  need  has  surfaced  where  several  regulators  are 
compelled  to  act  as  a  group  to  undertake  consolidated  supervision  of  the  financial  institutions, 
especially financial conglomerates, and this is becoming increasingly common. Regulators now tend to 
enter into MOUs to share information under the current legal provisions, and they also have periodical 
meetings,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  financial  system  stability  committees  or  as  inter-regulatory 
institutions committees to assess potential systemic risks/crises and to develop crisis prevention and 
resolution  measures.  In  fact,  in  some  countries,  Regulators  now  develop  common  tools  to  conduct 
financial “fire drills” to prepare for possible failures of large financial institutions, and such practices 
include various simulation techniques as well.  
That  is  not  all.  The  Regulators’  work  has  become  even  more  complex  due  to  the  rapid 
internationalization of the banking system. Internationalization could take place in two ways: through 
ownership  or  business  operations.  “Ownership”  involves  international  investors  and/or  international 
banks acquiring banks in other countries. Banking “business operations” gets internationalized through 
the use of modern IT where geographical boundaries and country regulatory boundaries are no longer 
applicable  and  it  becomes  increasingly  difficult  to  identify  a  single  particular  location  as  being  the 
operative area in respect of certain financial transactions. Modern IT and financial liberalization are the 
keys that have led to this type of banking internationalization. At the same time, it has provided for 
innovative electronic money and scripless settlements systems for cross-border financial transactions. 
Financial liberalization is now leading to banking internationalization where surplus funds flow cross-
border to finance deficit units, i.e., international intermediation. In this background, it is now realized by 
Regulations that the high mobility of capital flows creates enormous risks to internationalized banks 
and to international systems, if the individual fund management systems of such banks are not sound. 
This requires Regulators to place even greater weight upon the efficacy of the governance systems 
since the failure of such institutions could be catastrophic to the well being of the entire global financial 
systems. In addition, the ill effects of money laundering, financing of illegal activities, and the financing 
of terrorism through the banking system are further risks that are faced by banks due to this growing 
internationalization.  These  too,  need  to  be  addressed  by  stakeholders  who  are  involved  in  the 
development of the evolving systems. To deal with these challenges, Regulators now have to close 
ranks  internationally  as  well,  and  attempt  to  harmonize  prudential  requirements  to  monitor  risks  of 
international financial conglomerates, and in this regard, we all must be somewhat relieved that the 
Basel capital accord has provided a clear framework for us to apply on the subject. 
As we all know, the Basel code of Corporate Governance for banks and financial institutions covers 8 
principles. These are: 
• 
Principle  1:  Board  members  should  be  qualified  for  their  positions,  have  a  clear 
understanding  of  their  role  in  Corporate  Governance  and  be  able  to  exercise  sound 
judgment about the affairs of the bank. 
Principle  2:  The  board  of  directors  should  approve  and  oversee  the  bank’s  strategic 
objectives and corporate values that are communicated throughout the banking organization. 
Principle 3: The board of directors should set and enforce clear lines of responsibility and 
accountability through the organization. 
Principle  4:  The  board  should  ensure  that  there  is  appropriate  oversight  by  senior 
management consistent with board policy. 
Principle 5: The board and senior management should effectively utilize the work conducted 
by the internal audit function, external auditors, and internal control functions. 
Principle  6:  The  board  should  ensure  that  compensation  policies  and  practices  are 
consistent with the bank’s corporate culture, long-term objectives and strategy, and control 
environment.  
Principle 7: The bank should be governed in a transparent manner. 
      4 
 BIS Review 24/2007
 Principle  8:  The  board  and  senior  management  should  understand  the  bank’s  operational 
structure,  including  where  the  bank  operates  in  jurisdictions,  those  that  may  impede 
transparency (i.e. “know-your-structure”). 
It is very clear today, more than ever, that Regulators also have a key role to play in achieving good 
Corporate Governance. In general, all regulations, in the Banking System, are intended in one way or 
another, to enforce prudential requirements on key areas of affairs of institutions to mitigate identified 
risks. Regulations on ownership, related party transactions, fitness and propriety tests for directors are 
directly  based  on  modern  Corporate  Governance  principles.  However,  the  Basel  Committee  goes 
further and describes the role of supervisors in Corporate Governance by adding new parameters as 
well. These are: 
• 
Supervisors should provide guidance to banks on sound Corporate Governance and the pro-
active practices that should be in place. 
Supervisors should consider Corporate Governance as one element of depositor protection. 
Supervisors  should  determine  whether  the  bank  has  adopted  and  effectively  implemented 
sound Corporate Governance policies and practices. 
Supervisors should assess the quality of banks’ audit and control functions. 
Supervisors should evaluate the effects of the bank’s group structure. 
Supervisors should bring to  the  board of  directors’ and management’s  attention,  problems 
that they detect through their supervisory efforts. 
  According  to  Basel  recommendations,  Corporate  Governance  should  be  promoted  by  other 
stakeholders as well. For instance, 
• 
• 
Shareholders – through the active and informed exercise of shareholder rights; 
Depositors and other customers – by not conducting business with banks that are operated 
in an unsound manner; 
Auditors  –  through  a  well-established  and  qualified  audit  profession,  audit  standards  and 
communications to boards of directors, senior management and supervisors; 
Banking industry associations – through initiatives related to voluntary industry principles and 
agreement on and publication of sound practices; 
Professional risk advisory firms and consultancies – through assisting banks in implementing 
sound Corporate Governance practices; 
Governments – through laws, regulations, enforcement and an effective judicial framework;  
Credit  rating  agencies  –  through  review  and  assessment  of  the  impact  of  Corporate 
Governance practices on a bank’s risk profile; 
Securities  regulators,  stock  exchanges  and  other  self-regulatory  organizations  –  through 
disclosure and listing requirements; and  
Employees – through communication of concerns regarding illegal or unethical practices or 
other Corporate Governance weaknesses. 
      In a broader sense, mandating the banks and financial institutions to adhere to full disclosures of their 
operations would not only allow the markets, investors, depositors and others to keep a close watch 
on  the  financial  institutions,  but  also  provide  an  opportunity  for  other  regulators  also  to  be  closely 
involved in supervising these institutions. For example, listed banks and financial institutions are not 
only  under  the  supervisory  arm  of  the  Central  Banks,  but  also  the  Securities  &  Exchange 
Commissions. In multi-regulatory and multi-supervisory systems like what is still prevalent in our part 
of the world, it is necessary to ensure that the regulatory and supervisory burden be shared by all who 
are responsible for regulating and supervising banking and financial institutions. This will also provide 
an opportunity to mitigate concentration of regulatory risks. In multi-regulatory regimes, it is particularly 
relevant to ensure that appropriate CG principles are laid down, so that all regulators are aware of the 
principles  behind  these  governance  rules  that  are  introduced  in  the  interest  of  the  wider  financial 
system stability. 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 5
In promoting sound CG, it is also necessary to develop an effective legal framework that specifies the 
rights  and  obligations  of  the  institution,  be  it  a  bank  or  a  finance  company  or  other,  its  directors, 
shareholders  and  other  stakeholders.  The  regulators,  on  their  part,  should  initiate  action  to  build 
capacity  in  CG  at  various  levels,  including  the  chairmen,  the  boards  of  directors  and  senior 
management  of  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  legal  framework  should  also  provide  for 
disclosure requirements, facilitating the enforcement of the law. 
Further, it is essential to encourage an effective financial news media, which deals with the importance 
of  CG  and educate  the  public. They should  play a more  responsible  role  in disseminating  accurate 
information to the public and initiating a meaningful discussion on the subject. 
Conclusion 
The developments in Corporate Governance that are taking place all over the world are increasingly 
complex. It is almost impossible for those who are not undertaking full-time studies on the subject to 
keep  pace  with  these  developments.  Yet,  all  of  us  who  are  interested  in  systems  that  stimulate 
business and keep the wheels of economies moving at a rapid space, would continue to have a strong 
interest  in  the  subject.  I  am  also  hopeful  that,  the  banking  and  financial  community  will  continue  to 
promote  and  foster  these  studies  and  practices  since  these  provide  the  lubrication  for  the  smooth 
functioning of our complicated financial systems in our ever-changing corporate regimes.  
We also know that a large portion of global business is in the banking sector. In addition, all business 
entities,  maintain  direct  relationships  with  banks  and  financial  institutions.  In  that  context,  the  pre-
eminent position that is applicable to the banks and enjoyed by them cannot be over-emphasized or 
under-estimated. Therefore, our efforts to enhance the governance capabilities and capacities within 
banks and financial institutions have to be at the forefront of our agendas. The trend in the world of 
targeting  governance  practices  in  the  banking  and  financial  sector  to  be  at  the  cutting  edge  of 
prevailing practices worldwide is a significant step in the right direction and should continue to be so in 
the future as well.  
Let  us  therefore  together  and  collectively  dedicate  ourselves  to  promote  and  apply  good  Corporate 
Governance principles and practices in our respective banking and financial sectors. Needless to say, 
the beneficiaries of such efforts will be our own economies which we are striving to develop as quickly 
as possible. 
6 
 BIS Review 24/2007
