Jean-Claude Trichet: The role of research in central banks and at the ECB 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the ceremony for the 
Award of the Germán Bernácer Prize, Madrid, 21 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to award today the 2006 Germán Bernácer Prize to Hélène Rey, 
Professor of Economics and International Affairs at Princeton University, for her outstanding research 
on financial globalization, exchange rates and capital markets. 
I am particularly pleased to be here for two reasons: The 2006 Bernácer Prize Selection Committee is 
composed of eminent economists that have global reputation and was chaired by Lucas Papademos, 
Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank;  and  I  had  myself  the  honour  of  being  in  touch  with 
Professor  Rey  as  soon  as  1998  when  she  led  a  research  granted  from  the  “Fondation  Banque  de 
France” 
I like to think that the Eurosystem has to some extent contributed to the brilliant career of Professor 
Rey and to her challenging research agenda. First in 1998 and then in 2003 and 2004, she received 
grants from the “Fondation Banque de France”. More recently, in 2005, she was granted a Lamfalussy 
fellowship by the Research Network on Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe, which is 
jointly  managed  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Center  for  Financial  Studies  at  the  Goethe 
University of Frankfurt. 
Financial support for young and bright European economists is one among several ways in which the 
ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  contribute  to  the  enhancement  of  research  in 
monetary  and  financial  economics.  This  leads  me  to  a  few  remarks  on  the  role  of  and  scope  for 
research at the ECB and more generally in central banks. 
The main goal of economic research at the ECB is to provide a strong conceptual and empirical basis 
for policy-making. More specifically, very important aims are to increase knowledge of the functioning 
of the euro area economy and to provide high-quality models, tools and analyses that are relevant for 
the conduct of monetary policy and the fulfilment of the other tasks and functions of the ECB. 
The general purpose and specific objectives of research in central banks are seldom questioned. A 
debated  issue,  however,  is  whether  central  banks  should  be  producers  or  simply  consumers  of 
research.  Should  central  banks  allocate  resources  to  costly  in-house  research,  rather  than  buying 
research output from universities and other research institutions? There are at least four reasons why 
the ECB – like many other central banks – has decided to develop its own research capability from its 
start. 
First, central banks need research-oriented economists to follow the latest developments in economics 
and to recognise their potential relevance for policy-making. Let me provide an example based on the 
sustainability  of  a  country’s  external  imbalance  –  a  topic  that  greatly  benefited  from  the  work  of 
Professor Rey. The literature has recently pointed to the limits of traditional approaches to the balance 
of  payments,  where  currency  depreciation  provides  the  bulk  of  the  adjustment  needed  to  correct  a 
country’s current account deficit. Traditional approaches fail to realize the consequences of financial 
globalization for the sustainability and adjustment of the external position. In the presence of variation 
in asset returns, cross-border asset holdings introduce valuation effects that decouple the dynamics of 
net foreign assets from that of current accounts, altering the role of the trade balance in correcting a 
country’s external position. Recent research at the ECB has been very enlightening in this respect.  
A  second  reason  for  conducting  research  in  a  central  bank  is  that  a  major  task  of  central  bank 
research is to bridge the possible gap between academics and policy makers and to create occasions 
for  interactions  with  the  academic  community  where  the  diversity  of  views  can  be  expressed  and 
discussed.  For  instance,  at  the  ECB  we  are  convinced  that  a  thorough  analysis  of  monetary 
developments  –  our  “monetary  pillar”  –  is  important  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  for  the 
anchoring of inflation expectations. Our view is supported by the strong empirical link between money 
growth  and  inflation  over  the  long-run  and  by  theoretical  considerations  relating  to  the  ability  of 
monetary and credit aggregates to point at imbalances in the financial system and inflationary risks. 
Looking at the historical experience, the analysis of monetary developments has helped the ECB to 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 1
assess the risks to price stability, to identify the nature of the shocks impacting on the euro area and to 
signal its medium-term orientation. This has been a key factor in anchoring agents’ expectations and 
in establishing the high credibility of the ECB. To broaden and deepen the monetary analysis we trust 
that  it  is  important  for  us  to  have  an  ongoing,  direct  and  candid  openness  to  discussion  with  the 
academic world. An example is provided by the 4th ECB Central Banking Conference on "The role of 
Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century", where the ECB engaged in an open debate 
with academics on this important topic.  
A  third  argument  to  invest  in  central  banks’  research  is  that  competition  with  the  academic  world 
ensures adequate monitoring of the quality of models and analytical tools used for policy. For instance, 
the  New  Area-Wide  Model  is  a  structural  macroeconomic  model  for  the  euro  area  that  has  been 
developed  by  staff  in  DG  Research  for  simulation  tasks  and  scenario  analysis.  The  model  is  also 
regularly  used  to  produce  research  papers  that  are  widely  presented  in  academic  conferences  and 
central banks workshops. This provides a quality check and guarantees that a model used for policy 
analysis is kept up to the highest standards. 
Finally,  a  fourth  reason  for  investing  resources  in  research  is  that  the  policy  process  sometimes 
requires research output not yet available at universities or other research institutes. The ECB has at 
times identified issues of fundamental importance for understanding the impact of monetary policy in 
the euro area, upon which limited information was available. As a consequence, the ECB has decided 
to lead and co-ordinate research efforts through Eurosystem networks, which involved the ECB and 
the national central banks of the euro area. The Monetary Transmission Network pursued for three 
years  empirical  analyses  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  the  newly  formed  euro  area. 
Macroeconomic  time  series  data  were  used  to  estimate  a  variety  of  econometric  models  of  the 
transmission  at  euro  area  and  national  level,  while  microeconomic  data  were  used  to  measure  the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  on  investment  of  non-financial  firms  and  on  the  lending  behaviour  of 
commercial  banks.  The  Inflation  Persistence  Network  worked  for  two  years  at  understanding  the 
patterns  and  determinants  of  inflation  persistence.  The  network  availed  itself  of  an  unprecedented 
data set. The individual price records underlying the construction of both consumer and producer price 
indices  was  made  available  in  a  large  number  of  euro  area  countries.  Moreover,  the  network 
conducted  surveys  on  price  setting  behaviour  in  nine  countries  of  the  euro  area.  These  databases 
enabled  to  understand  the  behaviour  of  price  setters,  to  investigate  the  determinants  of  nominal 
rigidities and to empirically test alternative price setting models for the euro area. Finally, the ongoing 
Wage  Dynamics  Network  aims  at  identifying  the  sources  and  features  of  wage  and  labour  cost 
dynamics  that  are  most  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  It  aims  at  clarifying  the  relationship  between 
wages, labour costs and prices both at the firm and macro-economic level.  
The ECB trusts that research is enhanced by exposure to external ideas and latest advances in the 
field. This exposure is mainly achieved through regular seminars and conferences. On top of internal 
seminars given by staff, the ECB weekly organizes an Invited Speaker Seminar and, jointly with the 
Center for Financial Studies and the Deutsche Bundesbank, a Joint Lunch Seminar. It also organizes 
a number of conferences and workshops. In 2006, the ECB co-organized fourteen conferences on a 
broad  range  of  topics,  such  as  the  theory  and  practice  of  monetary  policy,  wage  and  labour  costs, 
financial  integration  and  stability,  financial  systems  and  economic  growth,  payment  and  settlement 
issues, financial globalization and integration, financial statistics, and national accounts. Of course, a 
special interest is devoted to monetary policy issues. Together with the US Federal Reserve Board, 
the Center for German and European Studies at Georgetown University, and the Center for Financial 
Studies at the Goethe University, the ECB sponsors an “International Research Forum on Monetary 
Policy”.  The  purpose  is  to  encourage  research  on  monetary  policy  issues  that  are  relevant  from  a 
global perspective by organizing conferences that are held alternately in the Euro Area and the United 
States. Another important way to achieve external exposure is through visitors and consultants. Since 
2006, the ECB awards one Wim Duisemberg Fellowship per year to internationally renowned experts 
who  are  selected  to  visit  the  bank.  The  aim  is  to  promote  policy-relevant  research  that  meets  the 
highest academic standards. A number of consultants are also invited to visit the bank and to provide 
their expertise on major projects or research activities. 
Research  at  the  ECB  has  an  important  external  impact  through  a  number  of  channels,  namely 
presentation of research economists at workshops and international conferences, dissemination of the 
networks’  research  findings,  development  of  new  data  sets,  models  and  methodologies,  and 
publication  of  ECB  research  papers.  One  prominent  way  to  disseminate  research  is  through  the 
Working Paper Series. In 2006, the Series released 137 Working Papers, with 90 papers authored or 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2007
co-authored by ECB staff. These numbers stand high when compared with other institutions (such as 
the Federal Reserve Board) that are similar in terms of staff and tasks.  
Of course, the fact that the ECB conducts its own research does not mean that it does not support – 
and consume the results of – research conducted outside the bank. For example, the ECB currently 
contributes  to  two  research  networks  involving  research  institutes  outside  the  Eurosystem.  I  have 
already  mentioned  the  network  on  Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Integration  in  Europe,  which  was 
launched  by  the  ECB  and  the  Center  for  Financial  Studies  to  stimulate  research  on  financial 
integration and financial system structures in Europe, and on the linkages between Europe, the United 
States  and  Japan.  The  second  is  the  Euro  Area  Business  Cycle  Network,  involving  the  ECB,  the 
national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research.  Its  purpose  is  to  achieve  a  better  understanding  of  the  euro  area  business  cycle  by 
fostering empirical analyses on this issue. The ECB is also a contributor to the Centre for Economic 
Policy Research and a number of other research activities carried outside the bank. 
To conclude, I strongly believe that central banks need top-quality research on monetary and financial 
economics. Although general research of an academic nature might be better-suited for universities 
and  research  institutes,  there  is  still  scope  for  central  bank  economists  to  conduct  research  that  is 
relevant for the conduct of monetary policy and for the other functions and tasks of a central bank. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 3
