Ranee Jayamaha: Glimpse of current financial regulations 
Inaugural speech by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 
Client  Seminar  on  International  Trade,  organized  by  HNB  (Hatton  National  Bank),  Colombo, 
13 November 2006. 
 Mr  Theagarajah,  officials  of  HNB,  Mr  Richard  Lightbound  from  Wachovia  Bank,  distinguished 
participants, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for the invitation extended to me to be present at the 
client  seminar  on  Trends  in  International  Trade.  Let  me  congratulate  HNB  for  taking  the  corporate 
social responsibility seriously and arranging a forum to exchange stakeholder views on an important 
subject. 
Generally, regulations are not liked by anybody. Same goes with the financial community in Sri Lanka. 
However,  the  common  factor  is  that  even  regulators  do  not  like  to  rule  by  regulation.  For  a  better 
appreciation  of  the  past  and  present  financial  regulatory  environment,  let  me  first  set  out  the  key 
elements  underlying  financial  regulations.  In  summary:  (a)  regulations  are  mainly  a  reaction  to  an 
action by the financial community, although there may be instances in which regulations are brought in 
on  hindsight  with  a  forward-looking  approach,  but  they  are  a  few;  (b)  there  is  a  clear  difference 
between the objectives of regulators and market participants; (c) regulations are not necessarily a one-
way  street.  They  are  not  there  only  to  tighten  markets.  Many  instances  can  be  quoted  where 
regulations  have  been  relaxed  depending  on  the  circumstances  and  environment;  (d)  regulators 
should be proactive and work towards the development of markets rather than impeding their growth; 
and (f) the institutions and markets that are subjected to regulations should not try to find loopholes to 
circumvent regulations. Unless there is a conscious decision by the shareholders, the Director Boards, 
the senior management and officials of financial institutions, regulations by themselves do not bring in 
decided results. 
Let me first deal with the world financial regulatory environment with a brief background of attempts 
made to stabilise financial systems. 
Over the last 2 decades or so, the financial sector witnessed a radical reform process. The focus of 
the  reforms was  on  deregulation  and liberalization  of  the  financial  sector.  The  volume  and  value  of 
transactions  have  increased  many  times,  the  speed  with  which  transactions  are  initiated  and 
completed has accelerated; new markets have opened up; there has been a significant expansion in 
the  range  of  financial  instruments;  financial  firms  have  grown  bigger  and  bigger  and  international 
businesses have become increasingly concentrated in the hands of a relatively small number of mega 
financial institutions/firms with balance sheets, approaching in some cases exceeding trillion dollars. 
The driving forces behind these developments are well known. First, the world economy has grown 
substantially over the last two decades and financial activity has increased faster than the world GDP. 
Second,  there  has  been  a  significant  liberalization  of  financial  markets  and  the  environment  for 
international capital flows. Third, technology has advanced enormously in terms of both the capacity 
as  well  as  sophistication.  Countries  have  benefited  immensely  from  these  developments  and,  as  a 
result,  wide  choices  are  available  to  savers  &  investors,  borrowers  &  lenders  together  with  greater 
flexibility & efficiency in the allocation of capital. Many institutions have sprung up in both money and 
capital  markets.  Similarly,  the  financial  world  has  become  more  complicated  with  closer  inter-
connectedness within and between individual firms, institutions and markets. 
In  the  meantime,  the  regulatory  authorities  have  begun  to  focus  on  the  achievement  of  specific 
objectives and found that they have to react to action by the financial markets by putting breaks to halt 
the  rapid  expansion,  which  would  otherwise  threaten  the  stability  objectives.  So,  they  brought  in 
financial  regulations  to  deal  with  the  situations.  Unabated  by  the  tightening  of  financial  regulation, 
financial  markets  continued  to  grow  rapidly  and  ended  up  in  crises  and  the  world  has  learnt  many 
lessons from financial crises. The outcome of the Mexican crisis in 1994, the Russian crisis from 1992 
to 1995 and the Asian crisis from 1997 to 1998 was the further tightening of financial regulations and 
introduction of new ones. They were more reactionary and intrusive after the Enron and World Com 
failures in the USA. The Sarbanes Oxley regulations, which are considered somewhat draconian have 
come to stay, but may be with modifications. Similarly, after the BCCI and Bearings crisis, the Bank of 
England introduced a series of financial regulations and also handed over its supervisory functions of 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
financial institutions to the Financial Services Authority set up in 1998, with the primary objective of 
regulating financial markets in a meaningful manner. 
How has Sri Lanka fared? 
Sri  Lanka’s  financial  sector  is  not  insulated  completely  from  global  changes  and  their  impacts.  The 
financial authorities in Sri Lanka also faced the challenge of maintaining the overall financial system 
stability  while  trying  to  ensure  that  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  operate  prudently  and 
competitively.  So  they  brought  in necessary  regulations. Over  the  last  few  decades,  Sri  Lanka also 
reduced the level of statutory pre-emptions, dismantled the complex structure of administered interest 
rates,  laid  down  capital  adequacy  requirements,  introduced  prudential  norms  and  liberalized  entry 
norms  for  domestic  and  foreign  banks.  Most  of  these  measures  have  the  backing  of  specific 
legislation, under which the Central Bank has issued financial regulations. So, financial regulations are 
not a one-way street to tighten conditions but also to open up and promote competitiveness. 
Financial regulations are like traffic lights which stop financial intermediaries from going at the same 
speed  in  terms  of mobilizing  funds,  borrowing,  lending,  introducing  innovative products,  taking  risks 
and  engaging  in  speculative  activities.  When  they  have  to  stop  at  the  traffic  lights,  financial 
intermediaries  not  only  in  Sri  Lanka  but  also  elsewhere,  complain  that  they  are  over-regulated. 
Although  this  is  a  general  statement,  there  may  be  some  truth  in  it.  We,  as  responsible  regulatory 
authority,  recon  that  over-regulation  can  kill  the  initiatives  of  the  financial  intermediaries,  suppress 
innovations  and  market  developments.  There  is,  therefore,  a  clear  responsibility  for  the  financial 
regulators  to  ensure  that  financial  intermediaries  and  markets  are  not  over-regulated.  It  is  also 
understood  that  regulation  should  be  proactive  and  supervision  should  be  risk-based  and  not 
compliance-based. While these underlying themes are recognized as important elements in financial 
regulations, it is also significant to note that regulators are compelled to bring in new regulations when 
market  participants  are  non-compliant,  non-cooperative  and  for  not  being  prudent.  This  is  where 
market  discipline  is  important  in  avoiding  new  regulations.  The  non-compliance  by  one  important 
financial  intermediary  will  also  lead  to  all  other  institutions  being  subject  to  regulations  to  avoid 
discrimination. In this respect we are democratic and fair. 
Sri Lanka’s financial regulatory environment 
There  are  3  main  financial  regulators  in  Sri  Lanka.  They  are  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  the 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  and  the  Insurance  Board  of  Sri  Lanka  (IBSL).  The 
Registrar of Companies which registers banking and financial institutions is also seen as a regulator 
but  not  as  a  supervisory  body.  The  Central  Bank  as  the  apex  regulatory  authority  regulates  and 
supervises  about  70%  of  the  financial  sector.  The  IBSL  regulates  and  supervises  around  11%  of 
financial institutions, mainly the insurance companies and SEC accounts for about 4% of the system, 
basically the capital market institutions. The balance financial intermediaries are regulated by various 
authorities while some are not regulated at all. 
Banking  companies  in  Sri  Lanka  come  under  several  jurisdictions,  but  the  Banking  Act  is  the 
centrepiece  for  financial  regulations.  It  sets  out  all  necessary  regulatory  provisions  for  capital 
requirements,  shareholder 
limits,  credit  operations,  provisioning  requirements,  consolidation, 
acquisition  and  mergers,  suspension,  winding  up  of  banking  companies,  etc.  Sri  Lanka’s  banking 
sector  is  currently  operating  on  Basel  I,  but  getting  ready  to  implement  Basel  II  Capital  Adequacy 
Ratios  from  early  2008.  Basel  II  is  basically  risk  mitigation  in  banking  operations  and,  it  allows 
supervisors  and  regulators  to  encourage  or  require banks  to  build  up  capital buffers  in  good  times. 
Financial regulations have thus been set taking into consideration the cyclical situation which banking 
firms face in home and host countries.  
In addition to the provisions in the Banking Act, the Monetary Law Act which governs the operations of 
the Central Bank, also provide for regulation of banking companies. However, in recent times, through 
various amendments, most of the provisions of the Monetary Law Act have been incorporated in the 
Banking Act. Their stock market operations come under the purview of the SEC Act. In addition to the 
banks,  the  Central  Bank  regulates  the  finance  companies  under  Finance  Companies  Act  and  the 
leasing companies under the Leasing Act. The primary dealers who deal in the government securities 
market irrespective of whether they are banks or not, are under the supervision of the Central Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2007
The SEC regulates the investment companies, merchant banks, venture capital companies, unit trusts 
and  the  rating  agencies.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  the  SEC  issues  financial  regulations  to 
ensure  that  companies  listed  in  the  Stock  Exchange  operate  in  an  orderly  manner  preserving  the 
stability of the capital markets and, as a whole, the financial system. 
The registered insurance companies, the insurance broking companies and ancillary service providers 
are  regulated  by  the  IBSL  to  safeguard  public  interest.  The  insurance  policies  consist  of  long-term 
savings of the public and, therefore, the sustainability of insurance companies is important for long-
term savers.  
All financial institutions operating in Sri Lanka are required to comply with the recently enacted Money 
Laundering Legislation, Countering the Terrorist Financing Legislation and the Financial Transaction 
Reporting  Act.  Relevant  regulations  will  be  issued  shortly.  The  recently  introduced  Payments  and 
Settlements Act provides wide powers to the Central Bank to regulate the national payments system. 
Despite  these  legislation  and  financial  regulations,  there  are  many  operations  by  the  financial 
intermediaries which cannot be captured by one or more financial regulation. One such category is 
financial  conglomerates,  which  engage  in  banking  and  finance,  insurance  and  stock  market 
transactions. They still have a leeway to take advantage over others. Regulating these conglomerates 
is a real challenge. There is a limit to impose rules on all aspects of operations which will lead to over-
regulation and that should be avoided. Improved understanding of potential risks may bring in better 
results. We have to find a middle way in regulation. Market participants should also be given adequate 
information to protect themselves from any problems related to new products, markets, or institutions 
and how to mitigate risks. This is a task for policy makers and regulators. More importantly, in finding a 
middle path, regulators also have to trust markets and institutions, but ensure that the innovations do 
not  result  in  undue  stress  to  the  financial  system.  A  more  practical  way  to  regulate  financial 
conglomerates is the closer coordination among regulatory authorities. Another area that is difficult to 
be brought under regulation is the derivative trading by financial institutions. Fortunately, this trade has 
not expanded yet in Sri Lanka, but we may have to be mindful of their emergence, sometime in the 
future. 
The essence of financial regulations, therefore, is to encourage financial intermediaries to identify and 
manage risks without causing instability in their own institutions which can have riffle effects on the 
entire  financial  system  which  is  heavily  dependant  on  public  confidence.  A  systemically  important 
financial  intermediary  can  cause  serious  threats  to  the  wider  financial  system.  Financial  regulator 
helps to build that public confidence through regulation and supervision. That’s why regulators try to 
promote  financial  intermediaries  to  hedge  against  possible  risks  and  prevent  over  exposure.  In 
keeping with the world trends, the Central Bank as well as the other regulatory authorities will try to be 
proactive and avoid over-regulation, but at the same time take necessary steps to ensure system-wide 
stability.  
Let me sum up. Financial regulations are necessary given the complexity of financial transactions that 
are  taking  place  here  in  Sri  Lanka  and  elsewhere.  They  are  not  liked  by  anybody  but  regulations 
should be viewed as brakes or traffic lights. Regulations by themselves are not meaningful, unless the 
financial community makes a concerted effort to observe what is good for the wider financial system. 
Regulators  should  be  flexible  to  relax  regulations,  where  possible,  and  allow  markets  to  grow.  For 
example,  very  recently,  the  government  decided  to allow  foreigners  to  invest in  Sri  Lanka Treasury 
Bonds through TIERA accounts. That is a further relaxation of capital controls. If financial markets use 
this  opportunity  in  an  objective  manner,  we  can  expect  further  relaxations.  Regulators  and  policy 
makers should find a middle way to understand the way innovative products work. 
My message to this august audience is that under the present regulatory regime, Sri Lanka’s financial 
system is resilient and it is capable of absorbing shocks from within or outside. We should be happy to 
note  that  like  the  Sri  Lankan  economy,  the  financial  system  has  also  displayed  its  resilience  under 
trying  circumstances  in  the  recent  past.  We  hope  it  will  continue  to  be  so  in  the  future.  From  a 
regulatory point of view, we will continue to support markets and financial intermediaries to maintain 
the required robustness of the financial system. 
Thank y ou. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 3
