Erkki Liikanen: Regional economic integration and monetary cooperation 
Chairman’s remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at a Eurosystem seminar 
with  the  central  banks  of West  and Central  Africa, jointly  organised  by  the  Bank of  France  and  the 
European Central Bank, Paris, 1 February 2007. 
 Opening remarks 
Before  we  begin  the  discussion,  I  would  like  to  thank  our  hosts  and  the  ECB  for  organizing  this 
important seminar that gives us a unique forum to exchange views on important issues of common 
interest.  
It is a great honor and privilege for me to be chairing this first working session. The topic of the session 
– Regional economic integration and monetary cooperation – is an interesting one and highly relevant 
to all of us. The Banque Nationale de Belgique has prepared an excellent issues note which sets the 
stage for our discussion by reviewing the economic and monetary cooperation in the EU and in Africa, 
and by identifying some of the key challenges that these two regions face in their quest for deeper 
integration.  
We have an hour and a half for this session and I hope that this will allow us time for some general 
discussion following our speakers' presentations. Our lead speaker today is Mr. Guy Quaden. Our first 
discussant  is  Mr.  Damo  Justin  Baro,  Acting  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  West  African  States 
(BCEAO) and the second discussant Mr. James D. Rogers, Governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone.  
General discussion 
I  want  to  thank  the  speaker  and  the  discussants  for  their  most  interesting  and  very  insightful 
presentations. Now the floor is open for general discussion.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me try to recap shortly some of the key findings of our discussion. 
In general, it is obvious that Africa's situation in many important respects differs from that of the EU. 
Therefore,  we  have  to  be  very  cautious  in  drawing  lessons  from  the  EU's  experience  for  Africa. 
Nevertheless, there are also some important underlying issues that are common to both regions.  
First, as regards the origins and triggering factors of integrations processes in the two regions, there 
are clear differences:  
• 
In Europe, the traumatic experiences of the Great Depression and the Second World War 
gave an impetus for the integration process and the experience of the German hyperinflation 
had far-reaching impact on the nature of integration in the area of monetary policy. 
In  Africa,  the  first  steps  in  economic  integration  were  taken  shortly  after  the  bulk  of  the 
countries  gained  their  independence.  Some  limited  advances  were  made  in  subsequent 
decades within regional blocs, but the integration process was largely put on hold for over a 
quarter  of  a  century  owing  to  conflicts,  which  in  part  were  driven  by  divisive  forces  of  the 
Cold War. Only after the collapse of the communism was the integration process in Africa 
revitalized.  
 As regards the three long-term key structural factors that were identified behind the success of EMU, it 
was noted that some of them seem to be present in Africa, while some are lacking:  
• 
Growing consensus on macroeconomic policy objectives was an important factor in the 
European  integration  process,  and  it  seems  that  similar  phenomenon  is  taking  shape  in 
Africa. Indeed, in addition to favorable external environments, more prudent macroeconomic 
policies are clearly one of the key factors behind impressive growth performance of Africa in 
recent years.  
BIS Review 17/2007 
 1
  As  in  Europe,  there  also  seems  to  be  an  increasing  underlying  policy  will  to  drive  the 
integration  process  forward.  In  Europe,  this  policy  will  was  personified  in  certain  visionary 
strong  leaders  who  salvaged  and/or  reinvigorated  the  integration  process  at  some  critical 
junctures.  Africa  has  also  its  share  of  strong  leaders  but  owing  to  a  larger  number  of 
countries participating in the process keeping up a momentum toward integration is even a 
greater challenge than it was in the case of Europe.  
The  key  weakness  of  the  African  integration  process  when  compared  with  the  European 
experience,  is  the  lack  of  "natural",  market-driven  increase  in  economic  integration.  In 
Europe, trade interdependence increased rapidly following the Second World War and this 
trend has remained intact. However, in case of Africa, the level of intraregional trade remains 
low, even when taking into account the informal trade flows.  
The  role  of  monetary  integration  has  been  of  decisive  importance  in  the  European  context.  It  has 
yielded  significant  benefits  for  the  region  and  is  an  area  in  which  integration  has  become  most 
securely entrenched. The launch of the euro triggered many changes in the financial markets and we 
are still far away from realizing the full benefits of financial sector integration. The ECB continues to 
have a central role in facilitator or further financial integration within Europe, thus contributing to the 
improved growth potential of the euro area.  
Also in Africa, monetary integration has been a positive factor, as evidenced e.g., by the Franc Zone's 
contribution  to  relatively  better  price  stability.  Moreover,  monetary  cooperation  and  integration  will 
have an important role to play also going forward. At the same time, it was emphasized that the role of 
monetary  integration  should  not  be  overstated  because  the  main  impediments  to  integration  in  the 
Western and Central African region, and in Africa more broadly, are non-monetary by nature. 
• 
As was pointed out by several speakers, the key challenge in African economic integration is 
to  boost  cross-border  trade  within  the  continent,  i.e.,  within  and  across  various  regional 
integration structures. In this regard, lowering of relatively high tariff rates was mentioned as 
a priority. 
Also  a  number  of  other  well-known  measures  to  boost  trade  and  economic  growth  were 
discussed:  remove  red  tape,  harmonize  rules  and  practices,  improving  transportation  and 
energy infrastructure, improve business climate, invest in labor force skills, etc.  
 Also in Europe, there remains more to do on most of these areas, we need to continue to address 
similar issue in order to boost the growth potential.  
Our discussion has highlighted the crucial role of institution building for successful integration, both in 
Europe and Africa.  
The  underlying  logic  behind  any  economic  integration  process  is  to  pool  sovereignty  or  to  give  up 
some  flexibility  in  decision-making  in  order  to  realize  something  that  is  mutually  beneficial.  This 
requires  clear  "rules  of  game"  and  mutual  trust  in  the  decision-making  structures  and  at  each 
participant's national as well as at the supranational level. The more heterogeneous the participants 
are, the more essential it is to have in place clear decision-making structures.  
The EU was built gradually around a nucleus of countries that were relatively homogenous in terms of 
culture  and  the  level  of  economic  development.  Each  new  entrant  to  the  "club"  had  to  accept  the 
common  rules  of  the  game  and  had  to  adjust  its  own  institutions  to  comply  with  the  community 
standards.  Over  time,  as  the  number  and  heterogeneity  of  members  has  increased,  it  has  become 
evident that EU needs to update and strengthen its decision-making structures.  
To achieve this, the European countries need to come to a better understanding on an allocation of 
policy responsibilities to their most appropriate levels. While the subsidiary principle has served EU 
well  owing  to  its  flexibility,  it  alone  cannot  provide  sufficient  clarity  on  the  durable  allocation  of 
responsibilities. Clearer rules of game and more efficient decision making mechanisms would facilitate 
deeper  economic  integration  within  Europe,  the  draft  EU  "Constitution"  would  constitute,  despite  its 
shortcomings, is an important improvement in this respect.  
When talking about challenges brought about heterogeneity, it was noted that heterogeneity has not 
posed  significant  problems  for  the  Eurosystem's  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  it  was  emphasized  that 
some growth dispersion within monetary union is inevitable and even desirable. Related to this, I am 
personally fully convinced that individual euro area countries can cope with asymmetric shocks that 
are  inevitable  fact  of  life  in  a  monetary  union.  Indeed,  before  Finland  joined  EMU,  there  was  much 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2007
skepticism about its suitability for a country whose economy, in particular its export structure, was very 
different from the rest of the euro area. After more than eight years in the monetary union, many of the 
feared  asymmetric  shocks  have  been  realized  (e.g.,  volatile  swings  in  the  telecom  sector  and 
significant weakening of the U.S. dollar) but the Finnish economy has performed well, both in terms of 
growth and price stability.  
Turning back to the case of Africa, it seems that the combination of heterogeneity (both cultural and 
economical),  the  larger  number  of  initial  participants  and  the  proliferation  of  overlapping  integration 
initiatives  implies  special  challenges  for  devising  clear  and  credible  decision-making  structures  to 
support integration process. At the same time, these initial conditions imply that such structures are 
indispensable  for  successful  broadening  and  deepening  of  economic  integration.  Against  this 
background, the importance of strengthening domestic and supranational institutions by clarifying their 
decision-making and by making them more transparent and accountable was regarded as essential.  
Conclusion 
Finally, I would like to thank all the participants, especially our speaker and discussants. I think that we 
had a frank and meaningful discussion of the challenges facing both EU and Africa. I think that we all 
benefited and learned from this discussion that has offered many different perspectives to issues of 
common interest.  
It seems to me that, notwithstanding formidable challenges and many potential pitfalls, the outlook for 
greater integration in the both regions is fundamentally positive. With these remarks, I like to conclude 
and wish my African colleagues success in their challenging road toward further economic integration 
in Africa. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 3
