Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: The role Islamic financial institutions play 
in financing development projects 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the Regional Forum on the Role of Islamic Financial Institutions in Financing for 
Development, Manama, 4 September 2007. 
 Your  Excellencies,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  –  Good  Morning.  It  is  a 
great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  today,  and  to  help  inaugurate  this  important 
Regional Forum on the Role of Islamic Financial Institutions in Financing for Development.  
First, let me thank you all for participating at this event today. In particular, I would like to 
thank the officials of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 
(ESCWA) for their cooperation and work in putting on this conference with the Central Bank. 
I would also like to thank the sponsors for their kind assistance in staging this event.  
Islamic financial institutions have become increasingly involved in structuring and financing 
development projects in the region. Since Islamic financing must be based on real underlying 
assets, and preferably in the form of equity participation to create an equitable distribution of 
wealth, the opportunity for Islamic banks to participate in projects relating to infrastructure, 
industry and housing is unlimited.  
This  conference  is  particularly  significant  in  terms  of  its  timing,  and  the  subjects  to  be 
deliberated; because Islamic banking institutions are playing an increasingly important role in 
the global financial industry. In fact, Islamic banks, takaful companies, and investment funds 
that conform to the principles of Shari’a are attracting more interest from outside the region 
due the potential they represent in terms of capturing market share and mobilizing finance. 
The increasing international interest in Islamic banking is a reflection of the success that this 
industry  has  achieved  over  a  short  period.  Moreover,  Shari’a  principles  which  place 
emphasis on providing economic added-value to stakeholders and aim to create equivalence 
in  benefits  and  costs  free  from  harmful  speculation  are  gaining  more  attention  and  better 
understanding globally. 
The  increasing  demand  for  Shari’a  compliant  products  has  attracted  the  interest  of 
conventional international financial institutions, which have started their own activities in this 
field.  
I  note  that  many  foreign  supervisory  bodies  are  incorporating  amendments  to  their 
supervisory and regulatory legislation to allow for Islamic institutions and Shari’a compliant 
products which will reinforce the role of Islamic finance globally. 
Based  on  our  recognition  of  the  importance  of  the  Islamic  banking  industry  in  financing 
development  projects,  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  has  provided  the  requisite  supervisory 
and legislative foundation that corresponds to international best standards to facilitate further 
growth and  development of this industry. As such, these standards were incorporated into 
our prudential regulations that were issued from 2001 onwards. As a result, Bahrain became 
the  first  country  in  the  region  to  develop  and  implement  regulations  specific  to  the  Islamic 
banking industry.  
The Central Bank of Bahrain also pioneered the issuance of sukuk (Islamic bonds) in 2001 
and since a rolling programme of monthly issuance of the short-term Sukuk Al-Salam was 
put in place. Later that year, we started issuing medium and long term Ijara (leasing ) sukuk.  
Among new developments that the CBB expects to bring to market is an Islamic sell and buy 
back agreement (Repo). The Islamic repurchase agreement, which is in an advanced stage 
of development, will enable the simultaneous sale and repurchase at a future date of CBB’s 
BIS Review 98/2007 
 1
Institutions 
Islamic  Financial 
Ijara sukuk. This product will enable financial institutions to liquidate the Government sukuk 
for a short term in order to meet their liquidity needs.  
In  its  endeavours  to  create  more  opportunities  and  investment  alternatives  for  Islamic 
financial institutions, the CBB has also entered into strategic agreements with London Metal 
Exchange  (LME)  and  The  Tokyo  Commodity  Exchange  (TOCOM)  to  facilitate  trading  by 
Islamic financial institutions in international markets. To facilitate these agreements, the CBB 
has  asked  the  International  Islamic  Financial  Market  (IIFM)  to  develop  contracts  and 
documents  that  could  be  used  by  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  for  conducting  transactions 
through  commodity  murabahas.  And  I  understand  that  a  significant  progress  has  been 
achieved towards this goal.  
The  CBB  has  also  worked  with  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  and  other  stakeholders  to 
create various support institutions, necessary for the healthy development of the sector. As a 
result, Bahrain currently hosts 4 major Islamic supporting institutions, namely:  
• 
The  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for 
(AAOIFI),  
The international Islamic Financial Market (IIFM),  
The Islamic International Rating Agency (IIRA),  
The Council for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (CIBAFI),  
• 
• 
• 
The  CBB  is  also  cognizant  of  the  need  for  skilled  professionals  for  the  long  term 
development of the Islamic banking industry. Bahrain Institute for Banking Finance offers a 
wide  range  of  diploma  programmes  and  short  courses  in  the  area  of  Islamic  banking  and 
takaful.  
Other recent developments have included the establishment of a special Waqf Fund in 2006 
to  finance  and  publish  research,  studies  and  surveys;  making  available  specialist  training 
workshops and other educational opportunities;  
Undoubtedly, the increase in regional economic growth, coupled with economic reforms, and 
restructuring of the economies of the region have allowed for a bigger role to be played by 
the private sector. These developments in turn serve to increase investment opportunities in 
the Region for both Islamic and conventional financial institutions.  
I am confident that the gained intellectual capital residing in Islamic financial institutions shall 
contribute in bolstering regional economic development.  
In conclusion, I wish to repeat my thanks to you all for participating in this conference, and 
wish you success in your deliberations and discussion over the next two days, which I hope 
shall yield constructive and fruitful dividends.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2007
