Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The biggest risk - complacency 
Address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, delivered to the Círculo de 
Economía, Barcelona, 31 January 2007. 
 I  very  much  appreciate  the  opportunity  provided  to  me  by  the  Círculo  de  Economía  to  deliver  this 
address  at  this  time,  just  as  the  figures  for  last  year  have  been  released.  In  terms  of  the  Spanish 
economy's  performance,  the  figures  speak  for  themselves  and  confirm  a  favourable  short-term 
outlook.  Against  this  background,  I  think  it  is  very  important  to  reflect  on  the  underpinnings  of  the 
economy’s trajectory, in order to identify those factors that are genuinely relevant for projecting ahead 
the progress that has been achieved in recent decades. I have therefore thought it best to adopt a 
long-term  approach  for  this  speech,  going  beyond  conjunctural  analysis.  And  with  the  title  I  have 
chosen,  I  have  sought  precisely  to  stress  that  when  things  are  going  well  and  the  outlook  is 
favourable, the biggest risk is complacency.  
The  year  2006  ended  in  Spain  with  growth  at  around  3.8%,  outperforming  the  seven  biggest 
industrialised  countries.  This  is  the  first  time  in  many  years  that  this  has  happened.  Not  only  has 
growth in Spain been higher than in the euro area countries, but it has also been higher than in the 
United  Kingdom,  Japan  and  the  United  States,  which  in  recent  years  had  been  growing  at  a  rate 
above Spain. Indeed, on these results, Spanish GDP is now ranked seventh among the industrialised 
countries, in front of Canada and only behind the United States, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, 
France and Italy. Comparison with these seven countries can be taken as a basis to give us an idea of 
our strengths and weaknesses.  
In terms of job creation, Spain was once again prominent in 2006, with a growth rate of 3.56%. That 
ranks  us  first  among  the  big  seven,  and  if  we  compare  absolute  figures  (almost  700,000  jobs),  no 
other country in the developed world has created so much employment, with the sole exception of the 
United  States.  Turning  to  public  finances,  Spain's  end-year  surplus  also  compares  very  favourably 
with the deficits posted in the other main developed countries.  
Yet this should not hide the fact that we also ranked first in two unfavourable indicators. True, year-
end inflation in Spain was 2.7%, below the figure of 3.7% the previous year and, of course, far below 
the  level  of  4%  that  marked  the  end  of  some  of  the  high-growth  years  earlier  this  decade.  But 
compared with the other seven major industrialised countries, Spain had the highest inflation in 2006. 
And likewise for the current account deficit. Our deficit in 2006 will no doubt be close to 8% of GDP, 
the highest figure among the big economies.  
The Spanish economy has performed well against the backdrop of an expanding world economy and, 
most importantly for us, the firming of the recovery in the euro area. Global results in 2006 were once 
again surprising.  World growth was  around 5%,  greater  than  expected  at  the  start  of  the year,  and 
inflation was contained, despite the persistence of a notable rise in oil prices. The country that most 
improved in the euro area was Germany, where growth rose from 0.9% in 2005 to 2.5% in 2006. The 
fact  that  Germany  should  have  moved  onto  a  growth  path  after  so  many  years  of  sluggishness  is 
undoubtedly of great importance for the prospects of the Spanish economy.  
The optimism emanating from the booming international climate needs to be qualified, however. The 
world economy evidences certain problems and there are question marks about how hard or soft the 
landing of the US economy will be and whether the absorption of the balance of payments imbalances 
will  be  orderly  or  not.  Furthermore,  and  above  all,  uncertainty  looms  over  the  level  of  asset  prices 
following their high growth in recent years, in a situation of historically low long-term interest rates and 
exceptionally buoyant corporate earnings.  
In  the  case  of  the  Spanish  economy,  the  ongoing  expansion  has  been  accompanied  by  the 
emergence  of  certain  imbalances  that  pose  potential  risks  to  continuing  economic  dynamism.  The 
Banco de España has reiterated that Spanish growth is being driven by resident spending that has not 
always been met with sufficient responsiveness in domestic productive activity; consequently, cost and 
price pressures have ensued. These have contributed to certain imbalances whose presence means 
that  any  potentially  excessive  optimism  must  be  tempered.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  the  strong 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 1
growth of household debt, linked to intense house purchases in a property boom, and which is the 
other  side  of  the  coin  of  the  high  external  deficit  I  referred  to  earlier.  And  on  the  other  is  the 
persistence of an inflation differential with our European partners, which raises doubts about the future 
behaviour of our competitiveness. The Banco de España has issued warnings about these risk factors 
and will continue to monitor them closely and analyse the attendant developments in depth.  
Today, however, as initially stated, I should like to take advantage of the opportunity the Círculo de 
Economía has given me to take a longer-term perspective in examining recent developments in the 
Spanish  economy  and  its  future  possibilities,  moving  beyond  the  usual  short-dated  horizon  of 
economic forecasting exercises.  
Looking back, we can see how favourably the Spanish economy has fared over the past 20 years, 
which  is  an  incontrovertible  fact.  With  the  exception  of  the  1993  recession,  which  was  fairly 
widespread in Europe, our country has been growing since 1986 systematically at or above the level 
of growth in other European countries. And since 1994 we have had 13 uninterrupted years of growth, 
with mild oscillations around a generally high average rate.  
Spain's higher relative growth has many causes. Undoubtedly, the monetary policy of the European 
Central Bank, which has successfully achieved its objective of keeping euro area inflation and price 
expectations under control, has had a sharply expansionary effect on the Spanish economy. Indeed, 
lower interest rates have facilitated the growth of corporate and household debt and boosted spending 
and activity. But this cannot be identified as the sole cause behind our growth, and nor does it suffice 
to  explain  our  better  performance,  since  other  southern  European  countries  have  also  seen  their 
financial costs substantially cut and yet have not recorded comparable growth.  
Nor can there be many doubts about the favourable influence that the fiscal policies pursued since 
1994 have had on economic agents' confidence. With the help of European funds, these policies have 
enabled  the  budget  deficit  to  be  reduced  to  the  extent  that,  in  the  past  two  years,  we  have  run  a 
surplus. The beneficial effects of fiscal consolidation have been reinforced by the fact that the gradual 
elimination  of  the  budget  deficit  has  occurred  without  hardly  increasing  public  spending  relative  to 
GDP.  
Among the causes of the boom, we should also acknowledge the currency devaluations in the early 
90s.  These  took  place  as  a  result  of  the  turbulence  then  prevailing  and  led  to  a  peseta-euro 
conversion  rate  that  placed  us  in  a  very  favourable  starting  position  for  the  competitiveness  of  the 
Spanish economy.  
To find a reasonable explanation for the continuous higher growth over such a lengthy period, it is not 
sufficient  to  point  to  the  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  which,  at  least  in  the  monetary 
realm,  we  have  shared  with  other  countries.  We  must  also  turn  to  the  microeconomic  reforms 
undertaken  since  the  onset  of  democracy,  encompassing  areas  as  important  as  privatisation,  the 
labour  market  and  social  security 
liberalisation  of  numerous  markets; 
notwithstanding, as I shall indicate later, that there is still considerable work outstanding in this area.  
An  excellent  example  of  these  reforms  is  the  transformation  the  Spanish  financial  system  has 
undergone.  Here,  the  efficiencies  generated  by  liberalisation  contributed  to  all  players,  in  general, 
turning  in  a  sound  performance:  bank  and  savings-bank  managers,  trade  unions  and  employers' 
associations, governments and the financial supervisor all thus helped bring about an industry which is 
today held in worldwide esteem.  
Nonetheless,  although  these  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  policies  no  doubt  brought  their 
weight to bear, it would be very difficult to explain what has happened in Spain without turning to other 
more structural causes. One essential factor of growth in recent decades has been the change in the 
level  of  Spanish  educational  achievement  in  the  70s  and  80s,  which  meant  that  those  joining  the 
labour  market  in  the  90s  had  a  far  higher  level  of  educational  attainment  than  that  of  previous 
generations. And as well as higher education, these new entrants were also much greater in number 
than their predecessors. This indigenous population growth has been reinforced in recent years by the 
phenomenon of immigration, and has been an essential explanatory factor of our recent growth. 
In addition to the foregoing causes, which can be quantified, there are others that are more difficult to 
measure  since  they  refer  to  qualitative  aspects,  but  which  are  equally  relevant.  Thus,  for  instance, 
Spanish  trade  unions  have  progressively  adopted  a  bargaining  strategy  more  in  keeping  with  the 
requirements  stemming  from  Spanish  euro  area  membership  and  with  the  challenges  posed  by 
globalisation, and that has been conducive to employment generation and the growth of the Spanish 
economy in recent years.  
reforms,  and 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2007
Something similar may be said of the substantial continuity over time of the broad thrust of economic 
policy, irrespective of the different governments that have successively been in power. Such continuity 
has  also  impregnated  the  natural  debate  under  democracy  between  the  various  policy  options. 
Underpinning  this  debate  has  been  a  degree  of  agreement  on  the  importance  of  stability-oriented 
macroeconomic (fiscal and monetary) policies and the microeconomic policies geared to improving the 
workings of markets. And this is not something that is found in all developed countries. Specifically, 
continuity  in  privatisation  and  market  liberalisation  policies,  which  has  placed  Spain  in  a  leading 
position  in  continental  Europe  and  has  contributed  significantly  to  the  growth  in  the  past  20  years, 
would not have been possible without this underlying agreement.  
Whether this consensus is a result of the role played by Spanish economists, as Enrique Fuentes set 
out to demonstrate in his major work published by the Real Academia de Ciencias Morales y Políticas, 
will  be  something  for  historians  to  decide.  I  would,  however,  venture  to  say  that  in  the  economic 
debate  in  Spain  heterodox  positions,  or  those  furthest  removed  from  the  central  strand  of  current 
economic thought, are relatively marginal.  
Concerning qualitative aspects, I have no doubt that another of the factors behind Spain's dynamism 
is the improved management of Spanish firms. And behind this lies a process in whose beginnings 
Barcelona was a driving force. I refer here to the expansion and quality of our business schools, which 
enjoy  great  prestige  internationally.  In  the  business  school  rankings  of  recent  years,  three  Spanish 
institutions have systematically been in the top 30 worldwide.  
I would not wish to conclude this review of the factors contributing to the momentum of the Spanish 
economy  in  the  past  20  years  without  referring  to  the  important  role  decentralisation  has  played. 
Decentralisation is not free from risks - and I shall in fact deal with some that are most relevant to us - 
but it has acted in Spain as a powerful economic, social and cultural dynamo, in a similar way to what 
happened in post-war Germany with the creation of the Länders.  
***** 
Let us look now to the future. In the light of the trajectory of recent decades, what can we say about 
the future of the Spanish economy in the medium and long term?  
To tackle the future from a useful perspective, I shall follow Epictetus’s recommendation for gaining 
knowledge of the world. The stoic philosopher divided worldly matters into two: those that depend on 
us and those that do not. This classification is useful because, when talking about the future of the 
economy, it is worth focusing on those things that depend on the behaviour of economic agents and 
all those who intervene in framing economic, regulatory or supervisory policies, without wasting time 
regretting what we cannot change or influence.  
Among  the  things  beyond  our  control  is,  for  example,  the  external  environment,  including  the 
European economy which is so important for Spain, since our influence on developments in the rest of 
the world is very limited. It is also important to realise that the starting position of the Spanish economy 
with its strengths and weaknesses, which is the basis for predicting its short-term trajectory, is a given 
and we can do nothing to change it.  
As indicated at the start of my address, I do not wish today to dedicate my time or yours to analysing 
the economic situation or predicting the course of the economy in the coming months. Rather, I shall 
focus on those determinants of the future of the Spanish economy in the medium and long run that 
really depend on the behaviour of all economic agents.  
The  first  idea  I  wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  when  contemplating  the  future  is  that  the  favourable 
results of the Spanish economy in the past two decades cannot be attributed to a single cause; rather, 
they are due to a host of reasons. Accordingly, if we wish a similar performance in the coming years, 
we shall have to tend to the overall block of favourable factors we have enjoyed in past years and not 
believe that a simple repetition of one of the recipes applied may suffice. That is all the more relevant 
bearing in mind that some of the impulses in the past - such as those stemming from devaluations or 
from European funds, for instance - will not come round again.  
In my opinion, those who say we should focus exclusively on sound fiscal policies are mistaken, as are 
those  who  believe  wage  moderation  will  suffice  and  those  who  think  that  it  is  enough  simply  to 
continue pushing through structural reforms. I believe any partial approach is erroneous. We must look 
to all the fronts. If our fiscal performance or the labour climate worsens, if the consensus on the broad 
thrust of economic policies I referred to earlier is broken, or if we bring structural reforms to a halt, it 
will not be possible to maintain favourable results in the future.  
BIS Review 32/2007 
 3
True, having joined the euro area, some sources of instability have disappeared. The volatility of key 
variables for economic agents such as the interest rate, inflation or the exchange rate has diminished. 
But  growth  has  continued  to  be  unbalanced  in  those  aspects  I  have  already  mentioned,  such  as 
household  and  corporate  debt,  and  continuing  price  and  cost  differentials.  At  issue  here  are 
imbalances posing risks to growth sustainability within an area with very high stability requirements by 
Spanish standards.  
Yet  while  such  risks  are  very  important  for  the  Spanish  economy,  the  biggest  risk  of  all  is 
complacency.  It  is  vital  to  maintain  the  attitude  of  non-complacency  which  has  driven  economic 
agents,  governments  and  other  players  who  have  sustained  the  Spanish  dynamism  of  recent 
decades. A change in attitude which were to convert the satisfaction with the current situation into an 
excuse to detain the drive to innovate and reform would, sooner or later, bring the ongoing process to 
a halt. We must continue striving to discover how we can improve the performance of our institutions 
and companies. This is the main idea I wish to share with you today: let us not fall into complacency. 
However  much  we  have  progressed,  let  us  not  stop.  There  are  examples  of  developed  countries 
which, having achieved very favourable income and wealth levels, lost their reforming dynamism and, 
as  a  result,  entered  lasting  situations  of  slackness  and  sluggishness  with  serious  employment 
problems and a deterioration in confidence at all levels.  
It is therefore important to identify the specific policies we should foster in the future. With monetary 
policy now transferred to the European Central Bank, the policies left to us are fiscal and structural 
ones. And if I were to be consistent with the recommendation I made to watch over all fronts, I ought 
now to give an exhaustive list of each and every economic policy. But as Madame du Chatelet’s friend 
said, “The secret of being a bore is to tell everything”. Thus, out of respect for you, I shall choose only 
what I consider to be most significant in the fiscal and structural field.  
Structurally speaking, while the loss of competitiveness is one of the risks looming over the economy, 
the boosting of productivity should remain the driving principle of all reforms. The National Reforms 
Programme,  as  indicated  in  the  Banco  de  España  Annual  Report  last  June,  duly  includes  the 
liberalisation  and  market  flexibility  policies  the  Spanish  economy  needs.  It  is  now  a  question  of 
adhering to it. The programme provides for very important liberalisations such as those of the railway 
and energy sectors, which have so often been put back. If they are diligently and ambitiously rolled 
out,  they  could  contribute  effectively  to  the  growth  of  the  Spanish  economy.  The  gearing  of  public 
spending towards infrastructure and investment in Research, Development and Innovation should also 
be maintained.  
Promoting  an  environment  that  is  more  conducive  to  both  the  creation  and  closure  of  companies 
would  be  a  very  effective  means  of  modernising  the  Spanish  economy,  since  it  could  provide  the 
measures of flexibility and adaptability that are needed to compete amid the pressures generated by 
globalisation and to boost the incorporation of technological and managerial innovations. But of all the 
structural policies, the most important is undoubtedly education. As I have said, the educational and 
training  drives  of  the  past  decades  are  largely  responsible  for  the  results  achieved  by  the  Spanish 
economy, and improving education and training today is, once again, pivotal to our future growth. 
When  assessing  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  we  often  refer  to  differentials  with  other  peer 
economies in terms of inflation, productivity and many other variables. And it is right to do so since, 
against  a  backdrop  of  international  openness  and  integration,  relative  behaviour  and,  in  short, 
competitiveness  are  essential  for  the  continuous  improvement  of  well-being.  However,  the  most 
serious  gap  between  Spain  and  the  other  major  industrialised  countries  is  in  the  field  of  education. 
True, we have improved in this area in recent years. The proportion of the population aged 25-64 with 
a secondary education has risen from 24% in 1992 to 48% in 2005. But we have yet to reach 50% 
when the figure is 83% in Germany, 72% in the United Kingdom, 66% in France and over 80% in the 
Nordic countries. Conceivably, these differences might be heavily influenced by the relatively recent 
nature of our educational development; but looking at the percentages for young people in the 25-34 
age group, it can be seen that, despite the progress recorded, a gap exists which, though moderate 
(64% in Spain compared with figures of over 80% in most of the major countries), remains illustrative 
of our continuing laggardness.  
In  the  current  decentralised  State,  the  central  government  retains  few  responsibilities  in  respect  of 
education,  which  means  that  educational  progress  in  Spain  is  fundamentally  in  the  hands  of  the 
regional governments. These may thus be said to have a major responsibility in determining our long-
term  growth  prospects  and  the  future  functioning  of  the  Spanish  economy.  And  this  conclusion  is 
further reinforced when considering the changes that have come about in budgetary policies. Hence, 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2007
insofar  as  the  decentralised  structure  of  the  State  has  played  a  very  positive  role  in  growth  in  the 
recent past, as I said at the start of my address, when speaking of the future it emerges once again as 
a determinant of the first order. As is known, public spending by territorial governments is more than 
two  and  a  half  times  that  of  central  government.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  what  regional  and  local 
governments  do  is,  for  the  purposes  of  maintaining  the  public  spending/GDP  ratio,  much  more 
important than what central government does.  
The Budgetary Stability laws have taken this essential change in the structure of the State into account 
when  establishing  the  budgetary  discipline  rules.  And  to  date  the  stability  objective  has  been 
reasonably  met.  But  this  is  an  area  where  we  cannot  lower  our  guard.  As  I  have  said,  one  of  the 
advantages behind Spain's growth differential when compared with other European countries is the 
fact that our public spending/GDP ratio is below 40%, while in other countries it is close to or exceeds 
50%.  The  need  to  maintain  this  comparative  advantage  must  be  clear.  And  this  means  that  when 
public demands for education and health care exert pressure on territorial governments, especially at 
times when the growth of revenue is not as high as it currently is, it will be necessary for increases in 
education spending, which are so important for growth, to be offset by cuts in spending intended for 
other less priority areas. As regards health care, it should be recalled that there is extensive potential 
for  improving  management,  potential  which  we  must  harness.  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the 
experiences  of  other  European  countries  that  opted  for  a  model  of  increasing  public  spending  on 
health but which, nevertheless, did not attain the desired results. 
Decentralisation has accounted for much of our strength in recent decades and growth in the coming 
years will depend greatly on which direction we take. Employers, for instance, have recently issued a 
warning about the potential impact of decentralisation on certain regulatory aspects affecting market 
integration. The example of Germany's economic history in the 60 years since the Second World War, 
which  may  very  briefly  be  described  as  40  years  of  vigorous  expansion  and  almost  20  years  of 
sluggishness,  should  be  food  for  thought  when  extracting  all  the  strong  and  favourable  aspects  of 
decentralisation and avoiding those phenomena entailing risks to the efficient working of the economy, 
on which any lasting improvement in well-being ultimately hinges.  
Finally, another policy area to which great heed should be paid when seeking to sustain healthy public 
finances  in  the  medium  and  long  run  is  that  of  Social  Security.  Admittedly,  the  forecasts  available 
denote a lack of major problems in the Social Security system in the coming years; however, looking 
further  ahead,  it  is  clear  that  if  changes  are  not  made,  the  system  may  become  a  considerable 
deadweight  holding  back  growth  in  the  Spanish  economy.  When  the  long-term  consequences  are 
taken  properly  into  account,  it  is  fairly  clear  that  the  sooner  Social  Security  reform  begins,  the  less 
costly it will be. Or stated the other way round, if Social Security reform continues to be delayed, we 
may find ourselves faced with a truly dangerous dilemma: either changes are undertaken that will have 
to  be  more  drastic  and  may  be  traumatic  in  some  respect,  or  otherwise  growth  in  the  Spanish 
economy will be seriously impaired.  
In sum, on viewing recent developments in the Spanish economy we can draw a positive assessment 
that  should  not  disregard  the  accompanying  imbalances.  And  from  a  broader  medium-to-long-term 
perspective, we also see encouraging potential that likewise merits a favourable judgment. However, 
in  order  to  project  ahead  a  positive  growth  differential  relative  to  the  prevailing  pattern  in  the 
industrialised  countries,  we  must  not  lapse  into  complacency  and  must  keep  reform  firmly  on  the 
agenda. Evidently, reforms will have to be different from those adopted to date, but should be based 
on  a  similar  philosophy:  to  maintain  fiscal  soundness  against  a  background  of  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability,  to  push  ahead  with  liberalisation  and  market  flexibility,  and  to  give  weight  to 
education and training. If I had to opt for just one of these messages, highlighting what I consider to be 
the main task needed to anchor the dynamism of the Spanish economy in the long run, I would not 
hesitate to say that it is to improve the levels and quality of education.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 32/2007 
 5
