David Dodge: Promoting sound economic policies globally and locally 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Americas  Society  and  the 
Council of the Americas, New York, 29 March 2007. 
 It has been three years since I last had the opportunity to address the Council of the Americas. Since 
then, the global economy has continued to expand at a remarkable pace. Indeed, over the past five 
years, it has grown more than in any five-year period since the Second World War. 
In my opinion, much of this performance can be credited to the increasingly widespread acceptance of 
the  need  for  a  liberalized  worldwide  financial  and  trade  order.  Many  countries  that  once  closed 
themselves to the outside world are now actively engaged in the global economy. Notable examples 
are China, India, and, within the Americas, Chile. Many states that twenty five years ago would have 
been considered "less-developed countries," or that were within the sphere of the former Soviet Union, 
are now experiencing the benefits of economic openness, and millions of people have been lifted out 
of extreme poverty.  
In Canada and the United States, it is understood by many – although certainly not by all – that it is in 
our own interest, both economic and geopolitical, to increase the number of countries taking part in a 
liberalized financial and trade order. While there have been clear successes, particularly in Asia, there 
have  also  been  clear  disappointments.  Within  Latin  America,  there  have  perhaps  been  more 
disappointments  than  successes.  And  even  in  those  Latin  American  countries  that  have  taken  real 
steps to join the global economy, anti-globalization sentiment remains quite strong. 
So today, I want to talk about the factors that have led to either success or setback in our progress 
towards a liberalized global framework for trade and finance. Then, I want to talk about the particular 
challenges  that  we  face  in  promoting  active  involvement  in  the  global  economy  by  countries 
throughout  Latin  America.  I  will  confine  my  remarks  to  economics,  although  the  challenges  clearly 
extend well beyond this domain. 
Developing a global policy framework 
The best place to begin is with the aftermath of World War II. Delegates to the Monetary and Financial 
Conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, began to create an economic order where trade could 
flourish, and postwar reconstruction could take place. Led by a strong contingent of American, British, 
and, if I may say so, Canadian representatives, the delegates set out to establish new international 
institutions. These would serve as tables around which policy-makers would gather to work out what 
could be called the "rules of the game" for a new financial and trade order.  
Over time, policy-makers at these new institutions had some real success in developing the rules of 
the  game  for  several  important  areas.  Early  on,  there  was  the  establishment  of  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which would 
become  the  World  Bank.  Later,  the  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  was  launched,  which 
would ultimately become today's World Trade Organization (WTO). And over time, the Organisation 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  evolved  to  become  a  venue  where  financial 
authorities  could  gather  and  discuss  how  best  to  promote  strong  economies  through  liberalized 
markets, freer trade, and sound macroeconomic policies.  
Initially,  the  rules  of  the  game  were  meant  to  apply  to  many  of  the  so-called  "first  world"  nations, 
including the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. And for 
many years after the Second World War, the rules that had been developed served these countries 
reasonably well. Indeed, the global economic order was sufficiently successful that a number of other 
nations began to see how their economies and their citizens could benefit from taking part in it. And 
so, more nations began to adopt the policy frameworks needed to become engaged in an increasingly 
inter-connected  global  economy.  I'll  have  more  to  say  on  this  in  a  few  minutes.  But  first,  I  want  to 
discuss  the  struggles  of  policy-makers  to  keep  the  rules  of  the  game  relevant,  given  the  changing 
nature of the global economy. 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 1
in 
the  past 
tremendously  over 
few  decades.  Enormous  advances 
Updating the rules of the game 
The  need  to  keep  the  rules  of  the  game  updated  is  no  surprise.  After  all,  the  world  economy  has 
changed 
transportation, 
communications, and information technology have led to widespread gains in productivity and massive 
changes  in  the  structure  of  the  world  economy.  While  this  has  been  going  on,  new  economic 
powerhouses have emerged. In response to these developments, the rules of the game have evolved 
somewhat,  as  have  the  institutions  supporting  the  global  financial  and  trade  order.  But  to  be  blunt, 
neither the rules nor the institutions have fully kept up with the times.  
To illustrate my point, I'm going to say a few words about the IMF in particular. The Fund was critical in 
establishing  some  of  the  rules  for  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rates  in  the  years  immediately 
following the Second World War. But more recently, the IMF has been perceived by some countries as 
being  irrelevant,  and  its  activities  have  sparked  resentment  and  outright  hostility  in  other  countries, 
including some in Latin America. 
A major source of this hostility and perception of irrelevance is the fact that the Fund has not evolved 
in step with the global economy. And this lack of evolution contributed to the Fund's inability to prevent 
or even to mitigate international crises such as the Asian Crisis of 1997 and the Argentinean crisis in 
2001. In the absence of global co-operation to update the rules of the game, and an effective IMF to 
support these rules, we have seen a drift towards regional initiatives. And rather than using the IMF to 
efficiently pool international reserves, countries such as China have set out to accumulate very high 
levels of reserves.  
I have made several speeches in other places about the need to strengthen the surveillance function 
of the IMF, to improve its governance, and to make it more representative of today's global economy. I 
won't repeat those arguments here; if you are interested in the details of our recommendations for the 
IMF, I'd invite you to read the lecture I gave one year ago at Princeton University.  
The point I want to make today is that strengthening the IMF could help some countries – including 
those in Latin America – to willingly support and engage with the Fund. And this would increase the 
chances that these countries would willingly engage in the global economy. Unfortunately, in recent 
years, the attention of Canada and the United States has focused mainly on Asia. We have worked 
hard to help the Asian economies integrate into the global economy and take their rightful place at the 
policy-makers' table. We've encouraged these countries to play by the rules of the game with respect 
to international trade, in particular, by supporting their accession to the WTO. But at the same time, we 
have become concerned that these nations, notably China, are not always following the rules of the 
game with respect to monetary and exchange rate issues. Rather than deal with this issue through a 
strengthened IMF, we in the G-7, including the United States, have often dealt with it on a country-by-
country basis. 
My  contention  is  that  all  of  us  in  the  G-7,  particularly  the  United  States  –  which  truly  believes  in  a 
liberal financial and trade order – should lead the effort to strengthen multilateral institutions, such as 
the  IMF.  Not  only  would  a  stronger  IMF  be  a  more  effective  forum  for  dealing  with  the  policy 
challenges  now  seen  in  Asia,  it  would  also  be  more  effective  in  encouraging  the  countries  of  Latin 
America to engage more fully in a liberalized financial and trade order.  
Policy challenges in Central and South America 
Because  of  our  recent  focus  on  Asia,  we  have,  in  many  ways,  neglected  the  need  to  promote 
economic  progress  and  development  in  our  own  backyard.  We  need  to  pay  equal  attention  to 
encouraging global economic involvement and promoting appropriate policies in our hemisphere, so 
that the countries of Latin America and their citizens can share the benefits of globalization. 
But  this  is  not  a  simple  task.  The  challenges  of  Latin  America  differ  from  those  in  Asia  and  other 
regions.  And  the  task  is  made  more  difficult  because  there  is  no  table  around  which  the  economic 
policy-makers  of  this  hemisphere  regularly  gather.  There  is  the  Organization  of  American  States 
(OAS), but it deals mainly with political and strategic issues. There is CEMLA, but it deals with the 
limited range of issues common to the central bankers of the Americas. There is the Inter-American 
Development Bank, but it is more project-oriented than policy-oriented. And at the IMF, the countries 
of  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  island  nations  are  divided  among  four  executive  directors.  In 
short,  we really  do  need  a  table  around  which  all  the  economic policy-makers  of  the  Americas can 
gather. Unfortunately, there is no OECD for the Americas.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2007
If  there  were  an  OECD  for  the  Americas,  what  would  it  do?  Essentially,  it  could  serve  the  same 
function as the original OECD did for Western Europe. It could be a forum where economic policy-
makers would discuss how best to promote strong economies through sound monetary, financial, and 
fiscal policies, as well as how to promote liberalized markets and freer trade.  
I do not know how such a table could be created, or how we could ensure that discussions would be 
as  fruitful  as the  ones  at  the  OECD.  But  creating  such  a  table  could be a  very  positive step,  and  I 
would be most interested in hearing your thoughts on this during our discussion period. 
Monetary policy 
Let me now take a few minutes to discuss some of the issues that could be dealt with at an OECD for 
the  Americas.  I'll  begin  with  my  subject  area:  monetary  policy.  The  first  point  to  make  is  that  Latin 
America has to overcome a history of high inflation and, occasionally, hyperinflation. High inflation has 
not only held back economic development in Latin America, it has also had a devastating effect on its 
poorest  citizens,  who  cannot  shield  themselves  from  its  pernicious  consequences.  Inflation  has 
exacerbated the problems of an already skewed income distribution. 
Some countries have made substantial progress in getting inflation under control and keeping it under 
control. I am thinking here of Chile, Mexico, and more recently, Brazil. In these cases, central banks 
were given sufficient independence from government and tasked with controlling inflation, although I 
hasten to add that the independence of the Brazilian central bank has never been formally legislated. 
These central banks were then able to make progress by adopting an inflation-targeting framework, 
supported by a floating exchange rate.  
In  a  Latin  American  setting,  inflation  targeting  has  been  tremendously  helpful  in  promoting 
macroeconomic  stability,  facilitating  investment,  and  very  importantly,  aiding  the  most  vulnerable 
members  of  society.  Indeed,  a  low-inflation  environment  has  allowed  banks  to  offer  credit  to  some 
households for the very first time – often a crucial first step in escaping poverty. I'll say more about the 
banking sector in a moment. 
I should also mention that some smaller nations in the Caribbean and Central America have achieved 
low inflation, quite appropriately, by fixing their exchange rate to the U.S. dollar.  
But while we can celebrate some monetary progress, we must also consider the country with the most 
troubled  monetary  policy  history:  Argentina.  This  is  a  country  that  has  all  the  natural  advantages 
needed to be one of the richest in the hemisphere. But Argentina has consistently failed to live up to 
its  potential,  and  bad  policy  choices  are  largely  to  blame.  The  independence  of  Argentina's  central 
bank  has  been  repeatedly  undermined,  and  unfortunately,  the  current  policy  path  chosen  by  the 
government is once again leading to high inflation in that country. Of course, Argentina isn't alone in 
this regard. 
Perhaps the most important thing that Canada and the United States can do is to demonstrate our 
support  for  those  countries  that  have  made  the  right  policy  choices.  In  this  way,  we  can  show  the 
citizens and their governments that they are on the right path to development. That is why the Bank of 
Canada has worked closely with the Banco Central de Chile, the Banco de México, and the Banco 
Central do Brasil, to provide support and technical assistance as they implemented inflation targeting. 
Financial system policy  
Next, I'll say just a few words about financial system policy. Here, I'm referring to the rules governing 
banking and the financial sector, as well as policies to support sound clearing and settlement systems. 
This is an area that is often overlooked. A sound and stable banking sector is, of course, enormously 
helpful in encouraging investment, which leads to increased employment and economic activity. And, 
as I just mentioned, extending access to credit to a broader segment of the population is a critical step 
towards  economic  progress.  With  increased  access  to  credit,  the  poorest  members  of  society  are 
enabled to break out of the poverty trap. 
Progress in the financial sector area has been quite good in several countries for a number of years. 
Indeed,  one  could  argue  that  there  has  been  more  progress  in  Latin  America  on  financial  system 
policies than there has been in Asia. The result has been that some commercial banks from the United 
States,  Canada,  and  Europe,  have  expanded  into  the  region.  But  it  is  important  that  we  also 
encourage  local  financial  institutions  in  Latin  America.  In  the  long  run,  having  a  sound  and  vibrant 
BIS Review 31/2007 
 3
financial  sector  in  place  is  in  everybody's  interest,  even  those  financial  institutions  that  would  face 
increased competition in these markets. 
Another point to be made here is that policies must be put in place to encourage the development of 
local  capital  markets  across  Latin  America,  beginning  with  government  bond  markets.  It  is  through 
both  capital  markets  and  financial  institutions  that  savings  are  efficiently  turned  into  productive 
investments, stimulating economic growth and helping to alleviate unemployment and poverty.  
Clearly,  an  OECD-like  table,  where  policy-makers  in  Latin  America  can  learn  from  each  other,  and 
from our experience in Canada and the United States, could be tremendously helpful in this area. It 
would  be  very  beneficial  to  have  a  forum  where  economic  policy-makers  could  gather  to  discuss 
issues and devise solutions to help strengthen financial sector policies across the Americas. 
Fiscal policy 
Now  let  me  turn  to  fiscal  policy.  In  many  ways,  this  has  been  the  Achilles  heel  of  Latin  American 
economic policy. There are very few examples of sound fiscal frameworks in the region, although I 
would point to Chile, which has adopted the prudent policy of sequestering the windfall gains realized 
from the sharp increase in the prices of its exports. Elsewhere, Mexico and Brazil have made some 
progress,  although  not  as  much  as  they  might  like  to  see.  And  even  where  there  has  been 
improvement, countries still lack an anchor for their fiscal policy, although I have to acknowledge that, 
more  often  than  not,  the  problems  are  political  rather  than  economic.  That's  no  different  from  the 
situation in many of the OECD countries in the 1960s and 1970s. But what was helpful to the fiscal 
authorities of the OECD is that they received support from the analysis carried out at that institution, as 
well as from their colleagues around the OECD table. 
This  is  another  area  where  a  regional  table  for  the  Americas  would  be  a  tremendous  help.  Fiscal 
authorities from the region could gather to exchange policy advice and develop strategies to deal with 
their  situations.  And  civil  servants  could  gather  to  share  best  practices  with  regard  to  tax  and 
expenditure issues. We in Canada and the United States can offer advice. But, ultimately, fiscal policy 
in most of Latin America is a political problem, and it will be up to the people and governments of Latin 
America to solve it. 
Trade policy 
The  final  area  I  want  to  address  is  trade  policy.  We  can  all  agree  that  more  open  trade  is  key  to 
economic development. Canadians and Americans have clearly benefited from freer trade, and there 
is a reasonable degree of support for further trade liberalization. However, in Latin America, there is 
much  greater  resistance  to  freer  trade,  and  much  greater  popular  support  for  protectionist  policies. 
Indeed, a number of countries have chosen to adopt trade policies that impede growth and jeopardize 
improvements in living standards. 
But while governments in Canada and the United States generally favour and advocate freer trade, we 
don't always act on our own beliefs. And since we do a poor job in demonstrating our own willingness 
to live by the principles we espouse, it's not surprising that we in Canada and the United States have 
been unable to convince our neighbours in the Americas that the best way to raise incomes and lift 
people out of poverty is by taking on the challenges of free trade and global competition. 
One way for us to do a better job is to work more diligently towards a resumption of the Doha Round of 
trade  talks,  and  to  show  a  greater  willingness  to  open  our  own  markets  to  products  in  which  Latin 
American  countries  have  a  comparative  advantage.  I  recognize  that  it  is  easy  for  me,  as  a  central 
banker, to say that we need to confront our own protectionism. But this is a political problem that we in 
Canada and the United States have to solve. 
These areas – monetary policy, financial sector policy, fiscal policy, and trade – are what I see as the 
four major economic policy challenges for Latin America. And these are four areas where it would be 
very helpful to have a forum for economic policy-makers in the Americas, a forum that could facilitate 
greater co-operation in the hemisphere. My remarks today reflect a long-standing tradition at the Bank 
of Canada of working with our central bank colleagues throughout the hemisphere. But beyond the 
Bank's collaboration  in  the  region,  Canada  enjoys  an  enduring connection with  the  Americas.  More 
Canadians now travel to Latin America and the Caribbean than to any other part of the world outside 
the United States. Canada joined the OAS and signed NAFTA in the early 1990s. Our involvement 
with  the  Americas  has  grown,  encouraged  by  democratic  transition,  increased  commercial  and 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2007
investment  opportunities,  and  the  movement  of  people.  And  Canada's  engagement  will  continue  to 
grow.  In  a  speech  last  month,  our  Prime  Minister  noted  that  Canada  "will  seek  to  re-engage 
relationships throughout the Americas, with our partners in Mexico, the Caribbean, and Central and 
South America." 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude. The prosperity that we enjoy in Canada and the United 
States is a testament to the ability of free markets to generate wealth and raise living standards. We 
understand the gains that can come from building a strong global financial and trade order, backed by 
appropriate rules of the game. Other governments have worked hard to engage in this global order 
because they, too, understand the benefits that it can bring to their citizens. 
We now face two challenges. First, we must think globally about how best to update the rules of the 
game to take into account the evolving nature of the global economy. Second, we must act locally, 
within our own hemisphere, to help our neighbours to see that integration into the global economy is in 
everyone's interest. 
Neither of these tasks will be easy. They will require patience and persistence. And along the way, we 
will encounter governments that are more inclined to withdraw from the process than to engage with 
the  global  economy.  But  we  can't  let  the  difficulty  dissuade  us  from  our  goal.  To  the  delegates  at 
Bretton Woods, the task of rebuilding the world's economy must have appeared daunting indeed. And 
there were times when the political will to see this task through appeared to be lacking. But eventually, 
a  spirit  of  co-operation  overcame  the  obstacles,  and  policy-makers  gathered  around  tables  at 
international institutions and built a liberalized financial and trade order – an order that has led to the 
prosperity we know today. It is time to rekindle that spirit of co-operation and to build a table for the 
Americas, so that the benefits of the global economy can be spread throughout our hemisphere.  
BIS Review 31/2007 
 5
