Caleb M Fundanga: Payment system developments in the region 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of the 2007 
SADC Payment Systems Regional Conference, Livingstone, 2 April 2007. 
 • SADC Payment Systems Project Team Leader; 
• SADC Payment Systems Project Country Leaders; 
• Chairperson, Bankers Association of Zambia; 
• Delegates from all SADC Countries; 
• Distinguished invited guests; and 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I wish to welcome you all to Zambia 
and Livingstone in particular. For those of you coming to Livingstone for the first time, you will no doubt 
soon discover that this historical city, which incidentally was Zambia’s capital city until 1935 when it 
was  moved  to  Lusaka,  is  one  of  the  world’s  pristine  tourist  destination  and  boasts  of  a  number  of 
magnificent sights and places of cultural interest. For those of you that have been here before, I wish 
you a joyous time as you renew your acquaintance with this beautiful city and enigmatic Victoria Falls. 
To all of you, I implore you to shop around and take a piece of Livingstone as souvenir on your return. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to thank you all for being here for the 2007 SADC Payment Systems 
Regional Conference. This event has now become interwoven into the tradition and fabric of SADC. It 
has come to symbolize our commitment to collaboration and consultation within the SADC Committee 
of  Central  Bank  Governors  (CCBG)  and  annually  marks  our  contribution  to  the  process  of  regional 
economic  co-operation  and  integration.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  applauds  the 
favourable  response  from  all  central  banks,  individuals  and  other  institutions  represented  here  for 
allowing their members of staff to attend this event. As Bank of Zambia, we believe this event provides 
an excellent opportunity for exchanging views and sharing ideas in improving our national payment 
arrangements to foster economic growth and integration. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, lessons from the development of payment systems in the European Union and 
the  United  States of  America provide a  useful  guide  for emerging  market  economies such  as  ours. 
That be as it may, recent technological advancements and developments in China and India are also 
instructive as they glaringly indicate that it is possible to leap frog some of the historical development 
experiences  of  these  major  industrialized  economies.  However,  it  is  without  a  doubt  that  this  will 
require the concerted efforts and commitment of all those involved in the transformation of national 
payment  systems  to  stay  the  course  as  challenges  are  abound.  For  instance,  it  is  quite  clear  that 
consumer  demand  for  payment  services  largely  outstrip  supply  and  more  work  needs  to  go  into 
improving  the  outreach,  efficiency  and  pricing  of  existing  payment  arrangements.  In  this  regard, 
payment  systems  researchers  warn  that  if  left  unattended  or  unresolved  these  challenges  could 
eventually overwhelm us and hinder the effectiveness of payment systems and hence commerce. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would therefore like to salute the SADC Payment Systems Project Team for 
showing good leadership. This has ensured that the basis of the evolution of payment systems in the 
region  is  collaborative  and  consultative,  which  is  critical  to  the  overarching  objective  of  regional 
economic  co-operation  and  integration.  In  this  regard,  not  only  have  most  SADC  member  country 
implemented  real  time  settlement  systems,  but  these  developments  have  also  been  anchored  on 
common and jointly developed business and technical specifications. Other developments include the 
introduction of automated clearing houses. This particular development has positively contributed to 
improving  the  processing  efficiency  and  reducing  risks  associated  with  cheque  transactions.  Most 
importantly, perhaps, is that this development has enabled the introduction of systems such as direct 
deposits  (or  credits)  and  direct  payments  (or  debits)  which  are  truly  convenient  mechanisms  for 
handling the direct deposits of salaries and wages of workers amongst others. These direct-credit and 
direct-debit systems are also used to handle regular monthly bills for utilities and could potentially be 
used in administering pensions and many other government benefits. It is also instructive to note that 
these  developments  are  supported  by  sound  legal  bases  that  ensure  that  payment  systems  in  the 
region are safe, practical and meet international best practice. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, payment instruments and mechanisms are not new in this region. We all are 
aware  from  our  own  history  that  some  kind  of  instrument  and  mechanism  has  always  existed  to 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
facilitate trade and other endeavours. What is abundantly clear, however, is that given the increased 
mobility of the citizens within the respective SADC member countries between cities and rural areas 
and  at  times  between  member  countries,  the  need  for  payment  instruments  and  the  attendant 
mechanisms to facilitate safe and efficient remittances is arguably the relatively newer phenomenon. It 
is therefore the expectation of the Bank of Zambia that the 2007 SADC Payment Systems Regional 
Conference will discuss some of the most important trends and other strategic priorities confronting 
banks, payment  system  businesses,  merchants  and  other  service  providers  involved  in  the  delivery 
channel for payment and other financial services. This is imperative as it would facilitate the drawing 
up  of  a  development  agenda  of  future  priorities  and  contextualise  the  future  of  payment  system 
oversight. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  since  the  establishment  of  the  CCBG  a  decade  ago,  methods  of  effecting 
payments  and  other  financial  transactions  have  quickly  become  sophisticated  with  a  trend  towards 
execution  in  real  time  electronic  media.  All  this  is  taking  place  because  consumer  confidence  is 
growing in these instruments and mechanisms, which have been supported by growing confidence in 
SADC  member  countries’  economies  in  general  and  stability  of  the  national  financial  systems  in 
particular. It is therefore the expectation of the Bank of Zambia that this Conference will discuss this 
trend and its implications, particularly with regard to limited accessibility to technology and technical-
know how of consumers in SADC member countries. Other themes I am sure you will deliberate upon 
include confidentially of financial information, money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Effective payment system oversight needs to be promoted so that public confidence in the safety and 
soundness of the national payment systems is maintained. Understandably, this is a new area and in 
most member countries work is still exploratory. I therefore urge you all to double your efforts in this 
regard and deliver on this very important central bank responsibility. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  another  new  area  is  that  of  mobile  phone  enabled  payment  services.  This 
development  has  a  huge  potential  to  help  the  SADC  region  leap  frog  a  number  of  financial  sector 
development  challenges  particularly  those  related  to  improving  access  and  availability  of  financial 
services.  This  is  because  mobile  phone  based  services,  particularly  those  focused  on  low-value 
payments  where  swift  and  convenient  service  is  the  primary  goal  could  be  a  practical  solution  for 
SADC member countries. The challenge therefore is how well we all respond without damaging this 
sprouting and potentially cost-effective delivery channel for financial services, which can be damaged 
with over regulation or lack of mitigation for the risks its poses. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to conclude by reminding all delegates that it is my hope that at the end 
of  the  Conference  all  of  you  will  have  obtained  a  better  understanding  of  payment  systems  best 
practice.  Equally  important  you  will  also  have  obtained  a  clearer  view  of  the  purpose  of  payment 
systems within a developmental context and the need for concerted efforts in balancing our responses 
in  a  manner that  is  supportive  of  the  objective of  attaining economic  inclusion  and  growth,  regional 
economic co-operation and integration. 
With these remarks, I declare the Conference officially open and wish you successful deliberations. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
