Toshihiko Fukui: Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control (Bank 
of Japan’s overall review) 
Statement of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's 
Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs, 
House of Councillors, 10 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the first 
half of fiscal 2006 to the Diet on December 12, 2006. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present 
an overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's economy is expanding moderately. 
Exports  have  continued  to  increase  due  to  the  expansion  of  overseas  economies.  Business  fixed 
investment  has  also  continued  to  increase  against  the  background  of  high  corporate  profits  and 
generally favorable business sentiment. The positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector 
has  been  feeding  through  into  the  household  sector.  As  firms  have  been  increasingly  feeling  a 
shortage of labor, the number of employees has continued to increase steadily and household income 
has continued to rise moderately. In this situation, private consumption has been firm. With the rise in 
demand both at home and abroad, production has been on an increasing trend and inventories as a 
whole have been more or less in balance with shipments. 
Looking  forward,  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  experience  a  sustained  period  of  expansion  with  a 
virtuous circle of production, income, and spending in operation. The Bank will, however, continue to 
pay close attention to developments in overseas economies, including the United States, as well as 
crude oil prices. 
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have recently been more or less at three-month-
earlier  levels.  They  are  expected  to  increase  in  the  immediate  future  mainly  due  to  the  rebound  in 
international  commodity  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI; 
excluding fresh food) has been around zero percent due to the drop in crude oil prices, but from a 
longer-term  perspective  it  is  projected  to  continue  to  follow  a  positive  trend  as  the  output  gap 
continues to be positive. 
As  for  financial  conditions,  the  environment  for  corporate  finance  has  been  accommodative.  In  the 
corporate bond and CP markets, the issuing environment has been favorable. The lending attitudes of 
private  banks  have  continued  to  be  accommodative.  Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  has  been 
rising.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  amount  outstanding  of  lending  by  private  banks  has  been 
increasing. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
The Bank changed the guideline for money market operations at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) 
in February, raising the uncollateralized overnight  call rate target to around 0.5 percent. This policy 
adjustment  was  made  in  line  with  the  framework  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  introduced  in 
March 2006. 
The Bank reviewed the outlook for Japan's economy based on data and information on domestic and 
overseas economies available at the time of the MPM in February. Its assessment at that meeting was 
as follows: the CPI is likely to increase as a trend as the economy continues to expand moderately; 
and  with  the  prospects  of  the  economic  and  price  situation  improving,  the  stimulative  effect  of 
monetary policy, if the policy interest rate were kept unchanged, could gradually increase, and if the 
expectation takes hold, in such a situation, that interest rates will remain low for a long time regardless 
of developments in economic activity and prices, there is a medium- to long-term risk of larger swings 
and  of  inefficient  allocation  of  resources  as  firms  and  financial  institutions  over-extend  themselves. 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 1
The  Bank  judged  at  the  MPM  in  February  that  it  was  appropriate  to  adjust  the  level  of  the  policy 
interest rate in order to maintain a desirable course of economic activity and prices. This policy action 
will  still  keep  the  monetary  environment  very  accommodative,  and  the  Bank  believes  that  it  will 
contribute to ensuring price stability and achieving sustainable growth in the medium to long term. 
The  Bank  presented  its  basic  thinking  on  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy  in  the  April  2007 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, along with the outlook for economic activity and prices. In 
sum,  while  confirming  that  Japan's  economy  remains  likely  to  follow  a  path  of  sustainable  growth 
under price stability and assessing relevant risk factors, the Bank will adjust the level of interest rates 
gradually  in  accordance  with  improvements  in  the  economic  and  price  situation.  The  Bank  is 
determined to conduct monetary policy appropriately in the light of developments in economic activity 
and prices, and contribute to sustainable economic growth under price stability. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2007
