Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Trust reforms – positioning the business for growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the First General Membership Meeting of the Trust Officers Association of the 
Philippines (TOAP) for the year 2007, Manila, 30 March 2007. 
 Distinguished  directors  and  members  of  the  Trust  Officers  Association  of  the  Philippines;  fellow 
bankers, special guests, friends. Good evening. 
The invitation of TOAP President Ma. Lourdes de Vera declared that you are adopting the Hawaiian 
theme tonight. I was also advised that if I chose to come in my usual business attire, I will be given a 
lei.  
Naturally, I became curious. 
I remembered this wise woman who said: When a man brings his wife flowers for no reason, … there’s 
a reason.  
Tonight, you chose to bring the full bloom of flowers to this ballroom. Clearly, this is a celebration!  
Well …, if the practitioners in our trust and fund management industry are celebrating, then we at the 
Bangko Sentral are here to congratulate you.  
TOAP has been … and continues to be… a dependable partner of the Bangko Sentral in promoting 
the development of our financial system…and in upgrading the quality and variety of financial services 
to the public.  
This  is  the  reason  why  I  readily  accepted  your  invitation  for  me  to  join  you  in  your  first  general 
membership meeting this year. In particular, I appreciate the fact that our trust practitioners specifically 
requested that I discuss banking reforms as they relate to the trust industry.  
But first, I shall give you an overview, so that you can appreciate the context of our reform agenda.  
Economic prospects and financial stability 
We are all witnessing a markedly more positive sentiment on our economy as manifested in higher 
investment flows from abroad into both direct equity and portfolio securities. Not surprisingly, domestic 
investor activity has likewise perked up. These developments have re-energized our domestic financial 
markets. 
To  a  major  extent,  the  phenomenon  is  being  driven  by  global  liquidity  conditions,  relatively  benign 
global  capital  markets  and  generally  stable  world  economic  conditions.  These  factors  have  made 
international investors more willing to look at a broader array of investment opportunities, outside of 
the traditional favorites.  
But it is also true that smart money does not get into markets if the fundamentals are not right. So, 
what are the positive things that investors are seeing in the Philippines today?  
Well,  you  and  I  know  that  foremost  of  these  is  the  sea-change  in  our  fiscal  management.  Fiscal 
discipline, prudence and political will….have made a fiscal turnaround possible and a balanced budget 
attainable within two years. 
Investors  also  appreciate  our  ability  to  keep  the  lid  on  inflation  and  maintain  expectations  well 
anchored….even  in  the  face  of  challenges  posed  by  volatile  oil  prices,  unpredictable  weather 
conditions affecting food supply, and periodic shifts in global market sentiment.  
Already, headline inflation has dropped to less than 3 percent, boosting our credibility to achieve our 
medium-term inflation targets in a consistent manner.  
The significant strides in micro-level structural reforms have also not gone unnoticed in such critical 
sectors  as  power,  transport  and  communications,  agriculture,  and  of  course,  services  including 
banking and financial services.  
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
In banking, much progress has been made to clean up the stock of non-performing assets that built up 
since the 1997 Asian financial crisis…. and banks have stepped up the pace in their re-capitalization 
efforts.  
Operational improvements have likewise been introduced to strengthen risk management processes 
and to achieve more efficient operations. As a result, domestic bank balance sheets are stronger than 
they have ever been since 1997 and profitability has been restored.  
All  of  these  developments  are  generating  a  positive  chemistry  that  goes  hand-in-hand  with  windfall 
gains from our ever-growing remittance flows and robust merchandise exports. 
This  combination  has  resulted  in  unprecedented  surplus  in  both  the  current  account  and  overall 
balance of payments, record-setting international reserve levels, and…. external debt pre-payments.  
If we continue to play our cards right, I believe there is a good chance that we can sustain this happy 
convergence.  
For BSP, the emerging challenge to monetary management and prudential supervision is the steady 
delivery  of  financial  stability,  even  as  domestic  liquidity  growth  may  temporarily  accelerate  under 
benign fundamentals that we now have.  
We realize that the economy itself is undergoing structural change. Therefore, we are conscious that 
our policy reaction should not be dogmatic.  
The financial community that watches every move of the BSP must understand this evolving dynamic, 
carefully analyze the situation, and not irrationally contribute to any potential instability.  
Having said that, there are guideposts that remain clear. One is the principle of avoiding conditions of 
prolonged  negative  real  interest  rates  that  distort  investment  and  consumption  signals.  The  BSP  is 
very focused on this issue and is committed to adjust its policy settings, its instruments, and its tactics 
with agility…… as circumstances warrant.  
I  hope  these  general  remarks  on  emerging  economic  prospects  and  the  challenges  they  pose  to 
BSP…. are useful to your own decision-making processes.  
As  professional  managers  and  advisers  to  the  public  on  the  management  of  their  steadily  growing 
stock of financial savings, you play critical economic roles, in your own right.  
As interest rates moderate to lower level equilibrium, they will be in search of alternative ideas with 
acceptable return…. versus risk profile.  
This is apparent in the way deposits have grown vis-à-vis trust accounts in the last five years: a growth 
rate of 47% for trust accounts versus 61% for deposits. As of end-2006, banks reported P3.8 trillion 
deposits liabilities vs. P860 billion trust accountabilities.  
In that sensitive role, you share the responsibility to educate the investing public on the nature of their 
potential choices and to uphold the integrity and stability of our evolving domestic financial markets. 
After all, this is the ultimate foundation of investor confidence in these markets.  
This brings me to the subject of the reform agenda that we believe can move the trust industry to even 
greater heights…. and allow it to take its rightful place in our financial system.  
The harsh lessons of the bond and equity market sell-off in May 2006 that hit hard UITFs should not 
be so readily forgotten. Yes….there has been significant recovery since then, for those who held their 
ground as markets rebounded as expected,…. but it cannot be denied that investors who panicked got 
hurt from that unfortunate episode.  
On hindsight, the initial rapid expansion of UITFs amid the exuberance of the time….swept in investors 
who were not prepared for the higher attendant risks that are the natural corollary of higher returns.  
Yes, all the essential warnings were there both in regulations and in customer documents that were 
duly  signed.  But  it  is  equally  clear,  we  still  have  some  work  to  do  in  weaning  “investors”  from  a 
depositor mind set and form more realistic expectations….if we are to develop the domestic capital 
market as the second major pillar of our financial system.  
Recent developments make us more confident of a bright future for our domestic capital market and 
the important role to be played by the trust industry. This includes the final approval by Congress of 
the  long-awaited  PERA  bill  which  provides  generous  tax  incentives  to  encourage  individuals  to 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
voluntarily set-aside long-term savings: up to a maximum of P50,000 per year over their working life, 
up to at least age 55 to supplement their retirement income.  
This is a great opportunity and challenge for the trust industry to design product choices that conform 
faithfully to the laudable objective of this new law.  
Further,  the  improving  economic  prospects  also  set  the  stage  for  progressive  liberalization  of  our 
foreign  exchange  regime  to  allow  for  greater  flexibility  in  overseas  investing.  This  should  provide 
professional fund managers the necessary room to maneuver the diversification of their portfolios and 
to access a richer variety of qualified assets…. for the benefit of their customers.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  reform  agenda  must  be  pursued  vigorously….  if  we  are  to  secure  the 
opportunities. At the financial market level, the BSP is closely collaborating with key market players 
through  their  respective  industry  associations,  as  well  as  with  our  fellow  regulators  particularly  the 
SEC…..to achieve more transparent and investor-friendly markets.  
It is in this context, that we welcome the recent launch of the new government securities benchmark 
system that can promote fair price discovery, more effectively. We expect the trust industry to work 
within this new system so we can achieve full transparency and comparability of performance.  
The new benchmark should also assist in properly valuing debt securities and other financial products 
like derivatives, repos, as well as securities borrowing and lending arrangements… and thus promote 
their acceptability to the market.  
As the galaxy of available domestic capital market assets expands and the market deepens….it is the 
trust industry that will be a clear winner.  
We are also working hard to constantly improve the payments and securities settlement systems. It is 
basic  that  we  aspire  to  fully  achieve  efficient DVP settlement  in all  securities  transactions….  in  line 
with global standards in the area. This is critical to both investor protection and market stability.  
We also need to work closely to reform the trust industry itself. In that spirit, we are devoting dedicated 
resources at the Bangko Sentral… through our newly formed trust supervision group…to work closely 
with  TOAP.  Their  priorities  include  (1)  basic  trust  department  operating  standards;  (2)  risk 
management guidelines; (3) trust department rating system; (4) specialized examination procedures; 
and (5) improvements to UITF regulations.  
At a more fundamental level, we are also reviewing the basic governance arrangements of the trust 
department….as an entity within the bigger banking organization….to minimize potential conflicts of 
interest, while preserving natural business synergies.  
This includes a closer look at the composition of the trust committee and a clearer articulation of their 
duties and responsibilities for good governance. Also in scope are the qualifications of trust officers 
and the proper definition of their duties and responsibilities.  
The basic operating standards are designed to ensure consistency in the administration and operation 
of trust and other fiduciary business and investment management activities to better promote investor 
protection. The standards cover significant areas of trust operations and set forth the minimum array of 
procedures  –  from  account  acceptance  to  termination,  aimed  at  further  professionalizing  business 
conduct across all practitioners.  
On the other hand, the risk management guidelines will be formulated to identify, manage, and control 
specific  risks  in  the  trust  business.  In  tandem  with  the  basic  standards,  the  risk  management 
guidelines will enjoin trust entities’ total adherence to the cardinal principles of prudence and utmost 
care.  
A rating system for the trust unit… analogous to the CAMELS rating system for bank proper....is being 
formulated to independently assess their performance, given their special fiduciary responsibilities.  
To tie everything up, new specialized examination procedures are being drafted for trust operations…. 
to  basically  align  these  with  the  risk-based  approach  and  to  incorporate  compliance  with  the  basic 
standards and risk management principles.  
 Finally,  the  UITF  regulatory  framework  will  be  reinforced  to  cover  the  following:  (1)  improved 
certification  program  for  UIT  marketing  personnel;  (2)  additional  guidelines  to  standardize  UIT 
performance  reporting  for  marketing  purposes;  (3)  enhanced  risk  disclosures  and  client  suitability 
profiling;  (4)  updating  of  major  template  documents  like  the  declaration  of  trust  to  incorporate 
amendments to the regulatory framework; and (5) corporate governance structure of UITs such as the 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 3
possible  separation  of  trustee  and  fund  manager  functions  or  alternatively,  the  strengthening  of 
present combined function arrangement….as these matters have evolved in global best practice.  
Ladies and gentlemen. All these trust reforms are building blocks that should help us nurture a truly 
competitive and dynamic trust industry that is responsive and supportive of a growing economy. This 
we owe to our country and our people.  
Let us therefore take heart that even as we continue to face challenges…the opportunities ahead give 
much  promise,  especially  to  those  who  will  adhere  faithfully  to  the  tenets  of  good  governance. 
Remember: fairness, accountability and transparency.  
On this upbeat note, I greet you all…. Aloha!  
Thank you all and good evening. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2007
