Krzysztof Rybiński: The euro adoption – assessing benefits and costs 
Address  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the  panel 
discussion at the American Chamber of Commerce, Warsaw, 17 January 2007. 
 Only a few weeks ago the eurozone was enlarged for the second time. Slovenia became the first of 
the  ten  new  member  states  of  the  EU  and  the  thirteenth  country  to  share  the  common  European 
currency.  This  seems  to  be  a  good  occasion  to  return  to  the,  once  lively,  discussion  about  the 
advantages and disadvantages of joining the euro.  
However, before I proceed, I would like to make two important points. First, I would like to note that 
views presented here are my own and they do not represent the official position of the National Bank 
of  Poland.  Second,  my  economic  background  allows  me  to  speak  in  terms  of  standard  economic 
variables: output, consumption, prices etc. On the other hand, I do not feel competent to speak about 
highly immeasurable values like national pride. Notwithstanding the fact that people might derive utility 
from the pure fact of having in their wallets banknotes with Polish kings instead of European bridges, I 
have  no  idea  how  to  measure  this  utility  and  how  to  compare  it  to  the  utility  derived  from  more 
standard arguments of preference functions like consumption. For this reason I will speak in terms of 
standard macroeconomic variables, bearing in mind that this is certainly not the full story. 
If  economists  speak  about  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  joining  a  common  currency  area, 
they ultimately end up comparing the costs and benefits of accession. This is also the way I would like 
to  proceed.  However,  bearing  in  mind  that  what  is  known,  has  already  been  described  in  several 
voluminous reports (NBP 2004 for Poland, Csajbok, Csemerly 2002 for Hungary, HM Treasury 2003 
for  the  UK),  I  will  try  to  focus  on  issues  which  are  less  familiar  to  the  general  public  or  which  are 
potential risk factors. The nature of these issues is that they are mainly concentrated on the cost side 
of the analysis. Thus, it might seem from my lecture, that I mainly care about the costs or that costs 
outweigh benefits. Let me, in the very beginning, stress that this is by no means the case. As stated by 
the President of the National Bank of Poland, Mr Sławomir Skrzypek, an in-depth assessment of the 
costs and benefits of the euro adoption in Poland needs to be periodically repeated in order to make 
sure that we take into account all important factors of the fast changing global economy. The National 
Bank  of  Poland  is  willing  to  play  a  key  role  in  stimulating  the  public  debate  about  the  costs  and 
benefits of the euro adoption. Today’s panel is a good opportunity to contribute to this debate, and I 
would like to thank the American Chamber of Commerce for offering this opportunity. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  benefit  side.  Economists  typically  concentrate  on  three  sources  of  economic 
benefits related to monetary union. These are: 
- 
- 
- 
Transaction  costs  is  an  issue  of  particular  relevance  for  people  who  sit  today  in  the  audience. 
Everyone  exchanges  currencies,  knows  what  spreads  are  and  could  even  possibly  calculate  how 
much  his  company  would  save  on  transaction  costs  if  there  were  no  exchange  rates.  This  is  also 
relatively unsophisticated for the whole economy, and has been estimated to be approximately 0.2% 
of GDP in Poland (NBP 2004). Not much, but worth saving. 
Lower interest rates induce investment, thus strengthening the productive capacity of the economy 
and making higher output and consumption possible. We expect that in the case of Poland the interest 
rate adjustment after eurozone accession will reduce long-term rates by more than one percentage 
point. Any estimation of the exact impact on investment, output and consumption is subject to several 
assumptions. Nevertheless the NBP’s analyses show that an interest rate reduction will be the main 
source of benefits from joining the euro (Borowski 2003).  
The  benefit  we  know  the  least  about  is  related  to  trade  creation.  In  a  groundbreaking  study  Rose 
(2000)  estimated  that  joining  a  currency  union  may  boost  cross-country  trade  by  over  200%.  Most 
economists agreed with the direction and mechanism behind this – the single currency eliminates the 
uncertainty related to exchange rate movements and thus diminishes the risk related to foreign trade. 
However, the estimated scale seems to be much exaggerated. One problematic issue is related to the 
lower transaction costs, 
lower interest rates,  
trade creation. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
asymmetric shocks, 
arising micro- and macroeconomic imbalances. 
fact  that  before  the  eurozone,  we  did  not  have  examples  of  currency  unions  between  developed 
countries.  So  the  Rose  study  was  based  on  data  on  currency  unions  involving  poor  and/  or  small 
countries. As noted by Micco, Stein and Ordonez (2003), “one does not need to be a eurosceptic to 
wonder whether such findings are directly applicable to Europe’s single currency”.  
Follow-up  studies  (e.g.  Rose  and  Wincoop  (2001),  Kenen  (2002),  Persson  (2001))  attempted  to 
correct the Rose estimates but arrived, rather inconclusively, at anything between a 50% and 150% 
growth of bilateral trade. Recently, the first studies based on euro area data emerged. These show 
that the trade creation effect of the euro was substantial, although (until now) by an order of magnitude 
smaller that the original Rose estimate (e.g. Micco, Stein and Ordonez (2003)). Our knowledge about 
trade creation effects of the euro is still far from complete and we will probably have to wait another 
10+ years to have enough data to draw firm conclusions about its magnitude in the eurozone. 
Now let me move to the cost side. As already noted in contrast to the benefits, some costs have a 
contingent  character.  They  are  tail-events  –  rather  unlikely  but  with  a  possibly  high  impact  if  they 
happen. Let me concentrate on two issues: 
- 
- 
Shocks are by definition something we cannot foresee. Asymmetric shocks are shocks that affect 
only selected member(s) of a monetary union. Such events are considered the biggest threat to unions 
(Mundell 1961), because joining a common currency area substantially reduces the set of policy tools 
which could be used to mitigate the impact of the shock. Let us assume that a negative demand shock 
affects the Polish economy (e.g. consumers decide to buy less goods and services). In the short and 
medium run this brings about a reduction in output and higher unemployment. As long as Poland has 
its  own  currency,  it  can  use  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  to  stimulate  demand  and  reduce  the 
impact of the shock on output and employment. Moreover, the exchange rate might adjust (depreciate) 
and thus make our exports more price-competitive. Once in the eurozone, two of these channels are 
closed. First, there is no independent domestic monetary policy which could lower interest rates, and 
one  should  not  expect  the  ECB  to  react  to  a  local  shock.  Second,  after  joining  the  eurozone  the 
exchange rate disappears, so there can be no exchange rate adjustments.  
Accordingly, the only policy tool left after euro area accession is fiscal policy. For this reason it is of 
crucial importance to run a balanced budget in the medium run, so that in case of negative shocks, 
there is room for increasing the deficit and thus buffer the shock. Additionally, there are also economic 
forces which can bring the economy back to equilibrium. The most prominent is wage adjustment – 
after a negative shock falling wages can help reduce the cost of production and as a consequence 
prices. This will increase demand and help the economy return to equilibrium. A crucial prerequisite for 
this  channel  to  operate  smoothly  is  a  flexible  labor  market  –  only  if  wages  adjust  immediately  can 
increasing  unemployment  and  an  economic  slowdown  be  avoided.  We  know,  however,  that  this 
downward wage flexibility is rarely seen in real life. 
Regarding  asymmetric  shocks  one  thing  seems  certain.  We  are  not  able  to  foresee  if  serious 
asymmetric shocks are going to affect the Polish economy after joining the euro or not. We can only 
speak in terms of probabilities, and given the data, it seems that the probability of huge shocks seems 
limited. The Polish economy is strongly integrated with the eurozone, with a majority of exports going 
to  the  common  currency  area.  Moreover,  most  studies  (e.g.  Fidrmuc,  Korhonen  2003,  Eickmeier, 
Breitung  2005)  show  a  relatively  high  correlation  of  business  cycles  between  Poland  and  the 
eurozone. This substantially reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of asymmetric shocks. Looking 
ahead one can see potential risk factors. One of them is production clustering. If the recently observed 
trend for country specialization (e.g. Slovakia specializes in producing cars, India in business process 
outsourcing) holds on, it may increase the risk of asymmetric shocks in the future (De Grauwe 2003). 
Another example of a possibly distant future asymmetric “shock” is global warming. A recent report 
cited by Financial Times (FT, 6 January 2007) shows that the Northern members of the eurozone are 
likely to profit and the Southern members to suffer from the climate change. Nevertheless, whatever 
the likelihood of shocks, it remains of crucial importance to maintain a balanced fiscal perspective and 
flexible labor market which can absorb shocks, should they arise. 
Now  let  me  move  to  the  possibility  of  rising  micro-  and  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Such 
imbalances  can  take  the  form  of  lending  booms,  current  account  deficits  or  increasing  inflation 
pressure. Such a set of symptoms in a monetary union member country reveals in most cases one 
common cause – real interest rates that are too low. Economists have for a long time argued that each 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2007
economy has an appropriate, long-run level of the real interest rate called the natural rate of interest 
(Wicksell 1898). Keeping interest rates at this (unfortunately unobserved) level should guarantee that 
the economy will remain in equilibrium – output will not exceed production capacity and inflation will 
remain  stable  (Woodford  2003).  This  is  what  implicitly  or  explicitly  most  inflation  targeting  central 
banks are trying to achieve.  
One of the problems with joining a common currency area might be that real interest rates in this area 
will be lower than the natural rate of the new member. Recent research shows that this might be the 
case  for  Poland,  where  the  natural  rate  has  remained  in  the  past  above  the  euro  area  level 
(Brzoza-Brzezina  2006).  For  Poland entering  the  eurozone  means  lower  nominal  interest  rates (the 
spread on long-term rates remains between 100 and 150 basis points) and higher inflation (due to the 
catching up process). Together this means a drop in real interest rates, which could induce people and 
enterprises to substantially increase borrowing, and spend the loans on consumption and investment 
goods. What could be the consequences of this? 
First,  if  borrowing  accelerates  massively,  banks  may  start  granting  loans  without  properly  checking 
their  customers’  creditworthiness  –  this  could  result  in  bad  debt  problems.  It  is  a  well  known 
phenomenon (e.g. Demirgüç-Kunt, Detragiache 1998, Gourinchas et al. 2001) that lending booms are 
often followed by banking sector crises. Fortunately recent research on the potential for lending booms 
in Poland after euro area accession forecasts a rather moderate increase in lending (Schadler et al. 
2005,  Brzoza-Brzezina  2005),  and  shows  that  the  expected  credit  growth  is  rather  an  equilibrium 
phenomenon – a structural adjustment that should not have negative consequences (Kiss at al. 2006). 
Nevertheless,  even  if  a  serious  lending  boom  during  euro  area  accession  seems  unlikely, 
policymakers  should  remain  vigilant  and  prudent  banking  sector  supervision  should  be  the  right 
answer to such worrying developments. 
Second, higher domestic demand can fuel inflation pressure and increase imports, thus leading to a 
higher current account deficit. As to the second phenomenon, it seems that while outside a monetary 
union deep current account deficits worry investors and can, in extreme situations, lead to currency 
crises,  for  countries  that  have  already  joined  the  common  currency  they  do  not  matter  much.  An 
example  of  the  three  Baltic  States  (Estonia,  Latvia  and  Lithuania),  whose  currency  board 
arrangements  are  close  equivalents  of  a  monetary  union,  shows  that  enormous  current  account 
deficits (9-16% of GDP in 2006) have no apparent negative consequences for the economy.  
The case is, however, different with inflation pressure. In theory the margin for local demand-driven 
price increases in small member states of monetary unions is very narrow. This is guaranteed by the 
so  called  law  of  one  price  –  the  expectation  that  the  same  product  should  have  the  same  price  in 
various countries of a monetary union. In practice, however, there are several obstacles for this law to 
hold perfectly – some goods cannot be traded, most goods do not have perfect substitutes, there are 
transportation costs and tax differentials – so local demand pressures can play a role in driving prices 
in  monetary  union  member  states.  As  a  consequence,  products  manufactured  in  these  countries 
become more expensive and such countries loose competitiveness (e.g. Estrada, Lopez-Salido 2001). 
It is relatively difficult to foresee how the Polish economy will react to demand pressures once in the 
euro area. However, as in the case of asymmetric shocks, labor market flexibility is probably the best 
answer  to  the  described  phenomena.  It  allows  a  smooth  and  relatively  painless  adjustment  if  the 
economy looses competitiveness. 
Summing up, I have discussed selected aspects of the cost-benefit analysis of Poland’s adoption of 
the  euro.  Although  the  costs  may  seem  substantial,  one  has  to  bear  in  mind  two  things.  First,  the 
probability that these costs will have to be incurred is relatively low. Second, their magnitude depends 
crucially  on  domestic  policy  –  prudent  banking  sector  supervision,  labor  market  reforms  and  sound 
fiscal policies to name a few. In my view, given the evidence that reforms have been halted in many 
countries  after  entering  the  eurozone,  these  measures  should  be  taken  before  the  euro  area 
accession.  
Thank you for your attention. 
References: 
Borowski J. 2003. “Potential Benefits of Poland’s EMU Accession”, Focus on Transition No. 1. 
Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.  2005.  “Lending  Booms  in  the  New  EU  Member  States:  Will  Euro  Adoption 
Matter?”, ECB Working Paper No 543, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 3
Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.  2006.  “The  Information  Content  of  the  Neutral  Rate  of  Interest:  The  Case  of 
Poland”, Economics of Transition 14(2), s. 391-412. 
Csajbók,  A.,  Csermely,  A.  (ed.)  2002.  “Adopting  the  euro  in  Hungary:  expected  benefits,  costs  and 
timing”, MNB Occasional Paper 24, National Bank of Hungary 
DeGrauwe, P. 2003. “The Enlarged Eurozone: Can it Survive?”, Jelle Zijlstra Lecture, NIAS. 
Demirgüç-Kunt,  A.,  Detragiache,  E.  1998.  “The  Determinants  of  Banking  Crises  in  Developing  and 
Developed Countries”, IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 45, No. 1, Washington, D.C. 
Eickmeier, S., Breitung, J. 2005. “How synchronized are central and east European economies with 
the  euro  area?  Evidence  from  a  structural  factor  model”,  Discussion  Paper  20/2005,  Deutsche 
Bundesbank 
Estrada, A., López-Salido, D. 2001. “Understanding Spanish Dual Inflation”, Documento de Trabajo n.º 
0205 Banco de España 
Fidrmuc J., Korhonen I. 2001 “Similarity of Supply and Demand Shocks between the Euro Area and 
the CEECs”, BOFIT Discussion Paper No. 14. 
Financial Times “EU’s grim climate change”, 6 January 2007. 
Gourinchas, P.O., Valdes, R., Landerretche, O. 2001. “Lending Booms: Latin America and the World”, 
NBER Working Paper 8249. 
Kenen, Peter B. (2002) “Currency Unions and Trade: Variations on Themes by Rose and Persson” 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper 2002/08. 
Kiss, G., Nagy, M., Vonnák, B. 2006. “Credit Growth in Central and Eastern Europe: Convergence or 
Boom?”, WP 2006/10, Magyar Nemzeti Bank. 
Micco, A., Stein, E., Ordonez, O. 2003. “The Currency Union Effect on Trade: Early Evidence From 
EMU”, Economic Policy, 316-356. 
NBP 2004. “A Report on the Costs and Benefits of Poland’s Adoption of the Euro”, ed. J.Borowski, 
National Bank of Poland 
Persson, Torsten (2001) “Currency Unions and Trade: How Large is the Treatment Effect?”, Economic 
Policy 33, 435-448. 
Rose  A.K.  (2000):  One  Money,  One  Market?  The  Effect  of  Common  Currencies  on  International 
Trade, „Economic Policy” No. 30, pp. 449-461. 
Rose A.K., van Wincoop E. (2001): National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: the Real Case 
for Currency Union, „American Economic Review” Vol. 91, No. 2, s. 386-390. 
Mundell R. (1961): A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas, „American Economic Review” Vol. 51, No. 
4, s. 657-665. 
Schadler, S., Drummond, P.F.N., Kuijs, L., Murgasova, Z., Elkan van, R. 2005. “Adopting the euro in 
Central  Europe:  Challenges  of  the  Next  Step  in  European  Integration”,  Occasional  Paper  No.  234, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington.  
Wicksell, K. 1898. “Interest and Prices”, tłum. R.F.Kahn, MacMillan, New York, 1936. 
Woodford, M. 2003. “Interest and Prices”, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2007
