Jarle Bergo: Interest rate projections in theory and practice 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Foreign 
Exchange Seminar of the Association of Norwegian Economists, Sanderstølen, 26 January 2007. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain new assessments 
of the economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 Thank you for inviting me once again to this venerable institution – Valutaseminaret. It is a pleasure to 
be  here  with  you.  This  morning  I  had  planned  to  discuss  with  you  some  issues  under  the  broad 
heading of ‘Interest rate projections in theory and practice’. 
The  most  important  task  of  monetary  policy  is  to  provide  the  economy  with  an  anchor  for  inflation 
expectations  –  a  nominal  anchor.  A  credible  nominal  anchor  in  the  form  of  low  and  stable  inflation 
contributes to predictable framework conditions for economic agents.  
In  Norway,  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation  with  an  annual  rise  in 
consumer prices of close to 2.5 per cent over time. In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank 
operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and 
variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation targeting builds a bridge between the long-term 
objective of monetary policy, which is to anchor expectations of low and stable inflation, and the more 
short-term objective of stabilising economic developments. 
The  aim  of  preventing  inflation  expectations  from  becoming  entrenched  markedly  below  target  was 
one  of  the  main  reasons  for  reducing  the  key  policy  rate  to  a  very  low  level when  inflation  fell  and 
approached zero in 2003 and 2004, at a time when there was also spare capacity in the Norwegian 
economy.  We  indicated  that  the  interest  rate  would  remain  low  until  we  saw  clear  signs  of  rising 
inflation.  
Since summer 2003, the Norwegian economy has been in a clear upswing. Low interest rates, high oil 
prices and a favourable global environment have been important driving forces. Growth is strong in 
most industries, and profitability in the business sector is solid. Underlying inflation is still considerably 
lower  than  the  inflation  target.  However,  several  factors  point  to  higher  inflation  further  ahead. 
Capacity utilisation is high and there is little spare capacity in the Norwegian economy. Employment is 
 BIS Review 10/2007 
 1
rising  rapidly  and  unemployment  has  fallen  markedly.  There  are  signs  of  higher  wage  growth  and 
expectations  of  rising  inflation.  We  are  now  normalising  the  interest  rate  gradually.  Since  summer 
2005, the key rate has been increased by 2.0 percentage points and there are prospects of further 
interest rate hikes.  
 improves 
The  shortest  money  market  rates  are  determined  by  the  central  bank  via  the  key  policy  rate.  But 
private-sector consumption and investment decisions depend more on expectations regarding future 
developments  in  the  key  rate.  To  be  successful,  monetary  policy  must  be  able  to  influence  these 
expectations.  The  public  must  therefore  understand  the  central  bank’s  intentions  in  interest-rate 
setting.  Transparency  regarding  Norges  Bank’s  monetary  policy  assessments 
the 
predictability and effectiveness of monetary policy. 
In  recent  years,  we  have  endeavoured  to  facilitate  the  public  understanding  of  our  actions.  The 
background  material  for  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meetings  is  published  and  the 
assessments  underlying  interest  rate  decisions  are  explained.  When  I  addressed  this  assembly  in 
Sanderstølen last year, Norges Bank had just started publishing its own interest rate forecast. From 
using technical assumptions or others’ assessments, we have now taken ownership of the interest rate 
path in our projections. In the Inflation Report, Norges Bank publishes the interest rate path that in the 
Bank’s  view  provides  a  reasonable  trade-off  between  stabilising  inflation  at  target  and  stabilising 
developments in output and employment.  
So far, the experience of publishing our own interest rate forecasts has been positive. It seems that 
most  economic  agents  have  understood  the  content  of  the  forecasts.  At  the  same  time,  I  want  to 
stress  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  interest  rate  path,  which  is  why  we  present  fan  charts  with 
uncertainty intervals around the forecasts. In addition, the Inflation Report contains several different 
sensitivity analyses to illustrate alternative interest rate paths that may come about should economic 
developments  deviate  from  the  baseline  scenario.  At  the  same  time,  we  present  "interest  rate 
accounts"  where  we  explain  any  changes  in  the  interest  rate  path  since  the  previous  Report.  The 
specific interest rate path cannot and must not be looked upon as a guarantee and a path to which we 
unconditionally have committed ourselves. Should economic developments deviate from the projected 
path, the interest rate path will also shift. Instead, it can be said that through our communication we 
commit ourselves to a pattern of behaviour, a response pattern. If interest rate expectations can be 
influenced, it will in many cases be useful for a central bank to commit itself to a predictable response 
pattern.  This  kind  of  commitment  can,  if  it  is  perceived  as  credible,  have  a  positive  effect  on  the 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2007
economy’s  functioning  and  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  I  will  revert  to  this  theme 
shortly.  
 A  relevant  question  is  the  extent  to  which  our  communication  actually  influences  interest  rate 
expectations.  Forward  interest  rates  derived  from  yields  at  various  maturities  will  in  the  absence  of 
term premia and other risk premia normally reflect the market’s short-term interest rate expectations.1 
When Inflation Report 3/06 was published in the beginning of November last year, the forward interest 
rate was on a par with our forecast for the next six months, but considerably lower thereafter.  
It  is  now  almost  three  months  since  the  previous  Inflation  Report  was  published.  Since  that  time 
forward  rates  have  increased  and  approached  Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  path.  Forward  rates 
somewhat  further  out  are  still  lower  than  our  forecast.  The  reason  may  be  that  market  participants 
have a different perception of the interest rate path that is necessary to stabilise inflation at target and 
to  achieve  stable  developments  in  output  and  employment.  Alternatively,  the  market  may  have  the 
same short-term interest rate expectations as Norges Bank, but because of extraordinary conditions 
long-term  bond  prices  are  being  pushed  up  and,  consequently,  long-term  bond  yields  are  being 
pushed down.  
                                                      
1   Forward interest rates - often referred to as implied interest rates - are calculated so that a short-term bond, when rolled 
over and reinvested at the implied interest rates, generates the same yield as a long-term bond. For example, if we observe 
today’s one- and two-year interest rates (‘short-term’ and ‘long-term’ interest rate respectively), the implied forward interest 
rate one year ahead will be expressed by the equation 
is 
the one-year interest rate and 
is the implied one-year rate one year ahead. The expectations hypothesis holds that the 
implied interest rate is equal to the market’s interest rate expectations and the expected return from rolling over short-term 
bonds is equal to the return on a long-term bond. However, if term premia exist, the expected return from rolling over short-
term  bonds  is  different  from  the  return  on  a  long-term  bond.  If  the  term  premium  is  positive,  forward  interest  rates  will 
overestimate expected future short-term interest rates, while they will be underestimated if the term premia are negative. 
is the two-year interest rate, 
, where 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 3
Long-term bond yields have been at historically low levels in recent years. From lying in a broad range 
around  10  per  cent  at  the  end  of  the  1980s,  they  have  fallen  to  around  4  per  cent  in  the  past  few 
years. Developments in nominal interest rates must be seen in the light of inflation developments. High 
and variable inflation pushed up nominal interest rates earlier, both directly and via an inflation risk 
premium.  Future  inflation  uncertainty  generates  uncertainty  as  to  the  real  value  of  investments  and 
investors may require an extra compensation – a risk premium – for this. Low and stable inflation over 
the past 10-15 years has probably led to a decline in the normal interest rate level. Nevertheless, it 
would appear that long-term interest rates have been lower in recent years than one would believe to 
be a sustainable level, at least in the very long run.  
 4 
 BIS Review 10/2007
 According  to  economic  theory,  in  the  long  term  the  real  interest  rate  is  determined  by  structural 
fundamentals  such  as  productivity  and  population  growth  and  households’  long-term  saving 
preferences.2  It  seems  reasonable  that  there  is  a  long-term  relationship  between  an  economy’s 
potential growth and the real interest rate. If potential growth is higher than the real interest rate, the 
return  on  fixed  investment  will  be  higher  than  the  cost  of  investing.  This  provides  an  incentive  to 
increase fixed investment. Higher demand for fixed investment normally leads to higher real interest 
rates. 
Higher potential growth can also influence real interest rates in the long term as households seek to 
smooth  consumption  over  time.  Higher  potential  growth  generates  expectations  of  higher  future 
income.  Households  may  then  want  to  borrow  against  expected  future  income  and  thereby  reduce 
saving already today. Lower saving implies higher real interest rates. The time preference rate can be 
looked upon as an expression of households’ impatience in consumption. The higher the degree of 
impatience, the more households will want to consume today at the expense of future consumption, 
and the higher the real interest rate has to be in order to provide sufficient savings to meet investment 
demand.  
It is important to stress the long-term perspective of this analysis. In the really long term, it is potential 
growth  and  saving  preferences  that  determine  the  relationship  between  desired  saving  and  desired 
investment  and  thereby  also  the  real  interest  rate.  In  the  short-  and  medium-term,  however,  the 
economy is regularly exposed to shocks that influence economic developments, and thereby also the 
interest rate. It is not unlikely that we might see sizeable deviations of actual rates from the theoretical 
rates over longer periods. Such deviations may be exactly what are needed to bring the economy back 
towards  a  new  and  sustainable  equilibrium.  Moreover,  uncertainty  and  risk  premia  are  often 
disregarded in the theoretical world. In the real world, different types of risk premia exist that can lead 
to deviations from these stylised theoretical considerations.  
                                                      
2   The  expression  above  builds  on  a  variant  of  the  Ramsey  model,  which  is  a  standard  theory  of  economic  growth.  For  a 
further discussion of this model, see Blanchard and Fisher (1989) ‘Lectures on Macroeconomics’, MIT Press and Romer 
(2001) ‘Advanced Macroeconomics’, McGraw Hill. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 5
Potential growth and particularly the time preference rate are difficult to estimate. From 1979 to the 
present,  average  annual  growth  in  GDP  in  mainland  Norway  has  been  about  2.5  per  cent.  If  we 
confine  ourselves  to  the  past  10-12  years  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  average  growth  has  been 
somewhat higher at around 3 per cent.  
 There have been wide variations in the short-term real interest rate in Norway. In the 1980s and the 
beginning  of  the  1990s,  the  real  interest  rate  was  high  and  varied  around  6-7  per  cent.  Since  the 
mid-1990s,  the  real  interest  rate  has  been  considerably  lower  and  varied  around  3  per  cent.  The 
 6 
 BIS Review 10/2007
period of low and stable inflation is probably more representative of the future than the 1980s when 
inflation was high and volatile.  
Against  the  background  of  historical  developments  in  growth  and  real  interest  rates  over  the  past 
10-12 years, it may seem reasonable that the normal real interest rate level in Norway is in the range 
of  2½-3½  per  cent.  If  we  add  the  inflation  target  to  this,  a  range  of  around  5-6  per  cent  may  be  a 
reasonably normal level for the nominal interest rate. On an uncertain basis, the normal interest rate 
for Norway is now estimated to lie in the lower end of this range.  
 If we return to long-term interest rates, it might therefore seem as if they have been lower in recent 
years than the normal level determined by growth and inflation prospects. The cause of the low level 
of  long-term  interest  rates has  been a  theme  of  discussion  in  the  international  financial  literature  in 
recent years.3 One reason that is cited is the high level of saving in some Asian countries, particularly 
China, and in oil-exporting countries. Moreover, it has been pointed that investment has been low in 
several regions of the world, possibly as a result of previous periods of over-investment. A preference 
for  higher  saving  and  a  preference  for  lower  investment  both  contribute  to  lower  interest  rates. 
Moreover,  monetary  policy  in  China  and  other  Asian  countries  is  oriented  towards  exchange  rate 
stability.  In  order  to  ensure  that  exchange  rate  developments  are  in  line  with  the  objectives  of 
monetary policy, the Asian central banks buy US dollars and invest large portions of their purchases in 
US government bonds. This contributes to keeping US long-term interest rates at a low level, which in 
turn  have  a  considerable  impact  on  developments  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  other  parts  of  the 
world.  
In  addition  to  these  conditions,  new  accounting  and  solvency  rules  are  being  introduced  in  many 
countries.  The  new  rules  provide  pension  funds  in  particular  with  incentives  to  lengthen  asset 
maturities, improving the balance between asset and debt maturities. Increased demand for long-term 
bonds push up bond prices and push down yields.  
Normally, an investor will, on an expectations basis, be compensated in the form of a positive term 
premium  for  holding  long-term  bonds  instead  of  rolling  over  short-term  bonds.  Various  conditions 
                                                      
3   Though  the  literature  is  vast,  see  for  example  Ahrend,  R.,  P.  Catte  and  R.  Price  (2006)  ‘Factors  behind  low  long-term 
interest  rates’,  Working  Papers  490,  OECD,  www.oecd.org,  IMF  (2005)  ‘Global  Imbalances:  A  Saving  and  Investment 
Perspective’,  World  Economic  Outlook  September  2005,  www.imf.org,  IMF  (2006)  ‘Awash  with  cash:  Why  are  corporate 
savings so high?’, World Economic Outlook April 2006, www.imf.org, and Rajan, R. G. (2006) ‘Is there a global shortage of 
fixed assets?’, Remarks 1. December, www.imf.org 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 7
relating to saving and investment patterns in the world economy and new accounting and solvency 
rules may have led to a marked fall in term premia in recent years. In some markets, they can even be 
negative.  
The level of long-term interest rates is frequently used as an indicator of the normal interest rate level. 
If  low  long-term  interest  rates  are  caused  by  extraordinary  conditions  and  not  expectations  of  low 
growth and low inflation, long-term market interest rates may underestimate the normal interest rate 
level.  
When preparing an interest rate forecast, we must have a view of what the normal interest rate level 
is. In order to produce a forecast that reflects a reasonable trade-off in monetary policy, we have also 
drawn up a set of guidelines, which are presented in the Inflation Report. The criteria cannot provide 
an absolutely precise guide as to how the interest rate should be set, but points to factors we should 
have considered and assessed.  
 The  central  trade-off  is  between  inflation  prospects  and  the  prospects  for  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy, expressed in the chart by the output gap. The projections were published in Inflation Report 
3/06. If monetary policy is to anchor inflation expectations around the target, the interest rate must be 
set so that inflation moves towards the target. Inflation should be stabilised near the target within a 
reasonable time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The inflation gap and the output gap should also be in 
reasonable proportion to each other until they close.  
Let  me  now  look  at  monetary  policy  within  a  theoretical  framework.  In  the  literature  on  optimal 
monetary policy, the trade-offs are often specified in the form of a loss function, which the central bank 
attempts to minimise. In principle, many goal variables can be included in such a loss function, but it is 
normal  to  assume  that  inflation  and  the  output  gap  are  included.  The  cumulative  loss  can  then  be 
expressed by the following equation: 
 Here 
is  a 
parameter that expresses how much weight is given to stable output versus low and stable inflation. If 
is  the  inflation  target  and  y  is  the  output  gap. 
is  a  discount  factor. 
is  inflation, 
is greater than 0, this is often referred to as flexible inflation targeting.  
8 
 BIS Review 10/2007
Thirty to forty years ago, economic policy was widely regarded as an optimal control problem where 
the authorities could minimise society’s loss function directly and mechanically. Economic policy could 
in  a  sense  be  viewed  as  an  engineering  art.  However,  in  1977  Finn  Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott 
warned  against  this  approach  to  economic  policy  conduct.4  In  their  work,  for  which  they  were  later 
awarded the Nobel Prize, they showed that if the authorities in each period attempt to optimise on a 
discretionary  basis,  a  suboptimal  equilibrium  may  arise.  The  reason  lies  in  economic  agents’ 
expectations formation. 
Kydland and Prescott argued in favour of a rule-based policy, where policymakers commit to a certain 
pattern of behaviour. They also pointed out that it would generally be tempting to "reoptimise" at a later 
time  and  thereby  ignore  earlier  promises.  This  temptation  is  often  referred  to  as  the  "time 
inconsistency problem". For a rule-based policy to be successful, it must be credible so that economic 
agents  can  fairly  safely  assume  that  decision-makers  will  actually  follow  their  announced  response 
pattern. 
Norway’s  experience  of  various  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  during  the  post-war  period  provides  a 
good illustration of the difference between discretionary policy and commitment policy. In the period 
1946-1971, the krone was pegged to the US dollar. The dollar functioned as an anchor currency in the 
Bretton Woods system of international exchange rate management. The period was marked by high 
economic growth and low inflation. By participating in an international system we achieved credibility 
as to the authorities’ commitment to the fixed exchange rate.  
 During  the  devaluation  period  in  the  10  years  between  1976  and  1986,  the  credibility  of  the  fixed 
exchange rate regime was severely impaired. In this period, a total of ten devaluations or "technical 
adjustments" that entailed a devaluation were made. The devaluations took place under the so-called 
European currency snake and under the currency basket system that was established in December 
1978. The many exchange rate adjustments during the devaluation period were among other things 
aimed at correcting the previous deterioration in Norway’s relative cost position. As the chart shows, 
while the Norwegian krone gradually lost value in nominal terms against the Deutsche mark, in real 
terms the value was broadly constant. Such repeated "reoptimisations" eventually led to expectations 
that  the  authorities  would  not  honour  their  promise  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  in  the  future.  Instead, 
                                                      
4   Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal of Political 
Economy, 85, 473-490. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 9
there were growing expectations that if price and cost inflation became too high, the authorities would 
devalue the krone. The social partners and businesses then factored in higher inflation in their wage 
demands and price-setting. The result was higher cost and price inflation without the desired effect on 
competitiveness and employment.  
The  Norwegian  economy  was  lacking a  nominal  anchor  during  the  devaluation  period  in  the  1970s 
and 1980s, which fuelled inflation and instability. The ten-year period of devaluations is an example of 
how purely discretionary policymaking can lead the economy onto a suboptimal path, pointed out by 
Kydland and Prescott.  
The last devaluation came in 1986 after a fall in oil prices. Thereafter, the interest rate was used to 
keep  the  exchange  rate  fixed.  The  Norwegian  economy  had  to  undergo  an  extensive  turnaround 
operation. Confidence in the Norwegian krone had to be restored in order to avoid persistently high 
inflation. This required very high interest rates. It took a long time for foreign exchange markets to gain 
confidence in the strategy shift in exchange rate policy. It was not until 1990 that Norwegian interest 
rates  were  on  a  par  with  external  interest  rates.  By  tying  ourselves  to  a  reaction  pattern,  monetary 
policy credibility was restored and the way was paved for more stable economic developments. 
In the wake of Kydland’s and Prescott’s recommendations, both fiscal policy and monetary policy have 
become  more  rule-based  in  many  countries.  Policy  rules  are  useful  in  that  they  give  weight  to 
long-term objectives when faced with day-to-day economic policy challenges. Since the early 1990s, 
many  countries  have  implemented  institutional  reforms,  such  as  central  bank  independence  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy to reach government-defined objectives. At the same time, the objectives 
of  monetary  policy  have  become  clearer,  with  the  primary  objective  normally  being  low  and  stable 
inflation.  Thus,  the  authorities  in  many  countries  have  thereby  committed  to  give  priority  to  the 
long-term goals in monetary policy.  
The conduct of monetary policy under a flexible inflation targeting regime, given the defined objectives, 
also gives rise to challenges concerning commitment to a pattern of behaviour. However, the benefit of 
a commitment policy in relation to a discretionary policy is not as straightforward as for example that of 
a fixed exchange rate regime.  
The  benefit  of  commitment  to  a pattern  of  behaviour  lies  in  the  fact  that  today’s  prices, wages  and 
exchange  rates  depend  on  expectations  concerning  future  activity  levels  and  interest  rates.  If,  for 
example, a shock brings down inflation to a level that is considerably lower than the target in the short 
run, it is not only a low interest rate today, but even more so expectations of low interest rates in the 
future  that  will  push  up  inflation.  By  committing  to  a  response  pattern  that  implies  an  expansionary 
monetary policy, not only in the immediate term but also somewhat further ahead, inflation may pick 
up faster again. But if economic agents’ expect the central bank to discard this promise, inflation will 
not pick up to the same extent as would otherwise be the case. Over time such a commitment policy 
will improve stability in both inflation and the activity level compared to a policy based on discretion. 
Let me attempt to illustrate the gains of committing to a response pattern rather than pursuing a purely 
discretionary policy. We have developed tools that allows us to find interest rate paths that minimise 
the loss function, given a model of the economy’s functioning and given economic shocks. Within the 
framework of a small macroeconomic model, we have estimated the magnitude of the shocks to which 
the Norwegian economy has been exposed over the past 10-15 years. Under the two assumptions 
about  monetary  policy,  discretion  and  commitment,  we  have  estimated  how  large  the  variance  of 
output and inflation will be over time. We have assumed that the economy is exposed to the same 
shocks as in history. Let me emphasise that this exercise is only meant as an illustration based on a 
stylised economic model.  
10 
 BIS Review 10/2007
 The chart shows the variance of inflation on the vertical axis and variance of the output gap on the 
horizontal  axis.  By  minimising  the  loss  function  that  I  presented  above  under  discretion  and 
commitment respectively, we obtain different combinations of the variance of inflation and the variance 
of the output gap. By varying the weight on the output gap, lambda, in the loss function, we obtain a 
line for each strategy. The lines represent the minimum loss that can be achieved under commitment 
and under discretion. As long as private-sector decisions are partly based on expectations about the 
future, and the central bank through its actions and communication can influence these expectations, 
the chart illustrates a result that is independent of the explicit economic model: If the central bank can 
commit itself credibly to a response pattern, it will be able to achieve a better outcome over time than if 
in each period it attempts to optimise the situation. This is illustrated in the chart in that the line that 
represents  a  commitment  strategy  lies  closer  to  the  origo  point  than  the  line  that  represents  a 
discretionary strategy. If, however, economic agents are purely backward looking, there would not be 
any differences between the two approaches, and the two lines would converge into one. The more 
forward-looking  the  economic  agents  are,  the  greater  the  difference  between  the  outcomes  is.  The 
way  in  which  monetary  policy  is  implemented  and  communicated  may  therefore  influence  the 
functioning of the economy through the expectations channel. By committing to a pattern of behaviour, 
the expectations channel can be used effectively.  
BIS Review 10/2007 
 11
Let  us  now  take  a  closer  look  at  our  projections  in  the  previous  Inflation  Report.  The  inflation  gap 
closes gradually from below, while the output gap closes from above. According to the Bank’s view, 
these paths provide a reasonable trade-off between the objective of stabilising inflation at target and 
stabilising developments in output and employment.  
Let us now use a time machine and travel forward to 2008.  
 12 
  BIS Review 10/2007
This  picture,  which  is  the  same  picture  as  the  previous  one  but  for  a  shorter  time  period,  gives  an 
impression that we place less weight on the output gap. The picture becomes even clearer if we travel 
forward yet another year in time to 2009. 
 Inflation is now very near the target, while the output gap is still clearly positive. It may thus seem as if 
we are placing more weight on the output gap in the beginning of the period than at the end of the 
period.  This  suggests  that  the  reference  path  in  Inflation  Report  3/06  is  not  consistent  with  a 
discretionary  policy,  where  you  make  the  best  out  of  the  situation  in  each  period.  Such  a  strategy 
would have involved a higher interest rate in order to provide a better balance between inflation and 
output towards the end of the projection period. Rather, it seems that the reference path has elements 
of commitment.  
Let us therefore assume that we follow the response pattern we have committed ourselves to earlier. 
In the literature, one such strategy is referred to as commitment under a timeless perspective.5 It is 
possible to calculate, within the confines of our models, an optimal interest rate path based on such a 
strategy. 
                                                      
5   See for example Woodford, M. (1999) “Commentary: How should monetary policy be conducted in an era of price stability?”, 
Paper presented at the Jackson Hole conference, see http://www.columbia.edu/%7Emw2230/jhole.pdf. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 13
In  this  example,  we  have  been  able  to  reconstruct  (approximately)  the  reference  path  in  Inflation 
Report 3/06 by minimising a loss function under commitment in a timeless perspective. To reconstruct 
the reference path, the weight on the output gap in the loss function, lambda, has been set at 0.3. We 
also  had  to  place  a  weight  on  changes  in  the  interest  rate  in  the  loss  function.  This  weight,  which 
penalises  large  changes  in  the  interest  rate,  can  be  defended  based  on  considerations  regarding 
robustness and financial stability.  
What is the outcome if we depart from our established response pattern? 
 14 
  BIS Review 10/2007
The chart illustrates what might happen if the central bank reoptimises today, but promise never to do 
so again. In the model, this will result in a marked rise in interest rates today. But such an approach 
has been criticised in the literature. If the central bank departs from its response pattern today, it is 
easy to believe that it will do the same in the future. It may therefore be difficult to gain credibility for 
such a policy. Even if it may feel tempting, it is important to be aware of the costs associated with 
departing  from  an  established  response  pattern.  It  will  then  be  more  demanding  to  influence 
private-sector  expectations.  Frequent  reoptimisations  will  in  practice  undermine  the  benefit  of 
commitment and lead to a discretionary policy.  
The benefit of commitment hinges on the credibility of the central bank’s actions and communication. 
Thus, it can be argued that it is important to adhere to the previously communicated response pattern 
and  behave  consistently  over  time.  This  puts  the  central  bank  in  a  better  position  to  utilise  the 
expectations channel. Inflation can then over time be stabilised with smaller fluctuations in output and 
employment than would otherwise be the case. 
Here it is crucial to reinvoke the point I made earlier in my speech. Even if monetary policy follows a 
commitment strategy, the interest rate path may well change from one inflation report to the next. If for 
example new information concerning economic developments leads to a change in the outlook, the 
interest rate path will normally shift as well. In this respect, one can say that we are committing to a 
reaction pattern, not to a specific interest rate path. Reacting to new information is part of a predictable 
pattern of behaviour. 
I have discussed some of the aspects of the conduct and communication of monetary policy based on 
our own experience of presenting an interest rate forecast, but also based on monetary policy theory 
as described in the international economics literature. Theory can often provide a useful platform for 
analysing the challenges we are facing with regard to practical monetary policy. I have attempted to 
illustrate this today. 
In  practice,  we  are  facing  more  challenges  than  we  can  address  within  the  confines  of  economic 
models. The models can, for example, not help us in assessing key conditions such and uncertainty 
and risk. The monetary policy strategy we are pursuing must also take account of and guard against 
particularly  adverse  developments.  While  economic models  as  a rule  are  based  on  the  assumption 
that  the  inflation  target  is  fundamentally  credible,  in  practice  we  must  be  on  guard  with  respect  to 
developments that weaken the credibility of the inflation target as a nominal anchor in the economy. 
Normally,  the  interest  rate  will  be  changed  gradually.  In  cases  where  there  is  a  risk  of  inflation 
deviating  substantially  from  target  over  a  longer  period  or  when  high  financial  market  volatility  or  a 
wage-cost shock indicate that the credibility of monetary policy is in jeopardy, it may be appropriate 
with more pronounced interest rate changes. 
Models and theory can never provide a perfect recipe for how to set the interest rate – they are only 
tools. Norges Bank’s response pattern will also be based on judgment and qualitative analyses. We 
have as I mentioned drawn up a set of criteria which are given emphasis when we prepare the interest 
rate forecast. 
My point this morning has been that gains can be derived from predictable and consistent behaviour 
over time. I have demonstrated how economic models help us to systematise and challenge judgment. 
Monetary  policy  can  probably  make  a  more  effective  contribution  to  low  and  stable  inflation  and  to 
stabilising economic developments when the central bank is transparent about its assessments and 
analyses. I hope today’s presentation has made a contribution in this respect.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 10/2007 
 15
