Mario Draghi: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy  
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Ordinary  Meeting  of 
Shareholders, Rome, 31 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I wish to pay grateful and affectionate tribute to the members of the Directorate who left the Bank in 
2006 after decades of dedicated, rigorous and judicious work. They accompanied me in my first steps 
in this institution, providing the support of their loyalty and experience. 
Vincenzo Desario, who was appointed Director General in 1994, served the Bank in the exercise of 
highly sensitive functions, notably in the area of banking supervision. He led the Bank on an interim 
basis after the resignation of Antonio Fazio. He stamped his mark indelibly on the Bank’s approach to 
prudential supervision, principles of internal organization and daily administrative practices. The Board 
of Directors has named him Honorary Director General. 
Pierluigi Ciocca, who had been Deputy Director General since 1995, gave the Bank the benefit of his 
profound, original thinking and his vast economic and legal knowledge. He promoted the study of law 
and economics, inspired research for many years and helped to refine the analysis of the functions of 
central banking. 
In  2006  the  Directorate  acquired  new  members  with  expertise  and  experience,  some  of  it  gained 
abroad. Fabrizio Saccomanni, who as Vice President of the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development was in charge of risk management at that institution for three years, has been Director 
General since October. Ignazio Visco, Central Manager for Economic Research and previously Chief 
Economist of the OECD for five years, and Giovanni Carosio, formerly Central Manager for Banking 
and Financial Supervision, joined Antonio Finocchiaro as Deputy Directors General in December. The 
Directorate’s new membership combines valuable experience in the international arena with intimate 
knowledge of the Bank, analytical and research skills with specialization in the area of regulation and 
central banking. 
The  Bank’s  new  Statute  was  approved  last  year.  It  modifies  the  operations  of  the  Bank’s  decision-
making bodies: the Board of Directors, the Board of Auditors and the Directorate. It establishes the 
principle of collegiality for measures that have external significance. 
The Bank intends to renew itself, and has already begun to do so. The reorganization taking place 
affects the functions of the Head Office, the branch network and the representative offices abroad; it 
provides  for  the  full  integration  of  the  Italian  Foreign  Exchange  Office.  The  aim  is  to  reduce 
bureaucratic  procedures,  simplify  and  rationalize  working  practices,  thus  fostering  individual 
responsibility, reallocate resources from the Bank’s internal administration to its institutional functions, 
and  tap  into  new  recruitment  channels,  as  with  the  forthcoming  competitive  examination  for 
economists that is open to applicants from abroad. 
We  are  on  the  point  of  implementing  the  reorganization  of  the  activities  of  economic  research  and 
international relations, with the objective of structuring their tasks better according to particular needs: 
to  contribute  to  setting  the  common  monetary  policy  by  monitoring  and  forecasting  short-term 
economic developments and analyzing monetary strategy and transmission mechanisms; to study the 
fundamental problems of Italian economic development; to carry out research on the world economy 
and  cooperate  with  international  organizations;  to  refine  economic  statistical  methodology  and 
disseminate  economic  and  financial  statistics.  The  plan  for  the  reorganization  of  the  supervisory 
departments  is  being  finalized,  to  give  greater  weight  to  the  macroeconomic  analysis  of  risk,  the 
quality of regulation and consumer protection. There will be more interaction between research and 
supervision,  and  off-site  and  on-site  supervision  will  be  more  closely  integrated  and  have  more 
methods in common. Measures affecting the other functions will follow in due course. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  also  reviewing  the  principles  and  procedures  for  managing  its  own  portfolio  of 
financial assets. The aim is to increase transparency and separate the investment of its own resources 
more clearly from its other institutional activities. 
The Bank of Italy has recently introduced numerous innovations in its operating procedures. Since the 
beginning  of  2007  banks  have  been  permitted  to  include  bank  loans  among  eligible  collateral  for 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
Eurosystem  financing  operations.  Since  mid-April  the  Bank  has  conducted  new  very-short-term 
borrowing  transactions  on  behalf  of  the  Ministry  for  the  Economy  and  Finance,  making  treasury 
management  easier  and  more  predictable.  On  behalf  of  the  same  Ministry,  it  has  launched  the 
General  Government  Transactions  Information  System,  which  will  enable  government  entities  to 
evaluate their cash flows in real time and facilitate the adoption of electronic payment procedures. The 
project for the development of the new TARGET2 platform for settling large-value payments, which is 
being  carried  out  in  conjunction  with  the  Bank  of  France  and  the  Bundesbank,  has  reached  an 
advanced  stage.  TARGET2,  which  will  come  into  operation  in  November,  centralizes  the  technical 
infrastructure  of  the  European  payment  system,  reducing  the  cost  of  cross-border  interbank 
transactions.  It  will  allow  the  ever-growing  number  of  banks  with  a  presence  in  more  than  one 
European country to operate with a single account in central bank money and curb the cost of treasury 
operations. 
The branch network will be reorganized on a regional basis in forms that are more appropriate for the 
present  day  and  without  abandoning  the  Bank’s  nationwide  presence.  Reducing  the  tasks  of  self-
administration  and  increasing  those  with  greater  technical  content  will  give  branch  staff  new 
opportunities for learning and professional growth. 
Wide-ranging discussions with the trade unions on the organizational changes have been under way 
for several months. I hope that broad consensus will be reached before long on action to strengthen 
the Bank’s role and prestige and an agreement concluded on the necessary measures to assist the 
workers involved. 
The  Bank’s  expanding  international  commitments,  the  reform  of  its  governance  and  the  new 
operational  initiatives  have  posed  important  challenges.  The  staff  have  faced  them  with  their 
customary  professionalism  and  dedication,  born  of  a  tradition  that  has  cultivated  the  spirit  of  public 
service,  a  sense  of  identification  with  the  institution  and  merit-based  selection  in  recruitment  and 
promotions. I wish to express my gratitude to all the members of staff . 
The principles of Community law, primary legislation and the provisions of the Bank’s Statute protect 
the  absolute  autonomy  of  the  Bank  in  the  performance  of  its  institutional  functions  from  possible 
influence by its shareholders. However, the criteria for share ownership appear obsolete and do not 
ensure  a  sufficiently  broad  distribution  of  shares.  The  new  bill  on  the  reform  of  the  regulatory 
authorities goes in the right direction, being based on the principles of the independence of the Bank 
and of a balanced distribution of its share capital. 
Credibility  and  independence  are  essential  to  the  performance  of  our  duties.  The  autonomy  of  the 
central bank, though protected by law, can be fragile unless it is supported not only by authoritative 
analysis but also by consequent action. 
The world economy, finance and monetary policy 
The  world  economy  grew  by  5.4  per  cent  in  2006,  the  highest  rate  for  more  than  thirty  years.  The 
slowdown  in  the  United  States  was  off  set  by  continued  strong  expansion  in  China  and  the  other 
emerging countries and by the recovery taking place in the euro area and Japan. 
World  trade  continued  to  expand  at  a  rate  of  over  7  per  cent.  Economic  integration  has  been  an 
important driving force of the uninterrupted growth of recent years. It is threatened by the resurgence 
of protectionist tendencies; the signs are visible, most notably in the stalled negotiations on the Doha 
Round of liberalization measures. 
The persistent increase in current payments imbalances continues to pose a risk. The current account 
deficit of the United States reached 6.5 per cent of gross domestic product in 2006, the highest ratio 
ever recorded; with its counterpart in the growing surpluses of China and other Asian countries and oil 
producers, it has been financed easily thus far, but the share held by foreign authorities is rising. 
The  financial  sector  has  made  a  fundamental  contribution  to  economic  growth  in  recent  years  by 
permitting  unprecedented  capital  mobility  and  facilitating  efficient  capital  allocation  and  by  smoothly 
financing  imbalances  that  in  another  era  would  have  been  disruptive.  Financial  innovation  has 
enhanced market liquidity and reduced volatility. 
The expansion in the markets and the continued process of financial innovation are also changing the 
pattern of risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
The use of derivative instruments has grown further. Their notional value is now equal to ten times 
world GDP. Alongside instruments serving to hedge market risks, there has been a rapid expansion in 
those for the transfer of credit risk; the notional value of credit default swaps more than doubled in 
2005 and doubled again in 2006. By making it possible to slice up credit risk and evaluate it precisely, 
allocating it and spreading it among a multitude of market participants, credit derivatives help to raise 
the  productivity  of  the  financial  system,  just  as  new  production  technologies  boost  that  of  the  real 
economy. However, they can become a source of instability if intermediaries use them not to hedge 
existing  risks,  but  to  increase  the  volume  of  risks  they  assume.  In  addition,  credit  derivatives  can 
modify the modus operandi of the banks that use them. If lenders transfer part of the risk to others, the 
incentive to evaluate borrowers’ creditworthiness can weaken. A sign of this is to be seen in the rise in 
sub-prime mortgage defaults in the United States, where the transfer of risk is commonplace. 
Abundant liquidity and low interest rates have contributed to the vigorous growth of hedge funds and 
private equity funds. Their role in the functioning of the markets has been positive, but the scale of the 
phenomenon,  the  high  leverage  of  hedge  funds,  the  demand  from  investors  and  counterparties  for 
greater  transparency  and  the  potential  risks  of  instability  require  the  attention  of  the  market  and 
regulators.  Supervisors  seek  to  limit  systemic  risk,  relying  on  market  discipline  by  pressing  the 
intermediaries under their direct supervision to obtain the necessary information from hedge funds and 
satisfy themselves that procedures are in place for the best management of risk. 
Risk premiums have now fallen for a broad spectrum of financial instruments and markets. Investors’ 
perception of risk could suddenly change; an abrupt portfolio adjustment, whatever the cause, would 
have destabilizing effects on exchange rates and financial markets. Although it is more able than in 
the  past  to  absorb  small  and  medium-sized  shocks,  the  financial  system  may  have  become  more 
vulnerable to “extreme” events that have a low probability of occurring but potentially disruptive effects, 
due  not  least  to  the  system’s  increasing  complexity  and  the  growing  interdependence  between 
markets. 
The  development  of  new  instruments  and  the  emergence  of  new  types  of  intermediary  also  pose 
unprecedented  challenges  for  monetary  policy.  More  than  ever  before,  the  financial  markets  are  a 
source of information on trends in economic activity and the expectations of economic agents; central 
banks’ actions are reflected more rapidly in the prices of financial assets. At the same time, the money 
and  credit  aggregates  are  being  increasingly  affected  by  the  conduct  of  non-bank  intermediaries; 
financial innovation is complicating the interpretation of the behaviour of monetary aggregates. 
From December 2005 onwards the Governing Council of the European Central Bank has gradually 
moved towards a less accommodating monetary policy stance; it has raised official interest rates by 
1.75  percentage  points  since  then.  At  a  time  of  strengthening  economic  activity,  expanding 
employment  and  sharply  rising  energy  and  commodity  prices,  our  decisions  have  kept  inflation 
expectations firmly anchored to the objective of price stability. For the first time a powerful oil shock 
had no repercussions on inflation. 
Money and credit continue to grow strongly. Despite the impact of financial innovation on the velocity 
of circulation, monetary aggregates remain a fundamental element in the strategy of the Eurosystem. 
In  nominal  effective  terms,  the  euro  appreciated  by  almost  5  per  cent  in  2006.  One  factor  in  the 
strength of the single European currency has been the improved economic outlook for the area, in the 
face of fears of a slowdown in the United States. 
Monetary policy has remained conducive to growth. Real short-term interest rates are still below the 
average  for  the  area  over  the  last  twenty  years.  Long-term  rates  have  risen,  but  by  less  than  in 
comparable  phases  of  past  cycles.  The  gradualness  and  careful  communication  of  monetary  policy 
decisions have helped maintain stable conditions in the money and financial markets. 
Consumer price inflation in the euro area was 2.2 per cent in 2006, just over half the rate recorded in 
the  early  nineties.  A  similar  reduction  occurred  in  the  industrial  countries  as  a  whole,  while  in  the 
emerging  economies  inflation  fell  from  60  per  cent  to  5  per  cent.  This  remarkable  achievement  is 
attributable to the independence of central banks and the clarity of their statutory objectives, and also 
to the increase in competition triggered by the opening-up of markets. 
To strengthen growth in Italy 
The Italian economy has been recovering since the middle of 2005. Growth strengthened during 2006, 
to an average of nearly 2 per cent, a result that had not been achieved for five years. A similar rate of 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
growth is expected in 2007, despite the slowdown in the first quarter. The recovery has been fuelled 
by  investment  and  the  growth  in  demand  abroad,  especially  in  Germany.  Employment  has  risen 
substantially, but still largely in the number of temporary jobs. 
The Italian economy may have shaken off economic stagnation, but its rate of growth is still one of the 
lowest  in  the  euro  area.  In  the  first  half  of  this  decade  labour  productivity  fell  in  every  sector,  and 
especially in industry. The disparity in relation to the rest of the euro area indicates slowness in the 
adaptation of Italian industry to the changes in the technological and competitive environment. 
The  recent  improvements  in  productivity  and  exports,  though  still  modest  and  largely  cyclical,  may 
nevertheless suggest that a process of restructuring has begun. 
The restructuring of the industrial sector 
A survey of more than 4,000 firms carried out in recent months by researchers at the Bank provides 
initial  indications  that  this  is  indeed  happening.  More  than  half  of  the  industrial  firms  in  the  sample 
have changed strategy in the last five years. The 12 per cent of firms that have shifted their product 
range towards new sectors earned higher than average profits in 2006. One firm in five, almost double 
the  ratio  compared  with  the  beginning of  the  decade,  is  adopting  some  form  of  internationalization, 
ranging  from  cooperation  with  foreign  partners,  the  preferred  solution  for  small  firms,  to  the 
outsourcing  of  manufacturing  or  marketing.  In  all  the  firms  the  importance  of  investment  in  product 
development, design, brands, and distribution and customer-service networks has increased. Among 
medium-sized and large companies the use of new technologies for integrated corporate management 
is becoming more prevalent and the proportion of better-educated staff is rising; corporate profits have 
benefited as a result. Profits are also inversely correlated with the age of company leaders, a fact of 
great significance in the country of family capitalism: firms that have tackled generational changeover 
report higher average profits. 
Our  survey,  the  many  case  studies  accompanying  it  and  data  from  other  research  bodies  paint  a 
picture of change, owing partly to a more severe winnowing of firms. According to the Chambers of 
Commerce,  the  number  of  manufacturing  firms  deleted  from  the  registers  has  exceeded  new 
registrations  by  more  than  50,000  over  the  last  five  years.  Confronted  with  the  dual  shock  of 
globalization and technological change, the economy is beginning to react. 
It would be wrong to conclude that the crisis of productivity and competitiveness of the last few years 
is now behind us. Productivity in industry, which fell by 3 percentage points between 2001 and 2005, 
rose by just over 1 point last year; in Germany, France and Spain it increased by between 3 and 6 per 
cent. The divergence of trends in unit labour costs has become more pronounced. We still have a long 
road ahead of us. 
Company  size  remains  crucial.  Companies  must  achieve  sufficient  scale  to  support  the  high  fixed 
costs  of  continuous  innovation  and  an  active  presence  in  distant  markets;  even  more  than  in 
manufacturing plant, scale matters in developing products, fostering brand recognition and standing, 
and organizing production. Field surveys reveal obstacles to growth. In our study, 40 per cent of the 
firms that considered themselves to be too small missed out on opportunities to expand by means of 
acquisition or merger over the past decade. 
A gap to close 
The transformation of the economy is being hampered by an institutional framework that still has major 
shortcomings,  although  it  must  be  recognized  that  progress  has  been  made.  The  reduction  of 
unemployment, though important, is the only area in which Italy is in step with the timetable envisaged 
in the Lisbon Agenda. Italy is behind schedule as regards raising the employment rate, especially for 
women and older workers, education, vocational training, reducing the risk of poverty, innovation, and 
compliance with environmental constraints; in many cases the lag is greater than the average for the 
Union as a whole. 
Last year I pointed to areas where structural measures are of particular importance for the growth of 
the  economy  and  its  enterprises.  I  would  like  to  revisit  some  of  those  issues  in  the  light  of 
developments since then. 
Education continues to head the list of fields where change is most necessary. The low international 
ranking of the Italian school system has a geographical aspect that deserves attention. The disparity in 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2007
levels of scholastic achievement between North and South is significant even in primary school and 
tends to widen thereafter. One of every five 15-year-olds in the South is “knowledge poor”, which is the 
prelude to economic poverty; the disparity is even larger if the South’s higher drop-out rate is taken 
into account. Such a marked geographical difference shows that the problem lies not only in the rules 
but also in their practical application. 
The recruitment of teachers, their distribution between regions and different types of school, and their 
career paths are governed by mechanisms that feature, at different stages, both precariousness and 
irremovability. Mobility bears little relationship to educational need, merit or capability. Every year more 
than 150,000 of Italy’s 800,000 teachers change assignments in an arduous progression towards their 
desired position.  Another negative  factor  is  the  delay  in  developing  an  effective  school  assessment 
system, which the experience of other countries suggests is an indispensable complement to school 
autonomy. Changing the Italian school system must begin with a recognition of the vicious circles that 
penalize  it,  demoralize  teachers  and  betray  the  mission  of  public  education.  It  is  here  that  the 
problems originate, and not in a shortage of resources for education per student, which in Italy are 
actually above the European average. 
For an advanced economy, an even more direct and immediate contribution to growth comes from the 
university system. Some important reforms enacted in the past, ranging from financial autonomy to the 
evaluation of the quality of research, have still not been completed. Priority in the allocation of public 
resources should be given to financing scholarships for worthy and less welloff students. Universities 
should be able to compete for students and public funding on the basis of the quality of their teaching 
and research staff , selected for their academic standing and paid accordingly. 
The  degree  of  competition  in  the  domestic  market  in  both  public  and  private  services  affects  the 
growth of firms competing in the international arena. In the countries where the legal and regulatory 
obstacles  to  competition  in  energy,  telecommunications,  transport  and  professional  services  are 
greater,  manufacturing  industry  grows  more  slowly.  Until  a  short  time  ago  Italy  was  –  and  in  some 
respects still is – among the countries where regulation is most unfavourable to consumers. To date, 
liberalization in the energy sector has been halting. Although the price of electricity for industrial users 
in  Italy  has  risen  only  very  slowly  in  recent  years,  excluding  taxes  it  is  still  among  the  highest  in 
Europe, about 20 per cent above the average. Action to liberalize the market for services, which has 
been  initiated,  is  essential  to  regain  competitiveness  and  growth.  This  objective  should  also  be 
pursued  because  of  the  effects  it  will  have  on  consumers’  welfare,  not  least  in  terms  of  income 
distribution. In 2005 more than 15 per cent of the monthly consumer spending of the poorest 20 per 
cent of the Italian population went for goods and services now the subject of liberalization measures: 
€140 out of a total of €940, half of which was for energy in various forms. 
The shortcomings are particularly prevalent in local public services, notably urban public transport and 
the collection and disposal of waste. The succession of rules enacted in the nineties were designed to 
separate the management of services, to be awarded by competitive mechanisms, from activities that 
are natural monopolies, and assigning regulatory powers to local government. These guidelines have 
been  frequently  disregarded.  The  results  in  terms  of  the  cost  and  quality  of  services  have  been 
disappointing,  with  geographical  differences  depending  on  the  administrative  capabilities  of  local 
authorities. 
Liberalization  has  progressed  in  other  fields.  In  professional  services,  where  Italian  regulations  had 
been  the  most  restrictive  among  the  advanced  economies,  the  initiatives  undertaken  in  2006  have 
brought the level of regulation close to the middle of the international range. Action in the retail sector 
needs  to  be  continued,  by  establishing  not  only  in  law  but  also  in  practice  the  principle  that  sales 
outlets  should  not  be  rationed  geographically  except  on  sound  environmental  grounds  and  by 
guaranteeing the full application of this principle at regional and local level. 
The  failings  of  the  Italian  civil  justice  system  are  documented  in  international  studies  and 
demonstrated by the inconvenience suffered by individuals and firms. An international comparison of 
the  length  of  legal  proceedings  is  unforgiving.  To  take  just  one  example:  labour  disputes  take  an 
average  of  more  than  two  years  to  pass  through  the  lower  courts  in  Italy,  compared  with a year  in 
France and less than six months in Germany. The slowness of justice is due not so much to lack of 
resources as to organizational weaknesses and defects in the system of incentives. Here too there is a 
specific Southern problem; an ordinary civil case in lower court takes three times as long in Messina 
as  in  Turin,  averaging  1,500  days  against  500.  The  universal  application  of  information  technology 
would  make  proceedings  speedier  and  more  efficient  and  the  operation  of  the  various  offices 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 5
is 
that 
the  basic 
information 
for  effective 
indispensable 
it  would  also  supply 
transparent; 
reorganization. 
Information  is  vital  if  inefficiencies  are  to  be  eliminated.  The  quality  of  the  services  supplied  must 
become the yardstick for evaluating government departments and the activity of their managers. The 
objectives  must  be  clear  and  verifiable.  Differentiating  earnings  partly  on  the  basis  of  individual 
productivity, evaluated uniformly and transparently, would help attain them. This is provided for in the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  concluded  between  the  Government  and  the  trade  unions  last 
January. 
Infrastructure  represents  an  unresolved  problem.  The  experience  of  recent  years,  after  the 
amendment of Title V of the Constitution, has shown that concurrent decision-making between central 
and regional government is laborious and frequently ineffective. In the general interest, consideration 
should be given to the possibility that in certain cases it would be advisable, once a certain time has 
elapsed, to relieve the central government of the obligation to obtain the assent of the regional and 
local authorities. It must be possible to allow local needs to be expressed without for ever blocking 
public works that are necessary to the modernization of the country. 
Sustainable public finances 
According to Government estimates, net borrowing will come to 2.3 per cent of GDP in 2007, half a 
percentage point better than the target set at the end of last year. The primary surplus will rise to 2.6 
per cent. 
To ensure the sustainability of the public finances, deficit reduction must continue, with incisive action 
on the size and composition of the budget. 
At the end of 2006 Italy’s public debt reached €1,575 billion, or nearly €27,000 per person. For thirty 
years,  from  1964  to  1994,  its  ratio  to  GDP  rose  steadily,  from  32  per  cent  to  121  per  cent.  It  then 
declined  by  18  points  by  2004,  turning  upwards  again  since  then.  Without  asset  disposals  and  the 
restructuring of liabilities, the ratio of debt to GDP would be approximately the same today as in 1994. 
The accumulation of debt has not helped Italy to grow. It has not endowed the country with adequate 
infrastructure. 
High debt constrains public policies; it requires higher taxes and reduces the resources available for 
investment  and  welfare  expenditure.  With  interest  rates  rising,  albeit  by  very  little  so  far,  interest 
payments  are  again  tending  to  increase.  They  are  already  equal  to  the  amount  spent  on  public 
education and to two thirds of that spent on health care. 
In 2005 there were 42 persons aged 60 or more for every 100 of working age. By 2020 they will have 
risen to 53 and by 2040 to 83. These trends will affect spending on pensions, health care and social 
assistance. The choice we face is whether to reduce the debt burden in the next ten years, before the 
aging  of  the  population  becomes  more  pronounced,  or  to  wait,  but  in  this  case  accepting  major 
changes in the support that society will be able to provide to its weakest members. 
The recent improvement in the public finances is due to the sharp increase in revenue. According to 
the Government’s estimates, the ratio of tax and social security contributions to GDP will rise further 
this year. It is higher than the European average and close to the peak levels of the last few decades. 
Among the large European countries, France alone has a higher ratio. Because of tax evasion, which 
remains high despite signs of a recovery in tax receipts, the difference between Italy and the rest of 
Europe is greater in terms of the burden on honest taxpayers. The statutory tax rates on both labour 
and  capital  are  high;  the  corporate  income  tax  rate  is  only  lower  than  that  in  Germany,  where  the 
Government recently announced a cut of 9 percentage points. An excessive level of taxation and the 
variability and complexity of tax rules discourage investment in physical and human capital and raise 
the cost of compliance. 
Only  by  permanently  reducing  current  expenditure  can  the  deficit  be  curbed  and  the  debt  lowered 
without increasing the tax burden. Since 2000 primary current expenditure has risen by an average of 
one percentage point more per year than GDP. Its ratio to GDP has reached 40 per cent, comparable 
to the highest post-war levels. 
The expenditure mechanisms need to be changed. In 2006 primary current expenditure still grew by 
3.6  per  cent,  compared  with  the  Government’s  budget  forecast  of  1.1  per  cent.  There  is  scope  for 
saving  in  all  the  major  items  of  the  budget;  the  revision  of  expenditure  programmes  that  the 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2007
Government has commenced goes in the right direction. Redistributive policies also need to be subject 
to a cost-benefit analysis. 
A lasting adjustment requires action on the pension system. Life expectancy continues to rise and the 
number of Italians of working age to diminish; meanwhile, the employment rate is the lowest in the 
euro area. It is necessary to raise the average effective retirement age over time, not least in order to 
maintain  an  adequate  level  of  benefit.  The  architecture  of  the  system  introduced  in  1995  must  be 
applied.  Close  correlation  between  an  individual’s  pension  contributions  and  benefits  reduces  the 
distortions in levies and disparities of treatment between different categories of worker, and permits 
flexibility  in  the  choice  of  retirement  age.  Rigorous  and  prompt  application  of  the  adjustment 
mechanisms envisaged by the current legislation is essential. 
But it will not be possible to return the system to a sustainable path and at the same time guarantee 
workers adequate pensions without a rapid and resolute launch of supplementary pension provision, 
which is still underdeveloped. The returns on investments in supplementary pension plans are likely to 
be  better  than  those  on  severance  pay  funds,  and  further  advantages  derive  from  the  additional 
contributions  from  employers  and  favourable  tax  treatment.  The  decision  to  bring  forward  the 
introduction  of  implied  consent  for  the  assignment  of  accruing  severance  pay  to  supplementary 
pension funds to 2007 and the new forms of flexibility in the use of accumulated savings move in the 
right direction. However, in many cases enrolment in supplementary funds is being discouraged by the 
excessive  fees  charged  to  savers;  little  of  the  benefit  of  the  economies  of  scale  generated  by  the 
growth  of  pension  fund  assets  has  materialized  so  far.  Competition  must  increase;  fees  are 
insufficiently  transparent  and  the  restrictions  on  portability  are  excessive.  The  limits  on  the 
transferability of employers’ contributions need to be reconsidered. Information must be improved: if 
workers are not fully acquainted with the facts of the public pension that they will receive in the future, 
they  are  not  in  a  position  to  make  informed  decisions.  Supplementary  pension  plans  need  to  be 
extended to public employees as soon as possible. 
Without  prejudice  to  the  stability  of  the  public  finances,  and  given  that  overall  contributions  to  the 
public pension system equal 33 per cent of wages, by far the highest rate among the major European 
countries,  thought  should  also  be  given  to  permitting  individual  employees  to  make  voluntary 
allocations  of  a  limited  portion  of  their  public  pension  contributions  to  supplementary  pension 
schemes. 
The financial industry and the capital markets 
Italian  open-end  investment  funds,  which  had  17  per  cent  of  Italian  households’  savings  under 
management in 1999, now have barely 7 per cent. The outflow of resources, which is still influenced 
by  tax  disparities,  has  gathered  pace  lately,  and  in  the  last  three  years  amounted  to  almost  €100 
billion.  The  presence  of  foreign  funds  has  grown  as  a  result  of  distribution  agreements  with  Italian 
banks, while Italian banking groups have moved part of their operations abroad. 
Asset management strategies are still subordinated in large part to those of the controlling companies. 
Reducing  the  conflict  of  interest  inherent  in  the  cross-shareholdings  with  banks  and  insurance 
companies  and  the  consolidation  of  asset  management  companies  are  vital  for  the  growth  of  the 
industry.  As  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark,  an  open  architecture  and  a  clear  separation 
between companies and between owners benefit bank shareholders and fund clients alike. 
The  presence  of  private  equity  in  Italy  is  growing,  although  the  volume  of  transactions  remains  far 
below  that  of  the  other  main  European  countries.  Between  2003  and  2006  the  number  of  Italian 
management companies rose from 26 to 49 and funds’ financial resources from €3 billion to €6 billion. 
Above all, the growth is among companies not belonging to banking or insurance groups; in 2006 they 
accounted for more than half the total resources invested. 
Intermediaries  specializing  in  the  provision  of  equity  capital  can  foster  the  growth  of  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises,  contribute  to  strengthening  management,  facilitate  listing  on  the  stock 
exchange and accompany generational changeover. Family ownership is a pillar of Italian capitalism; 
the entrepreneur’s sense of identification with his enterprise is a driving force of growth. Precisely for 
this reason it is important to have the means of facilitating a changeover when this is necessary. When 
family owners lose their taste for creative risk, when the wealth invested in the business begins to be 
seen only as a source of rents or private benefits of control, the immobility of ownership may hold back 
the  growth  of  the business  and  set  it on  a  downward  path.  It  is  at  this  juncture  that  firms  have  the 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 7
greatest need of these intermediaries. The potential benefit to all from a changing of the guard is then 
at its highest, as sometimes is the resistance of the owners. 
There  is  a  close  link  between  the  spread  of  specialized  intermediaries  and  the  growth  of  the  stock 
exchange. More than a third of the Italian companies that listed between 1995 and 2006 were assisted 
by  private  equity  firms,  thus  increasing  access  to  the  stock  market  in  Italy,  which  until  now  has 
remained  restricted  mainly  to  large  firms  and  has  a  much  lower  market  capitalization  than  its 
counterparts in the other industrial countries. 
In a rapidly evolving international context, the strategies that Borsa Italiana intends to pursue remain to 
be defined: its shareholders need to provide clarification. Consolidation between companies managing 
the  international  markets  is  under  way;  the  integration  of  technical  infrastructures  has  accelerated 
sharply. This offers excellent growth prospects for those who participate, but raises questions as to the 
long-term fate of those who remain on the sidelines. 
Simple ownership structures increase firms’ ability to attract equity investment. An appropriate system 
of corporate governance satisfies a need for fairness in the treatment of shareholders’ property rights, 
but also criteria of efficiency. Less-than-transparent systems make it difficult for minority shareholders 
to  provide  a  stimulus,  accentuate  the  self-referential  nature  of  management  and  protect  the  private 
benefits of the controlling group. 
Italian  listed  companies  frequently  use  complex  organizational  structures.  Compared  with  other 
methods  of  separating  ownership  from  control,  a  pyramid  structure  may  make  it  more  difficult  to 
evaluate intra-group transactions adequately and increase the group’s opaqueness. The complexity of 
the leading groups has declined in Italy in the last few years. Between 1990 and 2006 the average 
number of listed companies per group fell from 6.8 to 2.5, the number of layers of control diminished, 
and  the  control  leverage  decreased.  Although  changes  in  tax  law  and  in  the  rules  on  group 
transparency played a part, this reduction in complexity was mainly due to market pressure. It is above 
all the application of the rules on intra-group transactions and the protection of minority shareholders 
that still needs to be strengthened. In the same period the market value of listed companies controlled 
under shareholders’ agreements rose from 18 to 22 per cent of the total and their number from 5 to 11 
per cent. 
Banks 
A year ago Italy’s two largest banks ranked seventh and eighteenth in Europe in terms of stock market 
capitalization.  The  top  three  cooperative  banks  held  49  per  cent  of  the  category’s  assets  in  Italy. 
Today,  if  the  operations  announced  by  their  boards  of  directors  go  ahead,  the  two  leading  Italian 
banks will climb to third and eleventh place, and the three largest cooperative banks will account for 73 
per cent of the assets of that category. 
What is happening in Italy is part of the process of banking consolidation that has been under way in 
Europe  for  several  years.  Most  of  the  mergers  have  originated  within  individual  countries;  in  some 
cases  they  have  subsequently  evolved  into  cross-border  operations.  Where  the  outcome  has  been 
successful,  the  resulting  banks  enjoy  considerable  economies  of  scale,  benefit  from  greater  risk 
diversification, and are highly capitalized. 
The  lead  time  before  the  synergy  underlying  a  merger  or  acquisition  must  translate  into  greater 
shareholder  value  and  more  efficient  customer  service  has  been  drastically  reduced,  however.  The 
advent of the single currency, the growth of the financial services industry, and globalization itself have 
created  a  European  and  world  market  in  bank  ownership  and  control.  Neither  size  nor  nationalistic 
defences can safeguard those banks which, although sound, do not constantly seek to increase their 
value; the market therefore needs to see the fruits of consolidation very soon after the more complex 
stages of the operation have been completed. Concentration of the supply of banking services must 
not lead to a lessening of competition: customers must reap the full benefits of economies of scale. 
Crucially,  the  governance,  corporate  structure  and  organizational  arrangements  the  new  banking 
groups adopt must ensure that they are soundly and prudently managed. 
In  many  instances,  the  banks  created  by  consolidation  have  introduced  new  forms  of  corporate 
governance, opting for the two-tier system; the activities of the new groups are coordinated by their 
operational holding company. The two-tier system of governance is effective if it is adopted in a way 
that  ensures  a  clear  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  various  corporate  bodies.  Overlapping 
8 
 BIS Review 56/2007
responsibilities  are  detrimental  to  efficient  decision-making  and  are  considered  by  shareholders  to 
destroy value; clear lines of responsibility also safeguard stability. 
Particular attention must be paid to internal controls where a group holding company is formed or its 
scope is expanded to embrace the entity created by the consolidation. New banking groups must take 
prompt  measures  to  ensure  centralized  risk  management,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  most 
vulnerable lines of business. Special emphasis must be placed on reputational risk. Risk assessment 
models must be adopted and control functions put in place without delay. 
The  acquisition  of  large  corporate  shareholdings  has  become  part  of  the  strategy  of  the  leading 
banking groups. For the banks, this means assuming new types of risk and may give rise to conflicts 
of interest. By law, such holdings have long been restricted in order to safeguard the stability of credit 
intermediaries. Developments in risk management techniques and in supervisory best practices now 
make  rigid  limits  ineffective.  Some  time  ago  the  Bank  submitted  a  proposal  to  the  Interministerial 
Committee for Credit and Savings that would allow to reduce administrative constraints by raising the 
limits on banks’ permissible shareholdings; this is rendered possible by a supervisory system based 
on  precise  assessment  of  all  the  risks,  adequate  capital  to  cover  them,  the  control  of  conflicts  of 
interest  by  means  of  governance  and  transparency  safeguards,  and  in  the  future  more  effective 
regulation of connected lending. 
Assessment of the merit of individual mergers is left to the market and the banks’ shareholders, who 
must be assured full information and adequate opportunities to be heard. They in turn have a duty, 
particularly  in  this  regard,  to  be  especially  active  in  ensuring  that  the  objective  of  mergers  and 
acquisitions is to increase value and then in verifying that management decisions are consistent with 
that  aim.  This  role  should  be  performed  in  particular  by  institutional  investors,  given  their  fiduciary 
responsibility towards those who have entrusted them with their savings, and by banking foundations, 
which manage funds in the interest of the community. The latter’s responsibility is all the more delicate 
and important for being less clearly defined in formal terms. 
The present limits on non-financial corporations’ shareholdings in banks and the associated prohibition 
on  their  acquisition  of  controlling  interests  will  also  be  reviewed  in  the  light  of  the  forthcoming 
Community legislation. 
Conditions are now ripe for reform of the legislation governing cooperative banks, to which it is hoped 
they will make a constructive contribution. A regulatory structure originally designed for small banks is 
in some respects no longer adequate to cope with the increasingly broad and fragmented ownership 
that has emerged as a result of consolidation. The legislative proposals to raise the limits on individual 
shareholdings,  strengthen  the  role  of  institutional  investors  and  broaden  the  mechanisms  for  proxy 
voting, without destroying the cooperative nature of such banks, are to be welcomed. 
In 2006 the capital adequacy ratio of Italy’s banking system rose to 10.7 per cent, although that of the 
leading groups declined slightly. In 2008 all Italian banks will adopt the criteria of the Basel II Accord. 
Depending on the composition of risk, this may lead to reduced capital requirements; it will certainly 
result in greater variability between banks. In order to guarantee leeway, the Bank of Italy is working to 
ensure that banks’ capital ratios, in relation to the degree of risk and the accuracy of risk management 
methods, remain well above the minimum requirement. Discussions with the banking groups that plan 
to adopt internal systems for calculating their capital requirements have intensified of late. 
In recent years cost reductions have contributed to the improvement in the operational efficiency of the 
leading Italian banking groups, which is now on a par with the average for the major European banks. 
Despite the progress that has been made, return on equity is lower, however, mainly owing to heavier 
loan losses; although favourable economic conditions are contributing to an improvement, the quality 
of Italian banks’ assets is still lower than that of the other leading European banks. 
The exposure of Italian banks to hedge funds represents less than 3 per cent of their capital. Their 
exposure to private equity funds is larger; together with loans to the companies in which these funds 
invest, it amounts to 13 per cent of their capital. Exposures are concentrated among the large banks. 
In the credit derivatives market the banking system is on average a net buyer of protection. 
The  integration  of  the  European  markets  brings  new  challenges  for  supervisors.  The  coordination 
bodies  created  by  the  Lamfalussy  procedure  have  helped  to  harmonize  regulation  and  strengthen 
cooperation  among  the  authorities  of  the  various  countries.  In  2006  we  took  part  in  coordinated 
simulations of critical events, so as to be ready to cope with episodes of instability having international 
effects. The convergence of supervisory practices must be carried further, to make the system less 
cumbersome, reduce the costs for banks and ensure equal competitive conditions. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 9
To simplify the rules while protecting stability and to keep watch over banks’ reputations by increasing 
the safeguards for customers have been our principles in regulating the banking system. 
In 2006 and the early months of 2007 the Bank of Italy abolished the requirement to give advance 
notice of the intention to acquire control of a bank, repealed the rules on maturity transformation and 
the limits on banks’ medium and long-term lending to firms, simplified the procedures for opening new 
branches,  issued  regulations  for  banks’  covered  bonds  to  create  a  broad  and  reliable  market,  and 
launched a review of all the supervisory legislation with a view to drastically reducing the number of 
authorizations. 
Public confidence remains essential for the soundness of banks. The Bank of Italy verifies compliance 
with the rules on the transparency of banking and financial transactions and services; the extensive 
checks it makes at intermediaries help to improve the standard of their dealings with customers. In 
addition to ensuring contractual correctness, the information banks give to customers must be clear 
and simple. In order to strengthen the real protection of savers and firms, we plan to review all the 
legislation on transparency and reduce the bureaucratic formalities. 
We  have  launched  a  new  survey  on  the  cost  of  bank  current  accounts,  among  other  things  to 
ascertain the importance of structural factors such as the impact of taxation and the excessive use of 
cash. 
The  recently  approved  European  directive  on  retail  payment  services  opens  the  market  to  new 
operators,  such  as  large  retailers  and  mobile  phone  companies;  it  increases  competition,  reduces 
costs, broadens the supply of services and lays the foundations for an integrated payment system in 
Europe. The Bank of Italy will support an extensive application of the directive, which it is to be hoped 
will soon be transposed by Parliament. 
 Italy has transformed its banking system, begun to put its public finances in order and started to grow 
again. 
I  have  already  reported  on  the  progress  made  by  the  banking  system.  The  role  we  played  in  this 
regard  was  neutral,  not  detached.  We  indicated  the  objective,  not  the  actors:  to  aim  for  growth, 
abandoning the parochialism of the past and accepting the challenge of the market. This was where 
the transformation originated, not in the plans of the authorities. It is now essential that shareholders, 
households and enterprises clearly discern the benefits, in the shape of stronger banks ready to offer 
a wider range of services at lower cost. Finally, the conflicts of interest that are ever present in the land 
of cross-shareholdings have to be resolved. The Bank will follow all of these developments closely. 
A modern financial system does not tolerate the mixing of politics and banking. Let the separation be 
clear-cut, and both will be strengthened. 
For the public finances once again to foster growth and not hamper it, their adjustment must involve 
less  current  spending,  more  investment  and  lower  taxes,  and  above  all  it  must  continue;  we  have 
ceased to accumulate debt, we have not begun to reduce it. 
We  must  tackle  the  structural  weaknesses  of  our  economy  with  greater  determination.  Household 
consumption, eroded by the extraction of rents and held in check by uncertainty about the outcome of 
reforms deeply affecting people’s lives, must regain its vigour. 
Never dealing with the problem of pensions definitively has a cost in terms of lost growth and lower 
consumption. 
These are attainable objectives if we all, each according to his own role and without tarrying to lament 
lost opportunities but drawing strength from awareness of the progress already made, can rediscover 
that sense of the common good that is essential to the enduring development of the country. 
10 
 BIS Review 56/2007
