Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan banking sector – the need for second tier of 
reforms 
Address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Pakistan Banking 
Association, London, 12 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Banking sector of Pakistan has been transformed within a short period of 5 years (CY2000-05) 
from a sluggish and government-dominated sector to a much more agile, competitive and profitable 
industry. Speed and sequencing of banking sector transformation and its role in promoting economic 
growth is now a leading story of a sector success. Within Pakistan it offers a story of what effective 
leadership  of  regulator  and  change  management  and  corporate  governance  can  achieve  and  offer. 
Outside Pakistan it is serving to offer rich lessons in what difference governance of regulator can make 
and how bank restructuring and privatization can change the landscape of the industry. At this session 
of UK’s Pakistan Banking Association I propose to share with you few key elements of this success 
story.  I  would  however  be  amiss  if  I  did  not  share  with  you  the  profitability  and  gains  in  banking 
industry and its role in promoting economic growth.  
2. 
The  banking  industry  in  Pakistan  will  continue  to  enjoy  these  trends  and  has  promising 
prospects.  However,  sustainability  of  banking  sector  performance  is  dependent  on  continued 
macroeconomic stability, stronger vigilance on the sector to ensure effective compliance of industry 
with  the  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  and  banking  sector’s  maturity  to  reorient 
their business models to enhance their penetration ratio and address the asset: liability mismatches. 
At Pakistan to ensure macroeconomic stability coupled with effective risk management and mitigation 
will be critical to Pakistan’s future and a precondition for sustainability of banking sector reforms.  
3. 
The  astounding  growth  of  banking  sector  has  stimulated  and  leveraged  growth  across  the 
board.  Major  reforms  in  the  banking  sector  have  resulted  in  a  more  resilient  and  efficient  financial 
system  that  is  better  placed  to  absorb  significant  macroeconomic  shocks.  Confidence  in  banking 
sector performance and prospects remains strong and scope for expansion and diversification remains 
phenomenal. This is supported by a combination of factors: 
4. 
Banking sector liberalization and restructuring was well sequenced and well designed. In early 
2000, financial sector reforms received strong impetus from high degree of political commitment as 
well  as  macroeconomic  stability,  both  a  prerequisite  for  smooth  and  effective  implementation  of 
financial  sector  reforms.  The  pace  and  sequence  of  bank  restructuring  was  possible  as  the 
Government created fiscal space for absorbing the costs of the nonperforming and legacy loans. In 
parallel  the  financial  deepening  process  triggered  by  financial  liberalization  reinforced  and  was 
supported by the rising economic growth and activity.  
5. 
Financial  liberalization  process  in  Pakistan  has  been  remarkable.  It  not  only  resulted  in 
privatization  of  large  public  sector  banks  but  the  process  of  privatization  was  effectively  conducted 
offering  new  management  in  most  cases  relatively  cleaner  bank  where  the  key  issues  of  NPL 
resolution  and  rationalization  of  work  force  were  dealt  with  upfront  or  ongoing  flexibility  is  awarded 
through  special  schemes  to  deal  with  the  outstanding  issues.  Augmenting  the  private  sector 
involvement,  the  entry  requirements  for  new  private  banks  were  relaxed  but  made  more  stringent  - 
both in terms of capital requirements and fit and proper criteria for both management and Board of 
Directors.  
6. 
Accompanying financial liberalization process was a strong effort on the part of central bank to 
bring  the  prudential  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  banks  at  par  with  the  BIS  standards. 
Pakistan is fully/largely compliance with the 28 of the 30 Basel Core Principles for effective Banking 
Supervision  and  the  remaining  2  principles  relate  to  consolidated  supervision,  and  are  under 
consideration for future compliance.  
7. 
 Growth in Banking Sector and its profitability is unprecedented. Banking assets rose three-fold 
over the last 5 years and industry size is reaching Rs4 trillion. The banking sector’s assets to GDP 
ratio grew from 47.2% in CY00 to 55.6% in CY05 since the growth in banking assets outpaced the 
nominal GDP; these trends are in sharp contrast from the declining trend in banks’ assets to GDP ratio 
during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Supported  by  privatization  and  consolidation,  assets  of  the 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
banking sector have shifted from public to private sector and there is a decline in asset concentration 
within the banking sector. This changing structure had far-reaching implications for the banking sector 
profitability.  
8. 
Return on banking assets before taxes have grown to 2.6% (1.8% after tax) relative to 0.2% in 
CY00 and return on equity has been 25.4%. Improvement in profitability has been supported by high 
economic activity but it is important to recognize that sustained economic growth, rather than sporadic 
improvement in real GDP, helps the financial institutions to earn higher profits. In quantitative terms, 
one  percent  rise  in  the  real  GDP  growth  tends  to  improve  the  profitability  by  113  basis  points.  In 
addition, low interest rates and inflation for most of the period in the last four years also supported the 
financial sector profitability, as one percentage point increase in real interest rates and inflation tends 
to reduce the ROA by 27 basis points in each case. Pakistan’s economy to a higher growth trajectory 
during  the  last  four  years  contributed  significantly  towards  the  improved  profitability  of  the  financial 
sector. 
As  per  the  latest  study  conducted  by  the  World  Bank,  Pakistan  has  been  ranked  second  in 
performance and efficiency indicators (India being the first) among the South Asian countries.  
9. 
trends in this area have involved: 
(i) 
Bank’s  profitability  has  also  been  driven  by  changes  in  assets  and  liability  management;  key 
rise  in  share  of  earning  assets  to  82%  indicating  a rise  of  7%  over  CY00  but  much  more 
relative to pre-reform period;  
rising focus on business income has helped raise advances/total asset ratio from 43.8% in 
CY03 to 54.4%;  
while  corporate  loans  remain  an  important  share  of  lending,  the  rise  in  share  of  SME, 
consumer finance and agriculture which typically carry higher charge than corporate loans;  
deposit  as  a  %  of  liabilities  rose  by  almost  10%  since  CY00  and  reached  84%  in  CY05 
consequently borrowing to liability ratio declined and banks have access to cheaper deposit 
funds as a large proportion of deposits were either non-interest or low interest bearing short 
term deposits, while the share of fixed-term deposits of six-month and above has witnessed 
a  substantial  decline.  The  average  cost  of  resource  mobilization  for  banks  (deposits  plus 
borrowings) has fallen from 6.6% in CY00 to 2.5% in CY05; and  
Operating expenses to income declines from 106% in CY98 to 91% in CY00 and to further 
51.2% in CY05 and total expense to income is in the range of 65%.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Privatization has significantly contributed in improving profitability of privatized banks, though it has not 
reduced but enhanced the intermediation spread.  
10. 
Improvements  in  financial  health  of  banking  sector  continue.  On  the  wake  of  this  reforms 
process overall financial health of the banking system improved well and further strengthened since 
year  2000.  Capital  adequacy  ratio  of  the  banking  system  now  stands  at  11.9  percent  from  10.9 
percent  in  year  1999.  Loan  infection  ratio  has  significantly  came  down  to  2.1  percent  closer  to  the 
internationally  acceptable  level,  as  compared  to  very  high  infection  ratio  (  at  15.3  percent)  in  year 
1999. These indicators seem more attractive while looking at the commercial banks perspective only 
and loan infection ratio for commercial banks stands as low as 1.4 percent in June 2006. Profitability 
indicators have significantly outpaced the international averages and the ROA after tax of all banks in 
Pakis tan now stands at 2.1 percent as compared to net losses in year 1999. In terms of their core 
business activity, the banks are now operating at the capacity significantly higher than was in 90s and 
the loan to deposit ratio now is around 70 percent. 
A  recently  released  study  conducted  by  the  World  Bank  on  “Getting  Finance  in  South  Asia”  also 
evaluates  Pakistan,  after  India,  as  having  higher  capital  adequacy,  lower  non-performing  loans  and 
stable liquidity position among the South Asian countries. 
11.  To  tackle  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans,  a  multi-track  strategy  was  adopted  which 
included  enacting  of  new  laws,  creation  of  institutions  to  pursue  recovery  of  bad  loans,  and  an 
incentive package for genuine cases (rescheduling of loans of those borrowers who were unable to 
pay  due  to  economic  constraints).  Specifically,  a  new  law  under  the  title  “The  Financial  Institutions 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
(Recovery  of  Finance)  Ordinance  2001”  was  promulgated.1  The  new  recovery  law  provided  a 
mechanism  for  expeditious  recovery  of  stuck  up  loans,  e.g.,  the  law  provided  a  comprehensive 
procedure for the foreclosure and sale of mortgaged property, without the interventions of a court of 
law, and automatic transfer of all cases pending in any other courts to banking courts for their early 
resolution.  
12.  Furthermore,  amendments  were  made  in  the  Banking  Companies  Ordinance  1962  (BCO)  to; 
provide legal coverage for expeditious recovery of loans. To deal with the historical portfolio of stuck-
up loans of the nationalized commercial banks and DFIs, the Corporate and Industrial Restructuring 
Corporation  (CIRC)  and  Committee  on  Revival  of  Sick  Industrial  Units  (CRSIU)  were  set  up.  While 
NCBs and DFIs were able to clean their balance sheets by transferring a part of their historically stuck 
up loans to CIRC which would then pursue their recovery independently, CRSIU was set up to valuate 
the  possibilities  of  restructuring  the  loans  of  those  industrial  units  that  had  became  non-operational 
due to unsustainable debt and were otherwise viable. On the incentive side, while concessions were 
offered to those borrowers who were keen to regularize themselves, cases of willful defaulters, after 
due course of law were referred to the National Accountability Bureau (NAB).  
13.  While political resolve was necessary to tackle the issue of the NPLs, it was equally important to 
have  a  dependable  infrastructure  to  provide  accurate  information  on  the  past  credit  history  of  the 
borrowers. Such information generation entails substantial cost for the lenders, and at times, a lender 
may  opt  not  to  incur  this  cost,  thereby  exposing  it  self  to  credit  risks.  The  need  for  setting  up  a 
centralized database of the borrower’s credit history was realized early in the reform process and the 
Credit Information Bureau was set up at SBP. Over the years, the scope, coverage and efficiency of 
this bureau has been enhanced to meet the needs of the growing financial sector. 
14.  Within South Asia, Pakistan’s banking industry fares well relative to all financial indicators too. 
Stepping back, the disproportionately high growth in advances, while improving the profitability, has 
raised the risk exposure for financial institutions. However, the simultaneous improvements in capital 
adequacy and relatively better quality of the fresh loans have mitigated the risk so far.  
Sustainability of banking sector reforms requires second tier of reforms 
15.  To ensure growth, high profitability and improvements in financial health are sustainable, it is 
critical  that  Pakistan  maintains  macroeconomic  stability  which  lends  investor  confidence.  Not  only 
have  the  first  phase  of  structural  reforms  launched  in  1999  still  to  be  completed  and  impact  of  its 
implementation  yet  to  take  firm  roots,  SBP  has  recognized  the  added  urgency  to  take  stock  of  our 
achievements and to evaluate where gaps still exist and to design the strategy and road map for the 
next phase of reforms.  
Pakistan banking sector is about to enter a long-term secular growth trajectory (Merill Lynch, 2006) 
16.  Explosion in banking industry has proven that the sector potential is high. The sector is further 
expected  to  receive  an  impetus  as  Pakistan  has  a  large  base  of  young  population  (69.5  million  - 
having less than 19 years of age - as per Census of 1998) and the country’s per capita income have 
risen  to  US  $  526  doubling  relative  to  FY2000  and  reaching  US  $  847  annually  with  promising 
prospects of these levels set to double by 2015. An evaluation of banking sector reforms reveals that 
preoccupation with the privatization of banking industry and clean up of past nonperforming loans, the 
reforms executed thus far are partial and incomplete. The diagnosis reveals that while there remain 
outstanding issues in Pakistan’s banking industry resolution of these offer significant opportunity to the 
banks to exploit the untapped markets.  
17.  First, although the banks have witnessed a substantial rise in profitability and improvement in 
capital adequacy ratios, the asset: liability management practices discussed above have increased the 
risk exposure of the banking sector, especially in the wake of monetary tightening since Q4-FY04. Few 
trends were noteworthy: 
(i) 
The fall in the share of longer-tenor fixed deposits led to an emergence of maturity mismatch 
in banks’ balance sheets. In particular, the incremental advances and investment had longer 
maturity compared with the incremental bank deposits. SBP encourage banks to attract long 
                                                      
1   Vide Ordinance No. XL VI of 2001 dated 30 August 2001 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 3
(ii) 
intended 
to  reduce 
this  measure  was 
term  deposits  by  reducing  cash  reserve  requirements  (CRR)  for  long  tenor  deposit  while 
raising  CRR  on  shorter  tenor  deposits.  Besides  improving  the  maturity  profile  of  banks’ 
liabilities, 
the  stickiness  of  bank  deposits. 
Responsiveness  of  bank  depositor  to  interest  rates  is  expected  to  drive  down  the  interest 
rate spreads.  
Advances  to  total  assets  rose  due  to  strong  credit  growth  and  impacted  banking  systems 
credit risk and liquidity indicators considerably from CY03 onward as reflected by the rise in 
advances  to  deposit  ratios  and  decline  in  liquid  assets  to  total  assets  ratios.  Surge  in 
advances,  with  a  relatively  larger  exposure  towards  high-risk  cliental  (such  as  agriculture, 
SME  and  household  sector)  also  exposed  the  banking  sector  to  higher  credit  risk;  the 
increased maturity mismatches, i.e., higher average maturity of assets than liabilities, have 
raised liquidity risk.  
So  far  the  banking  sector  has  effectively  coped  with  the  increased  risk  exposure.  While  non-
performing assets registered a downward trend from FY01 onward; banks witnessed a strong growth 
in capital, which stemmed from substantial improvement in profitability and increased in minimum-paid 
capital requirement. 
18.  As  expected,  the  indicators  for  productivity  and  capital  adequacy  have  shown  a  positive 
relationship  with  ROA  of  financial  institutions.2  The  latter  reflects  that  a  well-capitalized  financial 
sector is able to tap business opportunities more efficiently and have more flexibility in dealing with 
problems arising from adverse developments in the operating environment of the financial sector. This 
also  supports  the  ongoing  policy  of  strengthening  the  capital  base  of  financial  institutions  through 
raising paid-up capital requirement.  
19.  Second, banking sector reforms have not penetrated deep down or spread across population 
and  regions.  Vast  majority  of  the  population  does  not  have  access  to  financial  services.  Country  is 
characterized by lowest savings rates and access to finance remains weak. Few selected indicators 
are quite illustrative of the situation: Of the 156 million people, the number of deposit holder as per 
Statistical Bulletin is 26,321,688 which also include multiple accounts by same persons/entities. For a 
country with a population of approximately 156 million these numbers are abysmally low since it only 
accounts  for  less  than  17  percent  of  total  population.  Enhancement  in  deposit  mobilization  and  in 
particular promoting long term resource mobilization – this will require banks to raise deposit rates to 
stimulate low savings rate which have been partly hurt by low returns and partly by high propensity to 
consumption. Equally important are steps being taken by central bank to stretch maturity of deposit by 
charging lower reserve ratio’s for long dated deposits. 
20.  As  per  Credit  Information  Bureau  (CIB)  records  the  number  of  borrowers  from  the  banking 
system is under five million i.e. 4,781,509 as of end June 2006, which accounts for only 3 percent of 
the population. Not only is the population underserved but banks are catering to largely urban or semi 
urban areas and concentrating in similar locations/segments with limited reach to the middle and lower 
strata  of  society.  Notwithstanding  credit  to  previously  underserved  markets  such  as  consumer, 
housing, small- and medium-sized enterprises (SME) and agricultural sectors has expanded markedly 
and is now being provided by a broad range of financial institutions. Despite this large segments of the 
economy continue to operate with little formal credit. Credit penetration of banking sector is lowest in 
Asia pacific: number of borrowers is barely 5 million. Credit/GDP ratio is only 27% of GDP. While rising 
from under half a percent total consumer loans remains only 3.9% of GDP. Mortgage market currently 
is only $1 billion. Formal microfinance network which has witnessed significant growth reaches only 
770 households with limited coverage to women. 
21. 
approach: 
(i) 
In  developing  a  program  for  access  to development finance,  SBP  is  adopting a  four-pronged 
Encouraging the Government to divest its remaining stake in banks. Plans to privatize Small- 
and  Medium-sized  Enterprise  Bank  (SMEB),  Industrial  Development  Bank  of  Pakistan 
(IDBP),  House  Building  Finance  Corporation  (HBFC),  Investment  Corporation  of  Pakistan 
(ICP), and National Investment Trust (NIT) are on cards.  
Promoting microfinance industry development  
(ii) 
                                                      
2  
In order to avoid the simultaneity problem between equity ratio and profitability, we have included one period lag of EAT as 
an explanatory variable in the equation.  
4 
 BIS Review 5/2007
(iii) 
(iv) 
Leveraging  Islamic  finance  to  extend  outreach  to  unbanked  people  and  regions  where 
Shariah compliance products may offer an incentive and appeal to augmentation of financial 
services 
Launching  efforts  to  promote  new  business  models  and  technologies  that  will  broaden 
access to financial services in a sustainable and cost-efficient manner. This will require some 
adaptation of relevant regulations.  
The  progress  achieved  thus  far  can  be  solidified  by  revising  key  financial  sector  legislation,  most 
notably the SBP Act and Banking Companies Act, in accordance with best practice to avoid relapsing 
into past practices and unwarranted government interference. 
22.  Third,  Banking  consolidation  is  critical  to  enhance  bank’s  economies  of  scale  and  cost 
effectiveness while developing strong and robust banks that can withstand business cycle downturns. 
Central  bank  has  encouraged  the  consolidation  process  by  enhancement  of  minimum  capital 
requirement (MCR) in a phased manner to be raised each year by Rs1 billion from Rs2 billion to Rs6 
billion by 2009. As of end of September 2006, all the banks, except four, were meeting the Rs2 billion 
capital requirement and the average capital held by the banks remains higher than Rs3 billion. The 
process of banking sector consolidation is ongoing but is yet to fully unfold. While some banks have 
already  complied  with  new  MCR,  others  are  following  the  timetable  and  another  set  is  seeking 
mergers  with  stronger  banks.  The  mergers  and  acquisition  wave  is  facilitating  the  process  of 
consolidation. While some small banks are up for sale as they cannot meet capital requirements or do 
not see themselves as withstanding competition, others like foreign banks are acquiring banks given 
the attractiveness of Pakistani banks and their profitability and their desire to expand their outreach. 
Several mergers have taken place and more are expected in near future. The way the financial sector 
scenario has emerged over the past few years with number of mergers and acquisitions, it is expected 
that the process would continue at least for the next 5 years. We would have even fewer banks than 
today owing to capital requirement of 6 billion rupees by the year 2009. A typical figure could be 25 to 
30  banks  by  end  of  year  2010.  In  the  near  future,  we  foresee  at  least  three  mergers/acquisitions 
transactions  per  year.  Although  number  of  small  banks  would  reduce  but  the  number  of  foreign 
institutions are likely to increase.  
23.  This  is  largely  because  while  conventional  banks  are  being  consolidated,  SBP  has  been 
licensing both Islamic and Microfinance Banks. The ultimate aim is to have fewer and well capitalized 
banks of sound repute having a broad based clientele and geographical reach. It is only the sound, 
and adequately capitalized banks that can take up the dynamic role required in a developing economy 
like Pakistan. Consolidation is also critical factor to deal with any effects of the reversal of business 
cycle. At the moment, the economy is enjoying high growth, and the future outlook is quite buoyant. 
Sound policy making, however, demands that the institutions are strengthened during the boom period 
to  make  them  resilient  against  cycle  reversal.  The  rise  in  interest  rates  can  become  a  forbearer  of 
economic contraction or at least limited market correction. As such it is important to pursue policies 
that encourage creation of reserves on the balance sheets of the banks that will act as a cushion in 
the time of crisis. The recent step of tightening up of classification criteria of NPLs is very timely.  
24.  Fourth,  while  banking  sector’s  profitability  has  improved,  there  is  need  to  further  enhance 
competitiveness in the industry Currently, there is high sector concentration as the top five banks (out 
of total 39 banks) hold more than 50 percent of the industry assets, advance and deposits. The wave 
towards consolidation of banks is expected to enhance competitive pressures – for instance foreign 
banks are enhancing their outreach by acquisition of some strategic small banks which have a good 
branch network and few newer, relatively smaller, private banks have spread their reach to most major 
cities. These banks are now providing clients an option to diversify their business and not exclusively 
dependent on nationalized and large privatized banks that were the only sub-groups that had nation-
wide branch network.  
25.  Fifth, adoption of new Basel II accord brings in a comprehensive risk management system and 
links  economic  capital  with  the  risk  assessments.  Banking  industry  worldwide  today  faces  several 
issues  and  challenges  which  unless  effectively  addressed  would  impact  the  pace  of  adoption  and 
implementation  of  Basel  II.  In  Pakistan  the  roadmap  has  already  been  given,  and  the  standardized 
approach will commence from January 2008, while parallel run have been started from July 2006. The 
SBP’s strategy is to work very closely with the banking industry to ensure that Basel II implementation 
is well planned and formulation of a Steering Committee is already underway under the guidance of 
SBP.  However  simply  upgrading  banking  sector  will  be  quite  impossible  to  undertake  unless  the 
allied/support entities (e.g. credit rating agencies, IT systems etc) are also developed. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 5
26.  There  is,  however,  a  need  to  provide  institutional  support  for  those  sectors  that  are 
complimentary to the banking sector success yet sufficient market mechanism has not taken roots. At 
the moment market development is limited in Credit Rating Agencies, private sector Credit Information 
Bureaus,  and  independent  debt/financial  advisories  etc.  The  gaps  in  the  rating  agencies  are  of 
particular concerns for SBP, given the heavy reliance of Standardized approach under Basel II.  
Conclusion 
27.  Central bank is now in midst of evaluating and stock taking of financial sector reforms. While the 
transformation of financial system is impressive, it is far from complete. Not only is the change more 
visible in banking and equity markets relative to institutional finance as insurance and pension reforms 
have  lagged  and  corporate  debt  market  remains  small,  but  the  change  is  more  fundamental  in  the 
banking relative to even equity markets. Consequently it is no surprise that the banking system assets 
remain  the  larger  component  of  financial  asset  and  cater  for  bulk  of  financing  requirements  of  the 
country.  The  banks  also  have  been  engaged  in  taking  advantage  of  low  hanging  fruit  and  have 
leveraged lack of competition for resources and businesses to the best of their advantage. However, 
these  trends  are  not  sustainable  as  the  economic  and  business  cycles  accompanied  by  changing 
interest rate environment eventually both global and based on domestic market fundamentals are a 
reality  and  call  for  the  banks  to  be  thinking  of  their  long  term  interests.  Banking  sector’s  long  term 
sustainability requires a more fundamental change accompanied by 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Greater degree of consolidation to provide a stronger and robust banking system; 
A system that is well diversified and competitive; 
Stronger corporate governance and risk management aligned to principles of Basel II; and 
Financial  system  which  is  socially  inclusive  and  facilitates  access  to  financial  services. 
Although finance has help promote economic growth, but its contribution to providing access 
to finance to poor and disadvantaged region is limited. 
6 
 BIS Review 5/2007
