Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: Review of the UAE economy and the central 
bank’s performance in 2006 
Speech by His Excellency Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of the United 
Arab  Emirates,  at 
the  Bankers  Lunch,  hosted  by  The  Bank  of  New  York,  Abu  Dhabi, 
17 December 2006. 
 Excellencies, His Excellency Sulaiman Al Mazroui 
Ladies & Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure indeed to join you today, especially at this magnificent resort, thanks to our host; 
"Bank of New York".  
I would also thank Mr. Sulaiman Al Mazroui for the kind invitation and would try to be in line with the 
request in his letter, i e. to talk about banks' expected performance in 2006 and talk briefly about the 
UAE Economy.  
Therefore, I will focus my short speech on the following subjects:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Expected Bank's Performance in 2006 
The UAE Economy and the Exchange Rate Policy of the UAE 
Central Bank's Issues and Projects 
Expected Bank's performance in 2006  
1.  
This may be seen through four consolidated variables, comparing their figures as at 31st Oct. 2006 
with the figures of 31st Dec 2005, we will arrive at some important conclusions, these are:  
1. 
Total Deposits 
Total deposits went up by 16.3% so far, from AED 426.5 Bil.  
Total Advances 
Total advances went up by 29.2%, from AED 379 Bil.  
Total Assets 
Total assets went up by 25.1%, from AED 624.9 Bil. , and  
Total Profits 
Total profits went down slightly, by -0.5% compared to AED 14.8 Bil for the same period in 
2005. this could mean that we will see a further decline by 31st Dec. 2006.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Real Estate Mortgage loans - grew at 58.2% and stood at AED 27.7 Bil.  
Services - grew at 69.4% and stood at AED 53.8 Bil.  
Transport & Storage - grew at 67.7% and stood at 17.9 Bil.  
Financial Institutions (Excluding banks) - grew at 93.4% and stood at 14.4 Bil.  
These figures suggest that "Total Advances" having grown at 29.2%, deserve further analysis. If we 
consider  loan  categories  to  residents,  the  following  categories  witnessed  high  rate  of  growth,  as  at 
30th Sept. 2006:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
Loans to the more traditional categories such as, trade, personal business loans, personal consumer 
loans and construction went up at normal growth rates of between 9.9% to 13.6%.  
I  do  not  want  to  draw  conclusions,  but  please  take  note  of  these  figures  and  try  to  draw  your  own 
conclusions.  
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
The UAE economy and the exchange rate policy of the UAE 
2.  
The UAE Economy will continue to do well, as oil prices are expected to continue to hold above US$ 
50 per barrel. As you know, oil and gas exports' revenue even if we include free trade zones exports 
and reexports, this still will weigh around 70% of the value of all UAE exports' revenue.  
Inflation  in  the  UAE  comes  mainly  from  higher  rental  rates,  which  is  a  temporary  phenomena,  and 
expected to subside as new housing units and office space come to the market in a few months from 
now. 
The  UAE  will  continue  to  be  a  trade  &  business  center  and  a  tourist  destination  in  the  region,  and 
certain economic sectors will continue to grow; just avoid concentration.  
Ladies & Gentlemen,  
I will take this opportunity to try to respond to those who voiced their opinion recently that the Dirham 
fixed exchange - rate peg against the US Dollar is not suitable for the UAE Economy. To analyze, lets 
look at the UAE imports and exports in 2005, before we make any judgment based on ones feelings or 
interests. The UAE imported goods worth 36% of all its imports from Asian emerging economies and 
10%  from  USA  &  Canada  and  4%  from  GCC  countries;  this  is  straight  50%  of  all  imports,  all 
denominated in US dollars. If we add Australia & N. Z., Africa, other Arab countries & other countries; 
at least 70% of these countries trade with the UAE were done using US dollars or a currency pegged 
to the US dollar. Japan exports (UAE imports) are 69.5% denominated in US dollar, as per Bank of 
Japan letter to myself. Also Imports from the UK should be at least 50% denominated in US dollar. 
This  leaves  the  Euro  Area  which  represents  only  20%  of  UAE  imports,  which  could  be  purely 
denominated in a non-US dollar currency.  
On the other hand, about 70% of our exports are priced in US dollars, i.e. our oil and gas exports.  
Central bank's issues and projects 
3.  
Under this title I will now focus on: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Under the a) Regulatory & Supervisory Framework I have Basel II and Corporate Governance 
Regulatory & Supervisory Framework 
Image Cheque Clearing System to Replace Automated Cheque Clearing System 
Mobile Phone Payment System 
Implementation of Basel II 
i) 
Two years ago, we arranged high level meetings with Bank CEOs to discuss our programme for Basel 
II, and carried-out many awareness raising seminars. Also, In February 2006, we held initial meetings 
with Basel II managers of banks to discuss the gap analysis and objectives of the exercise. In March 
2006, we arranged with the Financial Stability Institute of the BIS to hold a Basel II training workshop 
for Central Bank BSED Team Leaders. In August and October 2006, we, in coordination with KPMG 
held a week long comprehensive training programme for BSED examination staff. 
On 27 August 2006, we issued a notice to all banks to announce Basel II requirements. 
From September to December 2006, we are reviewing aspects of a national discretion as part of an 
understanding reached at the GCC level, and we are also carrying-out consultation with UAE banks. 
In  February  2007,  a  comprehensive  Basel  II  training  workshop  is  planned  for  all  banks,  to  be 
conducted by KPMG. 
Implementation of corporate governance standards 
ii) 
During this year, we worked on Corporate Governance, as it is an essential element for the successful 
implementation of Basel II. We held the first ever seminar on Corporate Governance for UAE Banks' 
Boards of Directors and senior management on 20th March 2005. 
To enhance principal based corporate governance guidelines further, Central Bank of the UAE signed 
an  advisory  service  agreement  with  International  Finance  Corporation  of  the  World  Bank  (IFC)  on 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
26 December 2005, to conduct a high-level workshop for banks in the GCC and MENA countries and 
to issue a handbook for UAE Banks' Directors. 
The objective of the Handbook on corporate governance is to: 
1. 
Present  a  single  source  of  information  for  bank  directors  regarding  sound  corporate 
governance principles and best practices, and  
to  provide  a  set  of  reference  standards  and  guidelines  that  banks  can  use  to  benchmark, 
assess and if need be, improve their corporate governance framework.  
2. 
Image Cheque Clearing System to replace Automated Cheque Clearing System 
b) 
We  have  taken  many  steps  aiming  at  implementing  a  successful  Image  Cheque  Clearing  System, 
there  were  many  technical  issues  that  we  needed  to  tackle  and  some  legal  issues  to  resolve.  Our 
experience tells us that it is not so easy to implement systems that are processed both physically at 
one  stage  and  then  electronically,  or  vice-versa.  Also,  the  third  difficulty  is  getting  banks  to  work 
together  and  to  cooperate  to  achieve  a  certain  objective.  We  have  certainly  faced  these  issues  in 
implementing  the  image  cheque  clearing  system.  But  we  believe  that  implementing  this  system  is 
essential for improving customer services at banks, we also believe that the problems banks talk about 
are mostly theoretical and imaginary. 
Mobile Phone Payment System for banks 
Person-to-person 
Bill payments 
Payments for purchases at point of sale 
Internet purchases 
c) 
Our objective with this system is to make it easier for banks to add another element to improve service 
to their personal customers. The system is expected to become operational in the early part of 2007. 
The system will handle the following payments: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
and many more.  
We have already negotiated an agreement with Etisalat, to provide this service through their mobile 
phone network.  
Ladies & Gentlemen,  
Before I conclude I must thank The Bank of New York for hosting us at this magnificent resort and Mr. 
Sulaiman Al Mazroui for all the excellent arrangements and for inviting me. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 3
