Linah K Mohohlo: The challenges faced by developing countries in the current 
global environment, and how the IMF could be reformed to meet these 
countries' needs 
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the 2007 Executive 
Directors’ Retreat, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 20 June 2007. 
 Managing Director, Mr de Rato 
Deputy Managing Directors, Mr Kato & Mr Portugal 
Distinguished Executive Directors, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and privilege that I am in your company this evening. Equally important, I am 
most grateful that I have the opportunity to share some thoughts with you on the challenges 
faced  by  developing  countries  in  the  current  global  environment,  and  on  how  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  could  be  reformed  to  meet  these  countries’  needs.  These 
subject  matters  are  the  core  dimensions  of  your  Retreat  discussions  and  there  should  be 
consensus building emerging at the end of the Retreat. 
Since  these  are  broad  topics,  I  can  only  briefly  highlight  a  few  points  in  view  of  the  time 
constraint.  I  should  also  admit  that  although  the  topics  have  a  global  perspective,  it  is 
inevitable  for  me  to  draw  on  my  African  and  Botswana’s  experience,  where  I  continue  to 
serve in a number of capacities. In sharing my views with you on these matters, I can assure 
you that none of my remarks are intended to be provocative. However, I am convinced that it 
is in the best interest of your deliberations that I express my perspective on the issues as 
candidly as possible. 
Global economic trends 
I consider the hallmark of my remarks to be opportune for several reasons. This is a time of 
almost unprecedented increase in global prosperity. World economic growth is not only rapid 
(estimated at 5.4 percent in 2006); it is also broad-based. In Sub-Saharan Africa, economic 
growth  in  2006  was  5.5  percent,  a  trend  which  is  forecast  to  continue  through  2007  and 
2008, and has, accordingly, given rise to optimism which borders on euphoria. 
In fact, some commentators (non-economists presumably) have gone as far as to describe 
the current situation as a “perfect calm”. While this expression or description may be more 
poetic than accurate, it, nevertheless, helps to draw attention to an important point, and that 
is,  if  “perfect  calm”  is  a  correct  analogy  for  “anti-storm”,  then  the  favourable  current 
conditions  should  be  regarded  as  exceptional,  which  means  that  they  will  not  continue 
indefinitely.  For  this  reason,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  other  concerned  parties 
cannot afford to be complacent, for to do so is to ask for trouble. To paraphrase a recent 
piece by Larry Summers, this is a time when a lack of fear would be cause for concern.1
This  is  not  the  time,  therefore,  to  argue  that  the  international  financial  institutions  have 
become  obsolete.  On  the  contrary;  given  what  are  commonly  referred  to  as  “global 
imbalances”,  global  monetary  stability  has  become  even  more  uncertain,  a  situation  which 
calls for the Fund to safeguard global stability now and into the future. 
Moreover,  the  seemingly  increased  prosperity  of  many  developing  countries,  although 
typically  from  very  low  levels,  may  tempt  the  advanced  economies  to  drag  their  feet  in 
implementing important previously promised initiatives, including the increase in aid to Africa 
                                                 
1   L. Summers “A lack of fear is cause for concern”. Financial Times 27 December, 2006. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
by the G8 and pushing for a successful conclusion to the Doha Round of trade negotiations. 
Failure  to  fulfil  these  commitments  energetically,  and  now,  risks  missing  the  opportunity 
afforded  by  the  current favourable  global  economic  conditions  to  sustain  global  prosperity. 
Worse  still,  it  would  undermine  the  very  dynamic  that  underpins  the  current  rapid  pace  of 
economic growth. In fact, a well known economist, Joseph Stiglitz, may have exaggerated 
the  current  global  economic  situation,  when  he  described  it  as  being  close  to  having 
conditions  where  all  countries,  including  the  poorest,  can  benefit.  It  is  my  belief,  however, 
that we are still far from achieving that desirable goal, despite the undeniable rapid speed of 
globalisation.  
Globalisation and world trade  
Speaking of globalisation, we are aware that, for the most part, it is driven by technological 
advances  that  have  made  diverse  means  of  transport  and  communication  increasingly 
cheaper. As a national of a developing country, I firmly believe that we should seek to take 
advantage of the many opportunities offered by globalisation rather than seek to avoid the 
accompanying  challenges.  I  am  convinced  that  the  challenge  is  to  improve  levels  of 
productivity as the key to rising living standards; this is a fundamental truth which I never tire 
to raise. 
But how can we maintain this positive approach when so many larger and more developed 
economies are so wary of some of the effects of globalisation? The scope for avoiding the 
challenges  of  globalisation  is  almost  non  existent.  Even  bilateral  and  regional  trade 
agreements may not be favourable to small developing countries such as Botswana with a 
population of only 1.8 million, given the world trading system that is increasingly becoming 
complex and competitive. 
Globalisation  also  affects  international  financial  markets,  where  the  amounts  traded  are 
becoming larger and more diverse. You will recall that the Managing Director, Mr de Rato, 
underscored the point when he characterised these developments in his recent speech to the 
Bretton Woods Committee, as a “torrent of change”2. Faced with this torrent of change, the 
alternatives are either swimming or sinking, as drifting is not an option. 
Changing balance of economic power 
Related to the globalization process is the fact that, in recent times, the world has witnessed 
a  change  in  the  balance  of  economic  power.  Observers  suggest  that  50  years  ago,  60 
percent of global GDP had come from within the original G7 countries and the balance from 
the rest of the world; but now the situation has reversed. There is no doubt that this change 
is  a  challenge  to  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions.  For  instance,  it  so  happens  that  no 
advanced industrialised country has borrowed from the Fund for more than 20 years, and yet 
these countries tend to dominate decision-making. On the other hand, other members of the 
Fund  expect  the  institution  to  deliver  on  its  mandate  fairly  and  equally  to  all  the  185 
members. It is in this context that there remains the legitimate expectation that, in time, there 
will be a reform of the voting system so that developing countries, a large number of which 
are  in  Africa,  can  be  in  a  position  to  influence  policy  in  a  meaningful  manner,  both  in  the 
Fund and World Bank. 
Indeed the role of China and other countries in its league, as major economic players in the 
world, has made it imperative and urgent to change the quota system. Hence the decision of 
the  Fund’s Board  of  Governors  to increase the  voting  power  of  China,  Korea,  Mexico  and 
                                                 
2   R.  de  Rato,  “Steering  a  Course  Through  the  Torrent  of  Change:  Principles  for  Reform  of  the  International 
Monetary Fund”. Speech to the Bretton Woods Committee, 12 June 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2007
Turkey. While this is a laudable decision, a lot more needs to be done on the Fund’s quota 
system  and,  therefore,  voting  power,  so  that  it  can  be  reflective  of  the  member  countries’ 
economic  weight,  while  ensuring  that  the  voice  of  low  income  countries  can  have  a 
meaningful impact in decision-making. 
Quota reform 
While  the  Fund’s  Medium  Term  Strategy  has  several  complementary  elements,  the  centre 
piece is still the issue of quota and voice reform. It was heartening to see that some progress 
is being made as reported in the communiqué of the International Monetary and  Financial 
Committee  (IMFC)  following  the  2007  Spring  meetings.  Nevertheless,  we  have  only  heard 
fine statements of principle, and hardly any reports on concrete agreements. For instance, 
the  quota  and  voice  reform  brief  on  the  IMF  website,  currently  states  that  “Following  the 
endorsement received in Singapore last September, IMF staff and the IMF Executive Board 
have  looked  at  several  of  the  key  issues,  many  of  which  are  complex  and  require  careful 
deliberation and broad consultation”. This may be true, but it is hardly informative. 
Of course, it is true that collective action requires consensus building and a “give and take” 
approach in order to make progress. But for quota reform, two salient points stand out. First, 
a situation where we rely on the current voting system to produce reform of itself in a manner 
that would be acceptable to all members, inevitably requires more giving than taking by those 
wielding more voting power due to their economic weight. 
Second,  the  basic  issues  of  quota  reform,  and  the  basis  of  their  resolution,  appear  very 
straightforward to many of us. Continued delay can only risk a wider malaise. If I may quote 
again, a recent IMF working paper entitled “Rethinking The Governance of the International 
Monetary Fund” submitted that: “a major revision of the quota formulas is long overdue, and 
leaving  this  unaddressed  raises  serious  questions  regarding  the  IMF’s  governance  which 
could develop into a core mission risk and jeopardize the relevance of the institution”3. For 
this reason, observers have called for meaningful progress such that the quota review can be 
completed in time for the 2007 Annual Meetings4. It is encouraging that the Fund’s Managing 
Director  has  recently  indicated  that  the  Executive  Board  is  earnestly  working  towards 
accelerating the quota review timetable. In this endeavour, it is legitimate to expect that the 
views of a diverse spectrum of interested parties will continue to be canvassed in order that 
an amicable consensus can be reached. 
Role of the international financial institutions 
I  thought  I  should  also  comment  on  the  role  of  the  international  financial  institutions. 
Admittedly,  there  have  been  benefits  derived  from  these  institutions  since  the  end  of  the 
Second  World  War.  In  particular,  the  contributions  of  the  Fund,  World  Bank,  World  Trade 
Organisation  and  the  OECD  have  been  remarkable.  It  was  inevitable  that,  over  time,  the 
Fund  would  change  in  many  ways  from  its  original  role  of  policing  a  fixed  exchange  rate 
system among the major economies. In this regard, only a few weeks ago, the Independent 
Evaluation  Office  reported  on  Exchange  Rate  Surveillance  for  the  period  1999-2005  and 
concluded, among others, that “the IMF was simply not as effective as it needs to be in both 
its  analysis and  advice,  and  its  dialogue  with member  countries”5.  This  shows  that,  in  this 
case, there is unanimity that there is need for change. 
                                                 
3   A.  Mirakhor  &  I  Zaidi  (2006)  “Rethinking  the  Governance  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund”  IMF  Working 
Paper WP/06/273. 
4   R. Cooper & E. Truman E. (2007) “The IMF Quota Formula: Linchpin of Fund Reform”. 
5  
Independent Evaluation Office (2007), “IMF Exchange Rate Policy Advice, 1999-2005: An IEO Evaluation”. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 3
On a related matter, the Policy Support Instrument (PSI), which was introduced in October 
2005, was in recognition of the fact that fewer countries need to borrow from the Fund. While 
it is acknowledged that one contributing factor to the reduced need for Fund lending is the 
extent  of  success  of  IMF  programme  implementation  in  the  past,  this  reduced  recourse  to 
Fund  resources  should  not  lead  to  member  countries  ignoring  the  Fund’s  reform 
programmes and policy advice, because doing so would be counter-productive. I hasten to 
add that, although not a borrower of Fund resources for programme assistance, Botswana 
values  her  long-term  partnership  with  the  Fund.  There  is  absolutely  no  doubt  that  Fund 
advice has largely been beneficial; so too has technical assistance. 
However, in the advent of the PSI, we should ask whether it has moved far enough from the 
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). Is there still too much prescription and not 
enough  discussion?  Is  the  Fund’s  endorsement  of  policies  still  so  important  for  member 
countries, given the increased opportunities for funding provided by financial globalisation? 
And  what  are  members  to  do  when  the  assessments  by  the  Fund  and  World  Bank  differ 
radically? It will be interesting to see the number of countries, if any, that have so far taken 
advantage of the programme, now that the PSI Fact Sheet is published on the IMF website. 
Furthermore, the Fund needs to change its approach to surveillance and, accordingly, some 
important structures of the Fund, such as the IMFC, have suggested that surveillance needs 
to become more advisory than prescriptive. It is felt that such an approach would encourage 
country  ownership  of  decisions  resulting  from  IMF  advice,  and  facilitate  more  timely 
publication  of  surveillance  Reports,  instead  of  the  current  protracted  exchanges,  in  some 
cases, on the findings of Fund surveillance missions. This is not to suggest that there should 
be  no  scope  for  a  more  constructive  dialogue,  especially  in  areas  where  the  difference 
between fact and perception is negligible. As it should be, the Managing Director espouses 
the view that the Fund must be trusted to give even-handed advice and fair representation to 
all its members. I need not emphasise that the role of the Executive Board is to ensure that 
this trust is earned and then maintained. 
Governance 
As I come to the end of my remarks, I would like to devote a few minutes to the related and 
equally important topical issue of governance, which is one of the principal themes of your 
Retreat. 
You may be interested to note that, earlier this year, the Bank of Botswana hosted a two-day 
workshop  for  SADC  Central  Banks  on  Trends  in  Central  Bank  Governance,  with  technical 
input and assistance from the Central Bank of Sweden, Bank for International Settlements 
and the Fund. Unsurprisingly, it was found that there is diversity in the internal governance 
structures  and  procedures  required  to  ensure  good  governance  of  an  autonomous  central 
bank, and it was further noted that consensus is yet to emerge regarding best practice in the 
conduct  of  a  central  bank  in  its  relations  with  various  stakeholders.  Diversity  was  due  to 
several  factors,  among  which  are  historical  and  socio-political  characteristics  of  a  country. 
Nevertheless,  there  were  common  pillars  that  are  a  basis  of  good  governance,  namely, 
accountability, 
interests  by  Boards  and 
management. 
Evidently,  governance  issues  in  the  Fund  are  similar  and  equally  challenging.  It  follows, 
therefore, that despite the diversity of the 185 member countries, the governance of the Fund 
must, of necessity, be based on these principles. You will agree that unless the Fund is seen 
to  be  managed  according  to  the  highest  standards  of  good  governance,  which  enshrine 
widely accepted notions of fairness and accountability in its operations and decision-making, 
including  in  staff  appointments,  then  its  relevance  and  objectivity  will  continue  to  be 
questioned. 
transparency  and  avoidance  of  conflict  of 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2007
The  Executive  Directors  themselves  do,  of  course,  strive  to  be  above  reproach  on  this 
matter, and it is important to stress that, from the member countries’ point of view, the buck 
of accountability stops with you, as you are effectively the guardians of this institution. 
Unfortunately,  recent  events  at  the  World  Bank  are  not  encouraging.  While  almost  every 
independent  commentator  saw  an  excellent  opportunity  to  reform  the  outdated  system  of 
choosing the leadership of the two Bretton Woods institutions, it was disheartening to note 
that the need for the reform of this practice was apparently not even on the agenda of those 
entrusted with such responsibility. This suggests that the United States of America has little 
inclination, if at all, of giving up its “traditional right” of appointing the President of the World 
Bank.  Similarly,  Europe  appears  disinclined  to  change  with  respect  to  its  historical 
“entitlement” to appointing its national to the leadership of the Fund. Needless to add, such 
“traditions" or “rights” have no place in the governance of modern institutions. The selection 
process must, of necessity, be based on merit, certainly not on the current primary criterion 
of  nationality.  Even  the  British  seem  to  have  seen  the  light  on  this  important  matter  with 
respect to appointments to the House of Lords, which used to be based more on heredity. 
It  is  my  sincere  hope,  therefore,  that  as  you  continue  your  deliberations  tomorrow,  this 
Retreat will explore new and innovative ways for the Board to effect appropriate changes to 
its governance practices, in the interest of all stakeholders. One of those changes, as many 
member  countries  have  submitted,  should  be  the  policy  or  practice  of  selecting  and 
appointing  the  leadership  of  both  the  World  Bank  and  the  Fund.  In  addition,  there  is 
implementation of the main elements of the Medium Term Strategy, with emphasis on quota 
and voice as well as surveillance reform. 
We all look forward to reaching the goal of an increasingly assertive International Monetary 
Fund based on its relevance. Such relevance to developing and developed countries alike 
must be earned through good governance in all its manifestations. 
Distinguished members of the high echelons of the Fund, with these words, it only remains 
for me to wish you success in your collective endeavours to advance the course of this great 
institution. I wish you fruitful deliberations in your Retreat. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 5
