Frederic S Mishkin: The role of house prices in formulating monetary policy  
Remarks by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the Forecasters Club of New York, New York, 17 January 2007.  
 Over  the  past  ten  years,  we  have  seen  extraordinary  run-ups  in  house  prices.  From  1996  to  the 
present,  nominal  house  prices  in  the  United  States  have  doubled,  rising  at  a  7-1/4  percent  annual 
rate.1  Over  the  past  five  years,  the  rise  even  accelerated  to  an  annual  average  increase  of  8-3/4 
percent. This phenomenon has not been restricted to the United States but has occurred around the 
world.  For  example,  Australia,  Denmark,  France,  Ireland,  New  Zealand,  Spain,  Sweden,  and  the 
United Kingdom have had even higher rates of house price appreciation in recent years. 
Although increases in house price have recently moderated in some countries, they still are very high 
relative to rents. Furthermore, with the exception of Germany and Japan, the ratios of house prices to 
disposable income in many countries are greater than what would have been predicted on the basis of 
their  trends.  Because  prices  of  homes,  like  other  asset  prices,  are  inherently  forward  looking,  it  is 
extremely  hard  to  say  whether  they  are  above  their  fundamental  value.  Nevertheless,  when  asset 
prices  increase  explosively,  concern  always  arises  that  a  bubble  may  be  developing  and  that  its 
bursting might lead to a sharp fall in prices that could severely damage the economy.  
This  concern  has  led  to  an  active  debate  among  monetary  policy  makers  around  the  world  on  the 
appropriate  reaction  to  the  run-ups  in  house  prices  that  we  have  recently  seen  in  many  markets: 
Should central banks raise interest rates? And how should they prepare themselves to react if housing 
prices decline? These are the issues that I will address today. The views I will express are my own 
and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Home prices, like other asset prices, have important effects on output and inflation. Home prices affect 
the economy in two primary ways. First, when they begin rising, the expectation of further appreciation 
tends to become built into the market. That expectation boosts demand for homes, which stimulates 
new construction and aggregate demand. Of course, the sustained rise in prices can simultaneously 
sow  the  seeds  of  a  market  correction  by  making  houses  progressively  less  affordable  relative  to 
income, thereby limiting the demand for them and restraining additional construction. Second, higher 
home prices increase household wealth, thus stimulating consumer spending, another component of 
aggregate demand.  
Because  central  banks  are  in  the  business  of  managing  total  demand  in  the  economy  so  as  to 
produce desirable outcomes on inflation and employment, monetary policy should accordingly respond 
to  home  prices  to  the  extent  that  these  prices  are  influencing  aggregate  demand  and  resource 
utilization. The issue of how central banks should respond to house price movements is therefore not 
whether they should respond at all. Rather, the issue is whether they should respond over and above 
the  response  called  for  in  terms  of  objectives  to  stabilize  inflation  and  employment  over  the  usual 
policy time horizon. The issue here is the same one that applies to how central banks should respond 
to potential bubbles in asset prices in general: Because subsequent collapses of these asset prices 
might be highly damaging to the economy, as they were in Japan in the 1990s, should the monetary 
authority try to prick, or at least slow the growth of, developing bubbles?  
I view the answer as no. 
I will outline some conventional arguments for and against reacting to asset prices over and above 
their direct and foreseeable effects on inflation and employment. I will also discuss some additional 
reasons why central banks should not overly emphasize house prices in particular. Although I come 
down squarely on the side of those who oppose giving a special role to house prices in the conduct of 
monetary policy, I do think that central banks can take steps to ensure that sharp movements in the 
prices of homes or other assets do not have serious negative consequences for the economy.  
There  is no question  that  asset  price bubbles  have  potential  negative  effects  on  the economy.  The 
departure of asset prices from fundamentals can lead to inappropriate investments that decrease the 
                                                      
1   House prices are measured with the repeat-transaction price index of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
efficiency  of  the  economy.  For  example,  if  home  prices  rise  above  what  the  fundamentals  would 
justify, too many houses will be built. Moreover, at some point, bubbles burst and asset prices then 
return to their fundamental values. When this happens, the sharp downward correction of asset prices 
can  lead  to  a  sharp  contraction  in  the  economy,  both  directly,  through  effects  on  investment,  and 
indirectly, through the effects of reduced household wealth on consumer spending.  
Despite the clear dangers from asset price bubbles, the question remains as to whether central banks 
should  do  anything  about  them.  Some  economists  have  argued  that  central  banks  should  at  times 
"lean against the wind" by raising interest rates to stop bubbles from getting out of hand. They argue 
that  if  a  bubble  has  been  identified,  then  raising  interest  rates  will  produce  better  outcomes.  For 
instance, William White, of the Bank for International Settlements, has said that "monetary policy might 
rather be used in a highly discretionary way to respond to growing imbalances that were judged by 
policymakers to threaten financial instability."2 Although central banks have generally not argued that 
interest rates should be raised aggressively to burst asset price bubbles, statements suggest some 
central  bankers  believe  some  leaning  against  the  wind  might  be  warranted.  For  example,  in  the 
second  half  of  2003  and  the  first  half  of  2004,  a  minority  of  members  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England  argued  for  raising  interest  rates  more  than  could  be  justified  in 
terms of the Bank of England's objectives for inflation over its normal policy horizon. They said that 
such a move would help lower the probability of house prices rising further and make it less likely that 
a house price collapse would occur later. Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, did not 
advocate leaning against the wind but did suggest that, to prevent a buildup of financial imbalances, a 
central bank might extend the horizon over which inflation is brought back to target. Statements from 
officials at the European Central Bank also have suggested that the possibility of an asset boom or 
bust might require longer than the usual one to two years in assessing whether the price stability goal 
was being met.  
The  recent  case  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  the  Swedish  central  bank,  is  particularly  interesting.  I 
studied the Riksbank in a report on monetary policy written with Francesco Giavazzi for the Swedish 
parliament  before  I  came  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.3  We  found  that  communications  by  the 
Riksbank  suggested  to  market  participants  that  it  was  actually  adjusting  monetary  policy  to  lean 
against the wind of rapid increases in home prices. On February 23, 2006, the Executive Board of the 
Riksbank voted to raise the repo rate 25 basis points (0.25 percentage points). This monetary policy 
action  was  accompanied  by  a  statement  acknowledging  that  the  inflation  forecast  was  revised 
downward. In fact the Inflation Report published on the same day also showed that inflation forecasts 
had  been  revised  downward  and  were  below  the  2  percent  target  at  every  horizon.  The  Executive 
Board's statement pointed out that "there is also reason to observe that household indebtedness and 
house prices are continuing to rise rapidly."4 It then said: "Given this, the Executive Board decided to 
raise  the  repo  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  at  yesterday's  meeting."  Not  surprisingly,  market 
participants took this statement to mean that the Riksbank was setting the policy instrument not only to 
control inflation but also to restrain house prices. A similar reference to house prices in explaining the 
decision to raise rates was made in the press release of January 20, 2006. 
The above statements suggest that some central bankers advocate that asset prices, and in particular, 
house  prices,  should  have  a  special  role  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  over  and  above  their 
foreseeable effect on inflation and employment. There are several objections to this view. 
A special role for asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy requires three key assumptions. First, 
one must assume that a central bank can identify a bubble in progress. I find this assumption highly 
dubious because it is hard to believe that the central bank has such an informational advantage over 
private  markets.  Indeed,  the  view  that  government  officials  know  better  than  the  markets  has  been 
proved wrong over and over again. If the central bank has no informational advantage, and if it knows 
that a bubble has developed, the market will know this too, and the bubble will burst. Thus, any bubble 
                                                      
2   William  R.  White  (2004),  "Making  Macroprudential  Concerns  Operational,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Financial  Stability 
Symposium sponsored by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, October 25-26 (www.bis.org/speeches/sp041026.htm). 
3   Francesco Giavazzi and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006), "An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary Policy between 1995 and 2005" 
report  published  by  the  Riksdag  (Swedish  parliament)  Committee  on  Finance;  refer  to  Sveriges  Riksbank  (2006), 
"Assessment of Monetary Policy," press release, November 28, www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=23320. 
4   Sveriges  Riksbank 
(2006). 
"Repo  Rate  Raised  by  0.25  Percentage  Points,"  press 
www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=20502. 
2 
 release,  February  23, 
BIS Review 6/2007
that  could  be  identified  with  certainty  by  the  central  bank  would  be  unlikely  ever  to  develop  much 
further. 
A second assumption needed to justify a special role for asset prices is that monetary policy cannot 
appropriately  deal  with  the  consequences  of  a  burst  bubble,  and  so  preemptive  actions  against  a 
bubble are needed. Asset price crashes can sometimes lead to severe episodes of financial instability, 
with the most recent notable example among industrial countries being that of Japan. In principal, in 
the  event  of  such  a  crash,  monetary  policy  might  become  less  effective  in  restoring  the  economy's 
health.  Yet  there  are  several  reasons  to  believe  that  this  concern  about  burst  bubbles  may  be 
overstated. 
To  begin  with,  the  bursting  of  asset  price  bubbles  often  does  not  lead  to  financial  instability.  In 
research that I conducted with Eugene White on fifteen stock market crashes in the twentieth century, 
we  found  that  most  of  the  crashes  were  not  associated  with  any  evidence  of  distress  in  financial 
institutions or the widening of credit spreads that would indicate heightened concerns about default.5 
The bursting of the recent stock market bubble in the United States provides one example. The stock 
market drop in 2000-01 did not substantially damage the balance sheets of financial institutions, which 
were quite healthy before the crash, nor did it lead to wider credit spreads. At least partly as a result, 
the  recession  that  followed  the  stock  market  drop  was  very  mild  despite  some  severely  negative 
shocks  to  the  U.S.  economy,  including  the  September 11,  2001,  terrorist attacks  and  the  corporate 
accounting scandals in Enron and other U.S. companies; the scandals raised doubts about the quality 
of information in financial markets and ultimately did indeed widen credit spreads.  
There are even stronger reasons to believe that a bursting of a bubble in house prices is unlikely to 
produce financial instability. House prices are far less volatile than stock prices, outright declines after 
a run-up are not the norm, and declines that do occur are typically relatively small. The loan-to-value 
ratio for residential mortgages is usually substantially below 1, both because the initial loan is less than 
the value of the house and because, in conventional mortgages, loan-to-value ratios decline over the 
life  of  the  loan.  Hence,  declines  in  home  prices  are  far  less  likely  to  cause  losses  to  financial 
institutions, default rates on residential mortgages typically are low, and recovery rates on foreclosures 
are high. Not surprisingly, declines in home prices generally have not led to financial instability. The 
financial instability that many countries experienced in the 1990s, including Japan, was caused by bad 
loans that resulted from declines in commercial property prices and not declines in home prices. In the 
absence of financial instability, monetary policy should be effective in countering the effects of a burst 
bubble.  
Many have learned the wrong lesson from the Japanese experience. The problem in Japan was not so 
much the bursting of the bubble but rather the policies that followed. The problems in Japan's banking 
sector were not resolved, so they continued to get worse well after the bubble had burst. In addition, 
with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  seems  clear  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  did  not  ease  monetary  policy 
sufficiently or rapidly enough in the aftermath of the crisis. 
A  lesson  that  I  draw  from  Japan's  experience  is  that  the  serious  mistake  for  a  central  bank  that  is 
confronting a bubble is not failing to stop it but rather failing to respond fast enough after it has burst. 
Deflation in Japan might never have set in had the Bank of Japan responded more rapidly after the 
asset  price  crash,  which  was  substantially  weakening  demand  in  the  economy.  If  deflation  had  not 
gotten  started,  Japan  would  not  have  experienced  what  has  been  referred  to  by  economist  Irving 
Fisher  as  debt  deflation,  in  which  the  deflation  increased  the  real  indebtedness  of  business  firms, 
which in turn further weakened the balance sheets of the financial sector. 
Another lesson from Japan is that if a burst bubble harms the balance sheets of the financial sector, 
the  government  needs  to  take  immediate  steps  to  restore  the  health  of  the  financial  system.  This 
should involve structural improvements in the way banks operate, not bailing out insolvent institutions. 
The prolonged problems in the banking sector are a key reason that the Japanese economy did so 
poorly after the bubble burst. 
                                                      
5   Frederic  S.  Mishkin  and  Eugene  N.  White  (2002),  "U.S.  Stock  Market  Crashes  and  Their  Aftermath:  Implications  for 
Monetary  Policy,"  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  8992.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  June; 
also in William Curt Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for 
Monetary, Regulatory, and International Policies. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 53-80. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 3
A third assumption needed to justify a special focus on asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy 
is that a central bank actually knows the appropriate monetary policy to deflate a bubble. The effect of 
interest rates on asset price bubbles is highly uncertain. Although some theoretical models suggest 
that  raising  interest  rates  can  diminish  the  acceleration  of  asset  prices,  others  suggest  that  raising 
interest  rates  may  cause  a  bubble  to  burst  more  severely,  thus  doing  even  more  damage  to  the 
economy. An illustration of the difficulty of knowing the appropriate response to a possible bubble was 
provided when the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy before the October 1929 stock market 
crash because of its concerns about a possible stock market bubble. With hindsight, economists have 
viewed this monetary policy tightening as a mistake.  
Given the uncertainty about the effect of interest rates on bubbles, raising rates to deflate a bubble 
may  do  more  harm  than  good.  Furthermore,  altering  the  trajectory  of  interest  rates  from  the  path 
predicted  to  have  the  most  desirable  outcomes  for  inflation  and  employment  over  the  foreseeable 
horizon has the obvious cost of producing deviations from these desirable outcomes.  
Because I doubt that any of the three assumptions needed to justify a special monetary policy focus 
on asset prices holds up, I am in the camp of those who argue that monetary policy makers should 
restrict their efforts to achieving their dual mandate of stabilizing inflation and employment and should 
not alter policy to have preemptive effects on asset prices.  
However, there is a further reason why I believe that a central bank should not put too much focus on 
asset  prices.  Such  a  focus  can  weaken  its  public  support,  making  it  harder  for  it  to  successfully 
conduct monetary policy to stabilize inflation and employment.  
A central bank that focuses intently on asset prices looks as if it is trying to control too many elements 
of the economy. Part of the recent successes of central banks throughout the world has been that they 
have  narrowed  their  focus  and  have  more  actively  communicated  what  they  can  and  cannot  do. 
Specifically, central banks have argued that they are less capable of controlling real economic trends 
in the long run and should therefore focus more on price stability and damping short-term economic 
fluctuations. By narrowing their focus, central banks in recent years have been able to increase public 
support for their independence. A central bank that expanded its focus to asset prices could potentially 
weaken  its  public  support  and  may  even  cause  the  public  to  worry  that  it  is  too  powerful  and  has 
undue influence over all aspects of the economy. 
Too much focus on asset prices might also weaken support for a central bank by leading to public 
confusion about its objectives. When my co-author and I conducted our evaluation of monetary policy 
in Sweden, I directly observed this problem. I heard over and over again in interviews with participants 
from  different  sectors  of  Swedish  society  that  the  statements  about  house  prices  by  the  Riksbank 
confused the public about what it was trying to achieve.  
My  discussion  so  far  indicates  that  central  banks  should  not  put  a  special  emphasis  on  prices  of 
houses  or  other  assets  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  does  not  mean  that  central  banks 
should stand by idly when such prices climb steeply. Rather my analysis suggests that central banks 
can take steps to make it less likely that sharp movements in asset prices will have serious negative 
consequences for the economy.  
Instead of trying to preemptively deal with the bubble - which I have argued is almost impossible to do 
-  a  central  bank  can  minimize  financial  instability  by  being  ready  to  react  quickly  to  an  asset  price 
collapse if it occurs. One way a central bank can prepare itself to react quickly is to explore different 
scenarios to assess how it should respond to an asset price collapse. This is something that we do at 
the Federal Reserve.  
Indeed, examinations of different scenarios can be thought of as stress tests similar to the ones that 
commercial financial institutions and banking supervisors conduct all the time. They see how financial 
institutions will be affected by particular scenarios and then propose plans to ensure that the banks 
can withstand the negative effects. By conducting similar exercises, in this case for monetary policy, a 
central  bank  can  minimize  the  damage  from  a  collapse  of  an  asset  price  bubble  without  having  to 
judge that a bubble is in progress or predict that it will burst in the near future. 
Another way that a central bank with bank supervisory authority can respond to possible bubbles is 
through  prudential  supervision  of  the  financial  system.  If  elevated  asset  prices  might  be  leading  to 
excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions, the central bank, as in the case of the United 
States, can ask financial institutions if they have the appropriate practices to ensure that they are not 
taking on too much risk. Working through supervisory channels has the advantage not only of helping 
make financial institutions better able to cope with possible asset price declines but possibly also of 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2007
indirectly restraining extreme asset prices if they have been stimulated by excessive bank financing. 
Also, reminding institutions to maintain risk-management practices appropriate to the economic and 
financial  environment  could  potentially  help  lessen  a  buildup  of  excessive  asset  prices  in  the  first 
place. 
Even  if  the  central  bank  is  not  involved  in  the  prudential  supervision  directly,  it  can  still  play  a  role 
through  public  communication,  particularly  if  it  has  a  vehicle  like  the  financial  stability  reports  that 
some central banks publish. In these reports, central banks can evaluate whether rises in asset prices 
might be leading to excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions or whether distortions from 
inappropriate tax or regulatory policy may be stimulating excessive valuations of assets. If this appears 
to  be  happening,  the  central  bank's  discussion  might  encourage  policy  adjustment  to  remove  the 
distortions  or  encourage  prudential  regulators  and  supervisors  to  more  closely  monitor  the  financial 
institutions they supervise. 
Large  run-ups  in  prices  of  assets  such  as  houses  present  serious  challenges  to  central  bankers.  I 
have  argued  that  central  banks  should  not  give  a  special  role  to  house  prices  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy but should respond to them only to the extent that they have foreseeable effects on 
inflation  and  employment.  Nevertheless,  central  banks  can  take  measures  to  prepare  for  possible 
sharp reversals in the prices of homes or other assets to ensure that they will not do serious harm to 
the economy. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 5
