Edgar Meister: European financial supervision – next steps  
Lecture  by  Mr  Edgar  Meister,  Member of  the  Executive  Board  of the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
“Kangaroo group breakfast debate”, European Parliament, Brussels, 29 March 2007.  
 I 
Ladies and gentlemen  
I wish to begin by thanking the hosts for inviting me to today’s “working breakfast”. It is a particular 
pleasure  for  me  to  share  with  you  some  of  my  thoughts  on  the  future  of  financial  supervision  in 
Europe.  
The prime objective for financial supervisors is to maintain the efficiency and stability of the financial 
system.  This  is  already  a  challenge  at  the  national  level  and  is  increasingly  becoming  one  in  a 
European context as well. The key question is “What should be the optimum design of financial market 
regulation  and  supervision?”  There  is  no  easy  answer  to  this  question.  However,  there  are  some 
criteria we can list.  
1. 
2. 
Supervision should be risk-oriented.  
Priority should be given to principle-based rules over detailed regulations for every specific 
case.  
Supervisors and their rules should place as minor a burden as possible on institutions – but 
still be effective to achieve the objectives pursued.  
When  developing  prudential  rules,  supervisors  should  consult  with  credit  institutions  at  an 
early stage in order to incorporate market expertise and to define rules which are consistent 
with market conditions.  
Given open banking markets, prudential rules should be applicable throughout Europe and 
worldwide.  
3. 
4. 
5. 
II 
It  is,  of  course,  difficult  to  put  these  criteria  into  practice  perfectly  at  all  times.  However,  we  have 
already achieved much in Europe. Let me cite some examples.  
One is introduction of the Lamfalussy procedure: a precondition for speeding up and enhancing the 
efficiency  of  the  legislative  process  in  Europe  by  involving  supervisory  experts  and  the  financial 
industry.  
Measures aiming at “better regulation” recently tackled by the Commission are another important and 
proper  step.  These  measures  cover  improving  the  legislative  process,  open  and  transparent 
consultations,  impact  assessments  which  include  financial  stability  aspects,  improved  monitoring  of 
implementation,  better  enforcement  of  Community  law  and  ex  post  evaluations.  This  approach  is 
widely supported by supervisors and the industry alike.  
“Better regulation”, in my opinion, needs to include granting a “regulatory pause”. Considerable efforts 
have  been  made  in  recent  years  to  create  the  regulatory  environment  for  an  integrated  European 
capital  and  financial  services  market.  However,  these  measures  –  especially  the  implementation  of 
Basel  II  and  the  CRD  –  have  placed,  and  are  still  placing,  a  substantial  burden  on  the  financial 
industry.  Now,  complaints  are  beginning  to  be  heard  from  the  industry  about  what  it  sees  as  a 
bureaucratic overreaction.  
Therefore,  only  absolutely  necessary  regulatory  projects  should  be  launched.  We  should  focus  on 
implementing and consolidating the existing provisions. In doing so, we should ensure that this is done 
prudently  and,  as  far  as  possible,  in  a  “market-friendly”  manner  in  order  to  avoid  any  unnecessary 
administrative burdens.  
The new German Liquidity Regulation, which came into effect on 1 January 2007, is one example of 
such  “market-friendly”  regulation.  This  gives  credit  institutions,  for  the  first  time,  the  option  of  using 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 1
their own internal liquidity risk measurement and management systems in order to limit liquidity risk for 
prudential  purposes.  Such  internal  procedures  need  to  meet  certain  requirements,  compliance  with 
which is assessed by supervisors in an approval examination. Approval for institutions to use their own 
procedures  eases  the  administrative  workload  of  dual  counting  for  the  purposes  of  internal 
management and the purposes of supervision. This is a new approach – in an international context, 
too  –  and  could  well  inject  new  life  into  the  debate:  both  within  the  EU  and  among  international 
standard-setters.  
Another  key  issue  is  enhancing  convergence  in  supervisory  practice  and  cooperation  between 
supervisory  authorities  in  Europe.  In  banking  supervision,  this  is  one  of  the  key  tasks  of  the 
“Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS). And CEBS has already made some progress 
and set things in motion in this area.  
• 
Supervisory  Disclosure:  Publication  of  national  rules, 
in  other  words:  acts  and 
implementing provisions, options and national discretions, criteria and methodologies of the 
Supervisory Review Process, and so on, on the CEBS website since the beginning of 2007.  
Task Force "New Tools for Convergence”: this working group has been dealing with the 
development  of  new  instruments  to  promote  supervisory  convergence,  especially  a 
mediation procedure for resolving potential disputes between supervisory authorities. Other 
aims include staff exchanges and training programmes designed to foster the emergence of 
a “common European supervisory culture”.  
Operational  Networks  consisting  of  the  line  supervisors  from  authorities  involved  in 
supervision  through  a  cross-border  group  of  banks.  The  aim  is  to  improve  the  flow  of 
information exchange and cooperation, thereby reducing the supervisory workload for these 
institutions.  
  Close cooperation has also emerged in the area of stability analysis. Examples that come to mind are 
the work of the ESCB’s “Banking Supervision Committee” (BSC) with its focus on analysing financial 
stability and structural developments, as well as the regular discussions at the “EFC Stability Table”.  
However,  supervisors  and  central  banks  in  the  EU  have  also  taken  precautions  for  the  event  of  a 
crisis. In 2003, for instance, the BSC reached an agreement on cross-border cooperation and on the 
exchange  of  information  between  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks.  In  2005,  the  finance 
ministries  joined  this  agreement.  To  avoid  any  misunderstanding:  we  are  not  talking  here  about 
guaranteed  financial  assistance  for  individual  institutions.  All  the  institutions  involved  agree  that 
responsibility  for  solving  problems  rests  first  and  foremost  with  the  market  players  themselves. 
Nevertheless, a framework for the better handling of systemic risks has been put in place.  
III 
Despite all this progress, there are still many items left on the agenda. Let me pick out three of them.  
Europe’s  supervisory  structures  are  under  non-stop  scrutiny.  Just  recently,  the  “Inter-Institutional 
Monitoring Group” presented its 2007 interim report on the Lamfalussy procedure. The report calls for 
greater  efforts  in  making  progress  with  level  3  supervisory  cooperation  –  which,  for  banking 
supervision, means within CEBS. I rate this, first of all, as an endorsement of the cooperative model of 
supervision  in  Europe.  That  further  efforts  are  needed  is  beyond  dispute,  and  this  is  something  of 
which  all  the  responsible  national  supervisors  are  aware.  What  is  important,  however,  is  that  these 
structures – which were created only a few years ago – are given the necessary time to achieve the 
consistent progress.  
Even so, there are occasionally calls from some banks to move European supervisory structures in the 
direction of a “lead supervisor” or even a centralised European supervisory authority to supervise large 
the 
institutions  active 
Bundesbank,  have  tended  to  be  critical  of  this  idea  in  their  initial  analyses.  In  its  White  Paper,  the 
throughout  Europe.  Most  European  banking  supervisors1, 
including 
                                                      
1   Callum McCarthy (FSA) says this about the idea of a “lead supervisor”: “Instead of this approach, we should recognise that 
regulation of pan-European groups requires collaboration among regulators. We must be more efficient in how we go with 
this. But pretending we can achieve better European regulation by simply ‘allocating’ the task to one regulator is not the 
answer.” 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2007
Commission,  too,  has  advocated  stepping  up  cooperation  within  the  established  structures  and 
pressing ahead with the convergence of supervisory rules.  
Still, please allow me to make some remarks on the concept of a “lead supervisor”. In this supervisory 
model, the home-country supervisor responsible for the parent of a financial group would take on the 
function  of  a  lead  supervisor  for  all  of  the  group’s  subsidiaries  and  branches  as  well  as  in  all 
subsectors  of  ongoing  supervision  throughout  Europe.  Large  European  banks  have  repeatedly 
advocated  this  model  recently.  From  the  point  of  view  of  regulators,  however,  there  are  some 
implications that need to be borne in mind.  
• 
Supervisors  in  the  host  countries  of  cross-border  banking  groups  would  sacrifice  much  of 
their  competency  and  sovereignty,  even  though  these  banks  are  systemically  relevant  in 
their respective markets. This primarily affects the new EU member states.  
“Level  playing  field”  issues  would  arise  if  large  banks  supervised  by  the  home-country 
supervisor – for example, in the reference market – were governed by rules which differ from 
those applying to banks that are not active across borders.  
 On  the  issue  of  a  “centralised  European  supervisory  authority”2:  this  would  be  predicated  on  the 
existence of a number of conditions in order to enable effective and efficient supervisory activity. The 
most important – and especially problematic – aspects include  
• 
Creating the conditions under European law to establish a centralised European supervisor, 
including amending the EC Treaties;  
Creating a single material supervisory (procedural) law;  
The absence of uniform insolvency legislation in the EU;  
The issue of creating a “two-class society” of financial institutions regulated by a European 
supervisor and those which are regulated by national supervisors yet simultaneously active 
in the same market.  
 We  must  not  forget  the  far-reaching  political  implications,  either.  After  all,  national  supervisors  in 
Europe would have to hand over a large chunk of their political sovereignty. This also raises the issue 
of the democratic legitimacy of such a centralised structure. I believe that, so far, there has been too 
little  or  no  discussion  at  all,  of  these  aspects,  which  at  the  end  of  the  day  affect  the  question  of  a 
political  union  of  European  countries.  Here,  politicians  have  to  achieve  results  before  banking 
supervisors can work on designing a European supervisory framework.  
IV 
While talking about work in CEBS, I mentioned the concept of “mediation”. This procedure originated 
in  the  securities  field;  in  certain  cases,  mediation  is  governed  by  directives.  The  Market  Abuse 
Directive,  for  instance,  envisages  mediation  by  the  “Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators 
(CESR)”  in  the  event  that,  in  a  case  of  suspected  cross-border  market  manipulation,  one  of  the 
responsible securities supervisors refuses to turn over the necessary information. MiFID calls for using 
mediation in disputes concerning determining the most liquid market for a given financial instrument. 
At  the  initiative  of  politicians  (Financial  Services  Committee,  FSC),  work  is  now  under  way  on 
establishing mediation within CEBS as well.  
Transferring a procedure that was designed for securities trading raises a number of questions. Unlike 
in  the  securities  sector,  in  the  banking  field  mediation  does  not  have  a  legal  foundation.  Although 
mediation is voluntary, and its results legally non-binding, considerable “moral” pressure to abide by 
the results is likely to be created. Moreover, it is not just specific “cases” or “products” which are at 
issue in CEBS to become subject to mediation but large sections of supervision. It must also be noted 
                                                      
2   On 27 March, ECON will probably adopt a report on the Commission White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010, 
which advocates, in surprisingly clear language, a centralised supervisor. In paragraph 34, ECON “[N]otes that for a real 
oversight  of  the  systemic  and  prudential  risks  of the  top  players  in  the  market,  the  present  system  of  cooperation  is  too 
weak, and promotes a well-equipped executive European prudential supervisory authority inside that system endowed with 
the appropriate competences for supervision of large cross-border and cross-sector financial conglomerates”. 
BIS Review 33/2007 
 3
that  the competencies of the potential mediation parties differ in the field of banking, depending on 
whether they are home or host supervisors.  
At the same time, the question of need for a mediation also arises in some areas. Thus, for instance, it 
is an option for approving group-wide risk-measurement procedures pursuant to Article 129 (2) of the 
CRD. However, CEBS has already developed “Guidelines on Validation” with the aim of reaching a 
common  decision  within  the  six-month  period.  Seen  in  that  light,  the  use  of  meditation  might  be 
criticised as an example of excessive bureaucracy.  
Mediation  cannot  –  and  must  not  be  allowed  to  –  undermine  the  European  or  national  legal 
framework.  Although  areas  such  as  “legal  proceedings”  and  “national  legislation”  are  not  being 
envisaged as objects of mediation, the possibility of subjecting national discretion – and, thus, national 
legislation – to mediation has not been clearly ruled out, either.  
Conclusion: careful thought should be given to the areas to which such a procedure is to be applied. 
Although mediation may help, it could also cause harm if the legal framework were abandoned entirely 
or interpreted too broadly. Mediation is not a new “Lamfalussy procedure” for adopting legislation but 
merely a tool for resolving disputes within the framework of supervisory cooperation.  
V 
Now, a few words on how to act in a crisis. Each crisis is different and therefore calls for flexibility in 
action. What is at stake is safeguarding the stability and efficiency of a financial system and, in some 
cases, also the use of taxpayers’ money. The existing agreements take account of these factors. More 
extensive initiatives, going as far as to prescribe courses of action or even automatic mechanisms in 
the use of supervisory instruments, would miss the mark altogether.  
A critical view should also be taken of ex ante “burden sharing” agreements in the event of a cross-
border crisis. These are ideas of a more theoretical nature whose practical implementation would pose 
severe problems. Cost allocation rules would also involve setting certain steps in the decision-making 
process.  Such  ex  ante  agreements  could  lead  to  a  far-reaching  loss  of  political  sovereignty  and  to 
interference in national budgetary sovereignty. In addition, the costs of crisis management are largely 
the  result  of  discretionary  decisions  taken  during  the  crisis  itself,  such  as  on  whether  to  save  or 
liquidate a company. It is therefore not possible to calculate the costs ex ante, and even an ex post 
calculation would pose problems.  
VI 
The conclusion we may draw is that the European cooperation-based supervisory system is currently 
a politically optimum structure under the existing conditions, by which I mean the absence of a political 
union. Supervision in Europe is well set up, cooperation is working efficiently and will be stepped up 
further.  
Cooperation is the key! Cooperation between supervisory authorities, in other words: the supervisory 
colleges for the major banking groups, but also through common training, bears considerable potential 
for enhancing supervisory practice and reducing the costs of supervision to institutions. In a world of 
increasingly integrated markets, the institutions rightly expect this from us.  
However, the integration of markets and the harmonisation of supervisory rules and practices are not 
goals in themselves. Integration should not be equated with uniform products and terms. Variety in the 
players’  behaviour,  products  and  markets  is  the  way  to  address  customer  needs  which  are 
characterised by differences in cultures. It can also contribute to financial stability. Everyone doing the 
same  thing  or  providing  exactly  the  same  products  would  increase  the  risk  of  “herding  behaviour”, 
which  would  potentially  have  undesirable  effects  for  stability.  Also,  the  process  of  financial  market 
integration should be driven by the markets and not by regulators.  
As  I  see  it,  excessive  harmonisation  or  even  complete  standardisation  of  supervisory  rules  and 
practices  would  go  beyond  the  current  reality  of  market  structures  in  Europe,  especially  in  retail 
banking. Completely harmonised products in the mortgage lending sector, for instance, would be the 
wrong approach. In Germany, fixed-rate mortgage loans combined with prepayment penalties are an 
established practice for which there is a demand. It gives customers the certainty to make plans even 
beyond  an  interest  rate  cycle.  The  problems  currently  afflicting  the  US  property  market  show  the 
impact  that  variable  rates  in  this  segment  can  have  on  customers  and,  ultimately,  also  on  financial 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2007
stability.  Stability  should  always  be  an  additional  consideration  when  devising  regulatory  measures. 
The limits of regulatory integration and harmonisation lie at the point where stability is put at risk!  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 33/2007 
 5
