Martín Redrado: An economy in transition 
Article  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  published  in  La  Nación 
newspaper on 25 June 2007. 
 Severe  economic  crises  make  countries  significantly  stray  from  the  path  of  long-term  growth.  In 
post-crisis  periods,  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  usually  overreact  to  then  gradually  readjust 
themselves  and  converge  towards  a  lasting  scenario.  Therefore,  for  some  time  there  remains 
uncertainty as to the “real” equilibrium value of the main aggregates, with many of the nominal and 
real variables showing distortions while returning to their usual levels. Factors such as the dimension 
of  the  crisis,  the  condition  of  fiscal,  monetary  and  financial  institutions,  and  the  sustainability  of  the 
external equilibrium achieved determine the duration of this normalization phase. 
Judging by the crises that shook the region over the past decades, not all countries are in the same 
stage of evolution. Thus, there are economies approaching their long-term cruising speed; in others, 
however, the convergence process is still incipient. Therefore, simplistic comparisons among various 
countries’ situations may lead to wrong recommendations. 
In Argentina, despite a notable recovery, several features of the current macroeconomic performance 
enable us to infer that the economy is still heading towards a new long-term equilibrium. Neither in 
Argentine history nor in the international experience do we find precedents for the deep, large impact 
of  the  2001-02  crisis.  Unlike  the  case  of  Brazil,  Mexico  or  southeast  Asia,  the  abandonment  of 
convertibility in Argentina included an institutional breakdown, a huge devaluation, the destruction of 
the financial system and the default on the public debt, all at the same time. 
These  transition  stages  take  time  and  raise  enormous  challenges.  Our  neighboring  countries’ 
experience teaches us that flexibility and gradualism in both policy design and implementation are the 
adequate way of treading them. During the Money and Banking Conference organized by the BCRA, 
Vittorio Corbo, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, stressed the sequential process undergone by 
the  Chilean  economy  following  the  crisis  of  the  early  1980s.  Four  elements  have  been  of  utmost 
importance in this long process: consolidating fiscal solvency as a countercyclical tool, reestablishing 
external  sustainability,  restructuring  liabilities,  and  rebuilding  the  financial  system.  Once  all  these 
aspects were addressed, progress was made in the consolidation of a fullfledged inflation targeting 
regime  that  is  nowadays  highly  credible.  Thus,  in  15  years,  Chile  managed  to  lead  inflation  from 
around 30 percent to the current annual 2.9 percent, after patiently building credibility and institutions. 
The  transition  was  characterized  by  a  flexible  regime  in  the  use  of  instruments,  including  foreign 
exchange market intervention first through the Central Bank and nowadays through operations with 
the government-owned exporting companies and the Treasury, which allowed the economy to adjust 
to both domestic and external shocks. 
In Argentina, the monetary policy transmission channels are only just being rebuilt, since credit to the 
private  sector  accounts  for  10  percent  of  the  domestic  product,  still  far  below  the  Latin  American 
average.  Moreover,  consumer  credit  reacts  weakly  to  interest  rate  fluctuations.  This  means  that  90 
percent of the economy operates in cash; therefore, the hasty adoption of certain instruments would 
not only be useless but also hamper their future use. We cannot “take short cuts”; rather, we must 
patiently rebuild the power of monetary policy tools. 
Furthermore, in certain macroeconomic scenarios with still persistent features of fiscal dominance and 
external  determinants,  monetary  policy  should  be  conceived  under  a  general  equilibrium  approach, 
where fiscal solvency, the monetary balance and external sustainability are mutually determined. 
In consequence, when devising the transitional monetary regime, the classical dilemma of rules versus 
discretion cannot be solved with an extreme option. Far from “buying” credibility, a “rigid” monetary 
policy  rule  might  become  unsustainable  if  the  people  anticipate  inconsistencies  with  the  rest  of  the 
macroeconomic policies. On the opposite extreme, “unrestricted discretion” would also lead nowhere 
and could contribute to a frustrating process. 
Our approach to financial and monetary policy rests upon this theoretical framework and is built on 
four pillars – (i) a gradual and consistent monetary policy that ensures money market equilibrium; (ii) a 
countercyclical  prudential  reserve  accumulation  approach;  (iii)  a  system  that  is  independent  from 
public sector financial needs; and (iv) a policy framework that boosts corporate and household credit. 
BIS Review 74/2007 
 1
The  current  regime  of  control  over  the  money  supply  and  the  demand  for  money  combines  the 
necessary  doses  of  monetary  prudence  and  flexibility.  Simple  rules  on  the growth  of  money  supply 
provide  the  adequate  tool  for  the  people  to  make  monetary  policymakers  accountable.  Thus,  the 
credibility lost in the crisis is gradually rebuilt without sacrificing the necessary discretion to address 
the  contingencies  inherent  to  an  economy  that  is  in  transition  towards  its  long-term  equilibrium.  To 
preserve the money market equilibrium, we apply a deep monetary absorption strategy coupled with 
reserve  accumulation  for  prudential  purposes.  Such  a  strategy  has  been  implemented  –  without 
neglecting  the  Central  Bank’s  balance,  which  is  now  showing  positive  results  –  through  various 
mechanisms that comprise the issuance of bills and notes, swap operations, the collection of liquidity 
assistance provided to banks during the crisis, and the minimum requirement policy. In this way, we 
are able to control the growth of the means of payment which is, for the first time since the end of the 
crisis, below nominal GDP growth, reflecting the prudential bias in our approach. 
In turn, credit should focus on facilitating consumption and investment decisions by the community. On 
the  one  hand,  we  have  set  strict  guidelines  to  reduce  financial  system  exposure  to  the  national, 
provincial and municipal public sectors and, on the other, we have created market incentives for the 
recovery  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  from  a  set  of  specific  measures.  Therefore,  in  the  past  two 
years, the share of credit to the government in the system’s total assets was significantly reduced, and 
bank  actions  are  focused  today  on  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  There  is  a  widespread 
expansion in all credit lines to the private sector and arrears hit a historical low that is currently below 
the average for the region. 
All this must be articulated through policy coordination as a sine qua non during the transitional phase. 
The most successful stories are those of countries that understood how important it was to reconcile 
aims  with  instruments  in  a  stage  such  as  this  one,  where  it  is  the  combination  of  fundamental 
economic policy tools that will allow us to achieve a gradual and lasting decrease of the inflation rate 
against a backdrop of sound growth and social inclusion. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2007
