David Dodge: Important issues related to the development of international 
capital markets 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Government Borrowers Forum, 
Montréal, Quebec, 15 May 2007. 
 Thank you, it's a pleasure to welcome you here today to discuss some important issues related to our 
common interest in the development of capital markets throughout the world. We are all interested in 
seeing the continued development of international capital markets, as part of the advancement of a 
market-based,  liberalized  trade  and  financial  regime.  Let's  remember  that  an  open,  market-based 
economic system is increasingly vital, in a world where change is driven by the development of new 
technologies and modes of competition; and where adjustments are occurring all the time. In such a 
world, price signals from markets can help us to understand what adjustments need to be made. A 
liberalized,  market-based  regime  is  really  the  best  that  we  have  found  for  promoting  growth  and 
prosperity,  higher  standards  of  living,  and  the  development  of  a  domestic  economy  that  is  flexible 
enough to cope with shocks.  
There  are,  of  course,  many  policies  needed  for  an  economy  to  become  more  flexible  and  market-
based.  But  today,  I  want  to  particularly  focus  on  the  importance  of  local-currency  bond  and  money 
markets. First, however, let me briefly outline the other necessary policies.  
Fundamentally,  a  commitment  to  maintain  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation  is  crucial.  In  most 
countries,  that  commitment  is  best  supported  by  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  which  facilitates 
adjustments when the inevitable shocks to relative prices, global trade, and capital flows occur. One 
other important policy is that governments must be fiscally responsible. This doesn't mean the books 
must be perfectly balanced each and every year. But it does mean that governments must maintain, 
and be committed to maintaining, a manageable debt-to-GDP ratio, and avoid running up debt that 
can hobble future governments, and prevent necessary adjustments. And finally, openness to global 
trade is of key importance to an economy's growth and prosperity.  
A  great  deal  of  attention  is  rightly  paid  to  these  very  important  policies,  which  form  the  essential 
building blocks in an economy. But today, I want to focus on the issue of having sound local-currency 
bond and money markets.  
First, I'll talk about the real advantages right at home that come with local-currency bond and money 
markets.  I'll  also  refer  to  Canada's  history  in  developing  such  markets,  and  to  some  elements  that 
remain a work in progress. I hope that our experience might be of some use to authorities in many 
emerging market economies, which are now developing their own local-currency markets. And their 
efforts are bearing fruit – the outstanding stock in these emerging economies' local bond markets now 
exceed $4 trillion US – a four-fold increase in value over roughly the past decade. I'll also consider 
how these domestic markets can fit into, and do their part in stabilizing, the global financial structure.  
Now, these are my personal observations which are based on 40 years experience in public finance, 
and as seen from two perspectives: both as a central banker, and before that, as a federal Finance 
department official. 
Over the years, I've come to appreciate that a sound local-currency government bond market helps on 
three distinct policy fronts. First is the discipline that it can impose in terms of macroeconomic policies. 
Second, it supports economic and financial efficiency. And third, it helps in the development of a stable 
financial system. Let me now deal with each of these points in turn. 
In terms of macroeconomic policy, a government must build credibility with its own citizens first of all. 
Citizens  need  comfort  that  the  government  bonds  that  they  hold  will  keep  their  value;  that 
governments won't default on their obligations, or resort to large tax increases or inflation to ease the 
real burden of repayment. This initial hurdle of building credibility can be difficult to get over, as many 
emerging markets can attest to today. But once this hurdle has been cleared, a well-functioning, local-
currency  government  bond  market  brings  with  it  the  incentives  for  authorities  to  keep  in  place  the 
sound  policies  that  I  mentioned  in  my  introduction.  Those  policies  should  include  monetary  policy 
aimed  at  maintaining  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation,  which  leads  to  an  environment  of  lower 
interest rates – both nominal and real – and lower debt servicing costs in the future. They also include 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 1
prudent fiscal policies, which then reinforce public confidence in the government and, in turn, in the 
domestic markets. 
Of  course,  none  of  this  suggests  that  all  government  borrowing  must  be  denominated  in  the  local 
currency. There will be times when a government will borrow in foreign currency, perhaps for projects 
that will support a future flow of foreign currency that can, in turn, help repay this borrowing. The real 
risk  here  comes  when  governments  find  themselves  repeatedly  borrowing  in  foreign  currencies,  to 
finance current domestic spending.  
Let  me  now  mention  Canada's  history  in  developing  our  local-currency  bond  and  money  markets, 
because  it  has  parallels  with  the  situation  in  which  many  emerging  market  economies  now  find 
themselves. In the 1950s, Canada was a relatively small, but very open economy that relied heavily on 
foreign trade, was dramatically influenced by fluctuations in commodity prices, and had a long history 
of foreign capital inflows to finance major projects.  
The  Bank  of  Canada's  primary  emphasis  at  that  time  was  on  the  development  of  a  government 
treasury  bill  market,  to  assist  in  the  more  effective  implementation  and  transmission  of  monetary 
policy.  In  addition,  the  Finance  Department,  with  the  central  bank  as  its  fiscal  agent,  wanted  to 
promote the development of a well-functioning government bond market. This would help to provide 
the government with low-cost and stable financing. Moreover, Canada had also moved to a floating 
exchange rate, and so it was even more important that our debt be issued in the domestic currency. 
But  the  authorities  also  saw  the  financial  system  efficiency  benefits  that  could  flow  from  the 
development  of  a  well-functioning  government  bond  market.  In  particular,  it  would  support 
development of, and access to, market-based credit for firms. The broader goal was to develop the 
foundation for an efficient domestic fixed-income market for private issuers.  
Of course, our markets have been continually evolving, and so we have had frequent consultations 
with market participants. These consultations have led to the development of a well-functioning and 
liquid  market  for  government  debt  right  across  the  yield  curve.  This  market  provides  the  pricing 
benchmarks for all other fixed-income instruments and their derivatives, thus facilitating market access 
for firms seeking debt financing. 
So what have we learned over the years? Well, experience has shown that in order to maintain an 
efficient, well-functioning local-currency debt market, it's helpful to focus on the key aspects of liquidity, 
transparency,  regularity,  and  integrity  in  the  structure  of  government  bond  and  money  markets.  As 
such, our efficient government debt market contributes to overall capital market efficiency by providing 
key benchmark and hedging tools.  
Now, in terms of financial system stability, the development of our domestic bond and money markets 
has led to stronger and sounder financial institutions. Stronger institutions and more complete markets 
facilitate  better  allocation  of  domestic  savings.  This  increases  domestic  investment,  and  thus, 
encourages stronger economic growth. 
Creating  local-currency  bond  and  money  markets  can  insulate  an  economy  from  global  economic 
shocks in two ways. First, by providing more stable and secure sources of liquidity. And second, and 
perhaps  more  important,  it  can  allow  for  a  better  matching  of  the  currency  of  obligations  to  the 
currency of receipts. 
In addition to contributing to a more stable domestic financial system, the development of domestic-
currency markets is important to promote global financial stability. Economies with a sound financial 
system  can  help  to  prevent  shocks  from  spreading  around  the  world.  The  Asian  financial  crisis  of 
1997-98  really  helped  to  illustrate  how  a  crisis  can  spread  among  economies  with  weak  financial 
systems, including, in some cases, serious mismatches in foreign currency assets and liabilities. This 
is  why  policy-makers  around  the  world have  been  putting  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  improving  domestic 
banking and financial systems.  
To develop a sound financial system requires several policy steps. The BIS Committee on the Global 
Financial System has outlined five key measures needed to develop deep and liquid bond markets. 
Allow me to list them. First, an economy must have a competitive markets structure; second, it must 
have  liquid,  benchmark  bond  issues;  third,  markets  must  be  efficient,  with  low  transactions  costs; 
fourth, markets should be safe, sound and robust; and finally, it's important that there is a wide variety 
of market participants. I see from your program that these are issues that you will be talking about in 
more detail later this afternoon. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2007
Ladies and gentlemen, I have spoken about how local-currency bond and money markets can help an 
economy,  by  giving  the  authorities  incentives  to  follow  good  macroeconomic  policies,  and  by 
supporting financial and economic efficiency. And, I've talked about how such markets can help in the 
development of a sound domestic financial system. This, in turn, can promote financial stability, both 
within a country and more broadly, in the global financial system. At the start of a conference like this, I 
thought it important to use my time to remind ourselves of why it is we need strong, local-currency 
bond and money markets. Speaking generally, the steps that Canada took in the past to develop its 
local-currency  bond  and  money  markets  may  be  applicable  to  today's  world,  and  to  the  various 
emerging market economies that are now trying to find their own path. But what is certain is that the 
original  principles  that  guided  us  in  creating  those  markets  –  liquidity,  transparency,  regularity,  and 
integrity – are as valid today as they were 50 years ago.  
BIS Review 69/2007 
 3
