Stefan Ingves: The Riksbank and the Swedish economy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Swedish Association of Local 
Authorities and Regions, Tylösand, 28 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
Firstly,  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  and  speak  to  this  assembly.  Today  I  will  talk  about  my 
views  on  the  role  of  the  Riksbank  and  about  the  current  monetary  policy  situation,  roughly  as 
expressed in the discussion at the May monetary policy meeting.  
International economic activity remains good 
Sweden is a very open economy and large parts of the business sector are dependent on being able 
to sell their products to customers abroad. If the economies in countries around us are doing well, then 
the  Swedish  economy  also  does  well.  In  recent  years  global  growth  has  been  extremely  high.  We 
believe that the growth rate will slow down slightly in 2007 and 2008, but will nevertheless remain high.  
After  many  years  of  high  growth  the  US  economy  has  now  entered  a  slowdown  phase.  Economic 
activity has been dampened above all in the housing sector, but also in the manufacturing industry. 
Productivity  growth  is  lower.  The  earlier  upturn  in  house  prices  has  slowed  down  and  residential 
construction has declined. The problems have been aggravated by the fact that it has been easy for 
people with low incomes to obtain large loans for housing. As yet the problems in the housing market 
do  not  appear  to  have  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  The  labour  market  and  household 
consumption are showing stable development and companies are still making good profits. We also 
know that US households and companies generally have strong balance sheets. But although most 
indications  are  that  the  economic  downturn  will  be  mild,  there  are  risks  of  a  more  pronounced 
slowdown.  
From a Swedish perspective, the weakening in the United States is counterbalanced by the fact that 
the economies in the euro area are now developing better than they have done in a long time. The 
euro area is Sweden’s most important export market. We are seeing signs that both households and 
companies in the euro area have a more positive outlook on the future. Above all, it is the turnaround 
in  Germany  –  Europe’s  largest  economy  –  that  is  important  to  the  euro  area.  Several  years  of 
restructuring in German companies has led to lower costs and higher competitiveness. Unlike many 
other countries in Europe, Germany has taken a larger percentage of world trade and is now once 
again the world’s largest exporter.  
Japan  has  long  been  struggling  with  economic  problems.  Hopefully  the  Japanese  economy  is  now 
heading for better times. The economy is growing at a fairly good rate and investment and exports are 
increasing. At the same time, higher incomes provide scope for higher consumption. There are many 
indications that the long period of falling prices and wage cuts will soon be over. The impression is in 
any case that the Japanese economy is moving in the right direction. 
In  China  the  annual  growth  rate  has  been  over  ten  per  cent  for  several  years.  Exports  comprise  a 
large  part  of  the  gross  domestic  product.  China’s  share  of  total  global  exports  has  increased  from 
around  1  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  to  just  over  8  per  cent  in  2006.  The  Chinese 
Government  is worried  that  the  high  growth will  lead  to  excessively  rapid growth  in  investment  and 
credit  and  thereby  to  bad  investments.  They  are  therefore  trying  in  various  ways  to  cool  down  the 
economy. As yet there are no clear signs that they have succeeded in this.  
Possible risks for the world economy 
The  question  is  whether  there  is  anything  that  can  threaten  a  positive  development  in  the  world 
economy  over  the  coming  years.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  tried  to  identify  some 
possible scenarios that could in the short term lead to lower growth. They envisage above all four such 
scenarios:  
BIS Review 54/2007 
 1
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Continued  high  growth  leading  to  a  shortage  of  resources  that  means  that  inflation 
accelerates again. 
Problems in the US housing market spreading to other sectors of the economy and leading 
to a sharp fall in economic activity. 
A  large  fall  in  stock  market  prices  on  the  world’s  stock  exchanges  leading  to  lower 
investments and lower consumption.  
A  rapid  and  brutal  correction  in  the  US  current  account  deficit  that  could  have  large 
repercussions.  
The IMF does not only envisage risks of a poorer development than expected – it may also be worth 
pointing out that they also see the possibility of an even more positive development. The Riksbank’s 
overall assessment is that international economic activity will enter a calmer phase over the coming 
two years, but at the same time global economic developments are very good right now.  
Sweden: Continued strong economy leads to slightly higher inflation 
The  situation  in  the  Swedish  economy  is  also  good.  Last  year  growth  was  over  4  per  cent.  For 
instance,  strong  global  growth  has  meant  that  exports  have  developed  strongly  for  several  years. 
Domestic consumption is also increasing rapidly now, at the same time as employment is rising. But 
the  slightly  weaker  international  economic  activity  means  that  activity  in  Sweden  will  also  be 
dampened somewhat in the coming years.  
Inflation is the Riksbank’s particular responsibility. The Riksbank’s objective is to maintain inflation at 
around 2 per cent a year. We measure inflation as a change in consumer prices. Last year inflation 
was over 1.4 per cent.  
Over the past twelve months the main contribution to the increase in the consumer price index, or CPI, 
came  from  increased  interest  costs.  However,  higher  electricity  prices,  rents  and  food  prices  also 
contributed  to  the  increase  in  price  levels.  Price  reductions  on  post  and  telecommunications  had  a 
dampening effect on inflation, as did falling prices for computers, DVDs and TVs. CPI is affected by 
technological changes, making it cheaper to make phone calls and to use the Internet. Inflation is also 
affected by the changes that come under the designation of globalisation, and that lead to increased 
trade and competition and to, for instance, cheaper imports of TVs.  
During the first three months of the year, inflation has not been as low as expected in the forecast 
made in February. This is mainly because energy prices have been slightly higher than calculated. In 
February we believed that CPI would be 1.5 per cent in March. Instead it was 1.9 per cent.  
Higher costs lead to higher prices 
One explanation as to why inflation is expected to rise in future is that growth in productivity – how 
much  is  produced  per  hour  worked  –  is  slowing  down.  At  the  same  time,  wages  are  rising  slightly 
faster than they have done in recent years. All in all, this means that companies' costs are rising more 
quickly. It is difficult to say when a higher rate of increase in costs will lead to a higher rate of increase 
in  prices.  Many  Swedish  companies  are  currently  making  large  profits  and  can  probably  manage  a 
period with higher costs without raising their prices. There are also other factors holding back inflation. 
For instance, prices of many imported good are continuing to fall.  
Better understanding productivity 
Inflation has been below target since the beginning of 2004, but we can now see that it has begun to 
increase again. The low inflation can largely be explained by the surprisingly strong productivity. Over 
the past fifteen years Sweden has had higher productivity growth than many other industrial nations, 
including  the  United  States.  Productivity  is  important  for  the  development  of  inflation  in  the  slightly 
shorter term. If productivity rises quickly, wages can increase without the companies’ costs rising. High 
productivity growth thus leads to low inflationary pressure, all other things being equal.  
We  still  know  too  little  about  what  lies  behind  the  strong  productivity  growth.  There  are  many 
indications  that  globalisation  and  increased  use  of  information  technology  play  an  important  role. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2007
These changes have probably led to many companies meeting tougher competition that has forced 
them  to  rationalise.  However,  IT  developments  have  also  given  them  new  tools  to  make  their 
production more efficient. In other words, there has been an increase in both the driving forces and the 
opportunities for making production more efficient.  
We must become better at understanding the driving forces behind productivity growth. For instance, 
the Riksbank has begun a project to gain greater insight into the relationship between investments in 
IT, organisation changes, on-the-job training and productivity. At the beginning of May we organised a 
seminar  where  a  number  of  organisations  and  authorities  presented  their  views  on  the situation.  In 
December we will also be organising a workshop where external researchers will contribute valuable 
points of view. As a complement to this, we are creating channels for direct contacts with companies. 
The purpose is to improve our knowledge of the current status and current events in the economy.  
Hopefully this will make us wiser with regard to developments in productivity growth. But at the same 
time,  one  must  have  realistic  expectations  of  what  can  be  achieved  from  this  work.  It  will  probably 
always be difficult to assess future developments in productivity.  
Wage increases slightly higher than expected 
The wage bargaining rounds in Sweden have entered the final phase. Large central agreement areas 
such as manufacturing, trade, construction, the hotel and restaurant and the local government sectors 
have concluded their agreements. These have been slightly higher than we had expected in February. 
But just like other observers, we find it difficult to translate all of the ingredients in the agreements into 
exact  forecasts  for  companies’  wage  costs.  What  we  do  know  is  that  in  the  long  term,  productivity 
growth determines the size of the wage increases that are possible for the economy.  
The  actual  wage  increases  have  several  components.  These  include  the  agreed  levels  of  wage 
increases  and  also  wage  increases  in  addition  to  the  central  agreement.  The  strong  labour  market 
involves risks of higher wage increases outside of the agreements than was the case in the previous 
wage bargaining rounds.  
One means of managing higher growth without this leading to a wage and inflation spiral is to get more 
people  to  participate  in  the  labour  force.  The  Government’s  Autumn  and  Spring  Budget  Bills  have 
contained  several  measures  aimed  at  increasing  the  labour  supply.  If  more  people  take  part  in  the 
labour force, wages and thereby inflation should be held back. Developments in the wage bargaining 
rounds so far do not indicate that the potential labour supply is holding back wage demands quite as 
much as we had earlier estimated.  
Abolition of property tax on housing 
One of the Government’s proposals that has received considerable attention is the proposal to abolish 
property tax on housing. A working group has been commissioned by the Government to investigate a 
model  that  would  finance  this  tax  cut  in  the  housing  sector.  In  this  model,  the  tax  is  replaced  by  a 
municipal  charge  and  higher  tax  on  profits  made  when  selling  property.  In  theory,  a  fully-financed 
proposal should not involve any effects on general housing price levels. However, in practice there is 
reason to believe that house prices will increase at a slightly faster rate due to the tax changes. In 
those parts of the country with high property taxes, and where the difference between the municipal 
tax  and  the  current  property  tax  is  substantial,  there  could  be  fairly  large  price  increases.  But  this 
would probably be mainly a one-off effect that did not have any more long-term effect on the rate of 
price increase. Therefore, a fully-financed abolition of the property tax would not necessarily have any 
major direct impact on CPI inflation. But one cannot rule out the possibility that it would have some 
effects  on,  for  instance,  consumption,  and  would  thereby  also  contribute  to  strengthening  demand, 
even if the effects were not substantial.  
The Riksbank and monetary policy 
The Riksbank’s task is to use all this information on what is happening in the Swedish economy and 
abroad to make a forecast of future inflation. The aim is normally to attain the inflation target within two 
years.  The  fact  that  we  have  this  horizon  is  because  monetary  policy  has  an  effect  on  economic 
developments  after  a  time  lag.  We  also  want  to  have  the  opportunity  to  adjust  the  interest  rate 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 3
gradually to take into account developments in what economists call the real economy. This refers to 
basic economic concepts such as growth and employment.  
In  the  long  run,  monetary  policy  cannot  affect  either  growth  or  employment.  These  are  instead 
governed  by  factors  such  as  population  growth,  technological  developments  and  the  way  various 
markets function. But by setting the interest rate at the right level we can ensure that fluctuations due 
to variations in economic activity are slightly smaller. At the same time, we must not forget that the 
interest rate is a blunt instrument. It cannot be used to fine tune the economy. 
The development of the repo rate 
Last year we raised the repo rate by a total of 1.5 percentage points to 3.0 per cent. In February this 
year the interest rate was raised by a further quarter of a percentage point to 3.25 per cent. At the 
most recent monetary policy meeting on 3 May we decided to keep the repo rate unchanged. At the 
same time, our assessment was that the repo rate will need to be raised gradually, which we had also 
assumed earlier. Now we believe that it will need to be raised more than was anticipated in February. 
This is necessary so that inflation will develop in line with the target.  
The  main  reason  why  we  need  to  revise  our  forecast  upwards  is  the  outcome  of  this  year’s  wage 
bargaining rounds. The central wage agreements have been slightly higher than we had earlier had 
reason to believe, given that unemployment is still quite high in Sweden.  
Some forecasters have believed in a higher interest rate path than we have predicted. However, this 
does  not  appear  to  be  because  their  forecasts  for wages  or  fiscal  policy  have  differed substantially 
from  those  made  by  the  Riksbank.  I  would  also  like  to  point  out  that  so  far  there  are  no  dramatic 
differences in our picture of current economic developments today compared with February. We will 
return to this in the Monetary Policy Report to be presented in June with a more detailed account of 
how we view the situation.  
Own interest rate forecasts 
When we expressed our views in February regarding the future development of the interest rate, it was 
the first time we presented our own assessment of the future repo rate path. By this we mean that we 
try  to  calculate  what  we  believe  will  be  a  well  balanced  monetary  policy  over  the  coming  years. 
Previously  we  presented  forecasts  for  the  economy  on  the  basis  of  what  the  financial  market 
participants believed about the repo rate. Now that we are presenting our own interest rate path it will 
be clearer both what we believe about the interest rate and what we believe about the economy in 
general.  We  consider  this  to  be  a  major  step  forward  in  the  Riksbank’s  way  of  explaining  how 
monetary  policy  functions.  For  most  people  I  believe  it  is  more  important  to  have  an  idea  of  the 
development of the interest rate over time, rather than to know what an individual interest rate decision 
will entail.  
In this context I always try to be as clear as possible. The interest rate path is merely a forecast, not a 
promise. The economic conditions on which we base our forecasts are constantly changing. Changes 
are constantly taking place in the economy, which means that we have to reconsider our opinions of 
future  developments.  The  interest  rate  path  represents  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  best 
assessment we were able to make at the time it was published. When the world around us changes, 
we also have to change our forecasts.  
Arguments in favour of openness and clarity 
It  is  sometimes  described  as  a  problem  that  considerable  openness  also  means  that  one  displays 
one’s mistakes. If we present an interest rate forecast that extends several years ahead, there is of 
course a substantial risk that we must change our forecast. I cannot see why this would be a problem. 
Anyone  with  insight  into  forecasting  work  knows  how  difficult  it  is  to  make  assessments  of  future 
events. Once upon a time, mystery and prestige were perhaps important assets for a central bank. But 
the way that monetary policy is currently conducted in Sweden and many other countries means that 
this no longer applies. The key concepts for a modern central bank are rather clarity and openness. 
Showing how the forecasts for the repo rate change when new information is received should lead to a 
better understanding of how monetary policy is conducted.  
4 
 BIS Review 54/2007
There  are  primarily  three  types  of  argument  in  favour  of  openness  and  clarity.  Firstly  we  have  the 
democratic argument. The Riksbank’s independence means that the general public can require us to 
be  open.  There  is  also  an  economic  argument.  If  it  becomes  clearer  how  we  view  the  interplay 
between monetary policy and the rest of the economy, it will be easier for monetary policy to have the 
intended  effect.  Last,  but  not  least,  there  is  an  argument  concerning  our  own  methods  of  working 
within  the  Riksbank.  By  being  open  and  clear  towards  the  outside  world,  we  force  ourselves  to 
become better at analysing. When it is easier to evaluate how well monetary policy functions, there is 
greater pressure on us to do a good job.  
Our decision to publish an interest rate forecast has made it possible to compare different forecasters’ 
assessments. It has further stimulated the debate on monetary policy and the economy. And this is 
excellent.  More  voices  and  clear  opinions  increase  the  possibilities  for  making  well-founded 
assessments.  
The fears expressed by a number of academics and practicians that financial market participants will 
now stop making their own forecasts of the interest rate have not been realised. Even after the interest 
rate path is published, there will still be a broad spectrum of opinions on how the economy and the 
interest  rate  will  develop  in  the  future.  There  is  nothing  unusual  in  this.  Those  who  operate  in  the 
financial markets know that we live in an uncertain world and for this reason they will continue to make 
independent assessments of interest rate developments.  
Changes in communication 
The Riksbank recently decided to take a further step towards greater clarity in its communication.  
Firstly, we will in future hold press conferences after each monetary policy meeting, regardless of what 
decision has been taken. Previously, press conferences have only been held if the repo rate has been 
changed  or  when  a  Monetary  Policy  Report  has  been  published.  However,  information  on  why  the 
repo  rate  is  being  kept  unchanged  is  in  principle  just  as  important  for  understanding  the  monetary 
policy conducted as is information on why the repo rate is being adjusted.  
Secondly, we have decided to make changes with regard to monetary policy signalling. By this I mean 
how we on the Executive Board of the Riksbank communicate what we intend to do with the interest 
rate. Now that we publish an entire path for the interest rate, the need to signal between the meetings 
has declined. Our conclusion is that there will not normally be any reason between the monetary policy 
meetings to give an indication of how the interest rate will be set. In exceptional cases, such as when 
an event occurs that radically changes the economic situation, while there is a long time to go until the 
next meeting, there may be reasons to signal between two monetary policy meetings. Of course the 
individual Executive Board members should continue to be able to express their own opinions publicly. 
But this is above all a question of afterwards clarifying and explaining personal deliberations made in 
connection with the monetary policy meetings. Differences of opinion within the Executive Board will 
also, as before, be made clear when the minutes of the meetings are published. 
This leads me on to the third change we have decided to make. The minutes from the monetary policy 
meetings will now include the names of the Executive Board members in relation to the discussion and 
not merely if they enter a reservation against the majority decision. In this way it will be easier and 
clearer to examine the motives behind the monetary policy decisions and therefore also to form an 
impression of future decisions.  
These  and  all  of  the  other  changes we  have  made  in  recent  years  are  intended  to  create  the  best 
possible opportunities to understand, evaluate and debate monetary policy. The debate on monetary 
policy is important and useful for us. It contributes to developing the way we work. The Riksbank’s 
openness, which we are now increasing further, enables a qualified public debate, which in turn is a 
part of how we can ensure accountability in a democracy.  
Thank you!  
BIS Review 54/2007 
 5
