Timothy F Geithner: The economic dynamics of global integration 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Forum on Global Leadership: US Competitiveness in a 
Globally Integrated Economy, Washington DC, 25 July 2007. 
 We  are  meeting  at  a  time  of  relatively  favorable  U.S.  economic  performance,  but  also  of 
growing  concern  about  our  relative  position  in  the  world  and  our  longer-term  economic 
prospects at home.  
On  a  wide  range  of  measures,  the  American  economy  and  American  business  are 
performing well. We are in the fifth year of expansion in the United States and in the midst of 
the strongest global economic expansion in more than three decades. Corporate profits as a 
share of GDP are close to the highest level in four decades.  
Corporate balance sheets are healthy. The six-month trailing bond default rate has stayed 
near zero this year, and the delinquency rate on commercial and industrial loans at banks 
remains extremely low. 
We have seen a substantial acceleration in trend productivity growth over the past decade. 
And  although  productivity  gains  have  slowed  recently,  as  they  typically  do  as  expansions 
mature, U.S. companies remain at the forefront of changes in science and technology—and 
in the application of those innovations to business processes across a range of industries. 
Overall, the U.S. economy continues to display remarkable resilience and flexibility, despite a 
range  of  adverse  shocks.  This  is  a  remarkably  favorable  picture;  and  yet  there  is  growing 
concern about the long-term challenges for the U.S. economy and their implications for future 
prosperity.  
In parts of the business community, there is growing anxiety about a perceived shift in the 
locus of dynamism and growth away from the United States toward Asia and other parts of 
the world. 
Public opinion surveys report increased concern among Americans about economic security; 
about  the  prospects  for  future  income  growth  and  economic  mobility;  and  about  the 
implications of the long-term increase in income inequality. 
And  there  we  can  see  growing  concern  among  the  general  public  and  in  the  business 
community about the struggle to find a political consensus to support reforms to help us meet 
these challenges.  
The United States has long been one of the most open of the major economies. This basic 
policy  choice,  along  with  a  range  of  other  actions  that  have  made  our  economy  relatively 
flexible,  has  allowed  us  to  be  a  substantial  beneficiary  of  the  rapid  increase  in  global 
economic integration and in the growing economic success of the rest of the world.  
Globalization has brought challenges as well as benefits, however. The combined forces of 
technological  change,  immigration,  and  the  rapid  integration  of  China,  India,  and  other 
economies  into  the  world  economy  are  altering  the  dynamics  of  competitive  pressures  on 
U.S. companies. The pace of change seems to be increasing, and more things we produce, 
and more of our services, are becoming tradable. And this seems to have fed anxiety, among 
firms and their employees, about the challenges in coping with these forces.  
These  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  context  of  a  longer-term  increase  in  income 
inequality in the United States. Incomes have grown more rapidly for the richer and better 
educated than for those at lower points of the income scale. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 1
These  changes  have,  in  turn,  contributed  to  some  erosion  in  the  strength  of  the  political 
center  in  the  United  States  on  a  range  of  economic  policy  issues.  Surveys  suggest 
diminished support for global trade. And there is more divisiveness on a range of issues such 
as tax policy and the appropriate role for government in the regulation of economic activity. 
Over the last half century and more, the U.S. economy has enjoyed some substantial and 
important relative advantages. Among the most important of these are the quality of our best 
universities; our openness to change; the incentives provided for innovation; the strength of 
property rights; the depth and liquidity of our world-class financial markets; and a record of 
stability in macroeconomic policy.  
These relative strengths of the U.S. economy remain significant and substantial. But the rest 
of  the  world  is  getting  better  at  establishing  the  important  conditions  for  dynamism  and 
innovation.  These  improvements  are  not  a  reflection  of  U.S.  weakness,  nor  are  they 
themselves a threat to U.S. competitiveness. We will benefit from more rapid growth in the 
rest of the world, but at the same time we need to be more attentive to addressing a range of 
challenges  that  could  ultimately  damage  the  prospect  for  future  growth  in  living  standards 
here at home. 
I want to talk about challenges we face in four areas: 
• 
• 
sustaining support for global economic integration,  
the role of public policy in education and other areas that are critical to our capacity 
to adapt to change,  
regulation and the role of the market, and  
macroeconomic policy.  
• 
• 
Let me start with openness. 
The pressures that have come with globalization and technological change have led many to 
suggest  that  we  should  become  less  open  as  a  country,  that  we  should  slow  the  pace  of 
integration,  or  that  we  should  provide  greater  insulation  or  protection  from  competition  for 
selective parts of the U.S. economy. 
Moving in this direction would, I believe, be a fundamental mistake. More than ever before 
our fortunes are linked to those of the global economy. If anything, we need to become more 
open, not less; more open to trade in goods and services, but also to investment, to people 
and to ideas.  
Global integration is not the solution to all our problems, but acting to restrict it or to insulate 
us from its consequences would damage our capacity to grow and to adapt to change, and 
these costs would make it harder, not easier, to deal with our longer-term challenges. To the 
extent we are reluctant to remove restrictions or subsidies in the United States, we make it 
easier for the forces in other countries to block reforms from which we would benefit.  
The world has a lot of experience with the costs and benefits of protection, and the balance 
of judgment on those questions has not significantly changed even with all the changes that 
technology  and  policy  have  brought  to  global  trade.  Economies  that  are  more  open  have 
generally seen more rapid growth, both in incomes and in employment. Economies that are 
less open have generally grown less rapidly. 
Openness itself, of course, is not enough. 
Our capacity to adapt to change depends in part on the effectiveness of government policy in 
a range of important areas. Education seems the most obvious of these, but policy in health 
care, in public infrastructure, and many other areas will also play an increasingly important 
role in determining the relative strength of the U.S. economy in this more integrated world. 
The U.S. educational system combines the strengths of high completion rates for secondary 
education,  a  rich  variety  of  post-secondary  school  educational  options,  and  exceptionally 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2007
strong  elite  universities,  with  the  weaknesses  of  substantial  unevenness  in  the  quality  of 
public education, and large disparities in the educational opportunities available to those of 
modest  income  and  the  relatively  rich.  By  some  estimates,  students  from  families  in  the 
bottom half of the income distribution account for only 10 percent of all places in our elite 
universities.  
An education system should be judged by how it serves the majority of the population, not 
just  the  performance  of  its  best  institutions.  And  as  technological  progress  continues  and 
global integration increases, our system will be judged by how good a job it does equipping a 
broader  range  of  students  with  the  skills  commensurate  with  these  challenges.  In 
communities  across  the  country,  there  are  encouraging  efforts  at  experimentation  and 
reform.  Progress  is  probably  going  to  require  more  substantial  public  investments  in 
education going forward.  
Health care does not usually make the agenda of conferences on competitiveness, but we’re 
seeing  a  welcome  wave  of  attention  in  the  business  community  to  the  broader  economic 
imperative of health care reform. The U.S. system has compelling strengths in the quality of 
care and the choices available to much of the population. But our system is also remarkable 
for the magnitude of the costs, the incidence of those costs across the economy, the number 
of  uninsured,  and  our  poor  performance  on  health  outcomes  even  compared  with  less 
wealthy economies. To cite just one example, infant mortality rates in the United States are 
more than two times the level in Japan. 
In a world in which economic performance depends increasingly on flexibility and adaptability 
to  change,  we  probably  need  to  move  to  a  system  in  which  a  change  in  employer  or 
profession does not carry the substantial uncertainty it does today about how one will provide 
for  one’s  health  and  that  of  one’s  family.  This  seems  fundamental  to  the  willingness  of 
Americans to support the level of openness to trade and to change that is an essential part of 
our present and our future. 
A defining feature of the American economy has been our embrace of the market, and the 
recognition that market forces are, in general, the most effective way of allocating resources. 
But markets cannot solve all problems, and government policy plays an important role in how 
well markets function. The test of policy is not just in the incentives we create for competition 
and innovation, but also in the clarity and stability offered by the regulatory framework and in 
the quality of public goods that governments deliver.  
Any one who travels outside the United States today returns with an appreciation about how 
rapidly public infrastructure is improving in many parts of the world, relative to what is evident 
in many parts of the United States.  
As global markets become more integrated and companies and capital can move more freely 
across borders, policymakers will face new challenges in the design of regulations. They will 
have to look more carefully at the balance of benefits and costs, when companies have more 
choice  about  where  to  invest.  They  will  have  to  find  ways  for  regulations  to  evolve  more 
quickly in response to developments in markets. They will have to explore ways to cooperate 
more closely with other governments, where national approaches alone cannot be effective.  
We need to get used to a world in which we will see, in many areas, less willingness to adopt 
a U.S. model or to defer to a U.S. view on the appropriate global standard.  
You can see some of these dynamics in the financial arena, and concern about the erosion 
in the relative position of the U.S. financial system.  
Financial markets outside the United States are now deeper and more liquid than they used 
to be, making it easier for companies to raise capital domestically at reasonable cost. These 
financial markets are at an earlier stage in the process of capital market development, and 
they will therefore experience rapid growth in securitization and the role of derivatives. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 3
These  factors,  more  than  other  differences  in  tax,  accounting,  or  legal  regulatory  regimes, 
account for the bulk of the declines' share of equity and debt raised in the United States by 
companies around the world. And this shift is something that we benefit from, not just in the 
direct sense that U.S. financial institutions play an important role in those markets, but in the 
broader sense that we will gain from the improvements in economic growth that come from 
financial market development around the world. 
But  in  this  context,  we  need  to  be  more  attentive  to  the  risk  that  specific  aspects  of  our 
system,  regulations  or  other  constraints,  create  a  greater  disincentive  to  locate  a  financial 
business here, or to invest here, or to raise capital here, than would have been the case five 
or ten years ago. We need to take a careful look at how we regulate financial activity in a 
world where capital is more mobile, and the structure of the financial system has diverged 
substantially from the system for which our regulatory framework was designed. 
That  does  not  mean  we  should  contemplate  weaker  regulation  or  lower  standards.  The 
strength of the U.S. system is in part the result of the confidence we have developed in the 
integrity and resilience of our markets, in part by establishing strong standards for investor 
protection, market  practices,  and  safety  and  soundness. Sustaining  this  confidence  will  be 
critical to the future strength of our financial system. 
To complete this list of policy challenges that are important to U.S. competitiveness, let me 
conclude with a few brief points on the broader imperatives of macroeconomic policy. 
The  United  States  faces  very  substantial  gaps  between  our  fiscal  resources  and  our 
expenditure  commitments.  The  size  of  these  gaps,  these  deficits,  have  been  masked  in 
recent years by a substantial, unanticipated and probably transitory surge in revenues, and 
by  an  unusually  long  period  of  unusually  low  long-term  interest  rates,  in  part  the 
consequence of foreign official capital flows. 
But these gaps remain substantial and the U.S. fiscal position is unsustainable. Time does 
not help. We are going to have to begin to develop a political consensus on the mix of policy 
changes  that  can  bring  our  commitment  and  resources  more  into  balance,  if  we  are  to 
preserve confidence in our market and our long-term economic prospects.  
One  of  the  most  important  roles  for  public  policy  is  the  maintenance  of  a  stable 
macroeconomic  framework  that  enables  firms  to  make  long-term  investment  decisions.  In 
this sense, the fiscal policy choices ahead for this country will be critically important to the 
overall environment in which U.S. enterprises operate. 
The business community will play an important role in shaping the policy response to these 
longer-term economic challenges. These reforms will have a long fuse. The benefits will be 
shared broadly, rather than captured specifically by particular sectors of the economy. 
American companies have a strong collective interest in sustaining public support for global 
integration,  improving  the  quality  of  public  goods  the  government  provides  in  education, 
health care and infrastructure, and in preserving confidence in U.S. fiscal sustainability. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2007
