Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Supervising Islamic financial institutions – 
developments in Bahrain 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the  4th  IFSB  Summit,  Session  1:  An  Overview  on  Alternative  Regulatory  Structures  for  Effective 
Supervision, Dubai, 15 May 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: Good Morning. 
It is a pleasure and an honour to be with you here today, and to see so many people participating in 
this 4th IFSB Summit. Bahrain was a founding member of the Islamic Financial Services Board, and 
we  very  much  support  its  objectives  of  developing  common  regulatory  standards  for  the  Islamic 
financial services industry. This task is becoming all the more important, as the industry grows and 
internationalizes. 
Today’s  panel  on  alternative  regulatory  structures  is  a  pertinent  one,  given  the  need  for  effective 
supervision  to  underpin  a  healthy  Islamic  financial  services  industry,  as  well  as  the  development  in 
recent  years  of  new  regulatory  organizations  in  the  GCC.  Of  course,  innovations  in  regulatory 
structures in many developed markets can be traced back to the late-1980s, so experience elsewhere 
has helped inform many of this region’s developments. 
I am sure that my distinguished fellow panel members will provide us with useful insights as regards 
the  wider  international  experience  in  this  area.  For  my  part,  I  will  focus  on  our  own  regional 
experiences,  with  particular  attention  to  developments  in  Bahrain,  where  over  the  past  5  years  we 
have  significantly  changed  our  institutional  regulatory  landscape,  by  moving  to  a  single  regulator 
model. 
Let me also preface my remarks by stating that they do not explore the issue of whether particular 
regulatory structures are best suited to Islamic finance, as compared to conventional forms of finance. 
Suffice it to say that in our experience, we have been able to support the growth of the Islamic finance 
industry both as a sectoral banking regulator and, now, as a single regulator. 
On this issue the key point I believe is that whichever structure is in place, supervising Islamic financial 
institutions  obviously  requires  specialist  knowledge.  More  importantly,  given  its  nature  as  a  fast 
developing industry, much attention and focus needs to be placed on putting in place the infrastructure 
and standards that will help support its growth in a healthy and sustainable manner. 
Until a few years ago, then, regulatory structures in the GCC were predominantly sectoral in nature, 
and  Bahrain  was  no  exception.  Banks  tended  to  dominate  the  financial  sector  and  financial 
intermediation, and they were therefore the primary focus of regulation. 
In all cases, responsibility for regulating and supervising the banking sector rested with central banks. 
This reflected, of course, the pattern typically established around the world, with central banks taking 
on  banking  supervision  as  an  extension  of  their  responsibilities  for  maintaining  orderly  payment 
systems and monetary policy. 
In most cases, the regulatory mandates of central banks in the GCC also extended beyond banks, to 
cover  certain  types  of  related  non-bank  institutions  (such  as  money  changers  and  sometimes 
investment firms). However, insurance supervision was separately regulated by Commerce Ministries, 
whilst stock markets (and their broking members) were run as self-regulatory organizations. 
In Bahrain, the above model changed in May 2002, when the government announced the transfer of 
regulation  of  the  insurance  sector  and  capital  markets  to  the  Bahrain  Monetary  Agency  –  the 
organization which at the time undertook the functions of a central bank and banking supervisor. This 
process culminated in September last year, with the passage of new legislation and the replacement 
of the BMA with a new organization – the Central Bank of Bahrain. 
This  was  a  far  reaching  reform,  creating  the  first  integrated  regulator  in  the  region,  and  bringing 
together  under  one  roof  both  prudential  and  conduct  of  business  regulation  for  the  whole  financial 
sector.  In  addition  to  its  comprehensive  regulatory  responsibilities,  the  CBB  very  much  remains  of 
course a central bank, responsible for systemic stability (including oversight of the payments system 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
and  monetary  policy),  as  well  as  for  other  central  bank  functions  such  as  currency  issue,  reserves 
management and the provision of banking services to government. 
Other  GCC  countries,  of  course,  have  also  initiated  a  variety  of  institutional  changes.  SAMA,  for 
instance, has assumed responsibility for regulating insurance, and a separate capital markets authority 
has also been established. Both Qatar and Dubai, meanwhile, have established integrated regulators 
for the separate jurisdictions established inside their territories, although existing regulatory structures 
largely  remain  unchanged  for  the  rest  of  their  financial  sectors.  Qatar,  however,  recently  moved 
regulation  of  the  Doha  stock  market  out  of  the  exchange,  into  a  separate  Qatar  Financial  Markets 
Authority. 
In short, this region is seeing a period of significant regulatory reforms, reflecting a variety of different 
approaches. However, they all share a common desire to see regulatory standards increased. 
Different  countries,  of  course,  need  to  develop  the  institutional  structures  that  work  best  for  them, 
depending on the state of development of their markets and institutional considerations. In our case, 
we strongly believe that the single regulator model has worked well for us, for a number of reasons. 
The key advantage for Bahrain has been the economies of scale and scope that the single regulator 
model  offers.  For  a  relatively  small  country  such  as  ours,  the  impact  of  these  economies  was 
significant. 
We have been able to utilize scarce specialist resources, such as our on-site examiners, who were 
previously available only in the BMA, across the different sectors. We have also been able to apply the 
more extensive supervisory experience and institutional capacity available in the BMA across the other 
sectors  as  well.  And  we  have  been  able  to  centralize  and  undertake  more  efficiently  key  functions 
such as policy development. 
The net result has been to upgrade significantly the quality of regulation and supervision applied to 
non-banking  sectors,  at  a  time  when  insurance  and  capital  markets  activities  are  fast  developing 
regionally. In 2005, for instance, we introduced a completely new rulebook for the insurance sector, 
including the first prudential rules specific to takaful firms; and we followed this up with a completely 
new rulebook for investment firms in 2006. Now, we are busy upgrading our capital market rules. 
Whilst  convergence  within  the  financial  services  industry  was  a  secondary  factor,  it  was  not 
insignificant.  In  particular,  the  development  of  capital  markets  has  obviously  impacted  on  our 
supervision of financial institutions: creating a single regulator gives us the opportunity to streamline 
notification  and  approval  procedures  for  financial  institutions  undertaking  such  activity.  This  is 
something that we are now actively looking to achieve. 
Let me conclude by highlighting what I see as some of the lessons arising out of our experience. First, 
creating  a  single  regulator  can  benefit  the  industry,  but  only  providing  the  regulator  works  hard  at 
harmonizing  the  approaches  of  its  predecessor  organizations  and  internal  processes,  for  instance 
creating single  points of  contact at  the  new regulator  for  firms. Merely merging  organizations  is  not 
enough. 
Second, combining different regulatory organizations, each with their own corporate cultures and way 
of  doing  things,  requires  a  great  deal  of  management  attention.  Staff  need  to  be  motivated  and 
retained, to counter the unsettling nature of change. New systems and processes need to be put in 
place. 
Third, as with most other jurisdictions that have undertaken such reforms, new laws also need to be 
put in place, which inevitably takes time. 
In Bahrain’s case, pending the enactment of a new law in 2006, we were able to make progress by the 
simple  expedient  of  initially  issuing  short  amendments  to  existing  sector  laws,  such  as  our  1987 
insurance act – the only change being to transfer regulatory responsibility to the BMA. This allowed us 
to  make  a  start  on  integrating  the  different  regulatory  organizations  early  on,  even  though  we 
continued to operate for a time under different laws for banking, insurance and capital markets. 
In  short,  a  single  regulator  in  our  experience  has  offered  many  benefits  –  but  it  is  not  an  instant 
solution. To be successful, it requires sustained effort and focus over several years. Five years on, we 
believe we have made significant progress in this respect, but there still remains more to do. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2007
