David Dodge: Monetary policy report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference 
the  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  Ottawa, 
12 July 2007.  
the  release  of 
following 
 Today, we released the July update to our Monetary Policy Report, which discusses current 
economic and financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Economic growth and inflation in Canada in the first half of this year have been stronger than 
was expected in the April Monetary Policy Report. The Bank judges that the economy is now 
operating further above its production potential than was projected in April.  
The  Canadian  economy  is  now  projected  to  grow  somewhat  more  strongly  in  2007  and 
somewhat more slowly in 2008 and 2009 than we previously projected. Higher interest rates 
across  the  yield  curve  and  a  stronger  Canadian  dollar  are  expected  to  bring  aggregate 
demand and supply in Canada back into balance in 2009.  
Inflation is projected to be slightly higher and more persistent than in the April Report. With 
the  direct  effect  of  the  GST  cut  ending,  and  with  the  impact  of  the  temporary  decrease  in 
gasoline  prices  in  late  2006,  total  inflation  is  expected  to  peak  at  about  3  per  cent  in  the 
fourth  quarter  of  this  year.  However,  as  excess  demand  diminishes,  total  CPI  and  core 
inflation should decline to 2 per cent by early 2009. 
The main upside risk to the Bank's inflation projection is that household demand in Canada 
could  be  stronger  than  projected.  Higher  levels  of  household  borrowing  and  broad  money 
growth point to this risk. On the downside, the adjustment in the Canadian economy to the 
rapid  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  may  dampen  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and 
services  and  reduce  inflationary  pressures  more  than  projected.  As  well,  the  ongoing 
adjustment in the U.S. housing sector could be more prolonged. In the context of our new 
projection, the upside and downside risks appear to be roughly balanced.  
On Tuesday, the Bank raised its key policy interest rate by one-quarter of one percentage 
point to 4 1/2 per cent, and we said that some modest further increase in the overnight rate 
may be required to bring inflation back to the target over the medium term.  
Paul and I would now be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
