Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Bahrain country showcase 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the Bahrain country showcase, Dubai, 14 May 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: Good Morning.  
Assalam Alaikum Wa-Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here today, and to open this Bahrain Country Showcase 
event.  
Bahrain, of course, has a long history as a financial centre, including a global profile as a centre for 
Islamic  finance.  But  Bahrain  has  much  more  to  offer  than  simply  its  experience  and  credibility  – 
however important these factors are, of course. 
Many developments have also quietly been taking place in recent years, and I am pleased that we 
have  an  opportunity  such  as  this  one  to  publicize  just  some  of  the  features  that  continue  to  make 
Bahrain a thriving financial centre. 
For whilst regional competition has undoubtedly grown significantly – and by the way this is something 
that I welcome, as benefiting the region as a whole – it is also true to say that Bahrain has continued 
to thrive as an international financial centre. This is something that perhaps doesn’t attract the publicity 
that it ought to, but is perhaps understandable – news organizations look for what’s new, more than for 
what’s stayed the same. 
Before I hand over to my colleague from Bahrain Financial Services Development, part of Bahrain’s 
Economic Development Board, to highlight the key features of Bahrain’s financial services sector, let 
me just say a few words about current regulatory developments. 
Bahrain  has  progressed  quite  dramatically  in  recent  years,  in  terms  of  regulation.  The  Bahrain 
Monetary  Agency  –  long-established  as  the  country’s  central  bank  and  highly  respected  banking 
regulator – became a single regulator in 2002, when it was also given responsibility for supervising the 
insurance  sector  and  capital  markets.  Last  year  saw  the  culmination  of  this  process,  with  the 
introduction  of  new  legislation  and  the  creation  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  as  the  successor 
organization to the BMA. 
Parallel to this process of institutional reform has been an unprecedented period of development and 
consolidation in terms of our regulations. Starting in 2004, we introduced a system of comprehensive 
Rulebooks, containing all our regulations in easily accessible format, to improve communication and 
transparency. And we introduced new regulatory frameworks for insurance and investment business 
firms, in 2005 and 2006 respectively. 
Now, we are working on updating our capital markets rules. The first element of this is our new rules 
on collective investment undertakings, which will underpin Bahrain’s position as the region’s leading 
funds centre, by introducing – for the first time – regulations specifically geared for expert funds and 
other alternative asset classes, such as hedge funds. 
Collectively,  these  initiatives  have  aimed  to  ensure  that  Bahrain  maintains  its  leading  role  as  a 
financial centre, in terms of responding to evolving market demands. I am pleased to say that these 
efforts were positively acknowledged by the IMF last year, in their Financial Sector Assessment review 
of Bahrain. But we are not complacent, and we will be continuing to develop our regulations in light of 
market needs and evolving standards. 
On this note, let me now turn to my colleague from the EDB, Shaikh Mohammed bin Khalifa Al-Khalifa, 
who will present in more detail Bahrain’s financial sector. 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
