Njuguna Ndung’u: Workshop on the compilation of banking statistics in Kenya 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  opening  of  the 
workshop  on  the  compilation  of  banking  statistics,  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies,  Nairobi, 
12 June 2007.  
 Kenya Banker’s Association (KBA),  
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK) and  
Central Bureau of Statistics  
Mr. Kevin O’Connor, Consultant IMF  
Mr. Oliver Chinganya, Regional Advisor, GDDS Project  
The representatives of:  
 
 
 
Distinguished Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me first and foremost welcome you all to the Kenya School of Monetary Studies and to this very 
important  workshop  on  the  compilation  of  banking  statistics.  I  must  thank  you  for  taking  time  off  to 
attend this function.  
I  wish  to  thank  the  IMF  consultant  in  particular  for  finding  time  to  participate  in  this  workshop  as  a 
resource  person.  As  you  may  be  aware,  the  IMF  has  played  a  major  role  in  the  development  of 
monetary statistics in Kenya and in countries around the world. In particular, the Fund, in collaboration 
with  the  Department  for  International  Development  (DFID),  continues  to  support  the  General  Data 
Dissemination System (GDDS) project which aims at improving the availability and quality of data in 
developing countries to conform with international standards. Kenya, as a country, being part of the 
GDDS project, provides an important avenue for database improvements. This workshop is therefore 
part  of  the  greater  plan  towards  the  improvement  of  statistics  in  Kenya  with  the  support  of  these 
organisations. I thank them for this contribution.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
My  task  today  is  to  open  this  workshop  but  before  I  do  that  let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the 
importance of this workshop and statistics in general. You will recall that the financial crisis that hit the 
Asian economies in the early 1990s was partly occasioned by lack of sufficient statistical information 
on what was going on in the banking system. I am glad therefore that thereafter, the world economies 
have taken initiatives to ensure that statistical capacities and developments are at the forefront so as 
to inform decision making at all levels. We at the Central Bank have not been left behind. Over the 
past few years, the Bank has been working on the improvement of monetary and financial statistics to 
meet the international compilation standards guided by the recommendations of the IMF mission on 
Report  for  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes  (ROSC),  and  Plans  for  improvements  under  the 
GDDS project. Implementation of some of the recommendations cannot be done without a joint effort 
with statistical officers in the financial sector, most of whom are present here today.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
There are varied uses of the banking data. The Government uses it, among other data, for economic 
planning.  The  Central  Bank  uses  it  for  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and 
monitoring of the financial system. The challenge currently for example is to monitor portfolio capital 
flows and disentangle from remittances. I am sure all the institutions represented here make use of 
data in one way or another. For example, consolidated banking statistics are normally shared with the 
banking  industry.  This  is  not  to  mention  other  users  of  our  statistics  including  the  private  sector, 
international investors and researchers.  
With such an immense use, it is important that the data collected is accurate and reliable. Secondly, 
the dynamic nature of our economies necessitates that we become dynamic in our approach to data 
compilation. New innovations, for example, new financial instruments, which impact on the monetary 
policy formulation and implementation, continue to come up. It is in this regard that the Central Bank 
has produced a revised draft data reporting form which will be discussed in this workshop.  
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Besides  the  accuracy,  and  reliability  time  is  of  the  essence  in  data  compilation  and  dissemination. 
Data  must  be  up  to  date  and  accurate.  I  therefore  urge  you  all  to  observe  CBK  deadlines  for  the 
submission  of  the  various  returns  as  indicated  in  the  various  Banking  Circulars.  As  far  as  having 
accurate and reliable data is concerned, we are all together, not just as a country, but with the rest of 
the world.  
As I conclude, let me welcome you once again to KSMS. To get maximum benefits from this workshop 
I urge all the participants to actively contribute in discussions and raise with the resource persons any 
issues that you think present grey areas.  
It is now my pleasure to declare the workshop officially open.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
