Lucas Papademos: Challenges for the European economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “The European Political Ideal: Cultural Origins and Future Challenges” organised 
by the European Cultural Centre of Delphi and the Konstantinos G Karamanlis Foundation, 
Delphi, 23 July 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
“There  is  nothing  more  difficult  to  carry  out,  nor  more  doubtful  of  success,  nor  more 
dangerous to handle than to initiate a new order of things.” These were the warning words of 
the Italian statesman and political philosopher Niccolo Machiavelli, back in the 15th century. 
It  is  in  the  light  of  these  words  that  we  can  especially  appreciate  the  extraordinary 
achievement of the Treaty of Rome, signed 50 years ago. For that Treaty did no less than 
“initiate a new order of things” in Europe. It changed – irreversibly – the relations among the 
nations  of  this  Continent.  When  Konstantinos  G.  Karamanlis  was  born,  100  years  ago, 
Europe  was  dominated  by  nation-state  rivalry,  mercantilist  competition  and  eventually 
isolationist  protectionism  that  led  to  two  catastrophic  fratricidal  wars  among  the  nations  of 
Europe. At that time, it was difficult to envision that, 50 years later. The leaders of a war-torn 
Continent  would  muster  the  courage  and  imagination  to  create  the  foundations  of  what  is 
today  the  European  Union.  But  they  did.  They  managed  to  “think  outside  the  box”  of 
autonomous  nation-states  and  indivisible  sovereignty  and  they  fashioned  a  novel  political 
entity,  in  which  decisions  are  made  together  on  many  important  issues  and  sovereignty  is 
shared,  and  where  supranational  institutions  assume  responsibility  for  the  performance  of 
tasks in the common interest.  
This  vision  of  a  European  Community  as  a  cooperative  endeavour  to  bring  peace  and 
prosperity  to  this  Continent  was  one  that  was  deeply  held  and  vigorously  championed  by 
Konstantinos G. Karamanlis. He was the driving force behind the accession in 1981 of this 
country  to  what  was  then  the  European  Economic  Community  –an  accession  which 
consolidated  Greece’s  transition  to  a  stable  and  vibrant  democracy.  It  is  therefore  very 
appropriate that this conference is dedicated to commemorating both anniversaries, the 50th 
anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, and the 100th anniversary of the birth of Konstantinos G. 
Karamanlis.  I  am  delighted  to  participate  in  this  event  and  address  this  distinguished 
audience.  
Over  the  past  25  years,  the  evolution  of  the  European  Union  and  the  transformation  of 
Greece have been impressive. The European Union has taken unprecedented steps towards 
deepening  and  broadening  its  integration.  Today,  the  Union  comprises  27  Member  States 
and has created a zone of peace, stability and prosperity for 495 million Europeans. A truly 
historic  milestone  with  far-reaching  monetary,  but  also  economic  and  political,  implications 
was the establishment of monetary union in 1999 and the creation of the single currency, the 
euro.  
Over the same period, since Greece’s accession to the Community, its economy and society 
have changed significantly. In the economic sphere, structural change – including financial 
deregulation,  market  liberalisation  and  greater  openness  –  has  contributed  to  increased 
efficiency. Macroeconomic stability has progressively improved. In 2001, Greece adopted the 
euro as its currency. As a consequence of the substantial economic adjustment – nominal 
and real – required for participation in the euro area and as a result of the benefits entailed 
by the adoption of the single currency, the performance of the Greek economy has improved 
markedly.  In  recent  years,  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  have  been  further 
enhancing the economy’s efficiency and stability. Today, Greece can take pride in a thriving 
and  dynamic  economy  –  with  rising  living  standards  –  although  a  number  of  important 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
challenges still lie ahead. Some of these challenges are partly linked to the adoption of the 
euro, which entails benefits and opportunities but also implies constraints on economic policy 
and the functioning of the economy. These constraints must be fully understood and taken 
into account to ensure sustained growth and a continued rise in living standards.  
An important consequence of a country’s participation in monetary union is the surrender of 
monetary  sovereignty  to  the  European  institution  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the  single 
monetary policy. This means that monetary policy cannot be conducted at the national level 
any longer, but is now the responsibility of the European Central Bank, which formulates the 
single monetary policy for the euro area as a whole. 
In my contribution to this conference on the future challenges for Europe, I will address two 
issues which are fundamental to the long-term performance of the European economy and 
the prosperity of European citizens: 
• 
the first concerns the necessary conditions and policies that can ensure in the long 
run the stability and credibility of the euro as a “currency without a state”;  
the  second  relates  to  certain  challenges  that  must  be  met  so  that  the  euro  area 
economy will enhance its potential for higher sustained growth and that the national 
economies will fully reap the benefits from their participation in a monetary union in 
which  inevitably  the  single  monetary  policy  is  conducted  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole.  
 II.  
The institutional and policy framework for Economic and Monetary Union in 
Europe 
Friends  from  outside  Europe  occasionally  raise  –  understandably,  I  would  say  –  rather 
fundamental questions concerning the construction of European monetary union. Is a single 
currency  for  13  –  soon  to  become  15  –  otherwise  sovereign  countries  really  a  viable 
construction?  There  is  a  European  Central  Bank  that  formulates  and  implements  a  single 
monetary policy for the euro area as a whole, but there is no United States of Europe – or 
whatever we may wish to call a European political entity that would resemble a nation-state. 
Can a “currency without a state” really be solid and credible in the long run?  
The success of the euro during the first eight years of its existence has demonstrated that we 
have  found  some  robust  answers  to  this  question:  First,  the  very  design  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union took into account the dichotomy between, on the one hand, a supranational 
single monetary policy and, on the other hand, economic policies – such as fiscal, structural 
or employment policies – which have remained the responsibility of the member countries. 
How  have  we  taken  this  into  account?  By  creating  appropriate  institutions.  “Nothing  is 
possible without humans, but nothing is lasting without institutions”, Jean Monnet observed 
with  great  prescience  back  in  the  1950s.  Solid  and  appropriately  designed  institutions  are 
indispensable.  But  additional  ingredients  are  necessary  for  the  successful  and  sustained 
performance  of  monetary  union.  The  second  essential  condition  pertains  to  the  policy 
framework  which  should  include:  clear  policy  objectives,  intelligent  and  enforceable  rules, 
effective policy instruments appropriately assigned to objectives, and credible commitment to 
objectives and rules.  
For the monetary union pillar of EMU, the independence of the ECB, which is enshrined in 
the Treaty and safeguarded by the public’s support, and the clear unambiguous orientation of 
monetary policy to the preservation of price stability are the core elements of the institutional 
set-up  and  our  monetary  policy  framework.  These  elements  are  solid  and  well-founded 
regardless  of  alternative  views  occasionally  expressed.  This  institutional  arrangement  is 
functioning well, it is delivering price stability and favourable financing conditions and, as a 
result, it is making an ongoing contribution to sustainable economic growth and job creation 
in Europe. Not only have inflation rates been on average in line with the ECB’s definition of 
price stability, namely an inflation rate close to, but less than, 2%, but medium and long-term 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
inflation expectations have also remained firmly anchored to our definition of price stability. 
These  facts  show  that  the  markets  and  the  public  have  confidence  in  the  euro  and  in  the 
ability and determination of the ECB to maintain price stability. 
Beyond the well-designed institutions for monetary union, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
and the actual conduct of policy have played an important role in the attainment of our price 
stability  objective  and  the  effective  functioning  of  monetary  union.  The  forward-looking, 
medium-term  orientation  of  this  strategy  and  its  analytical  framework,  employing  both 
economic and monetary analyses and all available pertinent information, has helped provide 
a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  and  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  thus  a 
solid basis for monetary policy decision-making. Moreover, transparent communication has 
enhanced the understanding, effectiveness and credibility of monetary policy throughout the 
euro  area.  Ultimately,  the  effectiveness  and  credibility  of  the  single  monetary  policy  will 
depend  on  the  consistency  of  objectives,  words  and  actions  and  on  its  ability  to  maintain 
price stability, in line with its objective, over the medium and long term. 
It is, therefore, with a degree of “parental pride” that we at the ECB look upon the first eight 
years of the single currency. While we are fully aware of the policy challenges that may lie 
ahead, we can be confident in the light of what has been achieved so far. The euro has been 
a success – and this fact has not been lost in a number of EU countries still outside the euro 
area, which have been attracted by the benefits of sharing the single currency. Last January, 
we  welcomed  Slovenia  as  the  thirteenth  member  of  monetary  union,  and  in  less  than  six 
months from now, Cyprus and Malta, too, will be adopting the euro as their currency. 
The  credibility  of  the  euro  is  reflected  in  its  attractiveness  which  extends  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  the  European  Union.  The  euro  is  being  used  by  many  economic  agents 
outside  the  euro  area  –private  individuals,  corporations,  investors  and  financial  market 
participants, traders as well as public authorities –as a store of value, means of payment and 
medium of exchange. It has become the second most widely used international currency in 
the world. The ECB has been collecting data about the international role of the euro since 
1999, and the observed developments are indeed impressive: at the end of 2006, over 30% 
of all international debt securities were denominated in euro, testifying to the euro’s role as a 
financing  currency;  40  countries  have  exchange  rate  regimes  linked  to  the  euro, 
demonstrating its role as anchor currency; and over 25% of global foreign exchange reserves 
are held in euro – and we have to bear in mind that not all countries disclose such figures. 
These  are  just  a  few  statistics.  The  point  I  want  to  make  is  the  following:  when  economic 
agents outside the euro area choose the euro as their preferred currency, this testifies to the 
trust they place in its stability and credibility. We see this trust as a sign of distinction for the 
euro. At the same time, we consider the global use of the euro as a market-driven process. 
Therefore,  the  ECB  takes  a  “neutral”  view  on  the  international  role  of  the  euro:  it  neither 
hinders nor encourages its global use. 
What  about  the  economic  pillar  of  EMU?  The  effective  functioning  of  institutions  and  the 
credible implementation of national economic policies are essential. In order to support the 
conduct of the single monetary policy and the smooth functioning of the monetary union, in 
order  to  ensure  and  better  coordinate  the  implementation  of  sound,  sustainable  and 
consistent  national  fiscal  policies,  and  in  order  to  foster  higher  output  and  employment 
growth, an economic policy framework is necessary. This consists of a set of institutions as 
well as of common policy orientations, rules and procedures which have been put in place. 
These include the Stability and Growth Pact, the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines and the 
Lisbon agenda. Has this framework delivered results? On this front, the past record has been 
somewhat  mixed,  but  in  recent  years  there  have  been  positive  developments  and  the 
prospects  are  improving.  Substantial  progress  has  been  made  towards  a  more  efficient 
European economy and the increase in employment has been impressive since the launch of 
the common currency. Nevertheless, we also have to admit that productivity and economic 
growth over the past decade have not been as strong as we would have liked – especially in 
comparison with the United States.  
BIS Review 83/2007 
 3
The challenges for economic policies in Europe 
III.  
Currently,  the  euro  area  economy  enjoys  a  solid  and  broad-based  recovery  and  growth  is 
expected to remain robust in the coming quarters. There are two key economic policy issues 
concerning  the  long-term  performance  of  the  euro  area  economy  that  must  be  effectively 
addressed. First, how to raise the potential for higher sustained non-inflationary growth in the 
euro area as a whole. Second, how to achieve this in a reasonably balanced way so as to 
optimise the benefits of all participants in monetary union and preserve its cohesion.  
For Europe’s current economic expansion to remain dynamic on a sustainable basis in the 
increasingly  competitive  globalised  economy,  it  is  essential  to  further  strengthen  the  two 
fundamental  determinants  of  long-term  growth:  labour  utilisation  and  productivity  by 
appropriately  influencing  the  underlying  factors  that  determine  the  ability  of  the  European 
economy to achieve increased efficiency and create more employment. In recent years, the 
rates of growth of both labour utilisation and productivity have increased, but there is room 
and  need  for  further  and  sustained  gains.  Let  me  briefly  elaborate  on  the  prospects  and 
means. 
The recent and ongoing upswing in economic activity has been accompanied by a significant 
and  steady  increase  in  employment  and  a  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate,  which  has 
dropped  to  the  lowest  level  (7%)  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999.  What  is  very 
positive  is  that  these  developments  also  reflect  a  continued  rise  in  the  labour  force 
participation  rate  and  a  relatively  stable  number  of  hours  worked  per  employed  person, 
following a decline in hours worked in previous years. As a result, the overall rate of labour 
utilisation  has  increased  and  is  likely  to  continue  to  rise  partly  in  response  to  the  labour 
market reforms implemented in many euro area countries that have increased the incentives 
to work and the employment opportunities. Nevertheless, there is clearly scope and need for 
further improvement in the euro area labour markets. The labour force participation rate and 
the hours worked per employed person are still relatively low and the unemployment rate is 
still  unacceptably  high  in  comparison  with  other  advanced  economies  and  with  the 
performance of the European labour markets twenty years ago.  
The  good  news  that  we  are  witnessing  at  present  a  job-creating  economic  recovery  in  all 
euro area countries is accompanied by another encouraging development with a potentially 
positive impact for sustainably higher longer-term growth: the productivity performance of the 
euro  area  has  also  improved  recently.  It  is,  however,  too  early  to  say  whether  this  is  a 
temporary or permanent improvement. But we do have evidence that, in certain sectors, and 
in a number of euro area countries, structural reforms and corporate restructuring have been 
raising productivity and are contributing to higher potential output growth. Even though more 
information  and  analysis  are  certainly  needed  in  order  to  reach  a  firm  judgement  on  the 
extent  to  which  recent  productivity  gains  represent  a  structural  improvement,  I  see  two 
conclusions emerging from labour market and productivity developments for the euro area as 
a whole, and for its member countries: first, the experiences of a number of Member States 
clearly  show  that  reforms  do  pay  off.  And,  second,  further  reforms  are  undoubtedly 
necessary in order to foster permanently higher growth in productivity and labour utilisation 
and thus faster long-term economic growth.  
There is growing recognition and consensus on the need for further substantial reforms to 
address the structural weaknesses of the European economy. Policy-makers in Europe know 
what their “To Do list” is in this respect. It includes: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
reforms to strengthen competition in goods and especially in services markets;  
reforms to increase flexibility and adaptability in labour markets;  
reforms  to  improve  education  (including  on-the-job  training  and  lifelong  learning), 
boost research and development, enhance innovation and facilitate the diffusion of 
technological  advances,  so  as  to  fully  exploit  the  potential  of  an  increasingly 
knowledge-based economy;  
4 
 BIS Review 83/2007
4. 
5. 
6. 
policies and institutions to create a more favourable business climate;  
reforms  to  foster  integration,  competition  and  innovation  in  European  financial 
markets, with a special emphasis on venture capital: and  
reforms to enhance the quality and efficiency of public expenditure and of tax and 
benefit systems, and of the sustainability of public finances. 
To carry out these reforms, the EU governments have set targets and made commitments 
within a rules-based framework. What is needed now is to honour these commitments and to 
actually  implement  what  has  been  agreed.  And  the  current  economic  upswing  in  Europe 
certainly provides a propitious opportunity to press ahead with the necessary reforms, as well 
as with further fiscal consolidation. After all, there is no better time to reinforce the roof than 
when the sun is shining! 
Moreover, it is also important for the economies of the Member States in the monetary union 
– where the single monetary policy is geared towards maintaining price stability for the euro 
area as a whole – to preserve and enhance their competitiveness position. Diverging inflation 
and competitiveness developments in individual member countries can have an undesirable 
impact on the performance of the national economies. Given that the single monetary policy 
cannot  –  and  therefore  should  not  –  be  used  to  alleviate  the  effects  of  such  regional 
divergences,  structural  reforms  and  economic  policies  in  individual  countries  should  be 
employed  to  address  any  country-specific  persistent  adverse  inflation  developments  or 
losses of competitiveness. 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
Let  me  come  to  a  conclusion:  we  have  gathered  here  in  Delphi,  the  seat  of  the  Delphic 
oracle. What would the oracle predict for Europe’s future? I will not try to guess. Incidentally, 
Jean  Monnet  was  equally  cautious  in  forecasting  the  future  of  the  European  construction, 
when  he  stated  that  “nobody  can  say  today  what  will  be  exactly  tomorrow’s  European 
structure,  because  tomorrow’s  changes,  which  will  be  triggered  by  today’s  changes,  are 
unpredictable.”  As  was often  the case  in  the  past,  the  Delphic  oracle’s response  might  be 
ambiguous and give rise to different interpretations about the future. There are, however, two 
certainties  we  can  count  on.  First,  the  inherent  dynamics  of  the  European  integration 
process, which Jean Monnet foresaw and Konstantinos Karamanlis championed, are still at 
work. The Intergovernmental Conference currently underway to elaborate the details of the 
new  Reform  Treaty  for  the  European  Union  is  a  clear  manifestation  of  this.  And,  second, 
whatever the shape of Europe’s evolving “ever closer union” in the future may be, the solid 
foundations  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  the  euro  –  our  common  currency  and 
symbol  of  our  shared  identity  –  will  undoubtedly  continue  to  be  core  components  of  our 
European future.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 5
