Mary C Nkosi: Profile of the Reserve Bank of Malawi 
Speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, during the African 
Bible College students’ visit to the Reserve Bank of Malawi, Lilongwe, 4 May 2007. 
 Mr. Jason Pink, Leader of Delegation, African Bible College  
Mr Eckton Chinyanga, Member Staff  
Students of African Bible College  
The General Manager  
Senior Management  
Heads of Department  
Members of Staff  
I  would  like  to  welcome  you  Mr.  Pink,  staff  and  students  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi.  It  is  my 
pleasure  to  see  you  and  your  team,  visit  this  institution  today.  Such  visits  accord  the  Bank  an 
opportunity to explain to the public in general and to students in particular, the activities that take place 
at the institution. I am hoping that you will be able to relate what you learnt in class with what you are 
going to hear and see during your visit today.  
Let me start by saying that the Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM) is a central bank. As such it is charged 
with many responsibilities which include the attainment of price stability or low inflation and ensuring a 
sound financial system to facilitating economic growth and development.  
The Reserve Bank of Malawi was established under an Act of Parliament in July 1964 (Caption 44:02) 
and started its operations in June 1965. In April 1989 the Reserve Bank of Malawi Act was revised 
stipulating the Bank’s principal functions which are in the interest of the national economy and are in 
line with the economic policies of the government. The 1989 Act made the Reserve Bank independent 
from government under section 4.  
At  this  juncture,  let  me  touch  on  the  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi. 
These can be split into 3 main parts:  
Main functions of the Bank  
A. 
Delegated functions of the Bank  
B. 
C. 
Other functions of the Bank  
Departments in the Bank are set up in such a way so as to fulfill these functions and responsibilities.  
A.  
1.  
2. 
3.  
Main functions of the Bank 
Formulation of monetary policies and maintenance of price stability  
The main function of the RBM is to maintain price stability in the economy so as to minimize 
inflation.  
• 
It does this by controlling money supply growth using 4 major policy instruments: 
Open  market  operations,  liquidity  reserve  requirement,  the  discount  rate  and 
repurchase arrangements.  
To issue legal tender currency in Malawi  
The RBM is the only institution that is legally authorised to produce statements that can be 
used as final means of payment for goods and services within the borders of the country.  
Preserving the value of the Kwacha both externally and internally  
The Reserve Bank ensures that the exchange rate is stable at all times. Thus it strives to 
ensure that:  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
4. 
5. 
6.  
  Money that is in circulation in the country should be backed by an equivalent level 
of foreign reserves.  
Banker and advisor to the government  
The  Reserve  Bank  maintains  government  accounts  and  manages  government  domestic 
debt.  
Banker to other banks in Malawi  
The  Reserve  bank  acts  a  banker  to  the  commercial  banks  by  keeping  commercial  banks 
deposits, which can be withdrawn by commercial banks when they run out of liquidity in their 
vaults.  
Acts as lender of last resort for financial institutions  
The RBM helps to alleviate liquidity pressure in the financial system. It does this by lending 
to banks through the Discount Window.  
Delegated functions  
B.  
On  behalf  of  the  Government  of  Malawi,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  carries  out  the  following 
delegated responsibilities:  
1.  
2.  
3. 
4.  
C. 
1. 
2 
 Establishment of money and capital market  
The RBM is the authority responsible for regulating and supervising the proper functioning of 
money and capital markets. It is responsible for the development of the capital market and 
for the provision of rules and regulations for fair and orderly market conditions.  
Supervision of financial institutions  
To  promote  financial  sector  development  the  Bank  carries  out  orderly  management  and 
supervision of banks and other financial institutions to protect their liquidity, equity base and 
ensure their overall viability and stability.  
Issuing of government paper and Treasury Bills  
The RBM is vested with the responsibility of issuing Local Registered Stocks and Treasury 
Bills as a way of raising resources for Government to augment its revenues. The Bank also 
underwrites i.e. meets the difference in case of under subscriptions from the financial sector, 
the parastatals and the private sector.  
Administration of exchange control  
The administration of exchange control was delegated to the Reserve Bank by the Ministry 
of Finance on 2 June, 1965.  
• 
Currently  there  are  no  restrictions  on  the  Current  Account.  However,  the  Capital 
Account has not yet been liberalised.  
Other functions  
To promote development and economic growth in Malawi  
The Reserve Bank of Malawi implements several measures designed to influence the money 
supply and availability of credit, interest rates and exchange rates with the view to promoting 
growth, employment, stability in prices and a sustainable balance of payments position.  
BIS Review 73/2007
2.  
Conducting research  
Collecting and analysing economic data from the financial and other sectors for research and 
policy purposes.  
Before I conclude, it is important to note that for the RBM to function effectively there are a number of 
departments  that  carry  out  several  functions  aimed  at  meeting  the  institutional  objectives.  The 
following  are  the  departments;  Research  and  Statistics,  Treasury,  Exchange  Control  and  Debt 
Management, Banking and Payment Systems, Bank Supervision, Supervision of Non-Bank Financial 
Services,  Currency  Management,  Legal  Affairs,  Administration,  Information,  Communication  and 
Technology,  Accounting  and  Finance,  Internal  Audit,  Risk  Management,  Human  Resource  and 
Institutional Development, Protective Services and Public Relations. There will be brief presentations 
from some of the departments where most of what I have said will be clarified further. In addition, you 
will go around some of these departments to see what goes on there. I hope that we can have an 
exciting exchange of ideas after going through these departments.  
Once again, we are pleased to have you here and please do take the opportunity to learn about this 
unique institution.  
Lastly, let me take this opportunity to invite you back to this room where your burning questions should 
be asked and possible responses given.  
Thank you for your attention.  
MAY GOD BLESS YOU ALL.  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 3
