Shamshad Akhtar: Demystifying Basel II 
Keynote address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the FICCI-IBA 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 26 September 2006. 
 After  years  of  research  supported  by  several  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  including  rounds  of 
country specific quantitative impact surveys and long drawn consultation with the industry, the Basle 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  issued  an  elaborate  framework  of  International 
Convergence  of  Capital  Measurement  and  Capital  Standards  –  A  Revised  Framework  (called 
Basel II Accord) in November 2005. Basel I served banking industry well since its introduction in 1988 
but  it  lagged  behind  the  financial  market  developments  and  innovation.  It  increasingly  became 
outdated  and  flawed  as  it  relies  on  a  relatively  crude  method  of  assigning  risk  weights  to  assets, 
emphasized  mostly  balance  sheet  risks  relative  to  multiple  risks  facing  financial  firms  today. 
Furthermore, it offered a regulatory approach to capital determination and standard setting which did 
not capture fully the range of large and complex banking operations and the accompanying range of 
diverse set of economic risks. 
Addressing the perceived shortcomings and structural weaknesses of Basel I, the Basel II Accord – a 
landmark regulatory framework – offers a newer and comprehensive approach and methodology for 
financial sector regulatory capital calculation which recognizes well the advancements and innovations 
in  banks’  businesses,  policies  and  structures  and  the  accompanying  financial  engineering  and 
innovation. 
The relevance and significance of Basel II stems from its ability to recognize effectively the different 
types of risks facing industry and the new products as well as off balance sheet transactions. Some 
distinct characteristics of Basel II are noteworthy: 
• 
• 
• 
aligns capital of banks with their basic risk profiles, 
it is elaborate and far superior in terms of its coverage and details, 
it has the ability to exploit effectively new frontiers of risk management and gives impetus to 
the development of sound risk-management systems, which in turn are expected to promote 
efficiency and more prudent allocation of resources, 
It  is  perceived  to  be  the  harbinger  of  the  future  disposition  of  bank  supervision  and  the 
evolutionary path on which the banking industry would tread, and 
 Finally,  it  is  designed  to  promote  financial  stability  by  making  the  risk-management  systems  more 
robust  and  responsive  to  tackle  the  complexities  arising  out  of  a  host  of  new  risks.  Given  its 
complexities,  Basel  II  has  been  subject  of  intense  debate.  The  industry  has  been  gripped  with 
complexities of different dimensions of risk and capital calculation methods, data requirements, and 
costs related to upgrading IT systems and business processes. Meanwhile, regulators are forewarned 
to  facilitate  a  proper  and  sequenced  adoption  of  Basle  II,  while  ensuring  effective  alignment  of  risk 
weights  and  capital  requirements  in  line  with  Basel  II  Accord.  The  debate  has  brought  to  forefront 
some  issues  and  inconsistencies  which  unless  addressed  would  adversely  impact  the  incentive 
framework. The final draft of the Basel II incorporated several of industry concerns. 
The paper aims to highlight the importance and challenges of introduction of Basel II. Basel II in itself 
has the ability to meaningfully capture and suggest probable solutions for virtually all dimensions and 
segments of banking risks. Diversity of approaches and methodology has brought with it criticism and 
challenges  since  it  may  encourage  and  incentivize  some  intended  and  unintended  behaviors  and 
practices,  while  adding  to  the  cost  of  doing  business.  The  challenges,  however,  bring  new 
opportunities  for  global  banking  systems  to  adopt  more  robust  risk  management  approaches  which 
should serve industry well for capital leveraging and taking higher but still manageable risks. 
Basel II - superior and all-encompassing architecture 
It  is  widely  recognized  that  Basel  II  is  a  major  breakthrough  in  theoretical  and  practical  world  of 
banking  industry  and  a  dynamic  framework  which  will  be  able  to  adapt  to  ongoing  innovation  and 
change. Some of the main features (see annexure) of Basel II are noteworthy: 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
First, while the new Accord maintains the level of capital adequacy requirements at 8% (Tier 2 
capital is restricted to 100% of Tier 1 capital) consistent with Basel I, it has shifted emphasis 
from regulatory to economic capital framework, while giving recognition to new risk mitigation 
techniques (default protection etc.) and clarifying new trading book capital questions. Careful 
evaluation of these elements suggests that Basel II is not ideologically about raising as per se capital 
requirement but focuses on efficient and effective capital allocation. Appropriate and sharpened risk 
articulation and assessment and safeguards would result in reduced capital requirements. Conversely, 
ill-conceived  financial  structures  with  risky  counterparties  will  attract  punitive  capital  requirements. 
Basel II in some senses “serves as a more intelligent solvency capital redeployment.” 
Second, the new Accord has depth and breadth in its architecture and it blends and integrates 
well, with an element of mathematical rigor, all key prudential and supervision norms, however 
the rules based approach allows substantive national discretion which has its pros and cons. 
Basel  II  at  the  very  basic  level  consists  of  the  Standardized  Approach  (SA)  which  recognizes  and 
defines various asset buckets and assigns them risk weights in accordance with the type and nature of 
corporate  issue  and  other  transactions  and  delegating  its  qualitative  assessment  to  external  raters. 
The  matrix  of  risk  buckets  and  weights  is  considered  to  have  added  excessive  complexity  for  less 
sophisticated  banks.  The  linkage  and  delegation  of  quality  assessment  to  external  ratings,  while 
understandable,  lends  excessive  confidence  on  the  objectivity  and  soundness  of  rating  agencies 
which, in at least developing countries has only thus far rated a small proportion of corporates and 
issues. 
Notwithstanding, the Pillar 1 offers a choice to resort to either a Standardized Approach (SA) which 
has  pre-specified  weights  or  to  turn  to  Internal  Rating  Based  (IRB)  approach  which  involves  a 
foundation  and  advanced  IRB  option.  These  approaches  are  differentiated  on  the  basis  of  (i)  the 
available in-house risk assessment expertise, (ii) the size and product mix of the bank, and (iii) overall 
financial  sophistication.  There  is  considerable national  discretion  for regulators  to decide, within  the 
parameters  defined  under  Basel  II,  on  risk  weights  for  different  types  of  finances,  treatment  of 
collateral and risk mitigation, etc. 
The core pillar is bedecked by two other pillars; and all three pillars are interlinked and intertwined and 
mutually reinforce each other. Pillar 2 (Supervisory Review) underscores need for strengthening the 
financial institutions’ internal capital assessment processes to capture risks which remained uncovered 
under Pillar 1 and thus set aside capital in line with the banks’ risk profile and control environment. The 
supervisory review process validates the bank’s internal assessments by ensuring that the whole array 
of  risks  has  been  taken  care  of.  Pillar  3  (Market  Discipline)  complements  the  other  two  pillars  by 
requiring disclosures and transparency in financial reporting to promote market discipline. 
Third, the Accord encourages banks to recognize all types of risk and take appropriate steps to 
mitigate these risks, while providing for adequate capital. Besides the credit risk, the Accord for 
the  first  time  recognizes  the  operational  risk,  however,  the  degree  of  guidance  and  complexity  in 
measurement provided within the framework for these risks varies. The Credit Risk (the risk of default 
by the counterparty) is dealt with most comprehensively in the Basel II in line with legacy of the first 
Accord as well as the banks traditional edge and competence in credit risk assessments. 
The  inclusion  of  Operational  Risk,  a  fundamental  improvement  over  Basel  I,  captures  risks 
associated with bank’s internal control processes and systems and corporate governance policies and 
practices.  Operational  risk  calculation  explicitly  requires  capital  for  “the  risk  of  loss  resulting  from 
inadequate  or  failed  internal  processes,  people  and  systems  or  from  external  events”  risk.  This 
definition includes legal risk, but excludes strategic and reputational risk. Three approaches underlie 
measurement of capital against operational risk: 
(i) 
Basic Indicator Approach (BIA) – capital for operational risk should be equal to the average 
over the previous three years of a fixed percentage (denoted alpha=15%) of positive annual 
gross income, 
Standardized  Approach  capital  charge  for  each  business  line  is  calculated  by  multiplying 
gross  income  by  a  factor  (denoted  beta)  assigned  to  that  business  line.  Beta  (ranging 
between  12-18%)  serves  as  a  proxy  for  the  industry-wide  relationship  between  the 
operational risk loss experience for a given business line and the aggregate level of gross 
income for that business line; and 
(ii) 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
(iii) 
Advanced  Measurement  Approach  -  the  regulatory  capital  requirement  will  equal  the  risk 
measure  generated  by  the  bank’s  internal  operational  risk  measurement system  using  the 
quantitative and qualitative criteria for the AMA. 
Overall the approaches for operational risk assessment are not as nuanced as for credit risk, however 
the AMA approach does allow for more fine tuning. Once again the banks with better risk assessment 
would opt for the advance approaches. 
Market Discipline pillar underscores need for transparency and disclosure of data and technicalities. 
The evaluation of banks’ risks and its systems and capital adequacy by the market will help ensure 
integrity  and  validation  of  other  pillars.  For  this  pillar  to  work,  it  needs  to  be  supported  by  proper 
accounting  rules  and  more  elaborate  disclosure  of  bank’s  strategies  and  approaches  adopted,  risk 
profile  and  capital  strategy  through  economic  and  credit  cycle,  information  of  the  stress  tests,  and 
PD/LGD data. 
Fourth, within the pillars, the Accord offers a range of options and incentivizes banks to move 
from  vanilla  SA  which  assigns  high  risk  weights  and  capital  standards  to  adopting  IRB  and 
within it further having the option to choose either the Foundation versus Advanced IRB. These 
options  have  clear  trade  offs  but  most  importantly,  IRB  offers  greater  capital  relief  relative  to  SA. 
Nevertheless,  IRB  systems  will  only  be  feasible  if  they  are  supported  by  databases  and  history  on 
credit losses, rating models and risk management systems etc. and their soundness and integrity has 
been validated by supervisors. 
Banks operating in less developed countries, having limited in-house expertise, and small to medium 
size are in general opting for SA. The advantage of SA is its relative ease of implementation by even 
small and mid-sized banks. The main problem, however, is that it would usually result in much higher 
capital  requirements  as  compared  to  IRB.  There  is  much  less  fine  tuning  of  the  risk  weights,  and 
banks have to rely on external rating agencies. The banks adopting this approach would thus be at a 
disadvantage against their competitors. Jurisdictions that will stick to the SA for too long may find that 
their domestic banks are losing ground to the foreign banks operating globally who are more likely to 
adopt IRB. 
Fifth, the IRB approach is being preferred by large global banks, which already competitively 
price credit risk. The key parameters under IRB approach are PD (probability of Default), LGD (loss 
given default), M (Maturity) and EAD (Exposure At default). Under the FIRB, the banks calculate PD of 
their portfolio, while the other parameters i.e. LGD and EAD are prescribed by the regulator. Minimum 
PD  is  0.03%  for  banks  and  corporates;  no  floor  has  been  prescribed  for  sovereigns.  The  LGD  for 
senior exposure is 45% and the subordinated exposure attracts a lower recovery of 75%. These rates 
should  be  re-examined  by  the  regulators  taking  into  account  the ground realities  of  their respective 
jurisdictions.1
The Advanced IRB provides discretion to banks, and as such there is an incentive to move too quickly 
to AIRB without adequate preparation. The balancing act has to be performed by the regulator, on one 
hand it has to promote the efficiency of banking capital and pursue more fine tuned risk assessment, 
and on the other it has to ensure that banks have sufficient resources and expertise to undertake this 
complex task. The AIRB approach has very high sensitivity to the changes in LGD and M given 
the differences in PDs. In a paper by ING Bank2, it is shown that at higher LGD levels e.g. 75% there 
is a particularly strong impact on the risk weights of bonds of lower rated issuers. On a similar note the 
variations  in  maturity  M,  have  greater  impact  on  low  rated  borrowers  as  compared  to  high  rated 
borrowers.  It  implies  that  in  case  of  a  BBB-  rated  borrower,  the  risk  weights  will  be  highest  for 
subordinated loans (LGD 75%) having long maturity (e.g. 5 years). At the same time for short term 
secured  loans  (i.e.  with  low  LGD)  the  difference  in  risk  weights  will  not  vary  a  great  deal  with  the 
quality of borrowers. The use of AIRB would thus produce winners and losers in the banking sector. 
The low rated borrowers and users of long term funds would face much higher costs of funds, whereas 
public sector and other high quality borrowers would gain. Regulators have to ensure that instead 
of  marginalizing  the  low  rated  borrowers  any  further,  policies  are  in  place  to  enhance  the 
overall credit profile of the business sector in the country. 
                                                      
1  
2  
ING Bank. Estimating the Basel Effect, July 2006 
Ibid 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 3
The choice of the approach will also impact sovereign borrowers. Some countries like Hong Kong 
and  China  will  gain,  because  the  risk  weights  associated  with  their  sovereign  loans  will  be  lower, 
whereas Turkey and Indonesia will face higher risk weights. According to ING report, the risk weights 
of OECD and Non-OECD countries would vary depending on the approach applied by the banks. The 
table below will give some RW of selected countries: 
  
The Accord clearly discourages certain exposures as banks earn more pejorative capital treatment for 
equity style risks which were under-capitalized in Basel I. An ING study has observed that a number of 
European banking groups have unwound their industrial and non-strategic financial equity holdings as 
a part of preparation for Basel II. 
Given the objectives and scope of Basel II and its architecture, the Mckinsey study (2004) highlights 
that there is a “Business Case for Basel II”3 as the accord could impact profits and generate gains 
from reduced capital charges which of course need to be netted from funding costs. For some banks, 
given the risk sensitive nature of Basel II, the regulatory capital could be substantially reduced by up to 
50 percent in segments such as residential mortgages, which would translate in to savings on funding 
costs.  However,  such  savings  would  be  subject  to  conditions:  such  as  requirement  that  regulatory 
capital should be higher than economic capital4 and presence of regulations such as leverage ratios 
which may prevent banks from reducing their regulatory capital significantly. 
The McKinsey’s research identifies four important Basel II-related risk-management efficiencies which 
could together raise pretax earnings by 3 to 6 percent. These include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Reduced charge-offs through better default-prediction and collection processes  
Improved  pricing  discipline  on  loans  and  risk  selection  through  risk-based  pricing  to  and 
reduced risk from new business opportunities. 
                                                      
3   Kevin  S.  Buehler,  Vijay  D’Silva,  and  Gunnar  Pritsch,  “The  Business  Case  for  Basel  II.”  The  McKinsey  Quarterly  2004, 
Number 1 
4   The  amount  of  risk  capital,  assessed  on  a  realistic  basis,  which  a  bank  requires  to  cover  the  risks  that  it  is  running  or 
collecting. Typically this is calculated by determining the amount of capital that the firm needs to ensure that its realistic 
balance  sheet  stays  solvent,  over  a  certain  time  period,  with  a  pre-specified  probability.  Firms  and  financial  services 
regulators should then aim to hold risk capital of an amount equal at least to economic capital 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2007
Reduced operating expenses by streamlining loans and underwriting processes  
Reduced operational loss expenses through the use of proper mitigation techniques. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Substantial savings can also be achieved through freeing up of regulatory capital, depending on the 
risk characteristics of loan portfolio. For example, a bank carrying substantial mortgage loan portfolio 
would free up regulatory capital when it moves to Basel II. In case of operational risk, for big banks 
that must adhere to Basel II, moving to a proposed advanced measurement standard might generate 
savings  from  20  to  25  percent  of  the  capital  requirements  for  operational  risk  if  regulatory  capital 
exceeds economic capital. 
Realizing these savings, however, would require substantial investment. For large, diversified global 
banks, the cost of implementation is estimated at $100 million but can be as high as $250 million, and 
the process could well take up to three years. For diversified regional banks, the cost is estimated at 
$25 million to $50 million.5 It is important to remember that many banks would incur much of this cost 
even without Basel II, since they must upgrade their risk-management capabilities to keep pace with 
changing markets and remain competitive. 
Basel II implementation – opportunities and challenges 
Globally there is a deep interest in Basel II. World wide there is a strong commitment for it but the 
pace of implementation would vary from economy to economy and bank to bank. Presently, on one 
hand  there  are  differences  in  economy  and  institutions’  risk  management  processes,  state  of  tech 
know how, customers portfolio, and on the other hand, the state of development of rating agencies, 
external  auditors,  and  above  all,  regulators  varies  across  economies.  By  virtue  of  their  better 
infrastructure, resources, and size of operations, the large internationally active banks particularly in 
Australia,  Japan,  Singapore,  Hong  Kong  and  Korea  are  expected  to  adapt  to  the  new  regime  in 
relatively shorter span of time. Meanwhile, economies with less sophisticated, small and fragmented 
financial structure would be implementing Basel II gradually and remain confined to adoption of SA. 
Notwithstanding,  in  next  few  years,  Basel  II  will  drive  and  shape  the  bank’s  business  strategies, 
policies and structure, its risk measurement and capital calculation methods, its internal controls and 
processes, data requirements, and IT systems. Although the ultimate aim is to achieve the intended 
benefits  by  way  of  enhanced  risk  management  and  lower  capital  requirements,  the  actual  Basel  II 
implementation  is  turning  out  to  be  complex  and  challenging  involving  substantial  funds  outlay  for 
changes  in  IT,  internal  controls  and  processes  and  human  resources.  These  challenges  offer 
opportunities  to  the  banks  as  well,  to  strengthen  and  transform  themselves  to  better  compete  both 
within and outside domestic markets. 
Banking  industry  worldwide  today  faces  several  issues  and  challenges  which  unless  effectively 
addressed would impact the pace of adoption and implementation of Basel II. These include 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 
10) 
11) 
Good and Reliable Data and Information 
Development of sound risk-management system 
Asymmetry in supervision 
Imperfect Markets 
Pro-cyclicality 
Access to finance for disadvantaged 
Operational costs 
Cross-border challenges. 
Challenges for the corporate Sector 
Cost and volume of capital 
Relevance of Basel II assumptions in the Asian context 
                                                      
5   Kevin  S.  Buehler,  Vijay  D’Silva,  and  Gunnar  Pritsch,  “The  Business  Case  for  Basel  II.”  The  McKinsey  Quarterly  2004, 
Number 1 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 5
The Problem of Adverse Selection 
12) 
Good  and  reliable  data  and  information  is  critical  to  proper  risk  assessment.  In  absence  of  this, 
Asia’s banks by and large are initially adopting SA for measuring their credit risk. Under SA, the role of 
the External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) and external auditors magnifies but coverage and 
penetration of both is limited. In the absence of reliable ratings for different assets, banking industry 
will not be able to fully exploit the flexibility of Basel II and most credit risks will tend to end up in the 
unrated 100% category and as a result there will be little change in capital requirements relative to 
Basel  I.  Furthermore,  the  erratic  behavior  of  loss  data  due  to  frequent  volatility  of  economic  cycles 
would deter the proper assessment of risks under IRB and hence the actual capital allocated might not 
be truly reflective of economic capital. In view of these, national regulators are striving to encourage 
both further development of national rating and scoring mechanism and encouraging banks planning 
to  adopt  IRB  to  collate  reliable  and  longer  trail  of  data  on  its  basic  inputs.  The  application  of  more 
advanced  approaches  also  depends  on  business  continuity  planning  and  sophistication  of  the  IT 
resources among banks as well as regulators. 
Development of sound risk-management systems 
The foremost challenge facing the banks in implementation of Basel II is to develop well-functioning, 
efficient  and  integrated  risk-management  systems.  While  the  treatment  of  market  risk  remains  the 
same under Basel II, banks need to strengthen their risk-management systems to properly define and 
assess  credit  and  operational  risks  and  to  recognize  the  inherent  interdependence  of  such  risk.  To 
capture credit risk under IRB, banks will have to generate exposure data and calibrate it properly to 
differentiate between borrowers’ default risks – a complex task in developing countries given the level 
of industry expertise, lack of historical data and absence of adequate technology. Most challenging is 
estimation  of  operational  risks  since  most  banks  do  not  have  required  systems  and  technology  to 
calculate operational risk or determination of capital standards. By increasing the sophistication of the 
operational  risk  assessment  and  management  processes,  banks  can  save  on  capital  charge  for 
operational  risk.  To  strengthen  risk-management  systems,  banks  and  supervisors  invariably  require  
capacity building both in terms of human and technology resources to enable them to properly assess 
the  risk-profile  and  associated  capital  requirements.  Supervisors  and  banks  will  have  to  achieve 
synergies in their operations to meet the high demands of Pillar II. 
Asymmetry in supervision 
When  different  market  participants  are  regulated  by  separate  supervisors,  it  is  difficult  to  maintain 
comparable quality of policy formulation and vigilance. The asymmetry of regulatory regime can arise 
within  one  country  e.g.  between  banks  and  securities  firms,  as  well  as  on  cross-border  level.  The 
Basel Accord provides an opportunity for developing common standards; yet it requires a much closer 
cooperation, information sharing and coordination of policies. In many developing countries, only the 
banks are coming under the ambit of Basel II and not other financial services providers, thus creating 
some scope of regulatory arbitrage.6 The presence of a large number of internationally active banks in 
the region requires close cooperation among supervisors across the globe to resolve the home-host 
issues. It would become all the more important for the jurisdictions where the approaches for Basel II 
would differ. 
Imperfect markets 
The  functioning  of  risk  assessments  system  of  banks  is  affected  by  distortions  in  markets  namely 
dominance  of  large  players,  high  asymmetry  of  information,  and  lack  of  market  depth.  The  price 
manipulation by significant market players can distort the true market value of securities’ portfolio. To 
make any meaningful assessment of market risk and encourage market discipline, the imperfections 
have to be removed from the financial markets. The regulator should have the capability to assess the 
price risk, and identify situations in which market values of portfolios have been over/ under stated by 
the regulated institution through price manipulation. 
                                                      
6   Challenges and implications of Basel II for Asia by Y. V. Reddy 3 May 2006 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2007
Pro-cyclicality 
One of the initial criticisms on the Basel II Accord was related to pro-cyclicality. The new accord could 
generate more pronounced business cycles in an economy particularly in recessionary period when 
the borrower’s credit risk increases, as measured by IRB, and the banks will curtail lending, while in 
boom time they will expand lending. However, under the new accord the deterioration of a portfolio 
should  begin  to  be  reflected  in  the  bank’s  capital  adequacy  ratio  at  a  much  earlier  stage,  and  no 
further deterioration should occur in the capital adequacy ratio at the moment it is recognized as an 
accounting  loss.7  Pro-cyclicality  can  be  addressed  by  several  ways.  For  example  supervisors  have 
discretionary powers under Pillar 2 to demand additional capital during a business cycle expansion or 
banks can adjust the value of probability of default (PD) in IRB system based on the historical trend in 
business cycle. However, the adjusting of the IRB parameters has to be consistent and transparent. 
Access to finance for the disadvantaged 
Keeping in view that the new accord would require banks to hold higher capital allocation for assuming 
higher credit risk, there is a concern that small businesses and poor segments of the society would 
receive no or very costly credit. Even under the old framework, the problem of access to finance for 
low  income  segments  is  quite  significant  for  developing  countries.  Given  the  wider  prevalence  of 
poverty,  particularly  in  the  South  Asian  region,  the  governments’  efforts  to  combat  poverty  might 
receive serious blow and hence cannot be addressed in isolation. However policies should be made to 
bring more segments in the ambit of financial services, without seriously compromising the banks’ risk 
profile. 
Operational costs 
The installation of risk assessment systems would obviously carry massive initial costs. Some of these 
costs  would  be  explicit  e.g.  cost  of  IT  systems,  hiring  of  new  staff,  trainings  etc.  There  will  be, 
however, several implicit costs e.g. adjustments in historical processes, and frequent adjustments of 
the new systems in the beginning of the learning curve. Moreover, compliance failures can result in 
incurrence of legal costs. In order to contain the costs of implementations for the banking sector, the 
banks should aim to8 (i) devise simpler work flows to keep processes easy to understand, (ii) have 
frequent  proactive  interaction  with  the  regulator  to  ensure  that  compliance  systems  are  developed 
correctly  the  first  time,  (iii)  ensure  that  legal  department  works  closely  with  compliance  and  risk 
management, and (iv) create swift corrective procedures for any compliance failures. 
Cross-border challenges 
The challenges discussed above become more pronounced in a cross-border environment. One of the 
main benefits of Basel II is to provide a common language to banks and regulators to communicate 
about risks embedded in an entity or transaction globally. However the difference in readiness across 
countries would make this quite difficult to achieve. The differences in preparedness of banks would 
hinder  information  sharing  across  sectors  and  across  borders.  Moreover,  this  may  also  create 
restriction  in  credit  flow  from  banks  of  developed  countries  into  the  emerging  economies,  because 
these banks may be discouraged due to high capital allocation for such investment. The most basic 
step is to ensure that whatever is the stage of development vis-à-vis the Basel II implementation, at 
least  adequate  information  disclosure  rules  (Pillar  III)  are  in  place.  This  would  help  in  building  the 
confidence level of foreign donors and banks. 
Challenges for the corporate sector 
Since the risk-sensitivity is at the core of Basel II, the flow and cost of credit to firms is going to vary 
depending upon their respective risk-profile. Those with high risk and low credit worthiness are going 
to be loser whereas the other with low risk and high credit worthiness shall derive benefit, as banks 
would have to allocate their capital accordingly. 
                                                      
7   Basel II – towards a new common language; by Ryozo Himino, BIS Quarterly Review September 2004 
8   Basel II Banking Revolution for Asian Banks, by Li-May Chew 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 7
This impact can be deduced from the emerging, peculiar clientele structures for the banks adopting SA 
and those going for the IRB. The IRB bank would find little attraction in lending to low rated borrowers 
because they would have to incur a capital charge which would be higher than 8%, while SA banks 
might  be  indifferent  regarding  their  lending  to  such  borrowers  because  they  anyhow  would  have  to 
incur  the  capital  charge  of  8%.  By  the  same  token,  IRB  banks  will  be  forced  to  attract  high  rated 
borrowers  through  more  favorable  pricing  of  products  whereas  the  SA  bank  would  not  be  able  to 
compete with the IRB bank on price to capture those high rated customers. Consequently, high rated 
customers would tend to converge into IRB banks and the low rated customers with the SA banks. 
This not only holds serious connotation for small, local banks of the developing economies because of 
the higher risk of default and possible deterioration in their asset quality but also for the non-financial 
firms on low rated spectrum as they might witness serious constraints in their access to credit at fair 
terms. 
Cost and volume of capital 
Some  studies  have  pointed  out  that  Basel  II  would  impact  cross-border  capital  flows  to  developing 
countries,  particularly  reducing  access  and  raising  the  cost  of  commercial  loans  from  developed 
markets. This is largely because developing countries carry low sovereign ratings which attract higher 
capital charge. Yet another possible implication is that international banks might find reduced incentive 
to expand their operations into these countries, thus further exacerbating their problem of low capital. 
However, the situation might favor those countries of the region, which are enjoying superior sovereign 
ratings  by  virtue  of  their  economic  and  financial  strength.  Under  the  SA,  countries  like  China, 
Singapore, Taiwan, Malaysia, etc. are going to benefit, as they will attract less than an 8% charge9. 
Relevance of Basel II assumptions in the Asian context 
The risk weights/ implied correlations for different exposures under standardized or IRB approaches 
are based upon certain assumptions which may not be applicable in the Asian context. For example, 
35%  risk  weight  for  mortgage  lending  is  based  upon  PD  estimates  and  LGD  of  rather  developed 
European/US  markets  and  may  not  be  adequate  as  the  losses  in  secured  real  estate  lending  in 
countries  like  Japan,  Korea,  Taiwan,  Thailand  and  Indonesia  have  at  times  exceeded  35%.10 
Therefore it highlights the need for the supervisors in Asia to assess whether these assumptions are 
equally applicable to their jurisdictions as well or not. 
The problem of adverse selection 
Under IRB, high quality corporate lending attracts a lower capital charge, while low quality borrowers 
require a higher charge than the 8% charge under Basel I. Under IRB therefore banks would prefer 
high quality over low quality borrowers, while under SA banks will have relatively greater incentive to 
lend to lower quality borrowers, particularly those that are not externally rated, given that these will 
continue to attract an 8% capital charge irrespective of the underlying risk. The possibility that high risk 
borrowers  will  migrate  to  banks  following  SA  is  a  concern  for  Asia  given  the  risk  it  poses  for  less 
sophisticated banks. 
Conclusion 
Basel  II  is  recognized  to  have  “revolutionized”  the  risk  assessment,  management  and  mitigation 
systems  and  offered  financial  industry  innovative  and  sophisticated  approaches  to  weighing  these 
risks.  Concurrently,  Basel  II  has  catalyzed  new  supervisory  approaches  which  have  encouraged 
regulators  to  start  thinking  of  aligning  their  national  regulations  along  the  Basel  II  Accord.  Most 
countries  have  now  defined  a  road  map  and  timetable  for  adoption  of  Basel  II  by  industry  and  to 
position  themselves  to  conduct  the  required  due  diligence  for  supervision  of  more  advanced 
approaches to regulatory framework. However, the progress on Basel II implementation varies among 
the regions reflecting mainly differences in their financial and technological readiness. The speed of 
                                                      
9  
10   FitchRatings Special Report “Asian Banks and Basel II”, January 2005 
ING Bank. Estimating the Basel Effect, July 2006 
8 
 BIS Review 4/2007
adoption could be explained by a succinct analogy that one can travel a certain distance by taking the 
high-speed autobahn while in Europe, however, the same distance would require a lot more time in 
developing countries context given the quality of the roads. 
BIS Review 4/2007 
  9
