Stefan Ingves: Monetary policy, openness and financial markets 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Skandinaviska Enskilda 
Banken, Stockholm, 24 September 2007. 
 "Say  as  little  as  possible  and  say  it  cryptically".1  This  type  of  communication  strategy  is 
probably  quite  unthinkable  for  most  central  banks  today.  But  this  is  how  US  professor  of 
economics  Alan  Blinder  describes  central  bank  communications  not  so  long  ago.  And  I 
believe that this description is a pretty good one of how things actually worked, say 15 to 20 
years ago. I would also guess that those of you here this evening who either monitored or 
worked in the financial sector at that time would agree with me. 
But since the beginning of the 1990s the Riksbank as well as most other central banks has 
taken considerable steps towards greater openness and clarity – both with regard to what we 
are  trying  to  achieve  and  how  we  are  going  about  it.  Constantly  working  towards  more 
efficient communication has been high on the Riksbank’s priorities list ever since the inflation 
target was introduced. But the pace of this work has varied as conditions for monetary policy 
and  demands  on  the  central  bank  have  changed.  So  sometimes  we  have  had  fairly  long 
periods without any major changes in our methods of communication, sometimes we have 
made many changes in a fairly short period of time. 
Particularly over the past two years we have made a number of changes and this has led to 
some  debate.  This  often  happens  in  times  of  change,  particularly  if  it  requires  a  learning 
process – for all those involved – before everything falls into place. And this is also the case 
with  the  changes  in  the  Riksbank’s  communication.  It  is  therefore  quite  natural  that  some 
questions  have  arisen:  Why  has  the  Riksbank  made  these  changes?  Haven’t  you  made 
things unnecessarily complicated – tried to “fix something that isn’t broken”? Have you even 
gone too far in your openness? These are important questions that I shall try to answer here 
tonight. 
Giving the right information at the right time and in the right way is particularly important in 
times of unease. There has recently been unrest in the financial markets around the world. 
Sweden has not been affected by the market turbulence to the same extent as several other 
countries.  I  would  nevertheless  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  about  our 
views on what is happening right now and on the Riksbank's role in this context. But before I 
do so, I would first like to discuss the changes in our method of communication made over 
the past two years and the reasons behind them. 
What are the reasons behind the increased openness and clarity? 
Many consider that the Riksbank is currently one of the world’s most open central banks.2 
And we have taken further steps in this direction over the past two years in particular. But 
what are the reasons behind this development towards greater openness? I think there are 
two  reasons  –  democracy  and  efficiency.  The  first  concerns  our  role  as  an  independent 
authority. The second is linked to the fact that our communication with the financial markets 
and the general public is essential for monetary policy and the financial system to function 
efficiently. 
                                                 
1   Page 38 in Blinder, A. S., (2006), “Monetary Policy Today: Sixteen Questions and About Twelve Answers”. I 
Fernandez de Lis, S. and F. Restoy (ed.), Central Banks in the 21st Century, Banco de España. 
2   See,  for  instance,  Eijffinger,  S.  and  P.  Geerats,  (2006),  “How  Transparent  are  Central  Banks?”  European 
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 22, 1-21. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
Our independence requires openness 
The  Riksdag  and  ultimately  therefore  the  Swedish  people  have  given  the  Riksbank 
considerable independence. But this is a “freedom with responsibility” that goes hand in hand 
with  the  requirements  for  insight  and  accountability.  This  is  how  things  should  be  in  a 
democracy.  Openness  is  also  something  that  traditionally  imbues  the  Swedish  public 
administration system in general. One of the corner-stones is the principle of public access, 
which  means  that  the  authorities’  activities  should  as  far  as  possible  be  carried  out  in  an 
open way. And this also applies to the Riksbank, of course. 
But openness is not only a requirement in itself but also a necessary condition for monetary 
policy to work. It does not work unless the Riksbank and the objective of our activities are 
supported  and  legitimated  by  the  people.  And  this  requires  that  we  are  open  and  clear.  It 
should be easy to critically examine how monetary policy is conducted and how well we live 
up  to  our  principles.  Most  people  probably  agree  that  the  Riksbank’s  openness  has 
contributed to a good monetary policy debate in recent years. 
Openness and clarity contribute to monetary policy functioning better 
But it is not only democratic reasons that have led to the Riksbank and most other central 
banks becoming more open and clear. Another important reason is that we have quite simply 
regarded it as a means of more easily achieving our objective and of making monetary policy 
more efficient. There are three main aspects I would like to emphasise in this context: 
• 
Firstly,  it  will  be  easier  to  communicate  that  the  interest  rate  decisions  made  are 
really  aimed  at  achieving  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  provides  greater  credibility 
and helps to anchor expectations around the target. It was an important reason why 
the  Riksbank  began  to  publish  its  inflation  forecasts  and  other  material  on  which 
decisions are based early on in the new inflation-targeting system. I do not believe 
that it would have been possible to build up confidence in the price stability target as 
quickly as we did if we had not been as open as we were regarding our work and 
our decisions. 
Secondly, openness and clarity are currently an important part of monetary policy in 
itself. You could say they are one of the tools in our toolbox. So what do I mean by 
this?  There  is  a  relationship  between  interest  rates  with  different  durations.  And 
expectations  of  short-term  interest  rates,  which  the  central  bank  governs,  are 
important  to  the  long-term  interest  rates.  A  central  bank  can  therefore  ”indirectly” 
influence  interest  rates  with  longer  durations  by  influencing  expectations  of  short-
term interest rates. Greater influence over interest-setting throughout the economy – 
the yield curve – makes the impact of monetary policy more effective. This is often 
called  conducting  monetary  policy  with  the  aid  of  “management  of  expectations”. 
And the best way to do this is to provide good information. 
The  third  and  final  aspect  is  that  increased  openness  and  clarity  “outwards”  can 
contribute  to  our  working  more  efficiently  within  the  Riksbank.  This  is  a  quite 
important argument. The more open we are, the easier it is for others to evaluate 
how  well  our  monetary  policy  functions.  This  gives  us  an  extra  incentive  to  do  a 
good job. 
  What has the process towards openness and clarity resulted in? 
The path towards becoming more open and clear has not always been easy, it has at times 
caused some debate. Two issues in particular have been the subject of lively discussion over 
the past year. The first is that we now publish our own forecasts for the interest rate path. 
The  second  concerns  how  representatives  of  the  Riksbank  send  signals  regarding  the 
interest rate in speeches and press releases. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
Interest rate path a natural step towards openness 
In February 2007 we presented for the first time our own forecast for the development of the 
repo rate. Prior to this only the central banks in Norway and New Zealand published their 
own interest rate paths. But this group has now grown, with the addition of the Riksbank and 
in March this year also the Icelandic central bank. 
At  the  beginning  of  this  month  we  also  decided  to  publish  our  forecast  for  the path  of  the 
policy rate – and a number of other important variables – in connection with each monetary 
policy meeting. This means that we will publish our interest rate forecast six times a year, 
instead of three as before. 
By publishing our own forecast for the interest rate we have become more open and clear 
with regard to our view of future monetary policy. Along the way we have used three different 
assumptions for the policy rate – that it will remain unchanged, that it will develop according 
to  market  expectations,  and,  accordingly,  that  it  will  develop  in  the  way  we  ourselves  find 
most likely. 
Reasons why we want to present our own interest rate path 
Making  its  own  forecast  for  the  policy  rate  provides  the  central  bank  with  a  better  tool  for 
influencing expectations among households, companies and agents in the financial markets. 
In  the  cases  where  our  view  differs  from  the  market  view,  we  no  longer  need  to  take  the 
rather circumstantial route via qualitative assessments of market pricing. 
Additionally, it becomes easier for us to show not only what we are thinking but also how we 
are  thinking  –  it  will  be  simpler  to  communicate  how  we  view  the  driving  forces  behind 
economic  developments  and  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve.  If  we  succeed  in 
communicating  our  view  of  how  we  think,  then  it  will  be  easier  for  others  to  make  good 
assessments  on  a  continuous  basis  of  how  new  information  should  affect  the  future 
development of the interest rate. This should reduce the fluctuations in the interest rate that 
are due to speculations regarding the Riksbank’s intentions. 
One aspect that may not have been given so much attention is that it has become simpler for 
households  planning  their  private  economy  to  form  an  impression  of  what  the  Executive 
Board considers to be a suitable development for the interest rate in the future. Previously, 
many  probably  had  to  refer  to  the  interpretations  made  by  financial  advisers.  But  now  the 
information is available in our Monetary Policy Report. Although the forecast for the interest 
rate  will  of  course  be  regularly  revised,  it  should  reduce  the  uncertainty  over  how  we 
ourselves view future developments. I believe this will be positive for everyone. 
The objections are not convincing 
But of course there are also some potential problems when a central bank presents its own 
forecast  of  the  interest  rate  path.  One  is  that  the  decisions  in  many  central  banks  are 
currently  made  by  a  group  of  persons.  How  can  a  group  of  decision-makers  agree  on  a 
forecast for the policy rate? The Riksbank’s experiences so far show that this need not be a 
problem. Nor does the Norwegian central bank, where decisions are made by an Executive 
Board consisting of seven persons, appear to have any major difficulties in agreeing on an 
interest rate forecast. 
Other  arguments  have  also  been  raised  against  an  own  interest  rate  path.  One  such 
argument  is  that  it  could  impair  our  credibility  and  instead  make  it  more  difficult  for  us  to 
communicate  with  the  general  public  and  the  financial  markets.  Let  us  assume  that  the 
Riksbank  first  publishes  a  particular  interest  rate  path.  Would  our  credibility  be  impaired  if 
new information leads to our making another decision regarding the policy rate than we have 
previously announced? 
I don’t think so. I believe that there is a broad understanding among households, companies 
and market agents that we need to adapt monetary policy and reconsider how we should set 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
the repo rate in future when new information changes the economic picture. We have been 
clear about the fact that a forecast is by definition uncertain and that it becomes more so the 
further ahead it stretches. And the interest rate path presented in the Monetary Policy Report 
is indeed a forecast. It is not a promise! 
The  fact  that  we  do  not  have  perfect  knowledge  of  the  future  is  no  reason  to  refrain  from 
being as open and clear as possible with regard to what we believe will happen. We must 
form an opinion of how the policy rate should develop in the future regardless of whether we 
publish it or not. If it turns out that we have made an incorrect assessment in our forecast, it 
would not have been less incorrect just because we had refrained from telling anyone about 
it.  It  is  hardly  reasonable  that  we  should  try  to  gain  greater  credibility  by  hiding  things  or 
sending unclear signals about one of the most important variables in our analysis. I believe it 
is  better  that  we  are  open  about  what  our  decisions  are  based  on,  now  that  the  inflation 
target is so well-established that we are able to be open. 
Another objection to central banks publishing their own interest rate forecasts is connected to 
the functioning of the market. This means that in principle the financial market agents could 
stop  looking  for  other  information  if  they  have  access  to  the  central  bank’s  forecasts  for 
interest  rates  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  How  the  market  views  economic  prospects  is 
normally reflected in the long-term market rates. This source of information could thus be lost 
and this would impair the functioning of the market. 
But  as  I  perceive  it,  there  have  not  been  any  such  signs  so  far.  In  addition,  I  find  it  very 
difficult  to  imagine  that  the  market  agents  would  stop  making  independent  assessments 
because we are publishing our own view of interest rate developments. They if anyone know 
that the interest rate path is a forecast and they therefore have strong reasons for continuing 
to search for information via other channels than the Riksbank. So far it has been clear that 
we  and  other  market  agents  have  actually  had  slightly  different  views  regarding  how  the 
interest  rate  will  develop  in  the  future.  And  this  is  actually  a  sign  that  things  are  as  they 
should be. It is quite natural that forecasters make different judgements, particularly in the 
slightly longer term. In the long term, there are also more factors than expected monetary 
policy that have significance for interest rates. 
We have so far only presented two forecasts for the policy rate, and as I mentioned earlier, 
there is a fairly large measure of ”learning by doing” for all those involved before everything 
falls into place. Everything does not always work perfectly from the start. But as I said, the 
purpose  is  that  our  communication  will  become  clear  and  more  efficient.  And  I  am  fairly 
convinced that we will get there, once the new system has been established. 
Clarity in the way we express ourselves in speeches and press releases 
The Riksbank has also changed its method of signalling monetary policy in speeches and 
press releases. In a broad sense, signalling means that we communicate in some way what 
we  are  intending  to  do  with  the  repo  rate.  A  narrower  –  and  perhaps  more  common  – 
interpretation  of  signalling  is  that  it  is  when  representatives  of  the  Riksbank  describe  in 
speeches and press releases how they consider the interest rate should be set at the next 
meeting, and perhaps slightly further ahead. 
Previously, the Riksbank signalled ”by degrees”. Between the monetary policy meetings the 
individual Executive Board members held speeches on the theme of "the current situation” or 
something similar. There we indicated, more or less explicitly, how we thought the interest 
rate should be set. When it was time for the monetary policy meeting, sufficient information 
was assumed to have been released “by degrees” with regard to how the Executive Board as 
a whole were reasoning so that the economic agents would not be surprised by the interest 
rate decision taken at the meeting. 
But with the broader definition of signalling – when we in some way communicate what we 
are  intending  to  do  with  the  repo  rate  –  the  publication  of  our  own  repo  rate  forecast  of 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
course also becomes part of the signalling. At intervals of two months, the general public and 
the financial markets now receive a detailed description of how a majority of the Executive 
Board consider that the interest rate should be set in the future. It is thus evident that the 
need  for  “signalling  by  degrees”  in  speeches  between  the  monetary  policy  meetings  has 
declined significantly. It was also the most important reason why we earlier this year decided 
that there would not normally be reason to indicate in speeches and press releases how the 
repo rate would be set at the next meeting. 
But there were also some problems with the earlier signalling that lay behind the decision. In 
certain  situations  it  was  probably  difficult  to  determine  whether  the  signal  being  sent  in  a 
speech should be interpreted as an individual member’s opinion or whether it reflected the 
views  of  a  majority  on  the  Executive  Board.  If  the  individual  members  sent  out  different 
signals it was probably also difficult to distinguish a clear message from this "cacophony of 
voices", to quote Professor Blinder again. This type of problem seems rather unnecessary. A 
central  bank  should  be  able  to  be  so  clear  with  regard  to  its  view  of  the  future  that  there 
should be no need for loosely-grounded speculations and interpretations – it should not be 
necessary to be a Kremlinologist to interpret the Riksbank. We hope that we have solved this 
problem with our new way of working. 
A  further  weakness  of  the  earlier  signalling  process  concerned  the  responsibility  the 
Riksbank  has  in  its  role  as  independent  authority.  It  is  a  question  of  democracy.  This 
responsibility includes, for instance, the fact that the general public must have good insight 
into the decision-making process – the decisions at the monetary policy meetings must be 
made in a correct manner. This is why minutes are taken at the monetary policy meetings 
and  then  published,  and  the  chairman  and  deputy  chairman  of  the  General  Council  of  the 
Riksbank have the right to attend the Executive Board meeting. There must be no doubt that 
the  interest  rate  decisions  are  actually  made  at  the  monetary  policy  meetings  and  not  at 
some other point in time – in some informal way that prevents insight. If the signalling prior to 
the  meetings  leads  people  to  believe  that  the  interest  rate  decisions  have  been  made  in 
advance of the meetings, then doubts may arise. 
A concluding reflection on the Riksbank’s communication 
Let me, before I go on to discuss the recent developments in the financial markets, conclude 
my discussion of the Riksbank’s communication with a reflection. 
The  fundamental  purpose  of  the  changes  we  have  made  in  our  communication  is  that  we 
shall become even more open and clear with regard to what we do and how we think. But at 
the same time the changes – particularly our own interest rate path – mean that we have 
stuck our necks out and opened ourselves up to criticism in a different way than before. We 
no longer describe our policy in the form of a simple – albeit perhaps slightly misleading – 
policy rule, but show a more composite picture; the way it looks to us when we make our 
decisions. 
The  publication  of  our  own  interest  rate  path  also  means  that  it  has  become  clearer  than 
before  when  we  reconsider  our  views  of  what  policy  will  be  appropriate  in  the  future  and 
when our views differ from those of the market. It is therefore perhaps not so surprising that 
some debate has arisen. 
But to refrain from making changes that we consider to be necessary because we run the 
risk  of  being  criticised  is  not  a  good  strategy.  I  am  convinced  that  the  best  method  of 
conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  long  term  is  to  describe  as  openly  and  honestly  as 
possible  how  we  are  acting  and  reasoning.  This  is  definitely  something  the  general  public 
can require of us in our role as an independent authority. 
So, to refer back to the questions I asked at the beginning. No, I do not think we have made 
things  unnecessarily  complicated  or  tried  to  fix things  that are  not  broken.  We  have  made 
changes we consider to be necessary both to improve the base for making monetary policy 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 5
decisions and to provide as true and honest a picture of how monetary policy is conducted as 
possible. 
What has happened on the financial markets? 
In  principle,  communication  is  always  important  to  a  central  bank  and  is  a  corner-stone  in 
most parts of our activities. When the world around us is marked by uncertainty and unrest, 
the  question  of  communication  becomes  even  more  important.  There  has  recently  been 
considerable  unrest  in  the  financial  markets.  But  the  Riksbank  has  nevertheless  seen  no 
need to specifically go out in public and comment on these developments. Sweden has not 
been affected to the same extent as many other countries and the Swedish interbank market 
and the financial system have functioned comparatively well. But let me nevertheless say a 
few words about what has happened and about the role the Riksbank plays in this context. 
General uncertainty has increased the need for liquidity abroad… 
Over the summer we saw signs of problems in the US housing market. The unrest increased 
when it was revealed at the beginning of August that several financial institutions had made 
significant losses in connection with the US sub-prime market. The background to this was 
that  the  number  of  households  experiencing  difficulties  in  paying  their  mortgages  had 
gradually increased. It was also difficult to assess to what extent the different market agents 
were exposed to the assets concerned – in which balance sheets the credit risks had ended 
up.  This  was  the  starting  point  for  a  more  general  reassessment  of  risk  in  the  financial 
markets. 
To make a long story short, one can say that the general uncertainty led to an increasing 
demand for safe assets such as treasuries. Government bond rates have fallen, while rates 
on some other investments have been pushed up. This is probably because risk premiums 
have increased, after being very low for a long period of time. For instance, interest rates on 
loans and deposits between banks, interbank rates, have risen in many countries. 
For instance, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Federal Reserve have seen a need 
to supply extra liquidity to slow down the rise in interbank rates. In the United Kingdom, the 
Bank  of  England  has  chosen  to  use  its  position  as  lender  of  last  resort  and  to  grant 
emergency liquidity assistance to a mortgage institution, Northern Rock. Emergency liquidity 
assistance  is  only  given  if  the  institution  in  question  is  assessed  to  be  solvent  but  lacking 
sufficient liquid funds. 
…and here at home 
Sweden has also been affected by the turbulence in the financial markets, albeit to a much 
lesser extent than, for instance, the United Kingdom, Germany and the United States. The 
fact that Sweden has been affected despite not being, as it were, involved in the problems 
that started the unrest is not so remarkable. We are a part of the global financial system and 
not an isolated northern outpost. 
The Riksbank governs the short-term rate that applies for one day, the so-called overnight 
rate, and this has remained stable around the repo rate. In brief, the Riksbank’s method of 
steering interest rates has worked well. But the interbank rates with slightly longer durations 
have risen, although not as much as in some parts of the world. This is primarily a question 
of different effects from the uncertainty in the financial markets, such as rising risk premiums. 
On  the  whole,  the  Swedish  financial  system  and  the  interbank  market  have  nevertheless 
functioned well. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2007
What is the role of the Riksbank? 
What does the Riksbank do when there is unrest in the money market? 
One  of  the  most  important  tasks  is  to  continue  to  ensure  that  the  economy  develops  in  a 
stable manner. We have to conduct our monetary policy so that we attain the inflation target 
of  2  per  cent.  Where  possible,  when  the  price  stability  objective  allows  scope  for  this,  we 
should  also  ensure  that  production  and  employment  develop  in  a  balanced  manner.  This 
involves  closely  monitoring  developments  and  following  how  the  forecasts  for  growth  and 
inflation develop. At our most recent monetary policy meeting we made the assessment that 
the financial unrest could slow down growth and inflation somewhat in the future and that the 
uncertainty had increased. At the same time, economic growth is strong both in Sweden and 
abroad.  To  attain  the  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent  and  ensure  a  good  development  in  the 
economy in the future, we decided to raise the repo rate. We also made the assessment that 
the interest rate would need to be increased further in around the same way as outlined in 
June. But the continuing developments in the financial markets are one factor among many 
that we will take into consideration in our decisions. 
If monetary policy is to function, interest rate-setting must also function. As I mentioned, we 
can only steer the shortest interest rate in the market. We do this by setting the repo rate and 
by daily adjusting the liquidity in the bank system at an interest rate that is very close to the 
repo rate. The banks can also receive as much liquidity as they need during the day against 
collateral. In addition, they can also deposit or borrow against collateral overnight with the 
Riksbank at the deposit or lending rate respectively. 
If we were to see serious and lasting problems, we have the possibility to take action. How 
we  act  depends  on  what  has  happened  and  on  the  situation  at  the  time.  And  if  we  take 
action, we will clearly describe what we are doing and why. 
The  Riksbank  has  close  contacts  with  the  Swedish  banks  and  with  other  financial  market 
agents. Although we do not see any indications of extensive liquidity problems at present, we 
will continue, as always, to closely follow developments in the financial markets. 
This is where our responsibility for financial stability also comes in. We have to ensure that 
the  payment  system  functions  in  a  safe  and  efficient  manner.  Part  of  this  work  involves 
regularly analysing developments in the financial market and the financial system’s capacity 
to withstand any shocks that might arise. We present our analyses regularly; most recently in 
May  this  year.  We  are  also  involved  in  shaping  the  regulatory  framework  to  ensure  it  is 
designed to achieve a stable system. In all of our work regarding financial stability we work in 
close cooperation with other Swedish and international authorities. 
If the situation were to go so far that more serious liquidity problems nevertheless arose, we 
have detailed plans for how we can deal with them. If the worst came to the worst, we have 
the possibility to grant emergency liquidity assistance to the financial institutions under the 
supervision  of  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority).  But  we 
only do so if the institution in question is solvent. Loans are then granted at an interest rate 
that is higher than the lending rates in our steering interest rate system and only if we see 
that the Swedish financial system is threatened. Swedish banks must not take this possibility 
for granted and thus take unnecessary risks. 
Here there is a link to our ambition to be open and clear. An open attitude sets limits and 
shows the game rules. We have clearly described how we view our role as “lender of last 
resort”, for instance, in our Financial Stability Report.3 By being open about how we manage 
emergency liquidity assistance we reduce the risk that a situation may unnecessarily arise 
                                                 
3   Financial Stability Report 2003:2 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 7
where we are forced to provide assistance. It also reduces the risk that we will be forced to 
provide support when this is not appropriate. 
Giving the right information at the right time and in the right way is important. It is particularly 
important  in  times  when  uncertainty  is  increasing.  I  hope  that  I  have  managed  to 
communicate today not only the principles that have guided us with regard to our external 
communication in recent years, but also our picture of the recent situation. I also hope that I 
have succeeded in communicating that our ambition is to clearly report what we do and why. 
Thank you! 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2007
