R Basant Roi: Bank of Mauritius’ new headquarters 
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  inauguration  of  the  New 
Headquarters Building of the Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 18 December 2006. 
 Dr. The Hon. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius 
Honourable Ramakrishna Sithanen, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and Economic 
Development 
His Lordship Mayor of Port Louis 
Hon. Judges 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Fellow Bankers 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Afternoon 
I am pleased to welcome you all to the inauguration of the New Headquarters Building of the Bank of 
Mauritius.  I  am  privileged  and  honoured  to  perform  this  inaugural  ceremony  in  your  distinguished 
presence, Prime Minister, Sir – a ceremony that is similar to the one performed by the first Governor of 
the Bank, Mr. Aunauth Beejadhur, for the existing building in the presence of His Excellency, Sir John 
Shaw  Rennie,  Governor  of  Mauritius  and  late  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam,  then  Premier  and 
Minister of Finance on 31st May 1967. 
One of the major constraints in the operation of the Bank when it was established way back in 1967 
was  insufficient  office  space.  The  offices  of  the  Bank  were  located  at  various  places  in  Port  Louis. 
Security vault for notes and coins was located at the back of the Treasury building, Exchange Control 
at the entrance of the present Government Centre and Main Office at the Anglo Mauritius Building. In 
August 1968, a banking office was opened at the Treasury Building to accommodate the increasing 
volume of banking business. 
The existing Bank of Mauritius building at the corner of Sir William Newton St and Royal Road was 
designed  by  Messrs  Victor  Heal  and  Partners  of  London.  Construction,  which  began  in  1969,  was 
completed in 1972. The building was designed for about 150 employees. The vault was designed to 
store a limited amount of notes and coins. In about ten years the Bank started facing a severe space 
constraint once again. 
One of the former Governors of the Bank, Sir Indur Ramphul, initiated the building project of the Bank 
in the 1980s. The land for the project was acquired in the 1980s. The Senior Building Advisers from 
the Bank of England recommended that the acquired piece of land was too small for the construction 
of a Central Bank building. My immediate predecessor initiated the building project in 1996. In the year 
1999  the  new  management  of  the  Bank  reviewed  the  entire  building  project  with  a  view  to  cutting 
down costs and to making more space available. 
The Cost Controller of this building project is Widnell Ong Seng Goburdhun; Architect, Lampotang & 
Loebl Schlossman Hackl (Chicago); Structural Engineer, Servansing Jadav/Thales; Building Services 
Engineer,  WSP  (Mauritius);  Interior  Designer;  Lampotang  &  Siew/Loebl  Schlossman  &  Hackl.  The 
Main Contractor is General Construction/Group Five of U.K. 
Construction  started  in  the  year  2000.  This  building  comprises  a  lower  basement  for  mechanical 
equipment, a basement for the vault and a basement for mezzanine linking to the existing vault. There 
is a podium consisting of ground, mezzanine, first floor car park, second floor car park and banking 
hall, third floor currency department. The third floor provides access to the garden. Above the podium, 
the tower comprises 12 floors and two plant room floors. 
The height of the building is 98 metres above ground level. The floor area is 16,834 square metres 
based  on  future  staff  of  445.  The  building  is  designed  to  last  100  years.  The  lower  basement  is  6 
metres below ground level with foundation on 36 large diameter piles that go 14 metres deep down 
into blue basalt. Volume of concrete used has amounted to 11,000 cubic meters and 1,300 tons of 
reinforcement.  In  fact  the  volume  of  concrete  used  in  the  construction  of  this  building  is  twice  the 
amount ordinarily used. 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
A  particular  feature  of  the  building  is  the  wide  range  of  special  security  provisions,  which  I  am 
prohibited from disclosing in details. Suffice it to say that once you get inside the building your picture 
is taken without your knowledge. Your body weight is automatically recorded at both, entry and exit 
points. Sensitive areas of the building are resistant to explosives, guns and thermic lances. Mantraps 
and proximity card access form part of the security system. Cameras shower the ins and outs of the 
building. Movements of individuals and objects are monitored closely at a Control Room. 
In the initial stage we were given to understand by the Mauritius Port Authority that the Bank’s tower 
would  have  fallen  within  the  four  degrees  sight  band  that  is  generally  kept  free  from  any  visual 
interference. To free air space for the construction of the building to proceed, a new navigation sector 
light system was installed for the Mauritius Port Authority. The Bank spent a total amount of about Rs8 
million  on  a  state-of-the-art  navigational  light  system.  It  was  donated  to  the  Port  Authority.  The  air 
space  is  now  free  and  anybody  planning  to  erect  a  high-rise  building  in  the  formerly  restricted  four 
degrees sight band should have no problem to obtain permit from the Port Authority. 
Wind tunnel tests were carried out in France to test the building against wind forces with a speed of 
275 km/hr. This required that the stone cladding and the curtain wall with glass, aluminium members 
and fixings thereto constructed in stainless brackets resist pressure and suction forces in the order of 
2/3 of ton per square metre. This means moving weight of 8 average bodied persons standing on an 
area of 1m x 1m. 
Total cost of the building, inclusive of fit outs and furniture, is expected to reach Rs1,890,700,000 of 
which Rs234 million went to the Exchequer in the form of VAT. At constant 1980 prices, the year when 
one of the first high rise buildings appeared in the Port Louis skyline, the cost of this building excluding 
VAT works out to Rs395 million. At constant 1994 prices, the year when yet another high rise building 
appeared  in  the  Port  Louis  skyline,  the  cost  of  this  building  excluding  VAT  works  out  to  just  over 
Rs1,010 million. This building, taking into consideration that it is an intelligent building, is indeed the 
least expensive high rise building in Port Louis. 
Before concluding, let me, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius and on my own 
behalf, thank the Mauritius Commercial Bank Ltd. for having allowed us to use the MCB building for 
the installation of the sector navigational lights. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
