European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Mr Lucas 
Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  Mr  John  Hurley,  Governor  of  the 
Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of Ireland, Dublin, 10 May 2007. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  press 
conference here in Dublin. I would like to thank Governor Hurley for his kind hospitality and to express 
our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of the meeting of the Governing Council. 
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  our  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by  Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to  increase  interest  rates  in 
March.  Strong  vigilance  is  of  the  essence  in  order  to  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  do not  materialise.  In  turn,  this will contribute  to  ensuring  that  medium  to  longer-term 
inflation expectations in the euro area remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. 
Such  anchoring  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards 
supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  Given  the  favourable 
economic environment, our monetary policy continues to be on the accommodative side, with the key 
ECB interest rates moderate, money and credit growth vigorous, and liquidity in the euro area ample 
by all plausible measures. Therefore, looking ahead, acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price 
stability in the medium term is warranted.  
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  the  latest  indicators  and  survey  data  confirm  that  the 
expansion  of  economic  activity  continued  in  the  first  quarter  of  2007  and  remains  solid  and  broad-
based. Looking ahead, the medium-term outlook for economic growth in the euro area continues to be 
favourable. Conditions are in place for the ongoing expansion to proceed at sustained rates. Global 
economic  growth  has  become  more  balanced  across  regions  and,  while  moderating  somewhat  in 
recent  quarters,  remains  strong.  External  conditions  thus  continue  to  provide  support  for  euro  area 
exports. Domestic demand in the euro area is also expected to maintain its momentum. Investment 
should  remain  dynamic,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of  favourable  financing  conditions, 
balance sheet restructuring, strong corporate earnings and gains in business efficiency. Consumption 
should  also  strengthen  further  over  time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income, 
increasingly supported by employment growth and improving labour market conditions. 
The  risks  surrounding  this  favourable  outlook  for  economic  growth  are  broadly  balanced  over  the 
shorter term. At longer horizons, the balance of risks remains on the downside, stemming mainly from 
external factors. Such factors include fears of a rise in protectionist pressures, the possibility of further 
increases in oil prices and concerns about possible disorderly developments due to global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
1.8% in April 2007, after 1.9% in March. Looking at the coming months, barring further increases in oil 
prices, significant base effects deriving from last year’s energy price volatility will strongly influence the 
profile  of  annual  inflation  rates.  On  the  basis  of  the  current  level  of  oil  prices  and  oil  price  futures, 
annual inflation rates are likely to fall somewhat in the months to come, before rising again towards the 
end of the year to hover at levels around 2%.  
Over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon, the outlook for price developments remains subject to 
upside risks. These relate notably to the increasing capacity utilisation in the euro area economy, the 
possibility of further oil price rises and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes 
beyond those announced and decided thus far. More fundamentally, stronger than currently expected 
wage  developments  could  pose  significant  upward  risks  to  price  stability,  not  least  in  view  of  the 
favourable momentum in labour markets observed over the past few quarters. The Governing Council 
is monitoring wage negotiations in the euro area countries with particular attention. It is crucial that the 
social partners meet their responsibilities so as to continue to avoid wage developments that would 
eventually lead to inflationary pressures and harm the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. In 
this context, it is also important to point out that wage agreements should be sufficiently differentiated 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 1
and take into account price competitiveness positions, the still high level of unemployment in many 
economies and productivity developments across sectors.  
The  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  medium  to  longer 
horizons. The underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong, in a context of already ample 
liquidity. The ongoing strength of monetary expansion is reflected in the increasingly rapid growth of 
M3, which in March reached an annual rate of 10.9%, as well as in the ongoing high levels of credit 
growth. Monetary and credit expansion is due partly to the moderate level of interest rates and solid 
economic growth.  
Short-term  monetary  and  credit  developments  can  be  affected,  inter  alia,  by  the  shape  of  the  yield 
curve and external factors, and be subject to some degree of volatility. Looking through such transitory 
aspects, there are, however, several indications that higher short-term interest rates are influencing 
monetary  dynamics,  although  they  have  not,  as  yet,  significantly  dampened  the  overall  strength  of 
these dynamics. For example, increases in short-term rates have served to moderate the expansion of 
the narrow aggregate, M1, in recent quarters, but its annual growth is still robust. Equally, the annual 
growth rate of loans to the private sector has shown some signs of stabilising since mid-2006, albeit at 
double-digit levels.  
All in all, taking into account both short-term factors and the underlying trend of the continued vigorous 
expansion of money and credit, there are clear indications of upside risks to price stability at medium 
to  longer-term  horizons.  In  fact,  following  several  years  of  robust  monetary  growth,  the  liquidity 
situation  in  the  euro  area  is  ample  by  all  plausible  measures.  In  this  environment,  monetary 
developments  continue  to  require  very  careful  monitoring,  particularly  against  the  background  of  a 
solid expansion in economic activity and still strong property market developments. 
To sum up, in assessing price trends it is important to look beyond any short-term volatility in inflation 
rates. The relevant horizon for monetary policy is the medium term. Risks to the medium-term outlook 
for price stability remain on the upside, relating in particular to stronger than currently expected wage 
developments in a context of ongoing robust growth in employment and economic activity. Given the 
vigorous monetary and credit growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of 
the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Accordingly,  the  Governing 
Council  will  continue  to  be  strongly  vigilant  in  order  to  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  do  not  materialise.  This  will  support  the  solid  anchoring  of  medium  to  longer-term 
inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  Therefore,  looking 
ahead,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  remains 
warranted.  
In  relation  to  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  recent  commitment  by  the  euro 
area  finance  ministers  –  at  the  Eurogroup  meeting  in  Berlin  on  20  April  –  to  make  full  use  of  the 
current economic growth and better than expected tax revenues to pursue sound fiscal policies and to 
avoid procyclical policies in line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. In the view of the 
Governing  Council,  this  requires  a  rigorous  implementation  of  2007  budgets,  the  avoidance  of 
expenditure  overruns  and  the  full  allocation  of  unexpected  extra  revenues  to  deficit  and  debt 
reduction.  For  2008,  countries  with  remaining  fiscal  imbalances  are  expected  to  pursue  more 
ambitious than planned budgetary targets . As a result, all euro area countries should achieve their 
medium-term objective of sound budgetary positions as soon as possible and by 2010 at the latest. 
Moreover, all countries should avoid fiscal policies that feed macroeconomic imbalances. This would 
allow euro area countries to prepare themselves for less favourable economic conditions. 
As  repeatedly  stressed,  the  Governing  Council  fully  supports  structural  reforms  that  enhance 
competition, increase productivity and foster economic flexibility, thus promoting the potential for real 
GDP growth and employment. Increased productivity also allows for increases in real wages without 
negatively  impacting  on  employment,  thereby  supporting  the  income  growth  of  the  euro  area  work 
force.  In  recent  years,  average  wage  increases  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  have  been  rather 
moderate, making a vital contribution to job creation and lower unemployment. It is important that this 
favourable trend in labour markets continues, so contributing to a prolonged and robust upswing. In 
this respect, sufficient wage differentiation is required so as to improve employment opportunities for 
less skilled workers and in sectors and regions with high unemployment. Furthermore, the removal of 
impediments  to  labour  mobility  would  help  to  address  local  imbalances  in  labour  markets  and  to 
enhance the adjustment flexibility of euro area economies to economic shocks. The euro area could 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2007
reap  major  benefits  from  these  policies  in  terms  of  economic  dynamism,  more  job  creation,  lower 
unemployment and increased per capita income.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 3
