Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Fighting financial crime 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the CBB-French Embassy Training Seminar on AML/CFT, Manama, 28 March 2007. 
 Madame Ambassador, Ladies & Gentlemen, Good morning: 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here this morning, to what promises to be an instructive 
and important training event. 
Let me start by thanking personally Her Excellency the French Ambassador, Madame Malika Berak, 
for  her  presence  here  today  and  her  embassy's  assistance  in  facilitating  this  event.  We  very  much 
value  the  contribution  made  by  various  French  institutions  in  Bahrain's  financial  sector,  and  this 
seminar  marks  a  further  development  of  our  strong  relations  in  the  financial  field.  A  special 
acknowledgement  in  this  respect  ought  to  go  to  BNP-Paribas,  who  are  supporting  this  event 
financially, as well providing a speaker. 
Let me thank also the various other presenters taking part in this event, particularly those who have 
travelled from overseas, for contributing their valuable time and expertise. 
Financial crime of course is an international phenomenon, which requires a coordinated international 
response. It is appropriate, therefore, that we come together in events such as these and share our 
experiences. The informal contacts and collaborative working relationships that are developed during 
these events can be of great help as we work collectively to combat financial crime. 
It may help set the scene if I say a few words about our approach in Bahrain to anti-money laundering, 
and what I see as the principal challenge that we face – some of what I am about to say will no doubt 
apply equally elsewhere in the region. 
First,  the  government  of  Bahrain  views  the  application  of  international  standards  as  critical  to  the 
success of the Kingdom as a commercial and financial centre, and this basic premise has underpinned 
our efforts in the AML field as well, where we believe we have achieved a fair measure of success to 
date. 
Over  the  past  two  years,  significant  efforts  have  been  made  in  updating  our  AML  framework.  For 
instance,  we  have  updated  our  existing  AML  law;  updated  our  AML/CFT  banking  regulations; 
introduced new requirements for insurance and investment firms; and introduced an inspection regime 
for designated sectors and professions outside of financial services. Internationally, we worked hard to 
support the establishment of the MENA-FATF, and are now honoured to host its secretariat in Bahrain. 
Having  strengthened  our  framework  to  reflect  the  2003  revision  to  the  FATF  standards,  and  the 
additional  emphasis  on  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism,  our  focus  is  now  very  much  on 
implementation.  We  believe  that  we  have  achieved  a  fair  measure  of  compliance  already,  be  it  in 
terms of levels of reporting of suspicious transactions by banks, and in our successful conviction of 
persons for money laundering offences. 
However, we would be the first to recognise that there is always more to do here. In particular, with 
relatively low levels of domestically generated criminal proceeds, the greatest risk of money laundering 
and terrorist financing comes from questionable proceeds that transit Bahrain and the region. Being an 
international  financial  centre,  of  course,  the  potential  for  proceeds  to  transit  through  our  financial 
system is increased. 
This poses particular challenges to our supervisors and law enforcement agencies. It means that we 
are more likely to be used by criminals in the layering stage of money laundering rather than in other 
stages of the process. To combat this effectively, we need to develop our training and tools to detect 
suspicious  transactions,  not  only  where  the  underlying  offence  occurred  locally,  but  also  where  the 
offence may have occurred in another jurisdiction, quite possibly a distant part of the world. 
This requires a sophisticated approach to transaction monitoring by institutions, and to investigations 
by law enforcement agencies. It potentially requires the analysis of complex financial trails which cross 
many international borders; close cooperation with overseas authorities; and resource intensive efforts 
to link the proceeds to a geographically remote underlying predicate offence. 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 1
This is the principal challenge that we now face, and that we are determined to meet as we continue to 
work on fighting financial crime. Events such as these, where we can benefit from the experiences and 
expertise of other jurisdictions, can make a valuable contribution in this regard. 
On that note, let me finish by thanking you, once again, for your much appreciated participation; and to 
wish you all a productive two days. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2007
