Guy Quaden: Regional economic integration and monetary cooperation  
(in Europe and Africa) 
Exposé  by Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Eurosystem  seminar 
with  the  central  banks  of West  and Central  Africa, jointly  organised  by  the  Bank of  France  and  the 
European Central Bank, Paris, 1 February 2007. 
 Dear colleagues, 
Chairman  Trichet  and  Governor  Noyer  have  asked  me  to  introduce  the  session  of  our  seminar 
devoted  to  "Regional  economic  integration  and  monetary  cooperation".  It  is  both  an  honour  and  a 
pleasure for me. In my presentation, I would like to talk to you about the subject that I know best, one 
in  which  I  obviously  have  a  comparative  advantage,  and  that  is  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in 
Europe  (EMU).  So,  I  will  recap  on  why  and  how  the  euro  was  introduced  and  what  are  the  main 
problems with European monetary union in practice. Drawing on this European experience, I will then 
broaden the perspective to Africa, under the supervision of our friends and colleagues from over there. 
EMU: a single and stable currency 
I.  
EMU comprises two separate, but complementary, elements: a single currency and a stable currency. 
These correspond to the two, interrelated, objectives of EMU: efficiency and stability. 
EMU is, in the first instance, a culmination of the Single Market. Monetary union implies that some 
exchange rates no longer exist, as for instance the rate of the Belgian franc against the German mark 
or  the  Italian  lira.  In  the  past,  the  volatility  of  these  exchange  rates  has  been  most  harmful  to  our 
economies and the functioning of a Single Market. With the introduction of the euro, this form of intra-
European monetary instability has been entirely wiped out once and for all. 
The single currency is a major step forward in terms of efficiency, resulting in lower transaction costs, 
more price transparency and a financial market operating in a more integrated way. All those elements 
favour a more efficient allocation of resources, thereby allowing a better functioning and a deepening 
of the European Single Market and more dynamic economic growth. 
The introduction of the euro and the new monetary policy have had important consequences for the 
financial markets in particular. A thorough integration process has taken place in the whole euro area. 
This integration is most evident on the money markets, especially on the interbank market. On that 
level, one may really refer to a single European market, the direct outcome of the common monetary 
policy. The integration of the money market and the disappearance of exchange rate risks have also 
provided a great boost to integration of the other financial markets. 
The Maastricht Treaty also ushered in a new framework for macroeconomic policy in Europe, aiming 
at  stability  through  both  a  single  monetary  policy  and  coordination  of  other  economic  policies. 
Significantly,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  also  laid  down  guiding  principles  for  the  conduct  of  economic 
policies,  thereby  elevating  the  goals  of  “stable  prices  and  sound  public  finances”,  as  well  as  the 
“principle of an open market economy with free competition” to constitutional status. 
Monetary policy plays a crucial role. The institutional foundations on which the ECB has been built are 
very  sound.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  made  it  one  of  the  most  independent  central  banks  in  the 
world.  In  this  way,  political  pressures  can  be  avoided  and  European  citizens  can  be  assured  the 
central bank's mandate of price stability will be pursued from a long-term euro-area-wide perspective. 
The Maastricht Treaty leaves, in principle, the other elements of economic policy in the hands of the 
Member States as a matter of national responsibility. This has led to an "asymmetric" economic policy 
framework.  This  asymmetry  reflects  the  limits  of  the  Member  States’  willingness  to  hand  over  their 
national  sovereignty  in  the  area  of  economic  policy-making.  However,  it  is  also  a  reflection  of  the 
subsidiarity principle, a fundamental constitutional principle of the European Union. But the subsidiarity 
principle  also  has  an  economic  rationale,  namely  that  the  delegation  of  policy  responsibilities  to  a 
higher level is only justified if the Community is better placed to carry them out. Applied to economic 
policy-making in the euro area, the subsidiarity principle therefore implies that monetary policy, by its 
very  nature  an  indivisible  whole,  is  not  suitable  to  be  left  decentralised.  The  same  logic  of 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
centralisation  also  holds  true  for  the  Single  Market’s  regulatory  framework.  By  contrast,  fiscal, 
structural and employment policies have remained largely national prerogatives. 
Why was Europe’s attempt at EMU successful? 
II.  
European integration is to a large degree a political process, which has its roots in the two world wars 
and  the  devastation  they  caused.  The  Second  World  War  proved  to  be  a  real  trauma  for  Europe's 
political leaders. The Schuman Declaration of May 1950, which laid the foundations for the European 
Coal and Steel Community, stated clearly that "solidarity in production will make it plain that any war 
between France and Germany becomes not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible". So,  the 
memory of the two wars made for a very strong political will to further European integration. At its heart 
was a process of Franco-German reconciliation and cooperation. 
So, although the start of the European integration process dates back to the years after World War II, 
the first official attempt to set up an economic and monetary union was not made until 1970, when the 
so-called Werner Report (commissioned by the European Council) outlined the main features of EMU 
and  the  road  to  its  achievement.  However,  due  to  strong  turmoil  in  the  international  economy  (the 
collapse of the Bretton Woods system and the oil crisis) and the absence of both policy coordination 
and political will, this first attempt at monetary union proved unsuccessful. It was not until the end of 
the 1970s that the monetary integration process resumed, more specifically with the establishment of 
the European Monetary System. 
Despite considerable difficulties, especially during the first years, the EMS contributed to a broadening 
of the "acquis communautaire", on the basis of which a genuine project for monetary union could be 
set  in  motion.  This  new  initiative  was  based  on  the  "Delors  Report",  again  commissioned  by  the 
European Council, which came up with a blueprint for an economic and monetary union in Europe and 
specified the successive stages through which it would have to go. Further negotiations resulted in the 
Treaty of Maastricht, which, despite the serious problems in the EMS during the years 1992-93, finally 
led to the launch of EMU in 1999. The EMS crises in 1992 and 1993 could have been fatal for the 
EMU project and served to show that EMU was not inevitable. However, the crises also underlined the 
political will of Europe's leaders and showed that they were ready to adopt difficult measures in order 
to move on to Economic and Monetary Union. 
Apart from an ever-stronger underlying political will, two long-term structural factors which prepared 
the way for the key decisions on EMU can be singled out, namely, an increasing degree of economic 
integration and a growing consensus on macroeconomic policy objectives. 
Economic  integration  in  Europe  has  advanced  enormously  over  the  last  few  decades.  Trade 
interdependence has increased. With growing financial integration in Europe and more foreign direct 
investment  flows,  income  from  wealth  has  also  become  more  internationally  diversified.  Economic 
linkages between the European countries have therefore grown much stronger. This interdependence 
has  pushed  up  the  costs  linked  to  the  use  of  national  currencies  in  a  Single  Market  in  terms  of 
conversion costs as well as costs of hedging against risks of appreciation or depreciation. 
Economic thinking also developed profoundly between the 1970s and the 1990s. At the beginning of 
the 1970s, what we called Keynesianism was still very influential among economic policy-makers in 
the  European  Community.  The  "Monetarist  counter-revolution"  shook  it  up  completely.  The  Phillips 
curve and the economic policy trade-offs it appeared to allow were called into question. Above all, it 
was the stagflation of the 1970s that further indicated the limits of activist policies. The monetary and 
fiscal expansionary policy adopted in several countries led to an upsurge in inflation and in public debt 
with no sizeable effect on the level of employment. 
Gradually, a new consensus developed which moved away from active demand-management policies 
towards a more medium-term orientation, emphasising structural, supply-side-oriented policies. A core 
ingredient  of  the  new  strategy  was  that  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  by  an  independent 
central bank and geared towards price stability. 
Does EMU need a political union? 
III.  
I would now like to turn to two questions which, for some outside observers, constitute just as many 
objections to European monetary union: 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2007
  is a monetary union conceivable and can it be stable without a political union between the 
countries concerned? 
can  a  single  monetary  policy  be  appropriate  for  a  group  of  countries  whose  individual 
economic performance, especially on the growth front, remains heterogeneous. 
Today, there are still some States in the world that don’t have their own currency (because they use a 
currency – like the US dollar or the euro for instance – issued by other countries), but there is only one 
currency (and by no means an insignificant one because it is the world’s second most important) that 
is not linked to any specific state structure – and that is the euro. 
In Europe, it all started with economic integration. Monetary integration followed later, at least for 13 
countries. Political integration is still lagging behind. Neither the European Commission nor the Council 
of Ministers constitute a genuine government for the EU or the euro area. 
Back in the 1980s, the most widely-held view was that monetary union should go hand in hand with 
political union. But, at the beginning of the 1990s, a number of European leaders cashed in on the 
exceptional  momentum  triggered  by  the  fall  of  the  Berlin  Wall  to  push  ahead  with  this  monetary 
unification plan without waiting for similar progress to be made on the political unification front. 
Nevertheless,  launching  monetary  union  was  in  itself  a  political  decision  of  the  utmost  importance 
since  it  meant  transferring  an  essential  part  of  national  sovereignty  –  the  monetary  policy  –  to  a 
supranational authority. 
After that, and despite the lack of a European State, the euro rapidly gained recognition as a credible 
currency for what I think are two basic reasons. On the one hand, the ECB and the Eurosystem, in 
charge of euro-zone monetary policy, have a clear mandate: price stability. On the other hand, their 
leaders  are  totally  independent.  They  can  neither  receive  nor  ask  for  instructions  from  any  outside 
interests, especially national governments. They must protect the sole collective interest of the zone 
as  a  whole.  The  monetary  policy  decision-making  process  has  not  only  been  centralised  but  also 
depoliticised. 
That said, there is no denying a certain lack of symmetry in the current structure of EMU, the relative 
weakness  of  the  politico-economic  pillar  vis-à-vis  the  monetary  pillar.  Unlike  monetary  policy,  fiscal 
policy remains in the hands of national States. Up to a certain point – which I have already mentioned 
– this situation corresponds to the principle of subsidiarity. However, we have to prevent inadequate 
national policies from causing any damage for the other partners and, in particular, for the common 
good that the euro enshrines. This is why the budgetary rules or constraints that make up the Stability 
and Growth Pact were defined. 
As we all know, the provisions of the Pact have not been fully respected. But they have constantly 
exerted a certain amount of pressure on States that have flouted the rules and it is to be hoped that 
the revised version of the Pact will be applied more rigorously. 
We also know that the Finance Ministers of the euro-area member countries meet regularly within the 
Eurogroup.  Some  politicians  talk  about  wanting  to  transform  this  group  into  Europe’s  economic 
government. From a personal point of view, I don’t see any objection to this, quite the contrary. But, if 
the objective – stated or not – of such a rise in power were to reduce the independence of the central 
bank,  then  it  would  be  a  really  bad  thing.  However,  the  risk  is  very  slight  as  this  principle  of 
independence is set in stone in the Treaty. I would add that the lack of visibility and substance of the 
political axis and the European Central Bank’s “institutional loneliness” all too often, and quite unfairly, 
make the ECB an escape goat for everything that is going wrong in Europe. After all, the examples of 
Germany yesterday or the United States today just go to show that you can have a strong political 
power and a strong central bank at one and the same time. 
Is heterogeneity a cause for concern? 
IV.  
In reality, the question of heterogeneity comes up in the case of any monetary policy, even national 
policy,  applying  to  a  more  or  less  disparate  set  of  regions,  and  all  the  more  so,  of  course,  in  big 
monetary unions. “Can one size fit all?” 
According to theory, an optimal currency area needs free movement of the factors of production as 
well  as  flexible  markets  and  a  limited  impact  of  asymmetric  shocks  on  the  various  partners  of  the 
monetary union. The euro area is not an optimal currency area. But does that really exist? In Europe, 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 3
however,  factor  mobility,  financial  integration  and  fiscal  transfers  between  Member  States  are  less 
than in the United States. In this case, can monetary union function properly? 
There is only one single monetary policy and the ECB can only focus it on price stability at the level of 
the euro area as a whole. In this kind of framework, the burden of adjustment, to asymmetric shocks 
for instance, rests on other mechanisms such as wages and relative prices or fiscal policy. 
What are the hard facts? As far as inflation is concerned, as I said before, both inflation rates and the 
divergences  between  them  dropped  sharply  before  the  move  over  to  monetary  union.  Since  then, 
inflation differentials have not been any higher than the gaps that can be observed between the main 
American regions. As for the dispersion of growth rates within the euro area, this has not got any wider 
since exchange rates were irrevocably fixed and is also comparable to the American situation. In both 
cases  –  inflation  and  growth  –  the  difference  with  the  United  States  lies  in  the  persistence  of  the 
differentials:  it  is  nearly  always  the  same  countries  that  have  the  highest  or  the  lowest  inflation  or 
growth rates. 
Growth differentials may be linked to catching-up processes (and here they are to be welcomed), to 
specific shocks or to inappropriate national policies. They may be the result of differences in trends or 
cyclical situations, too. 
Business cycles have become more closely aligned over the years under the impact of deeper product 
and  financial  market  integration  and  convergence  of  macroeconomic  policies.  Differences  in  trend 
growth  are  now  the  main  reason  for  most  differentials,  something  which  also  explains  why  the 
dispersion of growth rates shows a considerable degree of persistence. 
What conclusions can be drawn from these observations? 
Firstly,  that,  since  it  turns  out  that  there  is  more  heterogeneity  across  countries  in  trend  output 
developments than in cyclical movements, monetary policy is confronted with a relatively symmetric 
environment in those fields where it has an impact. 
Secondly, for the competitiveness mechanism to work properly, wage and price rigidities have to be 
tackled by national structural reforms. 
Moreover, decentralised fiscal policies based on automatic stabilisers are also an important instrument 
in  reducing  growth  differentials.  But  sound  public  finances  are  a  necessary  condition  for  automatic 
stabilisers to work fully. Member States should draw lessons from their maladjusted fiscal policy in the 
previous upswing and get their budgets into surplus during good times. 
Lessons from EU integration and challenges for Africa 
V.  
As previously mentioned, the road to EU economic and monetary integration has been paved by three 
long-term structural factors. First and foremost, there has been a strong underlying political will which 
has its roots in the reconciliation and cooperation process initiated in Europe after the Second World 
War. Secondly, economic integration advanced considerably over the following decades, fostered not 
only  by  trade  interdependence,  but  also  by  the  web  of  social  linkages  created  through  business, 
tourism or educational exchanges. And, thirdly, there is a growing economic consensus moving away 
from  active  demand  management  policies  towards  a  more  medium-term  orientation,  based  on 
structural, supply-side-oriented policies with a monetary policy strongly geared towards price stability. 
Those  three  factors  have  reinforced  each  other  in  a  long  process  of  gradual  building  on  prior 
achievements. Although that process was repeatedly interrupted owing to a diversity of economic and 
political difficulties, it comes to the credit of Europe's political leaders that they were able to appreciate 
those  difficulties  correctly  and  to  respond  to  them  with  a  visionary  and  forward-looking  project, 
sometimes in the face of strong opposition. An important ingredient in the success of EMU is also that 
the  project  was  flexible  enough  to  address  specific  concerns  and  overcome  various  sources  of 
resistance while keeping a high degree of consistency as regards its aims and conditions of access. 
In  launching its  own economic  and  monetary  integration  process,  Africa  is  starting out  from  quite a 
different position, in all three above-mentioned fields. Countries on the African continent are mostly 
young  states,  so  they  do  not  share  a  long  history  of  common  experience.  They  are  also  very 
heterogeneous. Compared with the EU, the degree of economic integration is also much more limited, 
especially  when  it  comes  to  trade  flows.  Heavy  reliance  on  commodities  and  the  general  lack  of 
complementarity in production and/or exports of goods and services automatically reduce the scope 
for intensive intra-regional trade, even within the same monetary zone. Last but not least, the building 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2007
of a consensus on policy objectives is complicated by the multiplicity of different integration initiatives 
in Africa. Those initiatives often overlap in terms of membership. 
African countries can rely on various assets to strengthen their economic integration. The important 
initiatives  that  have  been  set  up  all  over  the  continent  over  the  past  four  decades  show  a  strong 
willingness to pursue regional economic and monetary integration. Notable achievements have been 
realised on which to build further progress. Real integration between African countries is also stronger 
than it may appear from official statistics due to the large size of the informal economy. Indeed, official 
data  largely  underestimate  inter-  and  intra-regional  flows,  a  lot  of  transactions  being  unrecorded. 
These  informal  trade  flows  can  be  expected  to  be  substantial,  if  not  larger  in  some  instances  than 
official trade flows. Bringing those informal trade flows into the formal economy would, at the same 
time,  represent  a  strong  and  enticing  objective  for  further  integration  and,  in  turn,  cement  a  wide 
community of interest between countries on which to build a large consensus to push the integration 
process further ahead. 
Given the various regional integration initiatives already in place, there seems to be little need for any 
more formal initiatives. Taking capacity and budgetary constraints into account, the main challenge is 
to implement the agreements that already exist in order to bridge the gap between formal agreements 
and  de  facto  (informal)  trade  integration  which  can  be  observed  all  over  the  African continent  on  a 
daily  basis.  This  requires  removing  existing  impediments  to  formal  trade,  improving  the  general 
business climate and enhancing transparency and good governance. It also requires giving oversight 
institutions the necessary resources to do their surveillance job and a forceful mandate to intervene 
when problems arise. 
Other challenges are to address supply-side constraints, by enhancing complementarities, investing in 
labour-force skills, fostering a supportive business climate which allows the private sector to develop 
and expand its activities, and by addressing infrastructure constraints in transport and power supply. 
Africa has 15 landlocked countries, for which transport corridors are extremely important. The lack of 
adequate  transport  infrastructure  remains  a  problem  in  some  parts  of  Africa,  and  without  these, 
economic integration is bound to remain limited. 
This  leaves  the  question  of  the  potential  role  to  play  by  monetary  integration,  especially  since  the 
functioning  of  the  CFA  Zone  has  been  an  undeniable  success  in  the  global  process  of  African 
integration. This currency union has certainly yielded positive results, in terms of stability, for instance. 
Yet this stability has largely been achieved by importing credibility from a supranational central bank 
and thanks to the backing of the French Treasury. 
This is further evidenced by the respective role played by convergence criteria in the EMU and in the 
CFA  Zone.  The  observance  of  those  criteria  was,  from  the  outset,  considered  as  a  necessary 
condition to ensure the credibility of the single European currency and as a prerequisite for individual 
countries to join the EMU. On the contrary, in the CFA Zone, those criteria were introduced afterwards. 
This does not mean that they are superfluous, far from it. The imported credibility of the CFA Zone 
would  be  greatly  fostered  by  meeting  those  criteria  and  this  would  in  turn  help  to  make  further 
progress with economic integration. 
However, monetary issues do not seem at present to be the main impediment to regional economic 
integration and this integration does not seem to be much more advanced in the CFA Zone than in 
other  parts  of  Africa.  For  African  countries  which  do  not  belong  to  a  monetary  union,  monetary 
cooperation is not the most urgent issue that needs to be addressed to improve regional economic 
integration. Pursuing monetary integration may even deflect much-needed political energy and focus 
away from the main priorities with regard to regional integration. Those priorities should quite clearly 
be trade, infrastructure and good governance. 
As I mentioned at the beginning of my exposé, I have spoken only briefly and more cautiously about 
Africa as I do not know the region as well as my own continent. I am counting on the other participants 
who will now take the floor to certainly expand upon and perhaps even correct my remarks. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 5
