Niklaus Blattner: The demographic challenge – macroeconomic perspectives 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Conference "Die alternde Gesellschaft als sozio-ökonomische Herausforderung" 
(the aging society: a socio-economic challenge), University of Basel, Basel, 9 February 2007. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Demographic aging, i.e. the growing average age of the population, or the reversal of the age pyramid, 
is  also  a  matter  of  concern  for  a  central  bank.  Without  a  careful  analysis  of  the  long-term 
developments in the real economy, any monetary policy assessment, and consequently any inflation 
forecast, will be inadequate. In addition to the activities in the money and capital markets, the long-
term growth outlook – and thus also the population perspectives – are factored into the Swiss National 
Bank's monetary policy assessment.  
The  aging  of  the  population  is  a  fact.  It  is  linked  to  three  main  trends,  which  will  greatly  influence 
Switzerland's demographic landscape in the decades to come: first, the economically active population 
will decrease, second, the old-age ratio, i.e. the ratio of people over 65 to those between 20 and 64 is 
on the rise, and third, longevity is increasing.  
In future, Switzerland will have to produce more with fewer resources. "Fewer resources" because the 
economically  active  population  is  declining,  "produce  more"  because  the  old-age  ratio  is  worsening 
and  longevity  increasing.  The  consequences  for  the  macroeconomic  outlook  are  clear:  if  labour 
productivity and/or labour input fail to improve, the impending demographic development will lead to 
slower medium and long-term growth.  
It is thus all the more important that labour productivity increases. The growth in labour productivity 
depends primarily on workplace capital and product market success. It would be ill advised, however, 
to  make  oversimplified  calculations.  Neither  technological  progress  nor  capital  investment  are 
unaffected by demographic aging. While enthusiasm for embracing innovation may decrease with old 
age, greater experience can enrich human capital. On the one hand, a tighter labour market can be 
counteracted by shoring up investment. On the other hand, both the savings and the investment rate 
can decline. If foreign locations become more attractive, the latter is a particularly likely scenario. It is 
not clear how the overall effect of these interactions would impact overall on growth.  
These perspectives call for measures that boost both labour productivity and labour input. In a market 
economy, employers, employees and the self-employed have a number of instruments and options at 
their  disposal  to  increase  labour  productivity  and  labour  input.  However,  there  is  also  room  for 
improvement  with  regard  to  the  economic  conditions  within  which  businesses  operate.  First,  the 
capacity for innovation in Switzerland should not be allowed to decline. Therefore, policies fostering 
education  and  research  are  called  for.  Second,  Switzerland  ought  to  continue  to  attract  more 
investment. In other words, domestic investment should become more attractive. In a globalised world, 
Switzerland's  attractiveness  as  a  business  location  in  an  internationally  competitive  environment 
should  continue  to  improve.  Third,  the  economically  active  population  could  be  strengthened  by 
increasing  the  number  of  qualified  immigrants.  There  is  a  substantial  pool  of  labour  from  which  to 
recruit  not  only  within  the  European  Union  (EU),  but  also  in  other  regions.  At  the  same  time, 
Switzerland's employment quota could be lifted if more women now living in Switzerland entered the 
workforce. The key to achieving this goal is striving for a greater work life balance, i.e. combining a 
career and family life for both parents. For example, more women should have the option to work full-
time on a permanent basis. 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
