Ardian Fullani: Health passes through .. bank 
Interview  given  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  to  Klan  magazine, 
published on 23 June 2007. 
 - Mr. Fullani, initially we would like to listen to your comment about the efforts of the 
government  to  channel  financial  business  transactions  through  banks.  Is  this  effort 
somewhat strained, given that the other party (the business) expresses itself that high 
transaction commissions of commercial banks increase business costs and the banks 
themselves are not ready to carry out the transactions? 
The channelling of financial transactions through the banking system, as a process already 
tested  and  under  development,  is  a  much  expected  action,  which  outside  the  propaganda 
contours  will  really  contribute  to  weakening  of  the  infrastructure  that  nourishes  the 
informality. In recent years, the banking system has passed through an irresistible process of 
development and consolidation. Actually it may be stated without hesitation that the banking 
system in Albania is completely capable of encountering with dignity this requirement of the 
time.  
Dealing briefly with two or three important moments, I would start with the operation of two 
modern payment systems: Albanian Interbank Payment System (AIPS) where gross and real 
time  settlements  are  made,  and  the  Automated  Electronic  Clearing  House  (AECH)  (small-
value payments of clearing systems). Further on, I would highlight the significant growth of e-
payments,  the  entry  into  the  system  of  two  well-known  international  banks,  the  increased 
number of branches, as well as increase of ATMs and POS terminals for card payments in 
the  whole  territory.  Encountering  successfully  the  channelling  of  public  sector  salaries 
through bank accounts, followed also by those of the private sector and by a number of other 
banking services, I think are indicators of the proactive, ever increasing role of the banking 
system.  
To  clearly  understand  what  progress  we  have  made  so  far  in  this  direction,  it‘s  worth 
mentioning  some  statistics.  The  number  of  payments  processed  in  AIPS  system  has 
increased by 11 percent, while the value has increased by 21 percent compared to 2005. In 
the meantime, both systems, the AIPS and the AECH have a much higher capacity than the 
current number of payments processed in them. At end of 2006, compared to end of 2004, 
the number of P0S terminals was 7 times higher, while the number of electronic cards in use 
has increased more than 10 times and the transactions carried out through them was above 
12 millions, with a value of about ALL 188 billion. During 2006, 62 branches and agencies of 
commercial banks were established, leading the number to 294 at year-end.  
In this sense, I think that the current infrastructure of the  national system of payments we 
provide  is  completely  capable  of  facing  the  Albanian  market  demand  for  speed,  number, 
quality, size and security of payments carried out through these systems. Furthermore, the 
Bank  of  Albania,  in  its  role  as  the  regulator  of  this  system,  is  working  for  further 
standardization  of  payment  instruments,  which  will  lead  to  increased  quality  of  services 
offered by banks to their clients.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  increased  inflow  of  transactions  in  the  banking  system  will  further 
encourage competition within the banking system. Banks would be encouraged, in exchange 
of low commissions, to attract as many clients as possible, who in turn, would bring about 
more financial resources to banks. The banking activity, as any other business, aims at profit 
maximisation.  Therefore,  it  is  natural  to  charge  commissions  for  services  offered  by  the 
system, while their amount is an individual policy that changes from one bank into the other, 
in  accordance  with  the  size  and  other  specifications.  I  am  convinced  that  the  increased 
volume of work will bring about reduced banking commissions. I do not have any doubt in 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 1
this regard. What I would assure you, as the governor of the Bank of Albania, is the meeting 
of  an  early  requirement  of  the  banking  system  to  be  very  transparent  about  its  products, 
services, commissions and prices they generally apply.  
- As the process of channelling the financial transactions of business through banks 
had to be carried out since time ago, is it better to pass the costs of the moment and 
to channel the economy through the banking system?  
I would refer to "costs of the moment" as "benefits of the future". Imagine the other side of 
the  medal.  How  much  informed  will  the  banking  system  be  in  relation  to  the  potential  the 
various  businesses  have,  and  how  much  safe  will  it  feel  in  crediting  them  without  any 
hesitation?  From  this  viewpoint,  it  is  concluded  that  the  operation  is  necessary  and 
furthermore,  in  the  final  analysis,  businesses,  and  particularly  individuals  will  be  the 
beneficiaries.  In  a  broader  aspect,  the  information  on  economic-financial  potential  of  the 
country  would  increase;  the  banking  system  effectiveness  would  increase;  the  variety  of 
banking products and services would increase; the geographic coverage by banking services 
would  increase;  and  in  consequence  the  mobilization  and  re-allocation  of  funds  would  be 
more  appropriate;  the  competition  would  increase  and  costs  would  decrease.  All  these 
achievements would contribute to creating a more complete economic infrastructure of the 
country, which would raise the formality of the economy and would accelerate the economic 
growth rates of the country.  
-  Credit  extension  has  increased  fourfold  during  four  last  years,  but  this  has  not 
influenced on interest cut: Is this normal?  
It  is  true  that  during  last  years  we  have  had  a  rapid  credit  growth.  During  2005  credit 
increased by ALL 57.6 billion or about 82 percent in annual terms, whereas during 2006, it 
increased by 70.2 billion or about 55%. Upward trends are as strong even in the first half of 
2007. According to latest estimates, credit balance at end of 2007 will be around 21 percent 
of GDP. Without doubt, this view reveals that Albania, likewise most similar countries, has 
entered into the group of countries with high growth paces of credit to the economy. The first 
cause listed by experts is the so-called “catching – up process", which in other words means 
high growth caused by a rather low starting base.  
Naturally, there are also other factors, such as: macroeconomic stability, the maintaining of 
inflation  under  control,  low  interest  rates  in  Albania,  Europe  and  the  USA,  exchange  rate 
stability, increased banks’ ambitions to lend and the public confidence in receiving credit. The 
banking system development in the recent years, its successful privatisation and the process 
of consolidation characterising it in 2006 are other factors that have influenced on rapid credit 
growth.  Also  we  may  mention  the  introduction  of  new  credit  products,  such  as  consumer 
loans,  house  loans,  and  the  efforts  to  make  them  more  popular  through  aggressive 
marketing forms.  
Rise of credit to the economy at so high levels carries over the potential of cutting the interest 
rates through which it is offered. Referring to Bank of Albania statistics, if an ALL loan of 6-12 
month maturity at the beginning of 2002 was given on average by above 18 percent rate, in 
April 2007 it was given by only 10.16 percent. However, we should be prudent and always 
bear in mind the fact that about 75 percent of credit is in foreign currency and therefore, in 
forming the price of this kind of credit, banks refer to international financial market rates, such 
as euribor for the euro and libor for the American dollar. What is evidenced recently, thanks 
to increasing competition, is that ALL credit rates as an average expression of new credits 
have remained almost constant during the latest years, though euribor has increased almost 
throughout the whole period.  
- Is the default risk the one that keeps high interest rates or do we have a situation of profit 
by banks from an economy in transition, as randomly happens?  
It is not the high default risk the one that obliges banks to apply high rates. In price formation 
policies, banks, inter alia, factorise also the country risk, which for many objective reasons is 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2007
higher  than  that  of  the  developed  countries.  Also,  besides  this  risk,  there  exists  also  the 
economy  informality,  problems  about  ownership,  mortgage  of  properties  and  collateral 
execution.  All  these  factors  make  banks  work  hard  to  ensure  information  about  the 
borrowers. This leads to increased costs and to the risk of misleading financial analysis of 
the borrower, which would influence negatively on credit portfolio quality in the future. 
-  Time  ago  you  have  issued  the  warning  of  “bad  loans”  risk;  what  is  the  current 
situation like in this regard? 
A governor should always be concerned about such an important problem, related to loans 
portfolio quality. The current situation of credit quality remains satisfactory. The ratio of “non-
performing loans to (gross) outstanding loans, which measures the net size of exposure to 
credit risk is estimated to 1.5 percent.  
Constantly the Bank of Albania’s attention has been to strengthening of banking supervision 
measures.  Some  amendments  have  been  made  to  the  Regulation  on  credit  management, 
consisting in improvement of the lending process of banks, improvement of risk management 
and some measures have been taken for enhancing transparency with the public. Also, this 
regulation has provided some requirements on additional capital of banks, in case they have 
a high lending pace.  
However, we have to do with a process, which never ends and which will always be at the 
top-list  of  Bank  of  Albania  priorities.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  prudentially  credit  growth 
and  its  quality.  We  will  further  improve  prudential  regulations,  making  them  in  consistency 
with best standards used by European central banks. Only in this way a good credit quality 
will be ensured, for preventing any probable negative consequences on the financial stability 
of the country. 
-  Until  a  year  or  so  ago,  treasury  bills  could  be  purchased  only  at  central  bank’s 
windows,  while  the  selling  of  treasury  bills  may  be  also  carried  out  at  some 
commercial banks. Has the liberalization process influenced on yield cut?  
The  possibility  of  participation  of  individuals  in  primary  treasury  bill  market  through  the 
banking system dates back to 1996, while the Bank of Albania was included in this process 
only during the second half of 2001. The Bank of Albania, in its role as a central bank, having 
the  main  target  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability,  since  the  moment  of  opening  its 
windows has regarded this presence as temporary. In essence, the establishment of these 
windows was another possibility for the people to have greater access in purchasing treasury 
bills.  The  participation  of  individuals  in  the  primary  market  is  of  non-competitive  nature, 
meaning that they do not influence on price formation. They just accept the resulting auction 
price.  Therefore,  we  may  state  that  their  impact  on  yield  rate  fluctuations  is  almost 
insignificant.  Since  my  taking  office,  I  have  insisted  that  the  selling  of  treasury  bills  is  an 
operation that naturally belongs to commercial banks. To this end, we have discussed more 
than once with the banking system and with the Ministry of Finance for designing a strategy 
for the Bank of Albania’s gradual leaving from this “business” not natural to it, believing that 
the market forces and its principles are the ones that should manage this process. Therefore 
the banking system was required to be aggressive in this regard, providing to the clients the 
service of selling T-bills in primary and secondary markets.  
Parallel  to  that,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  concerning  this  service  at  its  windows,  made  two 
important  steps,  charging  a  service  commission  that  covers  connected  costs  and  deciding 
not  to  accept  cash  inflows  of  individuals  who  intend  to  invest  in  T-bills.  Since  then, 
participation in treasury bill auctions through Bank of Albania windows may be made possible 
only in case the intended amount for investment comes in the form of banking transfers. 
- Can you mention the positive sides of this liberalization?  
These  measures  may  rightly  create  the  idea  of  a  liberalization  process,  which  I  think  will 
really lead to further deepening and expansion of the financial market in Albania. Presently, 
we are working for presenting a new practice in the primary market of government securities, 
BIS Review 82/2007 
 3
that of the main mediators, or as already known in other terms, “primary dealers”. We believe 
that this relatively long period in transition has served as a school also for the public at large. 
What is more important in the whole process is the fact that individuals are getting more and 
more  acquainted  with  market  instruments.  The  better  and  with  more  conscience  we  know 
them,  the  easier  is  the  path  to  real  financial  market  development.  In  such  an  economy, 
individuals make the choice. 
-  Recently  you  have  received  evaluations,  since  the  institution  you  govern  has 
succeeded  in  maintaining  macroeconomic  parameters  and  price  level.  Can  you 
mention some of the measures you have taken during this period?  
It is true that the Bank of Albania‘s role in maintaining macroeconomic stability , particularly 
in controlling inflationary pressures, has been recently highlighted by a number of institutions 
within  the  country  and  abroad.  However,  I  would  highlight  the  public  evaluation  for  the 
institution I govern as the greatest success we have achieved. This evaluation is expressed 
clearly  in  anchoring  inflationary  pressures  in  the  country  and  in  increasing  the  degree  of 
using their products. Naturally I regard it a direct reflection of high technical and professional 
investment  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  made  in  setting  up  an  equilibrated  framework  of 
macroeconomic policies, in increasing financial markets, in developing the monetary market 
infrastructure and in consolidating the banking institutions. On the political plane, the Bank of 
Albania has kept unchanged its focus on monetary policy, to guarantee price stability in the 
economy.  It  has  monitored  prudentially  the  liquidity  conditions  and  interest  rates  in  the 
economy, as well as other factors of potential negative impact on inflation, raising twice the 
key interest rate in the economy. Also, the Bank of Albania has been a productive partner in 
coordinating the economic policies of the country and in the performance of the agreement 
with the IMF.  
On the financial market development plane, the Bank of Albania has undertaken a number of 
incentives  for  completing  the  banking  infrastructure  and  the  legal  framework.  Reflecting 
largely on macroeconomic stability and on improvement of banking infrastructure, lending to 
the economy has undergone very rapid paces during three latest years. On the other hand, 
the strengthening of banking supervision measures and the prudential regulations serve as a 
guarantee that the banking system expansion and rapid credit growth to the economy will not 
create problems for the financial health of banks and for their long-term sustainability. The 
Bank  of  Albania  is  raising  the  degree  of  professionalism,  which  is  a  guarantee  for 
strengthening  the  independence,  transparency  and  accountability.  Therefore,  the  decision-
making  process  has  been  further  perfected,  thus  increasing  the  credibility  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania to the public. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2007
