Caleb M Fundanga: Corporate social responsibility in Zambia 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Launch of the Mukuyu Tree 
(Slave Tree), Kabwe, 23 December 2006. 
 • The Provincial Minister of Central Province 
• Hon. Sydney Chisanga, MP 
• Hon. Rev. Gladys Nyirongo, MP, Minister of Lands 
• Hon. Kakusa, MP 
• Your Worship, the Mayor of Kabwe, Mr Richard Yumbe 
• The Deputy Mayor of Kabwe, Mr Edward Phiri 
• The Town Clerk, Mrs Vivian Chikoti 
• Distinguished Invited Guests 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good afternoon to you all. 
It gives me immense pleasure to be here this afternoon in the town of Kabwe, which also happens to 
be the place in which I spent my childhood. 
As you are aware, we are here to celebrate the occasion of the lighting of the legendary MUKUYU 
TREE, popularly known as the Slave Tree. 
For many of you Kabwe residents present here, especially our senior citizens, this tree rekindles many 
happy memories of joyous occasions such as Christmas, Independence Day and Labour Day, when 
the  TREE  would  shine  brightly  after  being  adorned  with  beautiful  multi-fluorescent  lights  for  all  to 
admire. 
The MUKUYU TREE is one of Zambia’s national monuments. Its history spans more than a century of 
being part of the lives of the community in this area. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This  historic  monument  invokes  memories  of  a  sad  but  important  aspect  in  our  beautiful  country’s 
history.  This  experience,  unfortunately,  did  not  only  affect  us  here,  but  the  whole  continent  and 
beyond, touching lives far and wide. 
I am referring to the infamous Slave Trade Era. Historians, time and again, narrate to us tales of how 
this wonderful tree was used as the resting place for our forefathers, who were captured into slavery 
as they were marched across this land, being traded as commodities from Africa to far away lands. It 
is now common knowledge, rather than myth, that our fore-fathers were being traded under this same 
spot on which we stand today, proud and free. 
After  the  abolition  of  the  Slave  Trade,  the  TREE  attained  a  new  significance  as  a  “rendevous”  or 
meeting place. It was from under this very tree that some of our fore-fathers were recruited and taken 
to fight in the First and Second World Wars. 
As mentioned earlier, later came the happy times of celebrations at Christmas, Independence Day and 
Labour Day. 
In the year 2002, the Bank decided to recognize the historical significance of the Mukuyu Tree and 
depicted it on the highest denomination of Zambian currency, the K50,000 banknote. 
It was therefore a matter of concern for us when the Tree and its surroundings fell into a deplorable 
state  due  to  the  Municipal  Council’s  inability  to  meet  the  financial  obligations  attendant  to  its 
maintenance  as  a  historical  monument  and  national  heritage  site.  The  Bank  therefore  decided  to 
adopt the Tree as part of its corporate social responsibility. 
Distinguished Guests, ladies and gentlemen 
The Bank of Zambia decided to formally adopt the MUKUYU Slave Tree as an on going project under 
its  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  Programme.  Substantial  resources,  both  human  and  otherwise, 
have gone into this project. The Bank’s aim was to assist Kabwe Municipal Council leaders to firstly 
restore the tree to some form of heritage status. Further, the Bank wanted to preserve and secure its 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
immediate surroundings in order to provide a place of rest and recreation for members of the public. 
The  exercise  was  also  aimed  at  restoring  levels  of  beauty  and  elegance  to  the  MUKUYU  TREE, 
thereby not only rekindling its former glory, but also hopefully contributing to Kabwe’s efforts to set a 
firm foot on the road to economic recovery through the much-heralded tourism sector. 
With our humble efforts, we hope that the MUKUYU Tree is now fit to be a real “meeting place” to 
provide a place of rest for members of the public who wish to seek refuge under its large and leafy 
shade.  Additionally  we  hope  that  this  initial  humble  step  has  contributed  to  the  restoration  of  the 
beauty and elegance of the MUKUYU TREE to its former glory. 
It  is,  therefore,  my  pleasure  to  be  here  today  not  only  in  my  capacity  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia, but also as a Zambian citizen, to celebrate and commemorate this occasion which takes us 
back to many years in history. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  phenomenon  of 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility.  Corporate  social  responsibility  has  become  an  integral  part  of 
conducting business in most internationally acclaimed and world class organizations and institutions, 
of  which  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  striving  to  become.  The  acknowledgement  of  the  importance  of 
corporate  social  responsibility,  in  my  view,  has  come  about  as  a  result  of  most  corporate  bodies 
realizing that they actually have more than just a little responsibility towards the communities in which 
they exist and do business. After all, these same communities cannot be distanced from any economic 
activity, just as one cannot live without the other. 
Let  me,  in  this  regard,  take  this  opportunity  to  urge  all  Commercial  Banks,  Non-Financial  Banking 
Institutions  and  other  corporate  bodies  that  are  involved  in  community  work  and  corporate  social 
responsibility  to  please  continue  assisting  the  needy.  There  are  numerous  projects  that  are  in  dire 
need of assistance. 
And  to  all  those  corporate  bodies  that  are  actively  engaged  in  corporate  social  responsibility 
programmes,  allow  me  to  commend  you  and  urge  you  not  to  relent  in  your  efforts  to  bring  the 
communities you serve closer to you. 
Distinguished Guests 
I hasten to add that the Bank of Zambia has not been alone in this project to restore the MUKUYU 
TREE.  The  Bank  has  partnered  with  the  Kabwe  Municipal  Council  leadership  with  whom  we  have 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). This MOU outlines the accountabilities of the various 
parties.  For  Kabwe  Municipal  Council,  the  main  accountability  and  responsibility  will  be  to  maintain 
and preserve the tree and its surroundings to ensure that the area is well protected and cleaned. 
The  Bank  has  also  worked  closely  with  Zambia  Electricity  Supply  Corporation  (ZESCO)  who  have 
kindly facilitated the provision of power to enable us light the MUKUYU TREE on a continuous basis. 
We have also worked closely with the National Heritage Conservation Commission whose input has 
been invaluable in providing insight into the history and status of the MUKUYU TREE as a national 
heritage site. 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia Board of Directors, senior management and staff and indeed on my 
own behalf I wish to thank all our partners for the good cooperation and oneness of vision that has 
culminated in the commemoration and re-launch of the MUKUYU TREE today. 
Distinguished Guests 
Before I conclude my speech, I wish to pose a challenge to the general members of the public and in 
particular to the people invited to grace this occasion today. The MUKUYU TREE has been identified 
and depicted as a national monument under the Laws of Zambia. By this assignment the tree belongs 
to all ZAMBIANS, young and old alike. My challenge to you all is to cherish it and preserve it. For the 
younger  generation,  I  encourage  you  to  learn  more  about  the  tree  so  that  you  can  in  turn  learn  to 
cherish the freedom that you have today in memory of all our forefathers who were sold into slavery 
many years ago. For our senior citizens, I request that you pass on the tales of the MUKUYU TREE 
which have been passed on to you from one generation to another so that the spirit of the MUKUYU 
TREE continues to live on. 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
On our part, the Bank of Zambia Board, Management and staff are committed to the MUKUYU TREE 
project.  We  shall  ensure  that  the  process  that  we  have  started  does  not  end  here.  The  MUKUYU 
TREE is depicted on the K50,000.00 note. It has also been featured on the Bank of Zambia Christmas 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2007
card  for  2006.  There  are  long  term  plans  to  erect  a  kiosk  which  will  house  an  information  desk  for 
information dissemination to both local and foreign tourists. The kiosk will also sell refreshments. 
My  request  is  that  we  all  work  together  to  protect  and  preserve  an  important  part  of  our  national 
heritage, the MUKUYU TREE popularly known as The Slave Tree. 
I thank you for joining us at this great occasion and I wish you all a Merry Christmas, and a Happy 
2007. 
MAY GOD BLESS YOU.  
BIS Review 1/2007 
 3
