Jean-Claude Trichet: The International Financial Architecture – where do we 
stand? 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a meeting organised 
by the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 16 April 2007. 
 It is a great pleasure to be back at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York City. My last visit to 
you was one year ago, and I must say that I always truly enjoy being here as the Council offers the 
best possible setting to discuss relevant policy issues of an international nature. 
In  my  talk  today,  I  will  look  at  some  key  features  of  global  economic  and  financial  integration  and 
elaborate  on  how  the  key  international  fora  and  institutions  in  charge  of  international  financial 
cooperation have responded to this process.  
The global integration of national economies continues at a significant pace. The scope of goods and 
services as well as of capital and labour that are being exchanged between economies is rising. A 
growing number of countries are involved in this exchange and can reap the benefits associated with 
it.  The  benefits  are  indeed  tremendous,  and  the  institutional  foundations  of  the  global  economic 
system, which are often referred to as the international financial architecture, deserve credit for having 
ensured that they clearly outweigh the related challenges.  
I will start out by sharing with you some thoughts on the major trends in the global economy, looking in 
particular  at  global  trade  and  capital  flows  as  well  as  the  emergence  of  new  actors  on  the  global 
economic stage. Thereafter, I will focus on the current state of the international financial architecture 
and flesh out how it has been adapting to the changing global economic environment.  
Major global economic trends – what are the issues? 
1.  
One important structural feature of today’s global economy is the interdependence of countries as they 
become more and more integrated into the world economy. This growing integration pertains not only 
to trade in goods and services but also to cross-border movements of labour and capital. Looking at 
trade data, we observe that global trade openness – measured as world exports and imports of goods 
and services as share of world GDP – has basically doubled over the last 20 years and now stands at 
60 percent. Trade in intermediate goods and services as a result of the rising internationalisation of 
production processes has been a growing driver in this regard. While these changes are impressive 
indeed, even more far-reaching developments have taken place in the area of financial integration. If 
one takes for instance the share of gross international asset holdings in world GDP as a measure of 
financial openness, one can see a remarkable eightfold increase over the last 25 years to now more 
than 130 percent. As far as global capital flows are concerned, it is noteworthy that the composition of 
these  flows  has  changed  significantly  over  recent  years.  While  foreign  direct  investment  and 
international equity flows were particularly strong in the late 1990s, international transactions in more 
liquid assets have risen in recent years, making up most of the increase in global capital movements. 
International risk-sharing and the transfer of net savings across countries are important features of this 
process of financial globalisation.  
Another salient characteristic of today’s global economy is the emergence of new important actors on 
the  global  economic  stage.  Emerging  market  economies  are  gaining  a  larger  share  in  the  global 
economy  as  their  product  and  factor  markets  become  more  closely  integrated  with  the  rest  of  the 
world.  The  integration  of  these  countries  and  their  participation  in  international  supply  chains  has 
clearly  affected  global  demand  and  supply  of  a  broad  range  of  goods  and  factors.  With  regard  to 
capital flows, according to Institute of International Finance data, emerging market economies in 2006, 
like in the year before, are estimated to have attracted more than USD 500 billion in net private capital 
flows. Net direct investment has been, and is projected to continue to be, a large component of these 
flows. Moreover, what bears emphasis is that emerging market economies in most recent years have 
been providing the rest of the world with net resources in the form of current account surpluses. The 
drivers  of  these  mainly  official  flows  are  in  particular  limited  domestic  absorptive  capacities  and 
underdeveloped domestic financial systems.  
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
In  sum,  these  significant  global  economic  developments  are  structural  and  systemic  in  nature  and 
have led to tectonic changes in the global economic landscape. They have brought about substantial 
benefits and entail inevitable challenges to both policymakers and market participants.  
The  benefits  associated  with  the  broadening  and  deepening  of  global  economic  interlinkages  are 
manifold.  The  ever  closer  integration  into  the  global  economy  of  a  rising  number  of  countries  has 
offered  new  possibilities  to  finance  investment  and  consumption  and  to  diversify  and  share  risks 
globally. Also, the scrutiny by international investors serves as a disciplining device, which enhances 
the quality of domestic economic policies and thus contributes to improved economic fundamentals. 
Moreover,  the  exchange  of  goods  and  services,  of  capital  and  labour  has  facilitated  the  transfer  of 
know-how and technology. All of these effects have led to an increase in global economic prosperity 
and rising living standards in many countries around the globe.  
While these benefits are indeed substantial, there are naturally also risks and challenges that need to 
be clearly identified. The ever closer integration of national economies and the rise in capital mobility 
have made the international system more vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment. Furthermore, 
international trade and financial links intensify the transmission of shocks from one country to another 
and amplify cross-border spillovers.  
A  cost-benefit-analysis  of  the  global  economic  trends  clearly  shows  that  the  benefits  outweigh  the 
costs  by  far.  That  said,  it  would  be  short-sighted  to  take  this  outcome  for  granted.  One  should  not 
forget that not long ago a number of severe financial crises posed a major threat to the international 
financial system: the debt crises during the 1980s, which started in Poland and Mexico and spread to 
Latin  America,  Africa,  the  Middle  East  and  the  Soviet  Union;  the  Mexican  crisis  in  1994;  the  Asian 
crisis  starting  in  1997;  the  Russian  crisis  in  1998;  and  the  Argentinean  crisis  in  2001-02.  The 
international community managed to resolve these crises successfully, with each crisis bringing about 
a  learning  process.  Each  case  was  different,  the  underlying  reasons  were  different,  and  hence  the 
necessary responses had to be adapted to the specifics at that moment.  
Past crises shed light on the vulnerabilities of the global economic and financial system and remind us 
of  the  importance  of  never  being  complacent.  The major  global economic  trends,  which  I  have  just 
sketched  out,  make  it  increasingly  difficult  for  policymakers  to  provide  the  public  good  of  global 
economic and financial stability. And consequently, strengthening the resilience of the global system 
has become an ever more demanding task. 
This  brings  me  to  look  at  some  key  international  fora  and  institutions  in  charge  of  international 
macroeconomic and financial issues and see how they have adapted to a changing global economic 
environment and evolving policy challenges.  
The International Financial Architecture – where do we stand?  
2. 
In response to the global economic and financial trends just outlined, international fora and institutions 
have undergone major changes both in terms of their structure as well as their focus of activities. I will 
confine  myself  to  four  important  areas.  First,  the  involvement  of  emerging  market  economies  in 
international fora and institutions. Second, reinforced focus on the multilateral and regional dimension 
of  monitoring  and  surveillance.  Third,  development  and  agreement  on  global  standards  and  codes. 
Fourth,  increasing  attention  to  the  integration  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  surveillance.  Let  me 
address these issues in turn.  
Involvement of emerging market economies 
The G7 has been instrumental in shaping the international financial architecture as it reacted to the 
need to better involve emerging market economies. The creation of the Group of Twenty (G20) forum 
of finance ministers and central bank governors in 1999 was inspired by the necessity to give major 
emerging  market  economies  their  place  and  have  them  participate  in  a  dialogue  on  global 
macroeconomic  and  financial  issues.  This  new  international  forum  brings  together  representatives 
from  19  industrialized  countries  and  emerging  economies  as  well  as  the  European  Union  and  the 
Bretton Woods Institutions. As regards the promotion of global economic and financial stability, which 
is its main aim, the G20 has been a remarkable forum for serious dialogue on a wide range of highly 
relevant  issues  such  as  exchange  rate  regimes,  prudent  debt  management,  domestic  financial 
deepening  and  international  codes  and  standards.  Peer  review  of  members’  policies  has  been  a 
helpful approach used by the group. The G20 has also played an important role in forging consensus 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
on reforms of the Bretton Woods institutions and has been constructively involved in helping shape 
mechanisms of crisis prevention and resolution.  
The G7 has also responded swiftly to the changing global economic environment by reaching out to 
the  growing  number  of  systemically  important  countries.  It  has  invited  representatives  from  major 
emerging  market  countries,  including  Brazil,  Russia,  India,  China  and  South  Africa,  to  parts  of  its 
meetings  so  as  to  enable  an  appropriate  exchange  of  views  on  issues  of  relevance  to  global 
macroeconomic and financial stability. Such outreach activities have also been launched by the BIS as 
regards meetings at Governors’ as well as experts’ level.  
Finally, the internal governance structure of the IMF is currently under review. The goal of the reform 
efforts is in particular to ensure a fair and adequate voice for all members of the IMF by aligning the 
distribution of quotas with countries’ relative positions in the world economy. 
Multilateral and regional dimension of monitoring and surveillance  
A  second  change  pertains  to  the  increased  attention  paid  to  the  growing  integration  of  national 
economies into the global economy and the related international linkages.  
Here I will highlight some improvements relating to the surveillance activities of the IMF. One important 
change concerns multilateral surveillance where the goal is to add a more global perspective to IMF 
surveillance  and  to  place  greater  focus  on  international  linkages  and  spillovers.  This  is  clearly 
desirable given the ever closer integration of national economies. Cross-checking between multilateral 
and  bilateral  surveillance  helps  promote  policies  that  are  consistent  not  only  with  other  domestic 
policies,  but  also  with  global  adjustment  within  the  international  monetary  system.  To  foster 
cooperation  on  issues  of  systemic  relevance,  the  International  Community  has  launched  a  new 
supplementary consultation procedure in a multilateral format. I trust that this multilateral consultation 
following the Spring 2006 IMFC meeting has been useful. And I have noted with satisfaction that the 
policy plans, set out by the participants, represent further progress in the implementation of the global 
strategy that the International Community has endorsed. I also trust that these policy plans which are 
being implemented will make a significant contribution to reducing imbalances.  
Apart from strengthening the multilateral dimension of surveillance, the Fund is also in the process of 
adjusting its regional surveillance. Experience has already been gained in the conduct of this form of 
surveillance  as  regional  reports  on  some  monetary  unions,  including  the  euro  area,  have  been 
prepared. That said, I deem it useful that improvements are being considered to place more emphasis 
on  the  interaction  between  surveillance  at  the  regional  and  the  country  level.  Another  area  that 
deserves attention is the treatment of intra-regional linkages and cross-country spillovers. Moreover, 
and on a more general note, I consider it important for the Fund to take full account of the specific 
features of the monetary unions that are subject to surveillance.  
Finally,  a  field  which  is  of  particular  interest  to  the  ECB  is  the  discussion  on  how  the  Fund’s 
surveillance over exchange rates and exchange rate policies could be improved. On a general note, I 
consider  that  the  Fund  in  its  exchange  rate  analysis  should  make  a  clear  distinction  between 
exchange  rates  which  are  a  policy  objective  and  those  which  are  market-determined.  As  far  as 
exchange rate policies are concerned, it is desirable for the Fund to engage in a regular dialogue with 
the  authorities  and  to  provide  a  confidential  view  on  the  appropriateness  of  these  policies  from  a 
country and from a global perspective. In this context, the Fund could play a useful role in assisting 
systemically  important  countries  to  establish  market-based  policy  frameworks.  This  would  help 
minimise  spillover  effects  in  the  form  of  asset  price  distortions  and  risks  of  disruptive  market 
unwinding.  For  the  Fund  to  be  effective,  it  is  of  course  crucial  that  members  comply  with  their 
obligations  to  surveillance,  including  as  regards  the  provision  of  data.  When  it  comes  to  exchange 
rates that are determined by market mechanisms, developments of the domestic economy should be 
reviewed, but communicating publicly on bilateral floating exchange rates should be avoided: it would 
always entail the risk of interfering with the proper functioning of foreign exchange markets and with 
the joint messages that the concerned authorities themselves would agree to give together on their 
own bilateral rates.  
Standards and codes 
It has been a very important development in the financial architecture that the International Community 
has strongly supported the generalisation of standards and codes. In this domain also the G20 played 
an important role. The various standard setting bodies, including the Basel-based committees, the IMF 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 3
and  the  World  Bank  and  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force,  have  managed  to  develop  many 
international  standards  and  codes,  which  have  been  agreed  upon  by  a  rising  number  of  countries. 
These standards and codes cover a broad range of fields such as transparency in fiscal, monetary and 
financial policies, banking supervision, corporate governance, accounting and auditing and reflect the 
growing  interaction  between  the  macroeconomic  and  the  financial  sphere.  The  role  of  these 
instruments  is  highly  significant  as  they  help  anchor  market  expectations by  effectively  constraining 
macroeconomic and financial policy measures. Moreover, compliance with international standards and 
codes makes national policies more transparent and mitigates the risks of disruptive developments. All 
of  these  effects  contribute  to  the  resilience  of  national  economies  as  well  as  the  global  financial 
system. One of the challenges that the standard-setting bodies are faced with is to ensure that the 
various standards and codes are mutually consistent and regularly updated so that they keep pace 
with the changing global financial environment.  
Let me mention, as an example, the voluntary “principles” to underpin a sustainable and healthy flow 
of private capital to emerging markets that I suggested myself a few years ago. Now the “Principles for 
Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets” have been set up thanks to a 
very  active  participation  of  emerging  economies  and  the  private  sector.  The  aim  of  these  market-
based and voluntary principles is to provide guidelines for the behaviour of sovereign issuers and their 
private  creditors  regarding  information  sharing,  dialogue  and  close  cooperation  in  times  of  financial 
distress.  To  date,  over  30  issuing  countries  have  voiced  support  for  the  Principles  and  expressed 
particular  interest  in  advancing  their  implementation.  On  the  investor side,  an increasing number  of 
financial institutions have backed the Principles.  
Integration of macroeconomic and financial surveillance 
The fourth important change concerns the increasing attention to financial sectors and markets that 
the international fora and institutions pay in their monitoring and surveillance of national economies 
and the global economic and financial system.  
A prominent institutional newcomer is the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which was set up in 1999 to 
enhance  policy  coordination  among  national  financial  supervisors,  the  International  Financial 
Institutions, and international standard setters with the aim of promoting international financial stability. 
Its creation came also as a major response to the financial crises of the late 1990s. They had exposed 
numerous weaknesses in the interaction of national authorities in charge of supervision and regulation 
of financial institutions operating in increasingly globalised markets and had underlined the need for 
improved information-sharing and harmonisation of national rules. Already one year after its creation, 
the FSF presented important findings and policy recommendations on three key systemically relevant 
issues,  namely  risks  stemming  from  large  and  volatile  capital  flows,  concerns  relating  to  offshore 
financial centres, and highly leveraged institutions. At the request of the G7, the FSF will soon provide 
an  update  of  its  2000  report  on  highly  leveraged  institutions.  Other  very  important  topics  that  are 
currently  being  monitored  include  credit  risk  transfer  markets  and  the  area  of  private  equity  and 
leveraged buyouts.  
International institutions also place increasing emphasis on the interplay between macroeconomic and 
financial surveillance. The BIS, for instance, has expanded its work on the link of macroeconomic and 
financial stability. Moreover, the IMF in the context of its strategic review is currently considering, and 
has  in  some  instances  already  implemented,  changes  to  its  surveillance  activities  by  placing  more 
focus on the integration of macroeconomic and financial surveillance. Given the increasing role that 
financial sectors and markets play in national economies as well as in the global economy, this is a 
very welcome development. Among the topics that are worth exploring are the identification of critical 
links  between  macroeconomic  and  financial  market  issues.  Also,  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in 
triggering disturbances and spillovers from the country to the global level would have to be studied in 
greater detail. Particularly important tools in this regard are of course the Financial Sector Assessment 
Programs, which the IMF established some time ago. These Programs as well as the assessments of 
observance  of  financial  sector  standards  and  codes  are  important  instruments  to  promote  the 
soundness of financial systems of IMF member countries.  
Conclusions 
3.  
The policy challenges associated with growing global economic and financial interlinkages need to be 
addressed  head-on  so  that  the  benefits  stemming  from  the  rapidly  integrating  global  economy  are 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2007
maximized and the related risks reduced to a minimum. It is for this reason that, as I have set out, the 
governance  of  the  international  monetary  and  financial  system  has  been  upgraded  in  a  number  of 
important ways to remain relevant and effective in the ongoing quest for global financial stability. 
The fact that more and more countries have established sound and transparent policy frameworks has 
led some observers to conclude that policy dialogue at the international level has lost its relevance 
and that the fora and institutions dealing with global financial issues have become redundant. I would 
clearly  disagree  with  this view.  Of  course,  keeping one’s  house in  order and putting  in  place rules-
based  policy  frameworks  are  decisive  contributions  to  the  stability  of  the  global  economic  system. 
However,  given  the  rising  degree  of  global  integration,  these  efforts  alone  do  not  eliminate  the 
potential  for  spillovers  from  one  country  to  another,  adversely  affecting  the  stability  of  the  global 
system.  
Therefore,  policy  cooperation  at  the  international  level  is  vital  to  strengthen  the  ability  of  the  global 
economic system to absorb shocks and hence to deliver the public good of global financial stability. A 
conditio  sine  qua  non  is  that  the  various  fora  and  institutions  that  form  the  international  financial 
architecture are designed and constantly upgraded so that they are up to the task. This is an important 
and ongoing responsibility that policymakers from around the globe are faced with. Living up to this 
responsibility  will  ensure  that,  going  forward,  global  economic  integration  will  lead  to  further  global 
economic prosperity. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 5
