Shamshad Akhtar: Islamic finance – emerging challenges of supervision 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 4th Islamic Financial 
Services Board Summit, Dubai, 15 May 2007. 
 Background 
I. 
Diversification and structural transformation in financial sector has been accompanied by increasing 
integration  among  different  segments  of  the  financial  sector.  The  traditional  boundaries  between 
banks and non-bank financial institutions are eroding and we are witnessing the growth of universal 
banking and/or mergers among different segments of sectors.  
This trend has its benefits but has associated risks as well. Supervisors face a dual challenge. On one 
hand,  supervisors  are  promoting  financial  diversification  and  consolidation  to  achieve  market 
development and innovation. On the other hand, supervisors have to position themselves to recognize 
the  new  dimensions  and  types  of  risks  and  encourage  appropriate  risk  mitigation.  These 
considerations have triggered world wide debate on how to effectively supervise different segments of 
financial sector in conglomerate and universal structure.  
So far these debates had been concentrated around conventional banking but now it is widely gripping 
the  world  of  Islamic  Finance  (IF).  Stronger  inter-dependencies  among  different  segments  of  IF  are 
emerging largely because Islamic Financial Institutions (IFIs), in principle, have features and inherent 
characteristics and more compulsion, than conventional banking, to conform to universal banking or to 
evolve inter-linkages among different market segments.  
Factors driving cross-sector linkages and interdependencies 
II. 
First  and  foremost,  IFIs’  depositors/borrowers  desire  to  conduct  financial  transactions  that  are 
Shariah compliant. It can be assumed that a person preferring to bank with an Islamic bank will also 
seek to use other faith-based financial services such as Takaful and Islamic mutual funds. This faith-
driven feature in itself forces and incentivizes IFIs to offer, along side bank-based services (i.e. deposit 
and loans), a wide range of financial services. As a result, Islamic banks end up undertaking non-core 
banking  activities  such  as  fund  management,  capital  market  operations,  securitization,  leasing,  and 
housing finance. This has enhanced the degree of integration between various segments of IF. For 
example: Islamic banks are likely to be strongly integrated with the Shariah capital markets since on 
credit portfolio side, Islamic banks do not have the same investment avenues as those available to 
their conventional counterparts. The outcome is that Islamic banks either end up taking large exposure 
in the capital markets directly or acquire subsidiaries which primarily engage in such businesses. 
Second differentiating aspect is the nature of contractual arrangements that drive deposits mobilized 
by conventional banks as compared to Islamic banks. Conventional bank deposits are interest based 
contracts  with  guaranteed  interest  return  whereas  Islamic  banks  raise  deposit  on  a  profit  and  loss 
sharing basis in either a Mudaraba or Musharaka structure. Mudaraba/Musharaka contracts transform 
the  Islamic  banks’  deposits  into  essentially  a  fund  management  product  (although  currently  most 
regulators  recognize  these  as  equivalent  to  conventional  deposit  contracts)  and  this  impacts  the 
corresponding asset portfolio. There is a need therefore that Islamic banks acquire assets on a PLS 
basis as well and eventually move beyond fixed return products, like Murabaha and Ijara. This pushes 
an Islamic bank towards universal banking since in order to manage the portfolio profitability; it needs 
to  invest  across  sectors  in  businesses  based  on  Shariah  principles,  like  equity  and  Sukuks  in  the 
capital market and trade contracts like commodity Murabaha, Musharaka, Ijara and Takaful.  
Thirdly, further development of Islamic banking itself depends on concurrent development of Islamic 
capital market. For instance, development of Islamic debt market is key to the provision of adequate 
liquidity  support  while  providing  additional  investment  avenues.  Likewise,  Takaful  development  is 
critical to provide insurance coverage to Islamic banking products, like auto and consumer financing, 
while  strengthening  secondary  capital  and  Islamic  bond  markets  by  being  a  major  buyer  of  Islamic 
instruments. It is the confluence of these factors that have induced regulators to encourage and IFs to 
promote rapid and deeper financial inter-linkages and integration.  
BIS Review 68/2007 
 1
Supervisory challenges posed by cross-sector developments 
III. 
It  is  some  of  these  above  considerations  that  have  augmented  strategic  alliances  and  linkages  of 
various types among IFIs, both within country and cross borders. As such, IFIs are evolving either as 
part of a global financial concern or as a domestic bank acquiring or establishing subsidiaries and/or 
the  two  arms,  i.e.  Islamic  and  conventional  banks  coexist.  Moreover,  as  the  conventional  parts  of 
financial  institutions  move  towards  cross-sector  integration,  their  Islamic  counterparts  (either  as 
specialized window or as independent entities) will also follow eventually.  
While it has by now been well established that there are significant benefits of enhanced integration 
and inter-linkages or conglomeration in IF, such as the economies of scale, operational synergies and 
effective use of scarce human resource, there are definitely certain risks.1 In this area, I would like to 
offer few basic observations. 
Firstly, it is inevitable that enhanced exposure of Islamic banks into capital markets exposes them to 
the volatility in associated businesses. Likewise, conglomeration, whether through universal banking 
or  through  parent  subsidiary  model,2  exposes  them  to  a  variety  of  issues  such  as  contagion  risk, 
regulatory arbitrage, high group exposures, conflict of interest etc. These risks apply equally to both 
Islamic  and  conventional  modes  of  finance.  However,  Islamic  banks  have  thus  far  not  erected 
firewalls, like conventional banks, to separate legally, financially and managerially their investment and 
commercial  banking  activities.  Obviously  these  risks  pose  a  challenge  to  the  supervisors  and 
necessitate that appropriate changes be made in the supervisory regime.  
Secondly, Shariah compliance issues necessitate taking a more aligned view across IF businesses as 
user of Islamic products may be oblivious of ideological differences as well as varying perceptions and 
interpretation  of  the  Shariah  advisors  or  boards  and/or  by  regulators.  Since  institutions  being 
supervised by one regulatory authority may be offering products of institutions being supervised by a 
different  regulatory  body,  this  could  introduce  complications  and  the  challenge  of  ensuring  uniform 
Shariah compliance across financial institutions and products.  
Thirdly,  traditionally  different  segments  have  been  regulated  by  their  specialized  supervisory 
authorities.  These  authorities  have  adopted  risk  management  principles  and  supervisory  stances 
which are strictly in line with the risk profile of supervised sectors in isolation. With sector integration, 
supervisors  have  to  coordinate  closely  in  policy  formulation  and  regulation  as  well  as  on-site 
supervision.  They  have  to  coordinate  creation  of  necessary  firewalls,  remove  moral  hazards  and 
govern  the  degree  of  cross  segment  exposure.  This  may  even  call  for  institutional  restructuring 
through  merging  various  supervisory  bodies  into  a  single  entity  or  for  closer  coordination  between 
supervisors through creation of a third coordinating body. 
Sector inter-linkages of Pakistan’s Islamic finance system 
IV. 
In Pakistan, besides offering trade loans, like Murabaha, Islamic banks are offering equity and quasi 
equity  products,  such  as  Musharaka  and  diminishing  Musharaka,  and  investment  banking  activities 
such as loan syndication, structured finance, etc. The six full fledged Islamic banks with a network of 
108 branches and another 58 stand alone Islamic branches of 13 conventional banks have registered 
phenomenal growth and as of April 2007, the Islamic banking sector constituted 3.3% of total banking 
assets.3 In view of the equity based nature of Islamic banking and lack of Shariah compliant financial 
instruments, central bank has allowed Islamic banks a relatively higher exposure (35% direct and 10% 
future of their equity) in capital markets compared to conventional banks (20% direct and 10% future). 
In  addition,  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  has  relaxed  statutory  reserve  requirement  (SLR)  for 
Islamic banks at 8% versus industry norm of 18%.  
                                                      
1   Financial Sector Regulation: Issues and Gaps, IMF 2004. 
2   Universal Banks: First structure is of universal bank, in which all financial operations are conducted within a single corporate 
entity. The second model is the parent-subsidiary or operating subsidiary model, in which operations are conducted in and 
regulated as subsidiaries of another financial institution, usually (but not necessarily) a bank. Finally, in a holding company 
model activities are conducted in legally distinct entities, each with separate management and capital but all owned by a 
single financial or sometimes (unregulated) non-financial institution. 
3   See Annex A for details on product wise share and bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2007
Furthermore,  Islamic  banks  are  allowed  to  nurture  parent-subsidiary/affiliate  model  whereby  Islamic 
banks are by and large setting up asset management companies, brokerage firms and, now, Takaful 
businesses. Thus far the supervision of IFIs is bifurcated, with Islamic banks being regulated by SBP 
and  non-bank  IFIs,  namely,  Modarabas,  Islamic  mutual  funds,  Takaful  companies  and  securities 
operations  under  the  regulatory  oversight  of  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan 
(SECP).  
Sector specific supervisory approach is also characterized by varying regulatory requirements vis-à-vis 
operational  matters,  governance  framework  and  Shariah  compliance  across  the  range  of  IFIs.  The 
differences extend to minimum capital requirements ranging from Rs6 billion for Islamic banks (by the 
year 2009), Rs500 million for family Takaful operators (by the year 2011), Rs300 million for general 
Takaful operators (by the year 2011) and Rs30 million for Islamic fund managers to Rs2.5 million for 
Modaraba  management  companies.  The  low  capital  base  of  financial  institutions,  engaged  in  the 
business  of  Takaful  or  fund  management,  poses  a  significant  risk  to  the  solvency  of  financial 
conglomerates that characterize the Islamic financial markets. In terms of financial reporting, Takaful 
companies  are  not  required  to  circulate  quarterly  accounts  among  shareholders  whereas  all  other 
Islamic financial institutions are required to do so in terms of the legal and regulatory framework.  
The  segregated  supervisory  approach  has  resulted  in  carving  of  legal  framework  specific  to  each 
sector  for  both  conventional  banks  and  IFIs4  but  eventually  there  is  a  need  for  addressing  the 
idiosyncratic nature of IF industry, products and market players. Moreover, with regard to IF, both the 
regulators are following different approaches towards Shariah compliance in the institutions regulated 
by  them.  SBP  requires  Islamic  banks  to  appoint  Shariah  advisors  according  to  a  prescribed  fit  and 
proper  criteria  and  a  Shariah  Board  has  been  constituted  at  the  level  of  SBP  to  deal  with  issues 
relating  to  Shariah  interpretation  and  compliance  among  Islamic  banks.  SECP’s  approach  varies 
across different segments of IF. A Religious Board, constituted by the government, is responsible for 
approving  the  prospectus  of  each  Modaraba  containing  the  types  of  business  to  be  conducted, 
management,  etc.  While  the  Religious  Board  has  a  significant  role,  there  is  no  requirement  for 
Modarabas  or  their  management  companies  to  appoint  Shariah  advisers  at  individual  fund  level. 
Islamic  mutual  funds  and  Takaful  operators,  on  the  other  hand,  are  required  to  appoint  Shariah 
Council/Boards but no explicit fit and proper criteria has been laid down by SECP in this regard. SECP 
is also authorized to appoint a Central Shariah Board under the Takaful Rules, 2005, which has not 
been established as yet.  
The  greatest  challenge  resulting  from  different  Shariah  compliance  practices  followed  by  Islamic 
banks, Modarabas, Takaful companies, etc. is the reputational risk faced by IFIs and misperceptions in 
the minds of public about Shariah compliance. This issue, therefore, needs to be addressed through 
coordination amongst the supervisors.  
Another  issue  arises  from  overlapping  supervisory  jurisdiction.  The  Banking  Company  Ordinance 
allows  banks  to  act  as  Modaraba  management  companies  for  floatation  of  Modarabas.  In  terms  of 
Modaraba Companies Ordinance, Modarabas can be formed to conduct any type of business, which is 
permitted  under  Shariah,  be  it  trading,  manufacturing,  airline,  financing,  leasing,  services,  etc.  and 
these  are  regulated  by  SECP.  Due  to  overlapping  regulatory  jurisdictions,  banks  are  floating 
modarabas  through  separate  subsidiaries,5  resulting  in  higher  administrative,  set  up  and  regulatory 
costs. For sometime (from 1991-1997), these Modarabas were under the regulatory control of SBP, 
but  the  powers  relating  to  licensing,  winding  up,  etc.  were  retained  by  SECP;  consequently  the 
regulatory  authority  has  been  reverted  to  SECP.  Again,  this  highlights  the  need  for  cross  sector 
regulation of IFIs. 
Eventually  there  is  a  need  to  develop mechanisms  for  oversight of  financial sector  in  an  integrated 
manner.  Besides  coordination  and  cooperation  among  regulators,  there  is  a  need  for  consolidated 
supervision framework for financial institutions, guidelines for consolidated public financial statements 
and  application  of regulatory  prudential  limits  on  group wide  basis  and  coordination  to  examine  the 
intra group linkages with industrial and commercial entities. While conventional and Islamic financial 
industry would have to adopt similar approaches to integrated supervision, it has to be recognized that 
                                                      
4   Fund management, as used here, refers to management of Islamic mutual funds and Modarabas. 
5   A number of banks have formed subsidiaries and floated modarabas like NBP, HBL, ABL, Habib Metropolitan Bank, etc. No 
Islamic bank has yet floated a Modaraba. 
BIS Review 68/2007 
 3
the latter is a relatively nascent industry and hence the targets should be modified to match the ground 
realities. 
Conclusion 
V. 
IFSB’s ten year roadmap has highlighted the cross sector nature of IFIs and the resultant need for 
supervision to evolve accordingly. It is in recognition of these factors that IFSB has sought to broaden 
its membership to securities and insurance supervisory authorities as Full Members of IFSB. IFSB’s 
efforts for developing Islamic regulations as well as accounting, auditing and governance standards 
will  facilitate  adoption  of  unified  principles  for  the  development,  operation  and  regulation  of  Islamic 
financial services.  
4 
 BIS Review 68/2007
