Amando M Tetangco, Jr: BSP & BMAP – continuing partnership for a stronger 
banking system 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Induction of the Board of Directors and General Membership Meeting of 
the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines (BMAP), Manila, 6 February 2007. 
 Distinguished  board  of  directors,  officers  and  members  of  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the 
Philippines (BMAP), colleagues in the banking industry, friends, ladies and gentlemen: Good evening! 
First, I wish to congratulate the BMAP board of 2006 for a job well done. As your President reported, 
much was accomplished during the year, even as you had fun as well. Let us therefore give all of you 
a well-deserved round of applause.  
I especially thank BMAP members for your support for the National Coin Recirculation Program of the 
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  the  “Tulong  Barya  Para  sa  Eskwela”  campaign.  Clearly,  it  was  a 
successful campaign as both the public and your banks are now more conscious of recirculating our 
barya. We also thank the BMAP members who provided promotional support for the campaign.  
Equally important, banks cooperated fully by accepting millions of coin donations and by making direct 
contributions to “Tulong Barya.” If we are to combine the donations raised and the production savings 
of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, “Tulong Barya” generated benefits worth P13 million for our public 
elementary schools!  
Let us therefore give another round of applause for this successful partnership between the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas and the BMAP!  
Moving forward, I am very pleased to know that the 2007 Board of BMAP is unique, and possibly a 
trendsetter,  insofar  as  representations  are  concerned:  you  have  universal  banks  (Metrobank  and 
RCBC),  commercial  banks  (Security  Bank,  PBCOM,  Phil.  Veterans),  a  thrift  bank  (World  Partners 
Bank),  a  government  bank  (DBP)  a  private  development  bank  (Plantersbank),  an  ATM  consortium 
(Bancnet) and, for the first time, a rural bank (Green Bank in Mindanao)!  
I  am  confident  therefore  that  BMAP,  in  2007,  will  be  able  to  implement  its  programs  in  a  more 
comprehensive and responsive manner.  
To  us  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  this  is  good  news  indeed.  As  one  of  several  core 
organizations  in  the  banking  sector,  BMAP’s  continuing  advocacy  for  banking  reforms  and  for 
strengthening  consumer  information  and  protection….is  certain  to  strengthen  our  partnership  in 
working toward a responsive and globally competitive banking system. 
With  the  economy  on  the  rise  and  savings  rate  on  the  upswing,  this  is  the  perfect  time  for  BMAP 
members  to  take  the  lead  in  ensuring  that  marketing  of  bank  products  and  services  are  done  in 
accordance with the good governance tenets of fairness, accountability and transparency.  
You  and  I  know  a  bad  egg  can  unfairly  spoil  and  soil  the  well-guarded  reputation  of  banks.  It  is 
imperative  therefore  that  BMAP  does  its  share  in  policing  its  own  ranks  in  accordance  with  the 
standards set in your brainchild that is the “Service Code for Consumer Banking in the Philippines.” 
This is the only way we can sustain public confidence in the banking system.  
As  BMAP  itself  said:  “bank-client  relationship  is  based  on  mutual  trust,  and  fair  banking  practices 
produce optimum results for both parties. Therefore, adherence to high service standards remains to 
be the primary concern of members of the banking industry.”  
I  hope  therefore  that  BMAP  will  sustain  its  efforts  in  providing  truthful,  useful  information,  and 
responsive service to its clients.  
I am pleased to note that some of our recommendations are being implemented by some banks. For 
instance,  several  ATM  machines  now  indicate  its  fees  before  a  transaction  is  initiated.  I  hope  that 
within the year, we would see all ATM machines doing the same.  
As  a  public  service,  I  also  recommend  that  all  banks  and  its  branches  prominently  display  in  their 
premises  the  names  and  contact  details  of  bank  officers  they  can  call  or  write  to  for  concerns  that 
remain unattended.  
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
I  say  this  because  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  has  been  receiving  more  and  more  complaints 
against banks which do not respond to their queries or request for clarification.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the banking community. Listen to your clients….take care of them…fulfill the 
promise of service you gave them when you marketed your products and services. You have it in you 
to facilitate the deepening of our capital markets by nurturing public confidence in the banking system.  
Economic Trends 
To anchor your marketing efforts, I will give you a brief overview of our economy in general and our 
banking sector in particular.  
As you all know, our economy continues to expand, with the services sector, to which banks belong, 
remaining as the main engine of growth, supported by the agriculture and the manufacturing sectors. 
On the demand side, resilient household spending and robust exports were the key drivers of growth.  
Other  positive  indicators  are  the  strengthening  peso;  the  steady  decline  in  inflation  –  3.9%  as  of 
January 2007; and generally stable food prices.  
Fundamental improvements in the fiscal sector resulting from higher revenue collections and prudent 
spending have been instrumental in shaping this much better economic picture.  
The external sector likewise significantly improved, with overall balance of payments (BOP) yielding a 
surplus of US$3.7 billion in 2006. In addition, gross international reserves (GIR) rose to a new record-
high  level  of  US$23  billion  as  of  end-December  2006  on  the  back  of  strong  dollar  inflows  from 
overseas Filipino workers remittances and from foreign investments. 
Banking system performance 
These  positive  economic  trends  augured  well  for  the  sustained  growth  and  stability  of  the  banking 
system. 
Financial indicators as of end-November 2006 revealed key strengths of the banking system: double-
digit growth in resources and deposit base; strong capital position; and enhanced profitability. 
We also achieved positive results in the ongoing asset cleanup in the banking system. The level of 
non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  in  the  banking  system  as  of  November  2006  was  at  P171  billion,  an 
almost 50 percent reduction from its peak of P306 billion in December 2001. Consequently, NPL ratio 
of the banking system further improved to 7.3 percent.  
Meanwhile, non-performing assets (NPAs) have dropped to 7.8 percent after peaking at 14.6 percent 
in  December  2001.  This  improvement  in  asset  quality  was  complemented  by  a  steady  increase  in 
provisioning for probable losses, demonstrating banks’ resolve to strengthen their balance sheets.  
We also saw an expansion in lending activity in 2006, with total loan portfolio increasing by 8.4 percent 
year-on-year to P2.0 trillion as of end-November 2006.  
Given its intrinsic function as an intermediary of funds, the banking system should continue to be at 
the  forefront  of  channeling  resources  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  that  can,  in  turn, 
provide a solid basis for a more balanced and sustainable economic growth. 
With these sound fundamentals as base, we can look forward to brighter prospects for the banking 
system in 2007. Nevertheless, let me emphasize that these prospects also rely heavily on the banking 
system’s sustained ability to rise to the challenge of a rapidly changing financial landscape.  
While the profitability of the banking sector has been on the rise, these are not exactly easy times for 
the  banking  industry.  Given  an  increasingly  integrated  financial  world,  the  banking  system  is  up 
against  a  scenario  that,  on  the  one  hand,  holds  fresh  opportunities  and  on  the  other,  presents  a 
myriad of complex challenges. 
Policy directions 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  BMAP.  This  year,  the  banking  system’s  flexibility  to  adapt  to  market 
changes will again be put to the test. That means you have a lot of work to do.  
2 
 BIS Review 13/2007
We are in for another hectic agenda as we move onward with our task of implementing substantial 
reforms that would ensure basic safety and soundness and promote greater efficiency of the banking 
system.  
Foremost  in  our  agenda  is  the  ongoing  asset  cleanup  in  the  banking  system.  We  are  now 
implementing the second phase of the cleanup process as an aftermath of the approval of the two-
year extension of the SPV Law in May 2006. 
To date, asset disposition under SPV II has reached 31 billion, involving the sale/transfer of NPAs to 
SPVs.  In  the  coming  months,  we  expect  more  transactions  to  be  completed  as  an  estimated  P51 
billion of applications are now in the pipeline.  
Equally  important  in  our  reform  agenda  is  our  continuing  initiative  to  upgrade  domestic  prudential 
standards in line with international best practices, specifically in the areas of corporate governance, 
risk management and capital adequacy.  
A  highly  anticipated  development  is  the  forthcoming  transition  to  Basel  II  in  July  2007.  Unlike  the 
existing BSP risk-based capital adequacy framework, the new Basel II-based framework will not only 
focus on the computation of the appropriate level of capital given a certain level of exposure, but will 
also highlight the need for more market disclosures by banks on their risk management exposures and 
practices.  
Preparatory  regulations  have  been  laid  down  to  ensure  a  smoother  implementation  of  the  Basel  II 
framework. 
Another  major  policy  thrust  of  the  BSP  is  to  foster  a  strengthened  environment  with  the  full 
implementation  of  consolidated  and  risk-based  supervision.  The  aim  is  to  provide  a  more 
comprehensive assessment of the policies, processes, personnel, and control systems of banks rather 
than on regulation compliance audit. We believe this is a more dynamic and forward-looking approach 
that is more compatible with modern banking practices.  
This is being complemented with enhanced regulations on risk management as a way of developing 
appropriate  standards  suited  to  banks’  risk-taking  activities.  These  include:  (1)  guidelines  for  the 
development  and  implementation  of  banks’  internal  credit  risk  rating  systems;  (2)  guidelines  on  the 
supervision by risk; (3) guidelines on technology risk management; and (4) guidelines on market risk 
management and liquidity risk management. 
Another related issuance of the BSP is the revision of the prompt corrective action (PCA) framework. 
The  aim  is  to  encourage  banks  to  take  early  action  to  align  capital  with  actual  risk  exposures, 
implement  business  improvement  measures  through  better  risk  management  and  strengthen 
corporate governance. 
We  will  also  carry  on  with  our  task  of  fostering  the  development  of  our  financial  markets  through 
support  for  various  legislative  measures,  such  as  the  creation  of  a  centralized  credit  information 
system. A centralized credit information system will further strengthen our efforts to improve the quality 
of financial information available to investors, enhance private sector access to credit, and minimize 
exposure to risks of financial intermediaries.  
On other key fronts, the BSP will also give priority to the development of the domestic capital market, 
in partnership with the private sector and other government agencies. We will continue to work toward 
creating  a  sound  market  infrastructure,  enhancing  transparency  and  market  discipline  mechanisms, 
promoting greater investor protection, and supporting the passage of key legislative measures. 
As supervisor of the banking system, the BSP is also deeply committed to ensure there is adequate 
consumer protection when it comes to banking and other related financial services. 
In fact, we remain steadfast in promoting financial literacy nationwide. Our primary objective is not only 
to enhance awareness of the basic consumer rights but also the inherent responsibilities of all market 
participants.  Hence,  we  have  been  conducting  briefings  for  special  interest  groups  and  local 
authorities in selected provinces. Let us therefore work together on more projects to promote financial 
literacy. 
Meanwhile, our internal capacity building initiatives included the creation of a “Consumer Affairs Unit” 
in our Supervision and Examination Sector to have a more focused, efficient and consistent handling 
of  consumer  complaints.  However,  to  more  directly  address  the  problems,  we  strongly  encourage 
banks to strengthen their customer care efforts and be more responsive to your clients in dealing with 
their issues. After all, goodwill is the long-run key to your success as financial institutions. 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 3
As bank marketing professionals, we will be relying on your continued assistance in promoting greater 
consumer  protection  and  upholding  financial  literacy  in  the  banking  system.  As  the  umbrella 
organization  of  bank  marketing  professionals,  BMAP  is  expected  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  these 
initiatives. 
These reforms all form an integral part of the BSP’s continuing reform agenda geared toward further 
strengthening the financial sector and improving overall confidence in the banking system.  
Ladies and gentlemen of the BMAP, we are counting on your support in reaching this goal. We can do 
no less in ensuring the continuous development of our country and in improving the quality of life of all 
Filipinos.  
Again, my congratulations to BMAP. Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. Mabuhay! 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2007
