Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia’s experience in strengthening its market for 
global sukuk activities 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
2nd  Malaysian  Islamic  Finance  –  Issuers  and  Investors  Forum  2007  "Malaysia  as  Global 
Sukuk  Centre:  Towards  Greater  Vibrancy  of  Malaysian  Sukuk  Market",  Kuala  Lumpur, 
13 August 2007. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the Central Bank of Malaysia’s 
website.  
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  speak  at  the  2nd  Malaysian  Islamic  Finance  –  Issuers  and 
Investors  Forum  2007  that  brings  together  industry  practitioners  and  investors  to  discuss 
recent  developments  and  key  issues  in  Islamic  finance.  Islamic  financial  markets  in 
particular, have experienced significant evolution and rapid expansion. We are now seeing 
the  emergence  of  highly  innovative  products  and  services  in  sukuk  market.  My  remarks 
today  will  focus  on  the  vast  growth  potential  of  the  global  sukuk  market  and  Malaysia's 
experience in strengthening our market for Global Sukuk activities. 
Vast growth potential for sukuk  
The  growing  role  of  Islamic  finance  in  mobilising  and  channelling  funds  to  productive 
investment activities across borders contributes to more efficient allocation of funds across 
borders and facilitates international trade and investment. Greater diversification of risks also 
contributes towards promoting international financial stability. The more recent developments 
in Islamic finance is the growing significance of the sukuk market to become an increasingly 
important  component  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  Five  major  trends  are  having  a 
significant bearing on the future development of the global sukuk market.  
Firstly, the bond market is now becoming key to meeting the funding requirements for both 
the public and private sectors in emerging market economies. This is particularly the case for 
the  Middle  East  and  Asia,  which  are  among  the  fastest  growing  regions  in  the  global 
economy. This includes financial needs of the private sector following the privatisation and 
implementation of infrastructure projects. The development of the Islamic Bond Market, the 
Sukuk Market will provide opportunities for the corporate sector, the government agencies, 
multinational corporations and multinational development institutions to raise funds through 
the issuance of sukuk to meet their financing requirements. The sukuk market also serves as 
an  important  platform,  complementing  the  conventional  bond  market,  in  enhancing  the 
effectiveness and efficiency for the mobilisation and allocation of funds within the domestic 
financial system, as well as in the international financial system. 
Secondly, while there has been growing interest in the issuance of sukuks by corporations, 
sovereigns and multinational corporations, the demand for sukuks significantly exceeds the 
supply.  Today,  the  global  sukuk  market,  denominated  in  international  currencies,  is 
estimated  to  exceed  USD50  billion.  Although  the  size  of  the  market  is  modest  by  global 
standards,  the  sukuk  market  is  experiencing  remarkable  growth,  increasing  at  an  average 
rate of growth of forty per cent per annum.  
The significant demand for sukuks have been spurred by the high levels of surplus savings 
and reserves in Asia and in the Middle East. This has been reinforced by increased liquidity 
in the international financial system in search of higher returns and greater diversification of 
risk.  Since  the  issuance  of  the  first  sovereign  global  Islamic  sukuk  by  the  Government  of 
Malaysia in 2002, there has been a series of other issues by the governments of United Arab 
Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain and Pakistan. An increased number of multilateral agencies have 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 1
also issued sukuks to finance development projects. In addition, both government agencies 
and  the  corporate  sector  have  considered  the sukuk  market  as  an  attractive  instrument  of 
financing.  
Thirdly, there is a great number of global players such as investment banks, Islamic banks 
and securities firms that are involved in the issuance of sukuk in the international financial 
markets.  A  large  number  of  Western  banks  are  also  providing  Islamic  financial  services 
taking  advantage  of  the  opportunities  and  to  provide  customised  products  and  services  to 
their customers.  
Fourthly, the established international financial centres have also shown interests to have an 
active  role  in  promoting  the  development  of  the  sukuk  market  including  enacting  the 
appropriate legislative provisions. These developments would augur well for the development 
of the sukuk market.  
Finally,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  paradigm  continues  to  evolve.  Indeed,  the  recent 
decade had witnessed significant global shifts in the approach to regulation and supervision 
across  many  countries.  In  addition,  the  harmonisation  of  standards  and  practices  is  also 
important. The establishment of the international standard setting organizations such as the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for 
Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI),  to  formulate  appropriate  prudential  and  accounting 
standards that would not only facilitate the process of harmonisation but also contribute to 
the  strengthening  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  IFSB  has  already  formulated  the 
prudential treatment for sukuk investment by the Islamic financial institutions as stipulated in 
the Capital Adequacy Standards.  
Malaysia's strength in the sukuk market 
Let me now turn to Malaysia's sukuk market. Significant progress has been achieved in the 
development  of  the  Malaysian  sukuk  market.  In  2007,  Malaysia  accounted  for  about  two-
thirds of the global sukuk outstanding, amounting to about USD47 billion. Malaysia not only 
represents the largest sukuk market in terms of outstanding size, but also in terms of number 
of issuance.  
In  developing  the  sukuk  market,  Malaysia  provides  a  total  solution  for  sukuk  activities  by 
providing  a  complete  sukuk  issuance  and  trading  platform,  that  is  supported  by  four 
elements:  a  wide  range  of  Islamic  instruments,  strong  legal  and  regulatory  infrastructure, 
sound Shariah governance framework and the talent supply. These elements are also further 
strengthened  by  Malaysia's  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system  with  all  the  key 
components of the financial system comprising the Islamic banking, takaful, Islamic money 
and capital markets that are now at an advanced stage of development. These different parts 
of  the  Islamic  financial  system  not  only  facilitates  the  issuance  and  the  distribution  of  the 
papers but also creates a strong demand for sukuk by providing a broad investor base. 
There is also a variety of Islamic instruments in the sukuk market in Malaysia that includes 
currency swaps and Islamic forward contracts available to facilitate hedging and other risk 
management activities. The Malaysian Sukuk market, is also supported by appropriate rules 
and regulations, and by the pool of experienced global and domestic players as well as the 
legal  and  accounting  professionals  including  legal  and  tax  consultancy,  as  well  as 
documentation in the issuance and trading exercise.  
In promoting Malaysia as an International Islamic Financial Centre (MIFC) we aim to develop 
Malaysia into a centre for the origination, distribution and trading of sukuks to provide further 
impetus  to  the  development  of  an  increasingly  vibrant  and  progressive  bond  market  in 
Malaysia as well as in the Asian region. This would reinforce the international dimension of 
the sukuk market in Malaysia by providing linkages with international issuers and investors. 
To  deepen  and  widen  the  bond  and  sukuk  markets,  Malaysia  has  further  liberalised  the 
foreign exchange administration rules to allow multilateral financial institutions, multinational 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2007
in 
the 
Islamic 
framework 
legal,  regulatory  and  Shariah 
and other national corporations to issue both ringgit and non-ringgit denominated instruments 
in our capital market. 
Malaysia  also  has  in  place  the  financial  infrastructure  and  facilitative  rules  that  contribute 
towards  efficient  price  discovery  and  shorter  time  to  market,  thus  providing  an  efficient 
platform for sukuk issuance and trading activities. 
The  established 
financial 
infrastructure in Malaysia is reinforced by the supporting financial infrastructure, including the 
settlement and bond information system.  
To facilitate an efficient sukuk issuance process in Malaysia, an MIFC One-stop centre is 
being  established  as  a  single  contact  point  for  efficient  delivery  process  to  facilitate  the 
issuance of sukuk. To further facilitate this process, there is no restriction on the ability to use 
international  rating  services,  on  the  ability  to  hedge  positions  and  on  the  ability  to  swap 
issuance proceeds into foreign currency.  
As part of our ongoing efforts to position Malaysia as an attractive gateway for the issuance 
of sukuk, a number of legal and regulatory requirements are further customised to reduce the 
cost of sukuk issuance. Profits and dividends received by non-resident investors from holding 
of  ringgit  and  non-ringgit  Islamic  instruments  issued  in  Malaysia  are  exempted  from 
withholding  tax.  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  (SPV)  for  Islamic  financing  purposes  via  the 
Islamic capital market are not subject to the administrative procedures under the Income Tax 
Act 1967. In addition, companies that establish these SPVs are given a tax deduction on the 
issuance cost of the Islamic securities incurred by the SPV. The issuance cost for all Islamic 
securities approved by the Securities Commission are also eligible for tax deduction. Finally, 
there  is  a  stamp  duty  exemption  for  10  years  on  instruments  relating  to  Islamic  securities 
under the MIFC.  
Malaysia has also put in place an efficient platform for trading of bonds including the Real-
time  Electronic  Transfer  of  Funds  and  Securities  System  (RENTAS),  Fully  Automated 
System  for  Issuance/Tendering  (FAST),  and  Bond  Information  and  Dissemination  System 
(BIDS)  to  provide  post-trade  transparency  and  market  liquidity  on  par  with  developed 
markets.  Malaysia  has  a  payment  system  link  with  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  on  US 
dollar  settlements,  while 
the  Malaysian  Government  Securities  are  clearable  with 
Clearstream.  
Finally,  of  importance  is  a  conducive  environment  for  innovation  and  this  has  been  put  in 
place.  In  2006,  the  Malaysian  market  continued  to  generate  innovative  products  with  the 
launch  of  sukuk  using  Mudharabah,  Musyarakah  and  Ijarah.  Landmark  issuance  such  as 
exchangeable  sukuk  Musyarakah  by  Khazanah  Nasional  Berhad,  marked  the  world's  first 
issue  of  its  kind,  incorporating  full  convertibility  features  common  to  conventional  equity-
linked transactions.  
An important enabling factor driving innovation is the availability of the pool of experienced 
talent.  There  are  currently  9,000  staff  with  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  They  are  also 
reinforced by the workforce of domestic and foreign conventional financial institutions. This 
expertise that resides in Malaysia allows for the development of innovative products so as to 
ensure that the product design and structure, as well as the risk management aspects that 
are being rigorously addressed.  
There is also positive response from the local and foreign financial institutions to establish 
International Islamic Bank, International Takaful Operator, as well as International Currency 
Business Unit to undertake international currency business in Islamic finance in Malaysia. To 
date,  eight  financial  institutions  have  been  granted  approval  to  set  up  such  International 
Currency Business Units in Malaysia.  
Commercial  banks  and  investment  banks  licensed  under  the  Banking  and  Financial 
Institutions Act 1989 (BAFIA) are allowed to establish International Currency Business Units 
to carry out Islamic banking business under their existing entities. 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 3
To enhance the delivery system to facilitate their establishment, an "executive green lane" 
has been accorded to expedite applications by expatriates for long-term employment passes 
with  multiple  entry  visas.  In  addition,  the  Foreign  Investment  Committee  rules  are  also 
relaxed  further  to  allow  for  100  percent  foreign  equity  ownership  in  these  financial 
institutions.  
The  MIFC  portal  has  also  been  launched  as  the  primary  source  of  comprehensive  online 
information  on  the  latest  initiatives  and  developments,  and  enables  convenient  access  to 
application  forms,  procedures  and  guidelines  related  to  entrance  and  participation  in  the 
MIFC. This Portal, is now accessible online at www.mifc.com.  
The  large  gathering  of  practitioners  here  for  these  two  days  to  discuss  the  wide  ranging 
matters  that  relate  to  issuers  and  investors  will  contribute  to  enhancing  the  collective 
understanding and expanding the boundaries of our knowledge on the opportunities in the 
sukuk  market  and  the potential  that  the  Malaysian  sukuk  market  provides  and  its  linkages 
with other international Islamic financial systems. This would facilitate greater cross border 
flows  and  not  only  contributing  to  enhancing  greater  international  economic  and  financial 
integration,  and  thus  to  the  global  growth,  but  also  towards  financial  stability  of  the 
international financial system.  
On this note, I wish you a successful conference. 
Supplementary information: 
The MIFC Secretariat is pleased to announce that the MIFC Portal has been launched as a 
key communication platform to strengthen the global identity and branding of Malaysia as an 
International Islamic Financial Centre, or MIFC. The development of the MIFC Portal is an 
important initiative to promote awareness and global outreach of the MIFC. 
The MIFC Portal provides comprehensive information on the latest initiatives, incentives and 
developments  in  the  MIFC.  In  addition,  the  MIFC  Portal  enables  convenient  access  to 
application  forms,  procedures  and  guidelines  related  to  entrance  and  participation  in  the 
MIFC.  The  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  announced  the  launch  of  the  MIFC  Portal 
during  her  keynote  address  at  the  2nd  Malaysian  Islamic  Finance  –  Investors  and  Issuers 
Forum 2007. The MIFC Portal is now accessible online at www.mifc.com. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2007
