Kemal Kozarić: Reflections on ten years of the Central Bank of Bosnia 
and Herzegovina 
Speech by Mr Kemal Kozarić, Governor of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at 
the  conference  on  the  10th  Anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
Sarajevo, 13 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Governors, 
From those previous presentations, you could hear about all the challenges that the Central 
Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  faced  during  the  previous  10  years.  The  new  Governing 
Board and the Management, in the full capacity, have been running this institution for three 
years now on the same principles, committed to maintain the local currency stability and the 
price stability, as the most important tasks of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The transition to the local management was done smoothly, which, to be honest, we actually 
expected. The Law on the CBBH has defined this state institution as independent and has 
given  us  a  good  base  for  performing  all  the  set  tasks  with  a  professional  attitude  and 
experience.  The  governing  structure  and  all  the  staff  were  motivated  to  have  the  Central 
Bank continue to go the way of stability, safety and confidence. 
The saying that confidence is difficult to gain, but easy to lose, may be the most evident in 
central banking, so we defined our policies very carefully in order to avoid the possibility of 
risking our reputation. 
Applying the currency board principles, we have continued to invest, in a safe and efficient 
way, the foreign exchange reserves of our Central Bank and today they reach the highest 
amounts since its establishment (KM 6.4 billion or USD 4.4). The Central Bank of B&H, as a 
fiscal  agent  of  the  state,  is  in  charge  of  servicing  international  obligations,  and  certainly 
contributes  to  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina’s  regular  and  timely  servicing  of  all  the  taken  over 
liabilities. Our institution as a fiscal agent has provided for Bosnia and Herzegovina to obtain 
a new credit rating which is currently B2 with a stable outlook. The successful reform of the 
payment system has set the Central Bank as the owner of RTGS system and gyro clearing, 
responsible for all the payments in real time in the country.  
The  creation  of  Single  Transaction  Account  Registry  of  all  legal  and  physical  entities  in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is another project which was very significant for all financial sector. 
The establishing of the Credit Registry of Legal and Physical Entities, which is in the function 
of commercial banks in respect of making better business decisions, also has a preventive 
impact on financial stability and decrease of credit growth. By the end of the year, we will 
also set up the platform for inter-bank market for gyro money and cash, which will have a 
positive effect on daily liquidity of commercial banks and reduce the costs and increase the 
safety of cash transport in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is preparing for issuing bonds to regulate the internal debt issue, 
primarily  the  issue  of  old  foreign  exchange  savings.  Those  would  be  the  first  bonds  to  be 
issued by the state and the CBBH will participate in the process as a fiscal agent – it will 
carry out the settlement of securities to be issued by the state. 
Today,  we  will  sign  the  agreement  on  direct  payment  operations  with  Serbia  and 
Montenegro,  which  will  influence  the  reduction  of  commercial  banking  payment  operations 
costs in this region.  
In  the  previous  period,  the  cooperation  with  the  institutions  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
primarily  with  the  Presidency,  the  Parliament  and  the  Council  of  Ministers,  was  at 
extraordinary  level.  The  independence  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 
BIS Review 101/2007 
 1
institutional, financial, personnel, was respected by all, which helped a lot to this monetary 
institution to achieve such significant results. The cooperation of the CBBH with international 
financial institutions, especially with the IMF, the World Bank, the BIS, the EBRD, was at a 
high  level.  The  USAID  was  involved  in  the  most  significant  projects  of  our  institution,  by 
helping,  both  in  material  and  personnel  respect,  their  successful  completion,  which  we 
sincerely thank them for. 
The  Eurosystem  has  just  finished  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  needs 
assessment  programme.  The  purpose  of  this  project  is  the  assessment  of  the  situation  in 
seven areas of operations the Central Bank, with the comparison with the standards of the 
European System of Central Banks. The programme applies to the functions of the Central 
Bank  related  to  the  coordination  of  activities  of  the  agencies  in  charge  of  licensing  and 
supervision,  economic  analysis  and  research,  financial  stability,  internal  audit,  monetary 
policy within the currency board arrangement, payment systems and statistics. 
In the report prepared by the Eurosystem experts, it is stated that «the CBBH is one of the 
most  stable  state  institutions  and  has  high  reputation  as  a  professional,  independent  and 
technically efficient organization which has achieved, in the previous 10 years, a significant 
progress  in  developing  functions  assigned  to  it.»  It  is  our  objective  to  join  the  European 
System of Central Banks, when B&H is ready to join the European Union, and – later on – to 
introduce the EURO as our own currency in accordance with EU Treaty requirements.  
I  am  using  the  opportunity  at  this  conference,  which  is  attended  by  Governors  and 
representatives of central banks in the region, to point out a need of a closer cooperation of 
central banks which could contribute to the economic development of the region. Namely, the 
common  long-term  objective  of  all  the  countries  in  the  region  is  the  membership  in  the 
European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  All  the  countries  are  on  the  same  road  to  the 
European Union, some of them progress faster and are well ahead of other countries, while 
others enter a complex process of meeting the criteria and fulfilling the European standards. 
The  Central  Bank,  as  a  unique  monetary  institution  with  the  primary  task  to  preserve  the 
financial stability and price stability in the country, also has a very important role in European 
integration  processes  and  regional  cooperation.  Our  region  has  common  objectives  and 
trends, therefore it is natural that we share and exchange experiences. The central banks in 
the region can cooperate in numerous projects which are highly important for the economy of 
both the country and the region. 
In  the  last  10  years  we  have  tried  to  implement  the  monetary  policy  in  a  responsible  and 
consistent manner and be a pillar for the entire banking sector and their clients. Our goal was 
to  in  a  transparent  way  establish  the  communication  with  the  public  by  organizing  press 
conferences, through press releases, regular presence in the printed and electronic media, 
and by issuing bulletins and periodic reports. I am using this opportunity to thank also the 
representatives of the media for their professional and objective reporting on the activities of 
the CBBH. 
I  wish  to  thank  also  the  previous  and  current  Governing  Board  for  their  full  support  in 
strategic principles of the CBBH, and to all the vice governors for their significant contribution 
to the achieved results and to all the employees. 
In  the  end,  as  you  know,  many  foreigners  have  spent  certain  periods  in  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina. Although I appreciate the contribution and engagement of all of them, the fact 
is that we quickly forget many of them. However, it is sure that the Central Bank of Bosnia 
and  Herzegovina  will  never  forget  the  engagements  of  Mr.  Serge  Robert  and  Mr.  Peter 
Nicholl. I wish to thank Mr. Robert, who, unfortunately, is not here today because of illness 
and thank you Mr. Nicholl for everything you have done for our institution. 
Thank  you  all  for  making  our  anniversary  even  more  important  with  your  presence,  and  I 
wish  the  guests  from  other  countries  to  have  a  nice  time  in  Sarajevo  and  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina. Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2007
