Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook in Norway 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign 
embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 22 March 2007.  
The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s 
monetary policy meeting on 15 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/07 and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below 
may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
First of all, I would like to welcome you to Norges Bank.  
This  event  gives  me  an  opportunity  to  discuss  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  and  to 
present  Norges  Bank’s  view  of  the  economic  outlook  for  Norway.  It  also  gives  us  an  occasion  to 
discuss other issues of mutual interest in an informal setting.  
The  Norwegian  economy  has  been  affected  by  several  positive  supply-side  shocks  over  the  last 
decade.  I  am  thinking  in  terms  of  the  effects  from  increased  global  trade  and  freer  flow  of  labour 
across national borders. I want to discuss how these shocks have had an impact on economic growth 
and inflation. These shocks have also affected prices in the Norwegian housing market, and they have 
had a strong impact on the income from the petroleum sector and thereby the transfer of funds to the 
Norwegian petroleum fund.  
Economic developments 
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime. 
Both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment are given weight in interest-rate 
setting.  
Inflation decelerated markedly from the end of the 1980s to the mid-1990s and has since been low 
and stable with considerably lower variability than earlier. Over the past 5-10 years, inflation has been 
fairly close to, but somewhat lower than the target.  
 BIS Review 28/2007 
 1
The  Norwegian  economy  is  now  growing  strongly,  following  a  pronounced  upswing  since  summer 
2003. Growth has been stronger than during the economic upturn in the mid-1990s. The continuous 
growth period of recent years is the longest ever recorded in the quarterly national accounts, which 
includes figures back to 1978. Average real growth rates for the past three years were well above 4 
per cent.  
 Since the economic recovery started, it has gradually broadened. Capacity utilisation is now high in 
most  industries,  and  there  are  reports  of  limited  capacity  in  most  regions.  The  number  of  unfilled 
vacancies is rising, and labour shortages are reported in almost every occupational category. There 
are shortages of drivers, pre-school teachers, supervisors, engineers, carpenters, architects, auditors, 
accountants, IT personnel and health workers. It has probably not been since the 1970s that we find 
such  widespread  reports  of  purely  physical  production  constraints,  for  example  now  in  the  form  of 
shortages of rigs and other equipment in the petroleum industry or shortages of plank, concrete and 
insulation in the construction industry.  
 2 
 BIS Review 28/2007
Unemployment  has  fallen  markedly  over  the  past  year.  The  pace  of  decline  and  the  level  of 
unemployment are reminiscent of two earlier cyclical peaks, one in the mid-1980s and the one that 
began  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  and  continued  into  the  present  decade.  Both  booms  culminated  in 
sharply accelerating cost and wage inflation.  
 Supply-side shocks to the Norwegian economy 
The combination of strong growth, high capacity utilisation and low inflation is a reflection of favourable 
global developments and a number of positive supply-side shocks to the Norwegian economy.  
The global expansion of recent years has resulted in strong growth in Norwegian export industries. 
Employment  has  increased  and  unemployment  has  declined.  The  favourable  labour  market  has 
boosted  household  optimism  and  supported  private  consumption.  Strong  demand  growth  and  solid 
profitability have also paved the way for growth in business fixed investment in Norway.  
So far, the weakening of the US housing market has not had pronounced spill over effects. Growth in 
China and India is strong and the euro area is experiencing a broad-based upturn. Global growth is 
probably less dependent on demand for goods and services in the US than was the case earlier.  
The global expansion has also resulted in high prices for many Norwegian export goods. The increase 
in oil prices over the past 4-5 years has been very important. High oil prices over a longer period have 
 BIS Review 28/2007 
 3
boosted oil investments and there are prospects that the high investment level will be sustained in the 
coming years.  
Oil  prices  peaked  around  USD  75  per  barrel  in  summer  2006.  Later  in  autumn,  prices  fell.  Current 
futures prices indicate that market participants believe prices will remain above USD 60 per barrel in 
the coming years.  
A  fall  in  prices  in  a  number  of  commodity  markets  at  the  beginning  of  2007  raised  the  question  of 
whether the pronounced price rise of recent years was being reversed. The experience of previous 
commodity  price  cycles  indicates  that  rising  prices  gradually  lead  to  increased  supply  and  reduced 
demand. This in turn leads to a fall in prices.  
Following a long period of expansion, international financial markets were marked by unrest around 
the end of February. It is still too early to say whether the turbulence signals a weakening of global 
growth prospects.  
Increased integration of China, India and other emerging economies into world trade, in conjunction 
with lower tariffs and reduced trade barriers, has led to a decline in prices for imported finished goods. 
This  effect  has  been  strengthened  by  a  significant  increase  in  the  share  of  imports  from  low-cost 
countries. For example, clothing and footwear, audiovisual equipment, furniture and white goods have 
shown very strong price declines.  
 Low prices for imported consumer goods, combined with high prices for our commodity exports, have 
resulted  in  a  strong  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade.  Since  2002,  the  terms  of  trade  have 
 4 
 BIS Review 28/2007
improved  by  about  40  per  cent.  A  similar  situation  has  not  been  seen  since  World  War  I,  when 
earnings in the shipping industry and other export industries were exceptionally high for a period.  
The supply of foreign labour has increased markedly after EU enlargement in 2004. Over the past two 
years, these labour inflows have accounted for more than 30 per cent of growth in our labour force. 
Norwegian companies have also been able to be considerably bolder in undertaking new assignments 
and  investments  knowing  that  they  can  procure  labour  throughout  Europe.  In  addition  to  increased 
labour inflows from Poland, Lithuania and other central European countries, we have long benefited 
from  inflows  of  labour  from  Sweden.  Many  workers  are  on  temporary  assignment  and  their 
consumption is primarily concentrated in their home country. The Norwegian economy has seen a net 
capacity increase.  
 Inward  labour  migration  delayed  the  fall  in  unemployment  in  this  expansion.  It  has  also  reduced 
bottlenecks  in  the  economy  and  curbed  the  impact  of  the  fall  in  unemployment  on  wage  growth. 
Labour inflows have also had a dampening effect on wage growth, probably because the wage level of 
foreign workers is somewhat lower than for Norwegian labour.  
Moderate  wage  growth  has  reduced  labour  costs’  share  of  mainland  business-sector  income, 
particularly in tradable goods sectors. In manufacturing, the wage share has shown a trend fall since 
the mid-1990s and the level has been the lowest since 1970 in the past few years.  
 BIS Review 28/2007 
 5
The wage share has fallen also in many other OECD countries. Emerging economies’ entry into global 
trade has resulted in a sharp increase in the supply of labour. The result has been a fall in the global 
price of labour relative to the return on capital. The wage share equilibrium may therefore have been 
reduced.  Increased  possibilities  for  relocating  production  abroad  may  have  weakened  labour’s 
bargaining power and moderated pay demands.  
 During the current upturn, we have also seen that the rise in prices for domestically produced goods 
and services has been lower than implied by historical relationships between inflation and wage and 
productivity growth. Increased competition in product markets may have dampened the rise in prices.  
In  a  survey  from  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  58  per  cent  of  the  companies  responded  that 
competition has increased in the past 2-3 years, while only 15 per cent reported that competition has 
decreased. In retail trade and services, almost 70 per cent responded that competition has intensified. 
Many  of  the  companies  that  experience  increased  competition  attribute  this  to  the  entry  of  more 
operators, including foreign operators, into the market.  
 6 
 BIS Review 28/2007
The Norwegian business sector has been quick to integrate information technology. This applies both 
to  companies  competing  on  international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the 
domestic market. In comparison with other countries, it is particularly productivity gains in banks and 
other service sectors that stand out. Examples are automated processes and swifter payments in the 
financial industry and improved inventory and management systems in commerce and transport.  
In  sum,  these  positive  supply  side  shocks  have  increased  the  growth  capacity  of  the  Norwegian 
economy, and have played their part in keeping inflation at a low level.  
 Monetary policy assessments 
 Monetary policy influences the economy with a lag. Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to 
stabilising  inflation  close  to  the  target  in  the  medium  term.  The  interest  rate  path  should  provide  a 
reasonable balance between the path for inflation and the path for capacity utilisation.  
When we reduced the interest rate in 2003, demand and output rapidly picked up. However, it took a 
long  time  for  employment  to  rise  and  the  next  phase  from  a  pick-up  in  employment  to  a  fall  in 
unemployment was also long. But now the upturn has entered into a mature phase. The enterprises in 
our regional network report that capacity constraints are now limiting further growth. Unemployment 
has fallen markedly over the past year. Wage growth appears to be rising, but so far only gradually. 
Prices  for  many  inputs  and  services  and  building  materials  are  rising  markedly.  Consumer  price 
inflation is also expected to pick up further ahead. Thus, interest rates are rising.  
BIS Review 28/2007 
 7
The  experience  of  previous  business  cycles  has shown  that  wage  and  price  inflation  may  increase 
markedly  in  a  late  phase  of  the  upturn.  Higher  interest  rates  will  counter  such  a  development. 
However, we must also prevent inflation from becoming entrenched well below 2.5 per cent. We will 
therefore be mindful of the effects of higher interest rates on the krone exchange rate when inflation is 
low. Positive supply-side conditions that have held down inflation so far suggest a gradual approach, 
so that we can assess the effects of interest rate increases and other new information on economic 
developments.  
At the meeting on 15 March, Norges Bank’s Executive Board presented the interest rate path shown in 
the chart. The Board decided that the key policy rate should lie in the interval 4-5 per cent in the period 
to  the  publication  of  the  next  Monetary  Policy  Report  on  27  June,  conditional  on  economic 
developments that are broadly in line with projections. Furthermore, the key policy rate is expected to 
move  up  to  about  5  per  cent  around  the  end  of  2007.  Economic  developments  are  uncertain.  The 
uncertainty surrounding the interest rate ahead is illustrated by the shaded area in the chart, which is 
intended to capture the outcome with a 70 per cent probability.  
 Long-term interest rates, income growth and house prices 
Favourable economic developments in Norway have had an impact on developments in our property 
markets.  House  prices  have  risen  sharply  over  the  past  14  years.  Real  house  prices  have  almost 
trebled. The rise in house prices has been considerably stronger than earlier and has spanned a long 
period. With the exception of a few months in 2003, house prices have risen continuously since 1992. 
This is the second longest period of rising real prices since 1819. Statistics for earlier years do not 
exist.  
8 
 BIS Review 28/2007
Norway  is  not  the  only  country  where  house  prices  have  shown  a  strong  rise  over  a  long  period. 
House price inflation has been particularly high in Ireland and the Netherlands, but Denmark, the UK 
and  Spain  also  stand  out.  The  countries  where  house  price  inflation  has  been  high  are  the  same 
countries where economic growth has been strongest.  
 Since prices are rising in tandem in many countries, it is natural to look for common driving forces. 
With  increasing cross-border  flows  of  intermediate goods, capital  and  increasingly  so  labour,  prices 
will  largely  reflect  growth  and  competition  in  the  global  economy.  If  capital  or  labour  becomes  too 
expensive in one country, businesses can relocate production. Prices for fixed factors of production, 
such  as  property,  will  on  the  other  hand  reflect  income  developments  in  different  countries. 
Consequently,  the  rise  in  property  prices  will  tend  to  be  highest  in  those  countries  where  income 
growth is highest.  
 BIS Review 28/2007 
 9
   External  and  domestic  interest  rates  are  low  in  an  environment  of  solid  growth.  Long-term  interest 
rates have fallen sharply both in nominal and real terms since the beginning of the 1990s. Inflation has 
declined and contributed to a fall in nominal interest rates. A more stable inflation environment also 
results in lower real interest rates when investors become more certain about returns. Furthermore, it 
would appear that high saving in some parts of the world is pushing down long-term interest rates. 
Saving is high both in oil-producing countries, China and other Asian countries.  
Long-term interest rates in Norway largely shadow external interest rates because like other countries 
Norway  is  keeping  inflation  in  check.  Norwegian  households  primarily  finance  house  purchases  by 
means  of  floating-rate  loans.  Long-term  interest  rates  are  still  of  considerable  importance  because 
they provide information about the future path of short-term interest rates that borrowers can expect 
over time. Unusually low short-term interest rates have probably also boosted the rate of increase in 
house prices in recent years, but this effect will be reversed when the interest rate is raised to a more 
normal  level.  Short-term  interest  rates  have  influenced  the  path  for  house  prices  over  the  past  15 
years, but periods of low interest rates are followed by periods of higher interest rates. Norges Bank’s 
key  policy  rate  is  therefore  of  limited  importance  for  house  price  inflation  over a  period  of  15  to  20 
years.  
The housing stock in Norway, which numbers a good 2.2 million dwellings, shows little change from 
one year to the next. As a result, higher demand for housing will primarily translate into higher prices in 
the  short  term.  In  the  1990s,  housing  starts  in  Norway  were  fairly  low  in  relation  to  growth  in  the 
number of households. Moreover, population growth has been higher in recent years, largely reflecting 
 10 
 BIS Review 28/2007
a high level of immigration. In 2006, the population increased by more than 40 000 and the number of 
households by roughly 30 000.  
Furthermore, migration patterns in Norway follow the business cycle. Migration to densely populated 
areas is now rising. Demands for high standards and new building regulations have also pushed up 
housing construction costs and thereby house prices.  
The main determinants of house price inflation have long been income, unemployment, interest rates 
and  residential  construction.  Over  the  past  few  years,  inward  migration  and  domestic  migration 
patterns may also have contributed. In the past year, however, house price inflation has been higher 
than implied by these factors. A large share of the increase in 2006 cannot be explained by previous 
patterns.  Developments  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  may  have  engendered  expectations  that 
house prices will only continue to rise. This may have increased house purchases for pure investment 
purposes and induced younger buyers to enter the housing market earlier than otherwise.  
The housing market may now be in a state of euphoria.  
 The rise in house prices has been accompanied by a sharp increase in household debt. In Norway, 
household debt is now almost twice the level of disposable income, and the debt to income ratio is the 
highest ever. It is higher than in Sweden and the UK, but lower than in Denmark and the Netherlands.  
Norway is among the countries with the highest share of owner-occupied dwellings, at around 80 per 
cent. This high proportion partly accounts for the high mortgage debt of households. In recent years, 
new loan products have also been launched, facilitating mortgage equity withdrawal. Housing wealth 
has become more liquid. Borrowers have greater scope for choosing repayment profiles. We cannot 
identify the exact level of household debt that can be sustained over time, but the rapid build-up of 
debt makes households more vulnerable.  
BIS Review 28/2007 
 11
Housing  investment  for  the  household  sector  as  a  whole  is  now  being  fully  debt-financed,  which 
means an increase in net debt. It would appear that household saving has fallen markedly in Norway 
in the recent past. Saving was negative in the latter half of 2006, which is the first time saving has 
fallen since 1988. The pronounced fall in saving indicates that households are taking greater chances.  
At  the  same  time,  government  revenues  and  savings  are  high.  The  long  period  of  prosperity  and 
government  budget  surpluses  may  have  engendered  a  sense  of  security  which  is  also  affecting 
household saving and house purchases.  
 Petroleum and the Government Pension Fund – Global 
 High oil and gas production and high prices, combined with high returns, have resulted in a rapid rise 
in the value of the Government Pension Fund in recent years.  
The  Norwegian  authorities  have  been  successful  in  ensuring  that  the  bulk  of  the  petroleum  wealth 
benefits Norwegian society as a whole. Both the state’s ownership interests through the State’s Direct 
Financial  Interest  in  petroleum  activities  (SDFI)  and  the  tax  system  have  been  important.  The 
companies that extract oil earn a reasonable return on their investments and have incentives to invest, 
but the economic rent has essentially accrued to the general public.  
The authorities have so far also been successful in smoothing spending of petroleum revenues over 
time.  This  is  important  for  several  reasons.  First,  it  is  misleading  to  look  upon  the  cash  flow  from 
12 
 BIS Review 28/2007
petroleum activities as income. The appropriate economic perspective is to see the transfer of cash 
flow  to  foreign  investments  as  a  way  of  transferring  capital  from  one  account  to  another  –  from 
petroleum to foreign securities. By doing so, we diversify risk.  
Second, the size of the cash flow from petroleum activities varies. If petroleum revenues were to be 
spent as they accrue, this would lead to wide fluctuations in demand in the Norwegian economy.  
Third,  petroleum  revenue  spending  has  an  impact  on  competitiveness  in  Norwegian  business  and 
industry. A high level and substantial variations in petroleum revenue spending would have a negative 
impact on internationally exposed industries.  
The  establishment  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  and  the  spending  guidelines  for 
petroleum revenues are part of the response to these challenges.  
The Fund is approaching the nominal value of one year’s GDP and may reach two in the course of the 
next decade. This is based on the assumption that oil prices remain high over the next few years and 
then fall to about USD 30 per barrel.  
 The  government  bases  its  withdrawals  from  the  Fund  on  an  average  real  return  of  4  per  cent  for 
financing current expenditure. Given this spending rule, the return may come to finance more than 15 
per cent of government expenditure in 10 years, which clearly shows that sound management of our 
petroleum wealth generates considerable benefits. The return represents future income that we forego 
if  we  draw  on  this  wealth  today.  But  even  with  this  source  of  income,  more  than  80  per  cent  of 
 BIS Review 28/2007 
 13
expenditure must be covered by other sources. Financing the large pension payments that will have to 
be disbursed in the coming decades will be very demanding in any event.  
I have talked about some of the supply-side shocks that have had a positive effect on the Norwegian 
economy.  Norway  is  now reaping  the  benefits  of  globalisation  through  increased  international  trade 
and freer labour flows across national borders. Globalisation also has its challenges and although I 
have not delved into these in my speech today, I would be delighted to discuss these and other issues 
with you in the question and answer session.  
Thank you for your attention!  
14 
 BIS Review 28/2007
