Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The international dimension of Islamic finance 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
2007 INCEIF Global Forum "Leadership in Global Finance – The Emerging Islamic Horizon", 
Kuala Lumpur, 30 August 2007. 
 It is my honour and great pleasure to be here to speak at this first INCEIF Global Forum, 
which  has  drawn 
together  a  distinguished  gathering  of  scholars,  researchers  and 
practitioners from the financial services industry. Let me focus on the international dimension 
of  Islamic  finance  which  has  continued  to  gain  significance.  Islamic  finance  now  extends 
beyond the traditional predominantly Muslim economies to become an increasingly important 
part  of  the  international  financial  system.  Total  assets  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  are 
estimated  to  exceed  one  trillion  US  dollars.  It  is  among  the  fastest  growing  financial 
segments in the international financial system with an estimated annual growth of 15 to 20 
percent. There is now a growing demand for Islamic financial products in the global market, 
far  exceeding  the  supply  of  financial  products  and  services  that  is  being  offered  by  the 
Islamic financial institutions. 
As  we  advance  forward,  the  international  environment  in  which  we  are  operating  is  also 
rapidly  evolving  to  become  more  complex,  competitive  and  challenging.  In  the  current 
environment it has become more volatile and uncertain. The challenge for Islamic finance is 
to  evolve  strategies  that  will  ensure  its  competitiveness,  dynamism  and  sustainability.  An 
aspect  in  the  contemporary  global  Islamic  finance  that  is  fundamental  is  the  “principled 
centred” nature of Leadership in Islam, that involves "trust" (amanah), and with that comes 
"responsibility" (taklif) and "accountability" (mas'-u-li-yah1). My remarks today will discuss the 
positive elements that Islamic finance brings to the global financial system, its prospects for 
enhancing  international  integration  and  the  potential  to  strengthen  the  socio  economic 
aspects of Islamic finance. 
Optimizing benefits of Islamic finance  
In  evolving  the  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  an  important  aspect  is  the 
optimization  of  the  oasis  of  benefits  and  opportunities  Islamic  finance  has  the  potential  to 
provide.  Islamic  finance  implicitly  embraces  strong  core  values  and  universally  beneficial 
characters. The fundamental requirement of Islamic finance is that it is confines its activities 
to that which is supported by an underlying economic transaction thereby avoiding emphasis 
on  speculative  purposes.  The  Islamic  principles  require  that  the  financial  transaction  be 
accompanied by genuine trade and business related transactions. This provides for a high 
level of disclosure and transparency. This thus prohibits the commoditisation of risks, which 
effectively leads to its proliferation through multiple layers of leveraging and disproportionate 
distribution. It reduces the potential for information gaps and for mispricing of risks and thus 
avoids the elements that could contribute to uncertainty and disruptive market conditions. 
The  Islamic  financial  system  derives  its  strength  and  stability  from  its  faculty  to  uphold 
Shariah principles. The Islamic financial system thus has an in-built dimension that promotes 
financial soundness and stability, as it resides within a financial trajectory underpinned by the 
forces  of  Shariah  injunctions.  These  Shariah  injunctions  interweave  Islamic  financial 
transactions  with  genuine  productive  activities  and  prohibit  involvement  in  illegal  and 
unethical activities. This intrinsic principle of governance contributes towards insulating the 
                                                 
1  
ICLIF Leadership Competency Model – Syed Naquib al-Attas & Wan Mohd Nor Wan Daud. 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 1
Islamic  financial  system  from  the  potential  risks  of  financial  stress  triggered  by  excessive 
leverage and speculative financial activities.  
Equally important is that the key components of the Islamic financial system, comprising the 
financial  institutions,  the  markets  and  the  financial  infrastructure,  has  demonstrated  its 
viability and robustness as a form of financial intermediation, with a mutually reinforcing role 
in enhancing the overall stability of the financial system. Its growing role in mobilising and 
channeling  the  funds  to  productive  investment  activities  across  borders  brings  significant 
benefits to the global economy. Firstly, it has the potential to contribute global growth and 
contributing towards some rebalancing of the global growth given that it brings about a more 
inclusive  financial  integration.  Secondly,  the  strengthened  international  financial  linkages 
allows for the potential for greater diversification of risks. The increase in the Islamic financial 
products,  the  growing  number  of  assets  classes  being  offered,  the  increased  cross 
ownership of assets have all expanded the possibilities for greater diversification of risks and 
the potential for return. 
The intrinsic nature of Islamic finance encourages risk management and provides confidence 
through explicit disclosure and transparency of the roles and responsibilities defined in the 
contract. The transparent nature of the Islamic financial contracts and the need for underlying 
economic transaction reinforces the stability of the Islamic financial system. 
A  vital  challenge  going  forward  is  however  to  build  a  stronger,  competitive  and  dynamic 
Islamic  financial  system  that  better  reflects  the  internalization  of  Shariah  principles  in 
financial transactions, in its form, spirit and substance. This epitomizes the objectives of the 
Shariah in promoting economic and social justice. While developing Islamic financial system 
with  products  and  services  mirroring  the  conventional  counterpart  is  acceptable  as  a 
pragmatic  approach,  it  needs  to  develop  further  on  its  own  paths  and  merits  so  as  to 
maximize  the  potential  benefits  of  Islamic  financial  system.  Key  to  this  is  having  an 
appropriate pricing benchmark to be an indicator for Islamic securities to be efficiently priced 
and credible.  
In addition, the role of Shariah scholars who have the full understanding of the mechanics of 
Islamic financial products and services, are key to ensuring its continued development. At the 
same time, Shariah decisions, when made, needs to be disclosed. This will allow others to 
appreciate the juristic reasoning, which in turn would lead to a wider acceptance of Shariah 
decisions, particularly if they have implications on cross-border transactions. 
As  the  Islamic  financial  system  becomes  increasingly  more  internationally-integrated,  it  is 
important 
institutional  strengths  and 
complementarities  and  the  need  to  maximize  synergies.  Collaboration  among  regional 
centres and key players in Islamic finance will be an important part of the process that will 
contribute towards greater international financial integration. Constructive engagement in the 
form  of  strategic  partnerships  and  collaboration,  as  well  as  in  market  access  needs  to  be 
enhanced. Allowing greater market access among players in Islamic financial centres can be 
a catalyst for enhanced integration and innovative elements in the Islamic financial industry.  
Malaysia's  experience  in  strengthening  the  international  dimension  of  the  Islamic  financial 
system has shown positive results. This has commenced in 2002 with the inaugural issuance 
of a global Sukuk to the liberalizing to allow for greater market access in Islamic banking and 
takaful initiatives by permitting entry of foreign players. 
The third area of international integration is the liberalization of our financial markets to allow 
for  greater  foreign  participation.  In  particular,  in  the  sukuk  market,  foreign  corporations, 
multinationals and multilateral agencies may raise ringgit and foreign currency denominated 
instruments  in  our  market.  Our  private  debt  securities  market  is  the  largest  in  South  East 
Asia. Malaysia also has highly liberalized exchange administration system that allows for the 
free  inflow and  outflow  of  funds.  There  is  also  no  restriction  on  the  utilization  of the  funds 
raised in our market. The funds may be utilized for investments outside the country. 
regional  and 
the  different 
recognize 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2007
Finally,  our  own  financial  institutions  have  ventured  beyond  our  domestic  borders.  These 
cumulative  developments  have  strengthened  our  linkages  with  other  Islamic  financial 
centres. 
Another  area  important  for  Islamic  finance  is  the  investment  in  research  and  development 
(R&D).  The  promotion  of  international  strategic  alliances  through  smart  partnerships  can 
create  greater  synergy  that  will  bring  about  new  approaches,  new  technologies  and  new 
areas of specialization. Such collaborative efforts amongst Islamic financial institutions would 
strengthen the ability to leverage on the industry's expertise. The introduction of innovative 
Islamic  financial  products  in  a  specific  jurisdictions  can  be  expanded  to  other  jurisdictions, 
which  in  turn,  will  contribute  to  broaden  and  deepen  Islamic  financial  markets  and  thus 
strengthen the overall development of the Islamic financial industry. In addition, collaboration 
between academic researchers and the practitioners will enable the practical application of 
such research findings.  
In the area of education and training in Islamic finance, there is now a critical shortage of 
talent  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  Collaboration  between  training  institutions  is  vital  to 
developing  the  pool  of  expertise  in  Islamic  finance  that  subscribes  to  common  standards. 
Establishing a network of mutual co-operation and collaboration would strengthen the efforts 
among  the  institutions  of  higher  learning  across  regions  in  the  areas  of  curriculum 
development, research, training, exchange of ideas and information, and resources in Islamic 
finance. Such partnerships in connecting the knowledge communities between regions would 
facilitate this process.  
In the area of Shariah, the progressive convergence of Shariah views and rulings, the mutual 
recognition  of  financial  standards  and  products  across  jurisdictions  would  be  major  driver 
towards  greater  international  financial  integration.  Such  a  convergence  and  harmonisation 
can only happen with greater engagement among the regulators, practitioners and scholars 
in Islamic finance in the international community.  
Finally  this  integration  process  also  requires  greater  cooperation  among  the  regulators  to 
ensure that the Islamic financial system is not subject to vulnerabilities and abuses and thus 
ensuring  its  soundness  and  stability.  In  this  respect,  the  sharing  of  information  among  the 
regulators  including  across  borders  is  important  especially  in  a  more  globalised  and 
liberalised  environment  where  financial  transactions  and  activities  have  become  more 
complex  and  globalised.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  greater  need  for  regulators  to  be 
continuously connected to share information on key issues and developments faced in their 
own  financial  jurisdictions.  In  this  respect,  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  has  an 
important role to facilitate this process. 
Closer  financial  linkages  among  Islamic  financial  institutions  from  different  jurisdictions  is 
essential to contribute towards accelerating the process and towards serving as a bridge to 
strengthen  the  relationship  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  markets  as  well  as  the 
investment and trade ties between regions. Such linkages within the industry could also lead 
to  new  product  offerings  and  to  co-arranging  financing.  There  could  also  be  mutual 
development  of 
including  other  research  and 
development endeavours.  
Finally, let me touch on the development of the socio-economic aspects of Islamic finance. 
While "profit motivated" Islamic financial institutions will continue to evolve and gain greater 
significance,  this  trend  also  needs  to  be  complemented  with  similar  evolution  in  the  socio 
economic  aspects  of  Islamic  finance  such  as  waqf  and  zakat.  A  stronger  zakat  and  waqf 
system would not only complete the equation for a comprehensive Islamic financial system 
that supports a more equitable distribution of wealth to ensure fairness and equity, it will also 
become  the  user  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  particularly  in  the  management  and 
investment of the zakat and waqf funds. In addition, access to Islamic financial services to 
micro enterprises would bring such activities into the economic mainstream and improve their 
level of performance. 
IT  systems  and  other 
technologies 
BIS Review 95/2007 
 3
Conclusion 
As Islamic finance advances forward to become an integral component of the international 
financial  system,  continuous  efforts  are  needed  to  further  develop  the  domestic  financial 
system  to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  a  highly  dynamic  and  rapidly  evolving 
environment. In our quest to build a viable and sustainable Islamic financial system, the aim 
is  to  contribute  to  the  channeling  of  capital  flows  to  productive  investments,  create  wealth 
and promote economic activities, that conforms to the principles and values of Shariah. With 
this, the Islamic financial system will ultimately bring benefit not just among Muslims but with 
the rest of humanity, Insyaallah. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2007
