Goh Chok Tong: ASEAN – the third growth engine in Asia  
Speech  by  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  of  the  Republic  of  Singapore  and  Chairman  of  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Gala  Dinner of  Merrill  Lynch  Pan-Asia  Rising  Stars 
Conference, Singapore, 9 May 2007. 
 A warm welcome to Singapore. Thank you for inviting me to your dinner and share my views on what 
is happening here. I will make a few observations about developments in the region and Singapore, 
and hope that my remarks will help digestion, rather than cause indigestion. 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  Merrill  Lynch  for  organising  this  conference  in  Singapore.  Such  an 
impressive gathering helps our goal of making Singapore an important financial and business centre. I 
hope the conference will serve as a forum not just for the exchange of business ideas but also the 
conception of new growth opportunities. 
This  year  will  be  the  10th  Anniversary  of  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis.  Despite  the  widespread 
devastation, Asian economies have bounced back. According to a recent World Bank report: 
“A decade after the financial crisis that devastated East Asia in 1997-98, the region is far wealthier, 
has fewer poor people and a larger global role than ever before. Led by continued strong growth in 
China, Emerging East Asia now has an aggregate output of over US$5 trillion, double the dollar value 
just before the crisis. Real per capita incomes in the previously crisis affected economies (Indonesia, 
Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand) have significantly exceeded pre-crisis levels.” 
– World Bank’s “East Asia & Pacific Update – Ten Years After the Crisis” (April 2007) 
Asia is resilient. I am confident about Asia’s future. 
I do not expect military conflicts as all countries are concentrating on economic growth and building 
cross-national and cross-regional ties. Tensions may arise in cross-strait relations due to forthcoming 
elections  in  Taiwan  but  so  long  as  the  US  Administration  maintains  its  clear  stand  that  it  will  not 
support  Taiwanese  independence,  the  situation  can  be  managed.  Terrorism  remains  a  long-term 
threat but will not topple governments or drag economies down. But an avian flu pandemic will be a 
different threat altogether. It will tank many economies. 
Barring this unpredictable risk, Asia will continue to surge over the next 20 years, powered by the twin 
engines of China and India. The story of China is well-known and that of India becoming increasingly 
so. So I shall not elaborate on them. Instead, I want to remind you not to overlook the region that is 
strategically-positioned  between  these  two  giants  –  the  ten  Southeast  Asian  countries  which  form 
ASEAN. 
Let me elaborate. 
A revitalised ASEAN 
ASEAN is being revitalised. In response to the Asian Financial Crisis, ASEAN countries took concrete 
steps  to  tackle  weaknesses  in  their  financial  and  corporate  sectors  and  implemented  structural 
reforms. These reforms have strengthened ASEAN’s economic fundamentals and financial stability. 
More importantly, ASEAN has made two important strategic moves: 
• 
• 
First, deepening linkages with external partners; and 
Second, accelerating intra-ASEAN integration. 
Enhancing links with external partners 
ASEAN has stepped up its links and integration with external players and major trading partners. 
ASEAN regards China and India as two powerful engines which will help the region lift off. ASEAN has 
already started negotiations for Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with both China and India. We target 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 1
to complete them by 2010 and 2011 respectively. These FTAs will provide even greater connectivity 
and opportunities for businesses. They will increase trade and investment flows. 
Besides China and India, ASEAN is also enhancing links with other economic centres. ASEAN signed 
a  regional  Trade  and  Investment  Framework  Arrangement  (TIFA)  with  the  US  last  August.  It  is 
negotiating FTAs with Japan, South Korea and Australia and New Zealand. And last week, ASEAN 
and  the  European  Union  decided  to  launch  FTA  talks.  This  shows  that  ASEAN  is  confident  and 
outward-looking. These agreements will form the economic spokes radiating from the ASEAN hub. 
Accelerating ASEAN integration 
ASEAN  knows  that  the  hub  itself  must  be  strengthened  if  it  was  to  grow  and  benefit  from  external 
linkages.  Hence,  ASEAN  is  pressing  ahead  with  closer  and  deeper  economic  integration,  and 
strengthening  the  organisation  politically.  This  will  also  help  ASEAN  to  overcome  the  challenges  of 
globalisation and global economic competition. Our aim is to transform ASEAN into the third engine of 
growth in Asia. 
To  do  this,  ASEAN  has  advanced  the  target  date  of  establishing  an  ASEAN  Economic  Community 
from 2020 to 2015. ASEAN Leaders will, at their Summit in Singapore in November, issue a legally-
binding  blueprint  to  implement  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  by  2015.  You  may  think  that  the 
time-frame  is  not  ambitious  enough  but  remember  that  ASEAN  is  like  a  centipede  in  its  movement 
where all legs must move in unison. Also, the 10 countries are at very different stages of development, 
with per capita ranging from a low of US$210 for Myanmar to a high of US$31,000 for Brunei. With the 
ASEAN  Economic  Community,  ASEAN  will  eventually  evolve  into  a  single  market  with  free  flow  of 
goods, services, investment and talent. An integrated ASEAN is expected to boost the region’s GDP 
by 10%. 
For businesses, an integrated ASEAN means greater market access and more harmonized rules and 
standards. For investors, an integrated market of half a billion people will be an attractive investment 
destination.  ASEAN’s  combined  GDP  of  US$1  trillion  is  not  insignificant.  It  is,  in  fact,  bigger  than 
India’s US$890 billion and more than a third of China’s US$2.6 trillion. 
ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  have  identified  capital  markets  as  a  key  area  to  fast-track  integration. 
ASEAN bond markets have tripled, from US$110 billion in 1997 to US$410 billion in 2007. From 2001 
to  2006,  ASEAN  market  capitalization  has  grown  by  more  than  120%.  ASEAN  has  in  place  further 
initiatives to harmonise and integrate financial markets and boost liquidity. 
With  further harmonisation  of  rules  and  regulations  and  increasing  capital  market  linkages,  we  look 
forward  to  the  deepening  of  ASEAN  market  liquidity.  As  financial  and  capital  markets  in  the  region 
become more integrated, there will be seamless flows of investments and capital. 
ASEAN  has  also  made  a  strategic  decision  to  strengthen  its  organisation  politically.  ASEAN  is 
finalising  a  Charter  that  will  lay  out  a  bold  and  visionary  future  for  ASEAN.  It  will  also  provide  an 
institutional framework for the grouping and transform it into a more effective and efficient rules-based 
organisation. The Charter will be signed at the Singapore Summit in November. 
Singapore – a global city 
As for developments in Singapore, we have used the last 10 years to remake ourselves, strengthen 
our competitiveness and expand our economic space. We have also continued with efforts to enhance 
Singapore’s position as a gateway to Asia by transforming Singapore into a global city. 
We  have  enlarged  our  economic  space  by  aggressively  pursuing  FTAs.  We  have  concluded  11, 
including with the US, India, Japan, South Korea and Australia. We are negotiating 11 more FTAs, 
including one with China. 
We have progressively restructured and diversified our economy. Manufacturing will continue to play a 
key  role  but  we  are  also  moving  into  more  technology-  and  knowledge-intensive  manufacturing. 
Fostering  world-class  scientific  research  and  strengthening  Singapore’s  attractiveness  as  an  R&D 
(Research  and  Development)  hub  is  a  key  priority.  More  of  Singapore’s  growth  will  come  from 
innovation and knowledge. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2007
In  the  services  sector,  we  have  strengthened  the  key  areas  of  tourism,  healthcare,  education  and 
financial services. We have been focusing efforts to become an international fund management and 
wealth  management  centre.  More  financial  institutions  are  using  Singapore  as  a  regional  hub  to 
conduct  their  investment  activities.  Singapore’s  asset  management  industry  has  continued  to  grow, 
with assets under management surpassing US$430 billion. This is complemented by the presence of 
an active financial research community. 
Singapore  is  also  a  hub  for  innovative  equity  products,  including  REITS  (Real  Estate  Investment 
Trusts), Business Trusts, derivatives and ETFs (Exchange Traded Funds). Singapore currently has 16 
listed  REITs  and  5  listed  Business  Trusts  with  a  total  market  capitalisation  of  about  US$20  billion. 
Given the huge developments taking place in Asia, more foreign capital will be required and Singapore 
could be the hub to raise capital for Asian real estate and infrastructure players. 
We are mindful of rising business costs. Office rental has gone up because of the spurt in demand. It 
should stabilize as more office space becomes available in the next few years. This year we have cut 
our  corporate  tax  rates  to  18%.  I  can  assure  you  that  our  corporate  tax  rates  will  always  be 
competitive. 
Talent, not just banks and investment houses, are drawn to a place where the living environment is 
clean,  green,  safe  and  buzzing  with  cultural  vibrancy  and  business  excitement.  We  will  continue  to 
make Singapore an attractive city where foreign talent will want to come to work and live and where 
they will feel at home. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
ASEAN  is  entering  a  new and  exciting phase.  Individually,  each ASEAN  country  possesses  unique 
strengths and offers unique opportunities. Together, an integrated and revitalised ASEAN holds great 
promise to become the third engine of growth in Asia. Singapore will contribute to the power of this 
engine. 
I wish you a pleasant evening and hope that you will have a fruitful stay in Singapore. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 3
