Nout Wellink: Basel II and financial institution resiliency 
Remarks  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the “Risk Capital 2007” conference, Paris, 27 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
I am pleased to join you today to speak about Basel II and financial institution resiliency. I would first 
like to commend the conference organisers for putting together such a comprehensive programme of 
events this week.  
I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss the Basel II Framework and how it was designed to help 
make banks more resilient in the face of turbulent waters and constantly shifting currents. Resilience 
comes from the Latin word for “rebound”, which implies change from the status quo and change is the 
only  constant  in  the  business  of  banking.  Banks  sometimes  need  to  adjust  to  unexpected  and 
unwanted shocks, though change also arises in a more positive way, such as innovation. Today I will 
focus  on  our  changing  financial  landscape  and  how  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee  and,  most 
notably, the Basel II framework helps firms and financial systems to become more resilient to these 
changes. 
From my perspective, financial resiliency has three distinct elements. First, it includes the existence 
and promotion of sound economic and financial policies. The second element is a resilient financial 
market  infrastructure  underpinning  the  system,  which  includes  sound  payment  systems,  robust 
exchanges, prudent accounting standards and sensible governance standards. Third, it is essential to 
have robust and resilient core firms at the centre of the financial system operating on safe and sound 
risk  management  practices.  A  sound  global  capital  adequacy  framework  is  critical  to  ensure  the 
robustness and resilience of these firms. It is on this third dimension that Basel II plays an important 
role and on which I will focus my remarks.  
Basel II – general 
We are witnessing a rapidly changing financial environment, which in some cases represents a sea 
change  from  traditional  practices.  We  have  seen  significant  advances  in  technology  and  financial 
product innovation that have reshaped the role played by banks in the credit process. An example is 
the  shift  in  business  models.  Core  institutions  are  moving  away  from  traditional  buy-and-hold 
strategies  to  an  originate-to-distribute  or  market-based  model.  Changes  such  as  these  create  new 
challenges – as well as new opportunities – for bankers as well as for supervisors. Innovation has led 
to  new  techniques  and  tools  for  managing  credit  portfolios  and  this  has  been  accompanied  by 
increased complexity. A regulatory framework based on a simple risk weight scheme has become less 
and less effective in assessing an appropriate level of regulatory capital against these new, complex 
risk exposures.  
Basel II – Pillar 1 
The  Basel  Committee’s  response  has  been  to  capitalise  on  the  improvements  in  banks’  risk 
management  systems  to  better  address  the  complexity  and  innovation  that  we  see  today.  This  is 
reflected in the first pillar of the framework that relates to minimum capital requirements. In order to 
meet the challenges, the Committee leverages off the core building blocks of banks’ risk management 
systems,  namely  the  probability  of  default,  loss  given  default  and  exposure  at  default.  These  are 
concepts  that  are  integral  to  the  risk  management  systems  developed  by  large  banks.  By  utilising 
these concepts, Basel II provides a more meaningful signal between risk taking and capital. This, in 
turn,  reinforces  sound  risk  measurement  techniques  and  the  framework  is  sufficiently  flexible  to 
accommodate new techniques and products.  
There are many aspects of Basel II that were drawn from modern risk management techniques and 
industry best practice. Banks themselves have indicated that Basel II has produced improvements in 
their risk management processes by spurring innovative work in several important areas. Let me give 
you a few concrete examples to illustrate this.  
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
First,  under  Basel  II,  we  have  seen  substantial  advances  in  operational  risk  measurement  and 
management,  particularly  with  respect  to  complex  risk  transfer  arrangements.  Since  the  Basel  II 
discussions  began  in  the  late  1990s,  there  has  been  a  tremendous  increase  in  research  on 
operational risk, including the forms it can take, the ways in which it arises, measurement methods 
and techniques to mitigate the risk. As a result, the industry has witnessed a surge of innovation and 
development in these areas. 
Second, with respect to stressed conditions, Basel II seeks to advance comprehensive stress testing 
frameworks  and  risk  management  practices  more  generally.  Strong  risk  management  is  a  critical 
component  of  a  bank’s  ability  to  withstand  shocks.  The  Basel  II  framework  requires  that  stress 
scenarios capture the effects of a downturn on market and credit risks, as well as on liquidity. Such an 
improved firm-wide approach to risk assessment is essential to ensuring that banks have a sufficient 
capital buffer that will carry them through difficult periods.  
Third, Basel II better assesses the risk inherent in arrangements using evolving technologies, such as 
securitisation and credit derivatives, that are used to buy and sell credit risk. This is clearly evident in 
the  originate-to-distribute  model.  Basel  II  provides  a  framework  that  allows  supervisors  to  focus 
discussions with banks on the robustness of their risk measurement and management of the complex 
financial  instruments  that  are  typically  used  in  this  model.  Basel  II  also  establishes  benchmarks  for 
recognising  risk  transfer  and  mitigation  in  securitisation  and  credit  derivatives  structures.  It  sets  a 
boundary between the point at which a firm transfers risk and actually retains the risk. These enable 
supervisors  to  assess  the  degree  of  risk  transfer  and  mitigation  under  both  normal  and  stressed 
market conditions.  
And finally, Basel II requires that firms strengthen their frameworks for assessing appropriate capital 
for the trading book. This has taken on increasing importance given the rapid growth of trading book 
assets  relative  to  the  banking  book.  For  example –  the  Basel  Committee  –  in  consultation  with  the 
industry – continues to work on developing a framework for better capturing the default risk associated 
with credit exposures in the trading book. In addition, Basel II permits firms to use their own models to 
measure counterparty credit risk exposures. This risk arises, for example, in OTC derivatives, which 
are  becoming  increasingly  complex  and  more  difficult  to  measure.  This  approach  is  closely  aligned 
with industry best practice as well as the underlying economic risks of these activities. 
Basel II has also paved the way for improvements in other, less visible ways. One example is Basel 
II’s  greater  focus  on  firms’  risk  management  infrastructure.  For  instance,  the  Framework  requires 
fundamental  improvement  in  the  data  supporting  PD,  LGD,  and  EAD  estimates  that  underpin 
economic  and  regulatory  capital  assessments  over  an  economic  cycle.  This  has  spurred 
improvements  in  areas  such  as  data  collection  and  management  information  systems.  These 
advances,  along  with  the  incentives  to  improve  risk  management  practices,  will  support  further 
innovation and improvement in risk management and economic capital modelling.  
Pillar 2 
Let me now turn to the second pillar – the supervisory review process. Pillar 2 really starts with you, 
the  banks.  First  and  foremost,  responsibility  lies  with  bank  management  for  developing  an  internal 
capital  assessment  process  and  setting  capital  targets  that  are  commensurate  with  the  bank’s  risk 
profile  and  control  environment.  A  sound  risk  management  process  is  the  basis  for  an  effective 
assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  a  bank’s  capital.  And  bank  management  bears  the  primary 
responsibility for ensuring that the bank maintains adequate capital to support the risks beyond the 
minimum  requirements.  Excessive  participation  by  supervisors  in  a  bank's  capital  adequacy 
assessment  process  or  firms'  over-reliance  on  supervisory  review  of  their  assessments  are  both 
counter  to  Basel  II’s  objectives  and  raise  the risk  of  moral  hazard.  The  better  banks  measure  and 
manage their risks, the more comfortable supervisors and the market will become with respect to their 
Pillar 1 processes, as well as the amount of overall capital that Pillar 2 indicates is appropriate.  
This  is  not  a  compliance  exercise!  Senior  management  and  boards  of  directors  need  to  lead  the 
process  and  ensure  that  their  institutions  establish  robust  internal  systems  that  capture  all  material 
risks  for  their  institution  in  a  rigorous manner.  Management  should  make certain  that  the economic 
substance  of  risk  exposures  is  fully  recognised  and  incorporated  into  the  bank’s  systems.  This  is 
extremely  important,  particularly  in  the  instance  of  securitisation  and  other  complex  risk  transfer 
arrangements where the risks retained by the firm are more difficult to measure. These estimates of 
risk must translate into robust capital assessments that can be validated by banks and supervisors. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
When supervisors assess economic capital, they should leverage off of banks’ systems. Supervisors 
need  to  understand  the  global  perspective  within  which  banks  operate.  Local  approaches  may  be 
warranted,  but  we  need  to  ensure  that  local  deviations  are  proportionate  and  that  the  costs  do  not 
outweigh the prudential benefits. 
To achieve the full benefits of Pillar 2, supervisors need to avoid falling into the trap of establishing a 
check-list approach to supervision. It is not in anyone’s interest to engage in a tick-the-box compliance 
exercise. Let me stress this - Basel II goes beyond merely just meeting the letter of the rules. The 
framework is more about a risk-focused approach to capital and risk management.  
I understand that for banks and supervisors to realise the full potential of Basel II, more work must be 
done on home-host issues. With respect to Pillar 1, we have resolved a number of concerns and have 
come quite a long way. The same vigour and energy needs to be applied to the home-host issues 
related to Pillar 2. I am confident that with the development of the home-host principles, increased use 
of  the  supervisory  colleges  and  further  dialogue  with  the  industry  we  will  make  progress  on  the 
outstanding issues. Many of these Pillar 2 issues, such as diversification, are particularly challenging 
and supervisors need to work with the industry to resolve them.  
I  expect  that  over  time  bankers  and  supervisors  will  engage  in  a  dialogue  around  Pillar  2  that 
ultimately will turn out to be one of the most important benefits coming out of the implementation of 
Basel II. For instance, I have already heard from a number of banks about the fruitful discussions of 
how credit risk mitigation is reflected in their risk models and about the robustness of risk measures for 
complex structured products. I have also heard discussions about how diversification is treated in risk 
management systems and how the dialogue surrounding credit risk stress testing is becoming more 
focused.  
Pillar 3 
Since the release of the Basel II framework, most of the focus has been on the first two pillars but we 
should not forget the third – and certainly not the least – of the three pillars. Market discipline is made 
possible by effective disclosure requirements and is a critical complement to the other two pillars of 
Basel II. Indeed, in the light of recent and rapid financial innovation, state of the art disclosure needs to 
keep up.  
Basel II seeks to raise the bar on the quality of disclosures, especially related to more complex credit 
risk  intermediation  activities,  covering  areas  such  as  counterparty  risk,  securitisation  and  credit  risk 
mitigants.  It  provides  clearer  industry  benchmarks  and  its  required  qualitative  disclosures  will  allow 
banks  to  put  their  quantitative  disclosures  into  context  and  help  explain  their  approach  to  risk 
management. 
To help advance the use of market discipline, Pillar 3 disclosures are, in many instances, required to 
utilise an advanced Pillar 1 approach, such as the internal ratings-based approach or the recognition 
of securitisation. This will help the industry move forward collectively. Further, Pillar 3 disclosures will 
enhance  discipline  around  risk  measures  since  banks  must  show  the  actual  outcomes  versus 
estimates.  An  example  of  this  is  the  required  disclosure  of  actual  losses  compared  with  estimated 
losses in the preceding period for each IRB portfolio, combined with qualitative information to explain 
the outcomes. 
However, challenges remain. There needs to be more discussion with a broader group of institutions 
to discuss their views regarding Pillar 3. In particular, banks have expressed their concern about the 
potential for misinterpretation of the purportedly complex disclosures by investors and the market in 
general.  Another  concern  relates  to  potential  inconsistencies  and  differences  across  banks  and  the 
unclear signal this may send to the users of such disclosures. Clearly, broad dialogue on this topic 
involving  supervisors,  bankers  and  market  participants  is  necessary  to  prevent  any  unintended 
consequences.  A  strong  understanding  by  the  market  of  Pillars  1  and  2  will  make  Pillar  3  more 
understandable and market discipline a more reliable tool for supervisors and the market.  
Before  I  conclude  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  costs  associated  with  Basel  II’s 
implementation  and  compliance,  particularly  costs  related  to  information  technology  and  human 
resources. Clearly, a shift in capital regulation as fundamental as Basel II entails significant transition 
costs  for  both  banks  and  supervisors.  However,  even  in  the  absence  of  Basel  II,  well  managed 
financial  institutions  would  have  continued  to  update  and  improve  their  IT  systems  and  risk 
management practices simply to keep pace with the evolving marketplace. Basel II has pushed firms 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 3
further than they may have gone on their own. In addition, Basel II confers other benefits, including 
greater operational efficiencies, better capital allocation and greater shareholder value through the use 
of improved risk models and reporting capabilities. One might reasonably expect such improvements 
to lead to more consistent profits and reduced volatility of credit losses as a result of consistent risk 
spreading, more effective deployment of capital, and the ability to make better business decisions.  
Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  close  by  reiterating  the  importance  of  Basel  II  in  support  of  financial  resiliency, 
especially in this age of rapid change and innovation. Basel II encourages better measurement and 
management  of  risk  exposures  and  the  treatment  of  complex  financial  instruments.  It  seeks  to 
advance the practice of stress testing as well as other risk management techniques. Under Pillar 2, 
banks take the lead in developing internal risk management processes that support robust estimates 
of regulatory and economic capital. Through enhanced transparency and market discipline, Pillar 3 will 
become more important because of increasing intermediation of risk through the capital markets. 
Both  banks  and  supervisors  need  to  take  a  long-term  perspective  when considering  the benefits  of 
Basel  II.  Regulatory  capital,  risk  management  and  risk-based  supervision  are  aligned  in  a  more 
consistent manner that can accommodate financial innovation. This capital framework is a long-term 
investment  that  if  done  properly  will  lay  the  foundation  for  further  evolution.  It  is  through  strong 
coordination among supervisors and with you – the industry – that we can realise the full potential of 
the Basel II framework. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2007
