John Gieve: London, money & the UK economy 
Speech  by  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  The  University  of  Surrey, 
Guildford, 26 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
The  past  year  has  been  one  of  rapid  growth  and  record  profits  for  much  of  the  financial  sector 
worldwide.  The  strength  of  the  world  economy  has  provided  a  favourable  wind  but  the  spectacular 
growth of derivative markets and the spate of leveraged buy outs have also fuelled the growth. And, of 
course, London has been at the centre of the story. 
In a speech in March I discussed the renewed ascent of London as a centre of international finance 
and concluded that it was based on powerful economic forces which were likely to persist.1 I showed 
how the leading position London built up in the days when Britannia ruled the waves gave it a strong 
comparative  advantage  based  on  language,  law,  time  zone  and,  above  all,  by  a  concentration  of 
expert labour. This allowed London to maintain an important role in international finance even while 
Britain’s overall economic and political position was eroded. In the last twenty years we have seen a 
resurgence  in  the  City  which  has  established  a  strong  position  not  just  in  traditional  markets  like 
foreign exchange, where its share is around 30% of trading, but in new products, with a share in OTC 
derivatives markets over 40%.2 The rapid growth of hedge funds in the West End is the latest example 
of  the  innovation  that  this  cluster  of  financial  skills  has  produced.  You  know  something  must  be 
happening when the Mayor of New York commissions a review of the threat London poses to New 
York’s position. 
London’s recent growth certainly has a cyclical element but it also reflects two more structural changes 
–  the  removal  of  barriers  to  international  capital  movements  and  the  advances  in  information 
technology. These have led to a growing role for international capital markets compared to national 
banking and to a growing concentration of those markets in a few hubs among which London and New 
York are dominant. And this finance revolution is still underway. It is far more advanced in the US than 
in  Europe  and  in  Europe  than  in  Asia.  In  the  absence  of  disasters  therefore  London,  as  the  pre-
eminent centre outside the US, can look forward to a long period of fast growth and expect its share of 
the UK economy to increase. 
This evening I want to discuss the implications of that trend for the UK economy and for economic 
policy. On the first, is London a goose laying golden eggs for the rest of the country or is it more of a 
cuckoo in the nest? On the second, how does the growth of London and financial markets generally 
impact  on  the  Bank’s  core  functions  of  setting  monetary  policy  and  maintaining  financial  stability. 
Finally  I  discuss  the  impact  of  financial  developments  on  the  growth  of  money  and  credit  and  the 
significance of that for the broader economy. 
London’s impact on the wider economy 
In principle, when one sector of an economy enjoys rapid growth, we would expect to see three broad 
developments: 
• 
• 
rewards earned by factors which are specific to the booming industry rise; 
unless there are sufficient unemployed resources available, productive resources shift into 
the booming industry; and 
employment in other tradable goods industries falls. 
                                                       
1   Gieve, J “The City’s Growth: The Crest of a Wave or Swimming with the Stream”, to the London Society of Accountants, 26 
March 2007. 
I use “the City” here loosely to cover not just the Square Mile but the whole of London’s wholesale financial sector including 
in  Canary  wharf  and  the  West  End.  A  fuller  exposition  would  also  give  more  attention  to  successful  regional  centres 
including Edinburgh. 
2  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
The results were illustrated by the Dutch experience with gas in the 1960s and by the UK experience 
with North Sea oil in the early 1980s.3 In both cases, part of the mechanism was a rise in the real 
exchange rate and consequent pressure on other sectors. 
Is that happening now in the UK? It is much harder to identify the impact of the City than the impact of 
the  discovery  of  gold  or  oil.  London’s  position  has  developed  gradually  and  the  statistics  rarely 
separate the group of wholesale financial markets and supporting legal, accounting and other services 
that make London special from a broader group including retail banking and insurance and business 
services. But there is some evidence that all three factors are at work. 
The story seems clearest with the specific factors of production. The cost of commercial property in 
London,  for  example,  has  grown  rapidly.  According  to  Jones  Lang  Lasalle  Research,  in  the  City 
average capital values are over $25,000 per sq.m, above both Paris and New York. And the costs in 
the West End, the main home of the new hedge fund industry, are almost twice as high. There is no 
doubt  that  the  success  of  London’s  financial  centre  is  helping  to  fuel  demand  for  office  space  from 
Canary Wharf to Mayfair. 
And  of  course  it  is  not  just  commercial  property  in  London  that  has  been  booming.  House  price 
inflation  in  London  has  outstripped  the  rest  of  the  UK  (Chart  1),  and  in  Kensington  and  Chelsea 
average  house  prices  have  risen  by  almost  40%  since  the  start  of  2005,  compared  with  20%  for 
Greater London as a whole. ECA International published a survey comparing average monthly rents 
for  a  70-square  metre  unfurnished  flat  in  the  largest  cities  and  showed  London  over  €  2,100, 
compared with New York around € 1,750 and Paris below € 1,500. 
The  figures  on  output  also  show  that  London  has  been  growing  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  country 
(Chart 2), and that has reflected the growth of financial and business services compared with other 
tradable sectors throughout the UK (Chart 3 and Chart 4). And despite the fall in oil production in the 
North Sea, we have seen a rise in the real exchange rate by over 15% when comparing the period 
1987-1997 to 1997-2007, although of course the financial sector would not have been the only factor 
behind that rise. 
More  immediately,  the  GDP  figures  in  May  showed  that  financial  intermediation  grew  by  6%  in  the 
sixth months to 2007 Q1 – an annual rate of over 13%. That is not the same as the City of course; but 
there is every reason to think the City has been growing at least as fast as the rest. 
However, while the success of the City is currently one factor in these trends, it is not the whole story. 
For a start there is a lot more to London than finance. There are other successful industries and, on 
the other hand, London is home not just to the wealthiest boroughs but also to some of the poorest 
and  most  deprived  areas  in  the  country.  As  a  result  it  has  one  of  the  highest  regional  rates  of 
unemployment overall. Secondly employment and profits in the City have been highly cyclical. 
On  scale  first,  a  recent  estimate  put  the  total  number  employed  in  “City”  jobs,  including  supporting 
professions like lawyers and accountants as well as bankers and asset managers, at around 340,000. 
That  amounts  to  about  9%  of  the  total  in  London;  significant  but  still  lower  than  the  number  in 
distribution or in government services. And the growth of employment will continue to be the net result 
from  the  expansion  of  activity  and  from  the  economies  made  possible  by  IT  and  by  the  relocation 
particularly of back office work to cheaper areas elsewhere in the UK or abroad. 
The jobs figures understate the importance of the sector in the economy because on average pay may 
be twice as high in the financial sector as in the rest of the economy; 9% of wages and salaries in the 
year  to  March  compared  to  4%  of  employment.  And  within  London  its  share  is  even  greater.  The 
average earnings of someone working in London’s financial intermediation sector in 2006 were around 
£90,000. On that basis, the financial sector might account for around 20% of remuneration in London. 
However it is still far from the only game in town. For example the Work Foundation’s fascinating new 
report on the creative industries suggests that their growth has contributed at least as much as the 
City to London’s overall performance. 
Moreover, while the trend is upwards, there is a marked cycle in the financial sector. Over the last 10 
years, for example there has been a striking swing in employment with rapid growth during the dotcom 
boom followed by a sharp fall and subsequent recovery (Chart 5). 
                                                      
3   The UK is a net exporter of financial services, running a surplus in 2006 of £26 billion (or 2% of GDP) on financial services 
and insurance. North Sea oil production peaked in 1999, and in 2006 was nearly 40% below this peak. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
That reflects a strong cycle in financial sector profits (Chart 6) which is an international phenomenon – 
indeed, in the last 10 years major European financial firms and US securities dealers saw an even 
bigger cycle in their profitability than major UK financial firms (Chart 7). 
The same is true for earnings (Chart 8). This reflects the importance of bonuses which account for 
around 20% of remuneration in the financial sector compared with around 5% across the economy as 
a  whole.  The  figures  in  the  City  itself  can  be  considerably  higher.  A  figure  of  50%  is  common  in 
investment banking, in which a rough rule of thumb is that firms distribute about half their pre bonus 
profits  to  staff.  It  is  estimated  that  4200  workers  in  the  City  received  bonuses  worth  more  than 
£1million in 2006/07. 
Of course the growth in those bonuses is contributing to the widening inequality of incomes at the top 
of the earnings distribution. Chart 9 compares the 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile with the median and 
shows that the main change is at the top. If we break that top percentile down further, we see a more 
dramatic widening. This is not just true of the City or of the UK. The average CEO in the UK earns 
around 100 times more than the average worker but there is an even wider gap in the US, with the 
average pay of CEOs over 250 times that of the average worker in 2005, having risen from around 
100 times in 1995. 
In  1999  Eddie  George  likened  the  change  in  the  City  since  Big  Bang  to  Wimbledon.4  The  UK  still 
prospered by providing the venue even though most of the players were foreign. 
Today I think the Premiership may provide an even better analogy. That is partly because foreigners 
now  own  an  increasing  number  of  the  venues  as  well  as  supplying  many  of  the  players.  That  is  a 
striking illustration of Britain’s openness to foreign ownership which sets it some way apart from most 
other countries both in Europe and America. But it is also because both the City and the Premiership 
have become the centres of global industries with a dramatic impact on revenues and on earnings. 
One of my first footballing heroes was Johnny Haynes, the David Beckham of his day as a passer of a 
football.  In  the  1960s  he  became  the  first  player  to  earn  £100  per  week  (roughly  £1500  in  today’s 
terms) in the British game which was then about four times the average male wage. Top Premiership 
players now earn more than 200 times the average wage. 
What has changed is the fact that pay is now being set in a world market. We have in the Premiership 
as in the City some of the best paid people in an international industry which is developing rapidly. We 
have imported the top of the world earnings scale and at a time when the stretch at the top world wide 
is increasing very fast. 
Just as in the Premiership, the stars of the City – the people who have not just the talent but the recent 
experience and networks to perform at the top level today – can command a high proportion of the 
returns from being at the hub of the industry. The growth of hedge funds and private equity can be 
seen  in  part  as  a  move  by  the  small  group  who  have  sufficient  expertise  in  new  instruments  and 
markets to take more of the returns on ownership.5
To  sum  up  so  far,  internationalisation  and  technology  favour  the  clustering  of  financial  markets  in 
London so we should expect London to continue to prosper relative to the financial industry worldwide 
and to the rest of the UK economy. That will tend to reinforce the trends of recent years with: 
• 
• 
a continuing shift of resources into the financial markets and into London itself, 
a continuing pressure for higher rents and rewards for those with the right combination of 
talent and experience, but also 
a strong cycle in profits, pay and employment. 
                                                       
4   E George, "Before the Millennium: From the City of London", 7 December 1999. 
5   Even for a footballer, being at your peak at the right time and place is critical to earnings. But with football like athletics, it is 
obvious that the best have outstanding talent. It is harder to believe the all the high earners in the City are intrinsically more 
intelligent or determined than others whether in universities, hospitals or factories. But the demand for the best paid reflects 
not just talent but experience. There may be many people who could run a trading floor given the right training but there are 
inevitably only a few who can demonstrate current success in doing so. Experience, like status and talent, is a “positional 
good”. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 3
Implications for economic policy 
That leads straight on to the first implication for policy makers. As London strengthens its position in 
financial markets, the cycle in international finance will have direct effects not just through the shifts in 
interest  rates  and  asset  prices  but  through  jobs  and  pay  in  an  important  sector  of  the  London 
economy. Any international financial crisis will be important not just because of its knock on effects on 
the core banks and markets on which British industry and households depend but because of its direct 
impact on the real economy. 
The growth of the City also affects the interpretation of some of the core statistics we use to monitor 
and  assess  how  the  economy  is  developing,  including  those  on  output,  earnings  and,  above  all, 
money and credit. 
First our GDP numbers don’t pick up financial sector very fully. In most sectors the contribution to GDP 
is roughly the sum of pay and profits. Measuring the output of the financial sector is more difficult. In 
the financial sector some types of banking activity are excluded from the final GDP figures. In 2008 the 
ONS plan to expand the GDP figures to include what is called FISIM and reflects those activities of 
banks which they cover by their net interest income.6 That will improve estimates of GDP, but they will 
continue to exclude income that banks earn through proprietary dealing. This is probably be right as a 
matter  of  national accounting  principle but  dealing  in  securities  is  a  part  of  what  some  international 
banks do. As a result changes in the level of activity in the City may not be fully captured in the GDP 
figures which most economic models, including the Bank’s, use as their summary statistic for the real 
economy. 
Second  the  growing  importance  of  bonuses  in  the  financial  sector  can  make  it  harder  to  interpret 
statistics on earnings. City bonuses are generally paid at the start of the year. As Chart 10 shows this 
leads to big peaks and troughs. At times when changes in earnings growth are of great interest, as 
they have been in recent months, it is difficult to identify the underlying path. 
The difficulty is partly a technical issue of how to smooth out the monthly variations. Do we spread the 
bonuses backwards over the last 12 months on the grounds that they are deferred pay conditional on 
profits in that period (with the consequence that you don’t know the true earnings figure for any month 
until  over  a  year  later)?  Do  you  spread  them  forward  because  they  will  tend  to  be  spent  over  the 
coming year? Or do you do a bit of both? To that uncertainty we can add the fact that there several 
different  measures  of  earnings  growth  including  two  –  the  AWE  and  AEI  –  which  are  telling  a 
somewhat different tale.7
There is also a more conceptual challenge. Are bonuses to be treated as part of the cost of labour or 
are they a form of profit sharing? The economic implications may be quite different. In practice they 
are probably a bit of both; bonuses are much higher when profits are good, but they are unlikely to 
disappear entirely in tough times (witness the concept of the “guaranteed bonus”). But estimating how 
they divide up is not easy. 
Money and credit 
The  third  area  in  which  the  development  of  financial  markets  is  complicating  the  interpretation  of 
statistics is money and credit. And again that is an area of keen attention at the moment. The question 
is  whether  the  recent  growth  of  the  money  supply  is  telling  us  something  about  the  prospects  for 
inflation  and  the  economy  that  we  are  not  getting  from  other  variables  –  like  consumption,  interest 
rates, prices, or inflation expectations. 
Chart  11  shows  monetary  growth  over  130  years  in  the  UK  against  consumer  inflation.  The 
association is obvious. But even in the days of the gold standard when the Bank had a more direct 
control  of  the  money  supply,  money  growth  and  inflation  diverged  for  periods  (eg  in  the  late 
19th century  and  in  the  late  1920s).  More  recently,  the  growth  of  money  in  the  1970s  did  act  as  a 
leading indication for inflation. But in the early 1980s the relationship appeared to break down despite, 
                                                      
6 
“Improving  the  measurement  of  banking  services  in  the  UK  National  Accounts",  Leonidas  Akriditis,  ONS  Economic  and 
Labour Market Review, May 2007 
I have used the AWE in this speech, even though it is the more recent and less well established of the two, because it is 
designed  to  handle  outliers  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  ranges  better  and  the  City  has  a  disproportionate  number  of 
outliers. 
BIS Review 73/2007
7  
4 
 or possibly because of, the fact that the monetary authorities were explicitly targeting the monetary 
aggregates as a means of controlling inflation. 
Part  of  the  explanation  of  the  divergence  was  that  the  1980s  were  a  period  of  rapid  financial 
innovation following the removal of exchange controls and of pricing, income and dividend policies. 
This changed the amount of money people were willing to hold for a given amount of money spending 
(which in economics is known as the velocity of circulation). So the increase in money growth did not 
lead to a pick up in inflation. 
Even so the acceleration of monetary growth at the end of the 1980s did foreshadow the upturn of 
inflation at the end of the Lawson boom. 
The chart shows that since 1992 the rates of growth in broad money and inflation have diverged again 
and that broad money growth has picked up sharply since 2003. A key question is whether this reflects 
a further spurt in financial innovation or is telling us that we should expect increasing growth of money 
spending and inflation. 
There  are  good  grounds  for  attributing  part  of  the  increase  to  structural  changes  in  the  financial 
markets which have led “other financial companies” (OFCs) to hold more deposits with the banks for a 
given level of economic activity.8
It is within this OFCs sector that the growth in money has been the most rapid (Chart 12). The view 
that much of this growth reflects structural changes of this sort is supported in my view by the way the 
spread between deposit and loan rates of interest has vanished in the last few years (Chart 13). Of 
course  that  might  be  the  product  of  competition  between  banks  to  lend  more  and  attract  more 
deposits; it also seems plausible that much of this lending is more about balance sheet restructuring 
than making a profit. 
However deposits associated with special purpose vehicles and intra-group only account for part of 
the  growth.  Even  if  we  strip  out  all  OFC  deposits  the  growth  rate  of  money  has  still  been  strong 
compared with the growth rate of money spending (Chart 14). In my final section I want to discuss 
what we should make of this. 
The significance of the money supply 
In the Treasury in the 1980s I was a close observer of the attempts to find a monetary aggregate as an 
intermediate target to guide policy. We were looking for both a predictable relationship between the 
policy instrument, interest rates, and the measure of money and a predictable relationship between 
that and our final objective, inflation. I remember the frustrations when both links proved unreliable. I 
am in no doubt that we are better off focussing directly on our final target, inflation. 
However  I  was  struck,  returning  eighteen  months  ago  to  the  economic  debate,  how  the  place  of 
money in our debates had changed. Our model, like most others, is “new Keynesian”. As a result, the 
discussion  sometimes  seems  to  resemble  the  discussions  of  “demand  management”  in  the  1970s 
more than the monetarist debates of the 1980s. But, if anyone was in any doubt, monetarism was not 
dead but only resting. And it has recently taken wing again as persistent monetary growth and rising 
asset prices have given us food for thought. 
At times the discussion of money can seem detached from the rest of the policy debate. Having listed 
all the other aspects of the economy factors – like world growth, consumption, financial markets and 
the labour market – “money” emerges as though it was a separate determinant impacting directly on 
inflation or inflation expectations like Heineken “refreshing the parts other beers cannot reach”.9 But 
money is very much part of the real world and we don’t need any hidden or ghostly mechanisms to 
see how it feeds through credit, asset prices and consumption in the wider economy. 
                                                      
8   The clearest example is the service offered by London Clearing House, where dealers effectively transact with each other 
(via gilt repo transactions) across the balance sheet of LCH, which results in an increase in both OFC’s deposits with and 
borrowing  from  banks.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  a  synthetic  securitisation  of  corporate  bonds,  a  special  purpose  vehicle 
(SPV) is set up to issue securities to investors and holds a cash deposit at a bank from which it makes payments if any of 
the  securitised  loans  default.  Both  of  these  examples  result  in  an  increased  in  measured  deposits  at  banks,  but  neither 
presages more nominal spending. 
9   G Ryle “The Concept of Mind” London (1949) Hutchinson. Ryle was criticising as incoherent a dualist view of mind and body 
in which the mind is instrumental in determining action but is wholly distinct from the physical realm. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 5
We  need  to  start  as  the  Governor  has  said  by  trying  to  distinguish  supply  shocks  from  demand 
shocks.10 Where growth in money is driven by the wish of consumers or companies to increase their 
holdings of money for a given level of spending, there need be no effect on nominal GDP or inflation. 
As I have discussed there is clear evidence of changes in demand of that sort in the financial sector. 
But that is not the whole story. So have there been increases in supply of money and if so how will 
they feed through into the economy? 
What does a supply shock look like? It is easiest to visualise in a closed economy in which the money 
supply is mainly notes issued by the monetary authorities. One can imagine then a direct increase in 
supply – a helicopter drop of extra notes. In that world people would really find themselves with extra 
cash in their pockets and would be expected to go out and spend some or all of it. With more money 
chasing the same goods, we would see a direct impact, first on money spending, then on inflation. 
In  the  modern  world  the  nearest equivalent  to helicopter drops  has been  the monetary  financing of 
government deficits. But monetary financing is not a problem we face at the moment, indeed it is not 
allowed within the EU under the Maastricht Treaty. 
So what we need to be concerned about today is the creation of extra money through the banking 
system and the way that happens is through the granting of credit to willing borrowers who borrow to 
spend on assets, investment or consumption. The supply changes we need to spot are changes in 
banks’ willingness to lend. And we don’t have to look far to find some. 
Take, for example, the growth of consumer credit in the UK (Chart 15). We see rapid growth in the late 
90s and early years of this century followed by a sharp decline as banks began to see defaults rising. 
Another  recent  example  is  the  sub  prime  market  in  the  US.  Chart  16  shows  the  arrears  rates  on 
successive cohorts of loans, marking very clearly the reduction in credit quality in 2006 as the market 
overshot. 
In both cases the figures and the market explanations confirm that these movements reflect at least in 
part  changes  in  the  supply  curve  for  credit.  The  borrowers  were  willing  but  the  banks  were  also 
pushing the supply by reducing costs and conditions (culminating some said in NINJA mortgages – for 
those with no income, no job and no assets). 
So I have no doubt that we have seen some supply changes to credit. Next we need to distinguish the 
sustainable changes from the cyclical. Sustained changes either in the economy or in financial sector 
technology may justify some increase in supply. For example, we have seen a long period of low and 
stable inflation and unemployment and that is expected to continue. That reduces some of the risks to 
lenders  and  borrowers  and  may  increase  both  the  demand  and  supply  of  credit  and  the  value  of 
assets  on  a  lasting  basis.  The  development  of  information  technology  allows  banks  to  collect  and 
analyse more information about borrowers which should allow them to target credit better and justify a 
change in supply. Finally the development of derivative markets has allowed the risks in loans to be 
split into their separate components and distributed to the people best placed to bear them. Again that 
should lower the supply curve for credit. 
All these factors were at play in the consumer credit and the sub prime markets but, despite the new 
sophistication of credit scoring and the derivatives markets, they both also showed all the classic signs 
of a credit cycle. Banks competed for business by lowering the costs and conditions on lending while 
the economy expanded, defaults were few, and profits appeared high. They overdid it, defaults started 
to rise, losses were taken and they toughened their terms again. The speed and severity of that cycle 
can have implications for financial stability as well as the stability of the broader economy. It is for that 
reason that there is a wide acceptance that there may be a case for monetary policy to “lean into the 
wind” in a cyclical upswing.11 That has been one factor in my support for the four interest rate rises of 
the last year. 
If there is evidence of a cyclical, unsustainable, element in the supply of credit and asset prices the 
next questions are: 
• 
where are we in the cycle, and 
                                                      
10   M King “Speech to CBI Dinner, Wales”, 11 June 2007. 
11   C Bean “Inflation Targeting: The UK Experience”, speech at the Annual Conference of the German Economic Association, 1 
October 2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2007
 is the present stance of monetary policy sufficient to bring it back to a sustainable trend or, 
given the lags in the impact of interest rate changes, is it set to exacerbate the downturn? 
Current conjuncture 
So where are we now? The consumer credit market in the UK and the sub prime and broader housing 
markets in the US have turned down and, while the sub prime saga is still not played out, it still seems 
unlikely that it will have severe knock on effects on the broader economy. 
Elsewhere  the  commercial  property  in  the  UK  looks  to  be  at  or  close  to  its  peak  (Chart  17).The 
housing  market  is  showing  some  glimmers  of  a  slowdown  in  activity  but  prices  are  still  rising  fast, 
especially in London; indeed the rate of increase of house prices is higher today in nearly every region 
than it was last autumn. And there is no sign of a slowdown in corporate lending. Overall lending to 
PNFCs is accelerating (Chart 18), investment is high, and on a global basis we are seeing spectacular 
growth in the LBO market (Chart 19) and the emergence of lower prices and conditions with so called 
“covenant lite” loans. 
Against that background the question is whether we have done enough. In reaching a judgement, of 
course, we need to take account of the full range of information on the real and nominal economy. We 
know that the full impact of past increases in rates has yet to come through. Yet we cannot be sure 
how much of a restraint current rates will be at this point in the cycle. It is not surprising therefore that 
there are different views on the MPC or that those views change in response to more information. 
My stance in recent months has reflected a judgement on the balance of risks taking account of both 
probabilities and likely impacts. The risks we face are: first that we may increase interest rates too fast 
or push them up too far, with an unnecessary loss of growth, and second that we may raise rates too 
slowly with a cost in higher inflation and potentially higher interest rates and a sharper slowdown in the 
end. 
I voted for a further increase earlier this month partly because I was not convinced that current rates 
would  be  sufficient  to  bring  credit  growth  and  nominal  demand  back  to  their  long  term  sustainable 
path. I also felt that the impact of moving too slowly on the credibility of the regime and thus the future 
prospects  for  the  economy  was  of  greater  concern,  given  the  robust  rate  of  growth,  than  an 
unnecessary slowdown in activity. In reviewing the position again in future months I will be watching 
the trends in the growth of credit and money carefully. 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 7
8 
 BIS Review 73/2007
  9
BIS Review 73/2007 
 10 
 BIS Review 73/2007
 11
BIS Review 73/2007 
 