Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy and government debt – different 
perspectives 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the 13th Zermatter Symposium, Zermatt, 28 August 2007. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  effects  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  overlap.  Fiscal  policy  can  have  a  cyclical  effect, 
while monetary policy can also generate income for the government. However, theory and 
practise have shown that, first and foremost, monetary policy must be used to ensure price 
stability and – to a limited extent – to dampen economic fluctuations. The principal aim of 
fiscal policy, however, must be to ensure that the national budget is financed as efficiently as 
possible. When government debt levels are high and budget deficits get out of hand, they 
pose a significant threat to a monetary policy that is geared to stability. Misusing monetary 
policy as an instrument of fiscal policy inevitably leads to a loss of purchasing power. Many 
episodes of high inflation have come about, ultimately, as the result of funding requirements 
on the part of the state. Nowadays, the independence of many central banks shields them – 
to  a  large  extent  –  from  the  fiscal  greed  of  politicians.  Nevertheless,  time  and  time  again, 
when government finances have fallen into disarray, central banks have been seen to come 
under  political  pressure.  From  a  monetary  viewpoint,  however,  government  debt  is  not 
entirely  unwelcome.  On  the  contrary,  government  debt  is  a  vital  ingredient  of  modern 
monetary policy. A liquid market for government bonds is a prerequisite for a modern and 
efficient financial market. Functioning financial markets, in turn, are necessary for an efficient 
monetary  policy:  a  liquid  market  for  governments  bonds  enhances  the  efficiency  of  the 
monetary transmission mechanism. Yields on government bonds and indicators derived from 
these yields are an important source of information for the monetary policy decision making 
process. Finally, in implementing government policy, government bonds serve as collateral. 
Sound government finances are a prerequisite for the long-term success of monetary policy 
and for maintaining price stability. However, healthy government finances do not necessarily 
imply  zero  government  debt.  For  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  an  efficient 
monetary policy, a liquid market for government bonds is a considerable advantage. 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 1
