Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report 
to the Congress  
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate,  Washington, 
14 February 2007.  
 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and other members of the Committee, I am pleased to present the 
Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
Real activity in the United States expanded at a solid pace in 2006, although the pattern of growth was 
uneven. After a first-quarter rebound from weakness associated with the effects of the hurricanes that 
ravaged the Gulf Coast the previous summer, output growth moderated somewhat on average over 
the remainder of 2006. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at 
an annual rate of about 2-3/4 percent in the second half of the year.  
As  we  anticipated  in  our July  report,  the U.S.  economy  appears  to  be  making  a  transition  from  the 
rapid rate of expansion experienced over the preceding several years to a more sustainable average 
pace of growth. The principal source of the ongoing moderation has been a substantial cooling in the 
housing market, which has led to a marked slowdown in the pace of residential construction. However, 
the weakness in housing market activity and the slower appreciation of house prices do not seem to 
have spilled over to any significant extent to other sectors of the economy. Consumer spending has 
continued to expand at a solid rate, and the demand for labor has remained strong. On average, about 
165,000  jobs  per  month  have  been  added  to  nonfarm  payrolls  over  the  past  six  months,  and  the 
unemployment rate, at 4.6 percent in January, remains low.  
Inflation pressures appear to have abated somewhat following a run-up during the first half of 2006. 
Overall inflation has fallen, in large part as a result of declines in the price of crude oil. Readings on 
core inflation – that is, inflation excluding the prices of food and energy – have improved modestly in 
recent months. Nevertheless, the core inflation rate remains somewhat elevated. 
In  the  five  policy  meetings  since  the  July  report,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has 
maintained the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent. So far, the incoming data have supported the view 
that the current stance of policy is likely to foster sustainable economic growth and a gradual ebbing of 
core inflation. However, in the statement accompanying last month's policy decision, the FOMC again 
indicated that its predominant policy concern is the risk that inflation will fail to ease as expected and 
that it is prepared to take action to address inflation risks if developments warrant.  
Let me now discuss the economic outlook in a little more detail, beginning with developments in the 
real  economy  and  then  turning  to  inflation.  I  will  conclude  with  some  brief  comments  on  monetary 
policy.  
Consumer  spending  continues  to  be  the  mainstay  of  the  current  economic  expansion.  Personal 
consumption expenditures, which account for more than two-thirds of aggregate demand, increased at 
an  annual  rate  of  around  3-1/2  percent  in  real  terms  during  the  second  half  of  last  year,  broadly 
matching  the  brisk  pace  of  the  previous  three  years.  Consumer  outlays  were  supported  by  strong 
gains in personal income, reflecting both the ongoing increases in payroll employment and a pickup in 
the growth of real wages. Real hourly compensation – as measured by compensation per hour in the 
nonfarm business sector deflated by the personal consumption expenditures price index – rose at an 
annual rate of around 3 percent in the latter half of 2006.  
The  resilience  of  consumer  spending  is  all  the  more  striking  given  the  backdrop  of  the  substantial 
correction in the housing market that became increasingly evident during the spring and summer of 
last  year.  By  the  middle  of  2006,  monthly  sales  of  new  and  existing  homes were  about  15  percent 
lower  than  a  year  earlier,  and  the  previously  rapid  rate  of  house-price  appreciation  had  slowed 
markedly. The fall in housing demand in turn prompted a sharp slowing in the pace of construction of 
new homes. Even so, the backlog of unsold homes rose from about four-and-a-half months' supply in 
2005 to nearly seven months' supply by the third quarter of last year. Single-family housing starts have 
dropped  more  than  30  percent  since  the  beginning  of  last  year,  and  employment  growth  in  the 
construction sector has slowed substantially. 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 1
Some tentative signs of stabilization have recently appeared in the housing market: New and existing 
home  sales  have  flattened  out  in  recent  months,  mortgage  applications  have  picked  up,  and  some 
surveys  find  that  homebuyers'  sentiment  has  improved.  However,  even  if  housing  demand  falls  no 
further, weakness in residential investment is likely to continue to weigh on economic growth over the 
next  few  quarters  as  homebuilders  seek  to  reduce  their  inventories  of  unsold  homes  to  more-
comfortable levels. 
Despite  the  ongoing  adjustments  in  the  housing  sector,  overall  economic  prospects  for  households 
remain  good.  Household  finances  appear  generally  solid,  and  delinquency  rates  on  most  types  of 
consumer  loans  and  residential  mortgages  remain  low.  The  exception  is  subprime  mortgages  with 
variable interest rates, for which delinquency rates have increased appreciably. The labor market is 
expected to stay healthy, and real incomes should continue to rise, although the pace of employment 
gains may be slower than that to which we have become accustomed in recent years. In part, slower 
average  job  growth  may  simply  reflect  the  moderation  of  economic  activity.  Also,  the  impending 
retirement of the leading edge of the baby-boom generation, and an apparent leveling out of women's 
participation rate in the workforce, which had risen for several decades, will likely restrain the growth of 
the labor force in coming years. With fewer jobseekers entering the labor force, the rate of job creation 
associated  with  the  maintenance  of  stable  conditions  in  the  labor  market  will  decline.  All  told, 
consumer expenditures appear likely to expand solidly in coming quarters, albeit a little less rapidly 
than the growth in personal incomes if, as we expect, households respond to the slow pace of home-
equity appreciation by saving more out of current income.  
The  business  sector  remains  in  excellent  financial  condition,  with  strong  growth  in  profits,  liquid 
balance sheets, and corporate leverage near historical lows. Last year, those factors helped to support 
continued advances in business capital expenditures. Notably, investment in high-tech equipment rose 
9 percent in 2006, and spending on nonresidential structures (such as office buildings, factories, and 
retail space) increased rapidly through much of the year after several years of weakness. Growth in 
business spending slowed toward the end of last year, reflecting mainly a deceleration of spending on 
business structures; a drop in outlays in the transportation sector, where spending is notably volatile; 
and  some  weakness  in  purchases  of  equipment  related  to  construction  and  motor  vehicle 
manufacturing.  Over  the  coming  year,  capital  spending  is  poised  to  expand  at  a  moderate  pace, 
supported by steady gains in business output and favorable financial conditions. Inventory levels in 
some sectors – most notably at motor vehicle dealers and in some construction-related manufacturing 
industries  –  rose  over  the  course  of  last  year,  leading  some  firms  to  cut  production  to  better  align 
inventories with sales. Remaining imbalances may continue to impose modest restraint on industrial 
production during the early part of this year.  
Outside  the  United  States,  economic  activity  in  our  major  trading  partners  has  continued  to  grow 
briskly. The strength of demand abroad helped spur a robust expansion in U.S. real exports, which 
grew about 9 percent last year. The pattern of real U.S imports was somewhat uneven, partly because 
of fluctuations in oil imports over the course of the year. On balance, import growth slowed in 2006, to 
3  percent.  Economic  growth  abroad should support  further steady  growth  in U.S.  exports this  year. 
Despite  the  improvements  in  trade  performance,  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  remains  large, 
averaging  about  6-1/2  percent  of  nominal  GDP  during  the  first  three  quarters  of  2006  (the  latest 
available data). 
Overall, the U.S. economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace this year and next, with growth 
strengthening  somewhat  as  the  drag  from  housing  diminishes.  Such  an  outlook  is  reflected  in  the 
projections that the members of the Board of Governors and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks 
made around the time of the FOMC meeting late last month. The central tendency of those forecasts – 
which  are  based  on  the  information  available  at  that  time  and  on  the  assumption  of  appropriate 
monetary policy – is for real GDP to increase about 2-1/2 to 3 percent in 2007 and about 2-3/4 to 3 
percent in 2008. The projection for GDP growth in 2007 is slightly lower than our projection last July. 
This difference partly reflects an expectation of somewhat greater weakness in residential construction 
during the first part of this year than we anticipated last summer. The civilian unemployment rate is 
expected to finish both 2007 and 2008 around 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent. 
The risks to this outlook are significant. To the downside, the ultimate extent of the housing market 
correction is difficult to forecast and may prove greater than we anticipate. Similarly, spillover effects 
from  developments  in  the  housing  market  onto  consumer  spending  and  employment  in  housing-
related industries may be more pronounced than expected. To the upside, output may expand more 
quickly  than  expected  if  consumer  spending  continues  to  increase  at  the  brisk  pace  seen  in  the 
second half of 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2007
I  turn  now  to  the  inflation  situation.  As  I  noted  earlier,  there  are  some  indications  that  inflation 
pressures are beginning to diminish. The monthly data are noisy, however, and it will consequently be 
some time before we can be confident that underlying inflation is moderating as anticipated. Recent 
declines in overall inflation have primarily reflected lower prices for crude oil, which have fed through 
to  the  prices  of  gasoline,  heating  oil,  and  other  energy  products  used  by  consumers.  After  moving 
higher in the first half of 2006, core consumer price inflation has also edged lower recently, reflecting a 
relatively broad-based deceleration in the prices of core goods. That deceleration is probably also due 
to some extent to lower energy prices, which have reduced costs of production and thereby lessened 
one source of pressure on the prices of final goods and services. The ebbing of core inflation has likely 
been promoted as well by the stability of inflation expectations.  
A  waning  of  the  temporary  factors  that  boosted  inflation  in  recent  years  will  probably  help  foster  a 
continued edging down of core inflation. In particular, futures quotes imply that oil prices are expected 
to  remain  well  below  last  year's  peak.  If  actual  prices  follow  the  path  currently  indicated  by  futures 
prices, inflation pressures would be reduced further as the benefits of the decline in oil prices from last 
year's high levels are passed through to a broader range of core goods and services. Nonfuel import 
prices  may  also  put  less  pressure  on  core  inflation,  particularly  if  price  increases  for  some  other 
commodities, such as metals, slow from last year's rapid rates. But as we have been reminded only 
too well in recent years, the prices of oil and other commodities are notoriously difficult to predict, and 
they remain a key source of uncertainty to the inflation outlook. The contribution from rents and shelter 
costs should also fall back, following a step-up last year. The faster pace of rent increases last year 
may have been attributable in part to the reduced affordability of owner-occupied housing, which led to 
a  greater  demand  for  rental  housing.  Rents  should  rise  somewhat  less  quickly  this  year  and  next, 
reflecting recovering demand for owner-occupied housing as well as increases in the supply of rental 
units, but the extent and pace of that adjustment is not yet clear.  
Upward  pressure  on  inflation  could  materialize  if  final  demand  were  to  exceed  the  underlying 
productive capacity of the economy for a sustained period. The rate of resource utilization is high, as 
can be seen in rates of capacity utilization above their long-term average and, most evidently, in the 
tightness of the labor market. Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that businesses are having difficulty 
recruiting well-qualified workers in certain occupations. Measures of labor compensation, though still 
growing at a moderate pace, have shown some signs of acceleration over the past year, likely in part 
the result of tight labor market conditions. 
The  implications  for  inflation  of  faster  growth  in  nominal  labor  compensation  depend  on  several 
factors.  Increases  in  compensation  might  be  offset  by  higher  labor  productivity  or  absorbed  by  a 
narrowing of firms' profit margins rather than passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices; in 
these circumstances, gains in nominal compensation would translate into gains in real compensation 
as well. Underlying productivity trends appear favorable, and the markup of prices over unit labor costs 
is high by historical standards, so such an outcome is certainly possible. Moreover, if activity expands 
over the next year or so at the moderate pace anticipated by the FOMC, pressures in both labor and 
product  markets  should  ease  modestly.  That  said,  the  possibility  remains  that  tightness  in  product 
markets  could  allow  firms  to  pass  higher  labor  costs  through  to  prices,  adding  to  inflation  and 
effectively  nullifying  the  purchasing  power  of  at  least  some  portion  of  the  increase  in  labor 
compensation.  Thus,  the  high  level  of  resource  utilization  remains  an  important  upside  risk  to 
continued progress on inflation. 
Another  significant  factor  influencing  medium-term  trends  in  inflation  is  the  public's  expectations  of 
inflation.  These  expectations  have  an  important  bearing  on  whether  transitory  influences  on  prices, 
such as those created by changes in energy costs, become embedded in wage and price decisions 
and  so  leave  a  lasting  imprint  on  the  rate  of  inflation.  It  is  encouraging  that  inflation  expectations 
appear to have remained contained.  
The projections of the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks are for inflation to continue to ebb over this year and next. In particular, the central tendency of 
those  forecasts  is  for  core  inflation  –  as  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures  excluding  food  and  energy  –  to  be  2  to  2-1/4  percent  this  year  and  to  edge  lower,  to 
1-3/4  to  2  percent,  next  year.  But  as  I  noted earlier,  the  FOMC has  continued  to  view  the  risk  that 
inflation will not moderate as expected as the predominant policy concern.  
Monetary  policy  affects  spending  and  inflation  with  long  and  variable  lags.  Consequently,  policy 
decisions must be based on an assessment of medium-term economic prospects. At the same time, 
because economic forecasting is an uncertain enterprise, policymakers must be prepared to respond 
BIS Review 15/2007 
 3
flexibly  to  developments  in  the  economy  when  those  developments  lead  to  a  re-assessment  of  the 
outlook.  The  dependence  of  monetary  policy  actions  on  a  broad  range  of  incoming  information 
complicates the public's attempts to understand and anticipate policy decisions. 
Clear communication by the central bank about the economic outlook, the risks to that outlook, and its 
monetary policy strategy can help the public to understand the rationale behind policy decisions and to 
anticipate  better  the  central  bank's  reaction  to  new  information.  This  understanding  should,  in  turn, 
enhance  the  effectiveness  of  policy  and  lead  to  improved  economic  outcomes.  By  reducing 
uncertainty, central bank transparency may also help anchor the public's longer-term expectations of 
inflation. Much experience has shown that well-anchored inflation expectations tend to help stabilize 
inflation  and  promote  maximum  sustainable  economic  growth.  Good  communication  by  the  central 
bank is also vital for ensuring appropriate accountability for its policy actions, the full effects of which 
can be observed only after a lengthy period. A transparent policy process improves accountability by 
clarifying  how  a  central  bank  expects  to  attain  its  policy  objectives  and  by  ensuring  that  policy  is 
conducted in a manner that can be seen to be consistent with achieving those objectives. 
Over  the  past  decade  or  so,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  significantly  improved  its  methods  of 
communication,  but  further  progress  is  possible.  As  you  know,  the  FOMC  last  year  established  a 
subcommittee  to  help  the  full  Committee  evaluate  the  next  steps  in  this  continuing  process.  Our 
discussions  are  directed  at  examining  all  aspects of  our communications  and have  been  deliberate 
and thorough. These discussions are continuing, and no decisions have been reached. My colleagues 
and I remain firmly committed to an open and transparent monetary policy process that enhances our 
ability  to  achieve  our  dual  objectives  of  stable  prices  and  maximum  sustainable  employment.  I  will 
keep members of this Committee apprised of developments as our deliberations move forward. I look 
forward to continuing to work closely with the members of this Committee and your colleagues in the 
Senate and House on the important issues pertaining to monetary policy and the other responsibilities 
with which the Congress has charged the Federal Reserve.  
Thank you. I would be happy to take questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2007
