David Opiokello: Confidentiality and transparency – the challenge to 
Bank of Uganda and the media 
Address by Mr David Opiokello, Acting Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Bank 
of Uganda Media Workshop on Confidentiality and the Right to Public Information: Central 
Banking Communications, Kampala, 24 May 2007. 
 The Chairpersons 
Resource Persons 
Distinguished participants 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to welcome you all to the Bank of Uganda Media Workshop on the theme 
“Confidentiality and Transparency: the Challenge to Bank of Uganda and the Media”. 
In the past, Central banking was shrouded in secrecy and mystery. There was a tendency to 
keep  the  central  bank  out  of  the  media  and  the  media  out  of  the  central  bank.  Recently, 
however,  there  has  been  greater  visibility,  transparency  and  a  lot  more  communication. 
There are three reasons for this development: 
Firstly,  increased  independence  of  central  banks  led  to  the  need  for  publicly  accountable 
conduct.  Secondly,  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  required  greater  public  visibility  and 
thirdly, a mandate to the central banks, either explicitly or implicitly, for maintaining financial 
stability in a world where the financial markets and their expectations matter. 
We  are  all  aware  that  the  Access  to  Public  Information  Act,  to  be  discussed  later  in  this 
workshop, gives Ugandans the right of access to information in possession of the State or 
any  of  the  state  organs  or  agencies  except  where  the  release  of  such  information  may 
prejudice state security or sovereignty. Information could also be withheld if the release of 
that particular information is likely to interfere with the privacy of any person. In the absence 
of the above two reasons, it is the people’s right to know and indeed the journalists’ right to 
gather and publish information. 
The  growing  importance  of  communications  by  central  banks  is  on  account  of  their 
responsibility for maintaining financial stability – which goes beyond the conduct of monetary 
policy. There is an assumption that well informed market participants would facilitate, if not 
assure, an improved functioning of the markets and the central bank is in the best position to 
provide  such  useful  information.  However,  whether  providing  information  would  result  in 
shaping and managing expectations, and if so, whether it is desirable, are difficult issues. 
Much has been said about the external communication of central banks in recent years and 
central  bankers  have  reflected  intensively  on  their  external  communication.  Transparency, 
candid explanations given to investors, savers, market participants, households and, to our 
fellow citizens are essential for central banks. It is probably fair to say that communication is 
an integral part of monetary policy. 
the  1960s,  many  economists  were  greatly 
A brief history of communication policy: communication of policy objectives, policy 
framework, and economic forecasts. 
In 
in  adapting  sophisticated 
mathematical techniques developed by engineers for controlling missiles and rockets to the 
problem  of  controlling  the  economy.  At  the  time,  this  adaptation  of  so-called  stochastic 
optimal control methods to economic policymaking seemed natural; for like a ballistic missile, 
an economy may be viewed as a complicated dynamic system that must be kept on course, 
despite continuous buffeting by unpredictable forces. 
interested 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 1
Unfortunately, macroeconomic policy turned out not to be rocket science! The problem lay in 
a crucial difference between a missile and an economy – which is that, unlike the people who 
make  up  an  economy,  the  components  of  a  missile  do  not  understand  and  anticipate  the 
forces being applied to them. Hence, although a given propulsive force always has the same 
predictable  effect  on  a  ballistic  missile,  a  given  policy  action  –  say,  a  2  percent  cut  in  the 
rediscount rate – can have very different effects on the economy, depending for example on 
what  the  private  sector  infers  from  that  action  about  likely  future  policy  actions,  about  the 
information that may have induced the policymaker to act, about the policymaker’s objectives 
in taking that action, and so on. Thus, taking the “right” policy action – in this case, changing 
the rediscount rate by the right amount at the right time – is a necessary but not sufficient 
condition for getting the desired economic response. 
Most  inflation-targeting  and  non  inflation  targeting  central  banks  have  found  that  effective 
communication policies are a useful way, in effect, to make the private sector a partner in the 
policymaking process. To the extent that it can explain its general approach, clarify its plans 
and objectives, and provide its assessment of the likely evolution of the economy, the central 
bank should be able to reduce uncertainty, focus and stabilize private-sector expectations, 
and with intelligence, consistency, and persistence – develop public support for its approach 
to policymaking. 
Why are accountability and transparency so important for monetary policy? 
The notion of transparency is broad ranging. It encompasses notions of accountability and 
political legitimacy of decision makers, as well as the legal and accounting infrastructure in 
which economic decisions are made. But from the operational perspective of a central bank, 
transparency can be regarded more narrowly in terms of the disclosure of information to a 
wider audience. Intuitively the release of a greater volume of more precise information in a 
timely manner seems beneficial because it reduces asymmetric information and uncertainty 
in financial markets. Information about the financial stability framework and public evaluation 
of national balance sheets against the yardstick on international codes and standards offers 
investors  an  opportunity  to  assess  risk  better  and  arrive  at  more  informed  decisions. 
Moreover,  greater  clarity  about  financial  stability  policy  potentially  simplifies  the  task  of 
monetary and fiscal policy by establishing clear lines of responsibility and objectives. In an 
environment of greater trust, effective communication by the central bank facilitates greater 
flexibility to act by various agents in the economy. 
Over  the  last  few  decades,  it  has  been  widely  recognized  that  the  maximum  degree  of 
independence for central banks, together with a clearly defined mandate, is the best way to 
ensure time consistency in the implementation of monetary policy and therefore guarantee 
stable  prices.  Consequently,  the  1995  Constitution  of  Uganda  has  granted  the  Bank  of 
Uganda full independence in the pursuit of its mandate. In a democracy, transparency and 
accountability are the quid pro quo for that independence. In other words, it is the duty of 
independent central banks to be transparent, accountable and to communicate. The BoU is 
made  more  accountable  by  clearly  explaining  our  objectives  and  decisions  to  the  general 
public, media, parliament and to the professionals in the financial markets. 
But transparency is not only a duty for the central bank. It is clearly also in the bank’s interest 
to embark on an effective communication as it contributes considerably to the efficiency of its 
policies.  This  helps  to  anchor  the  inflation  expectations  of  the  financial  markets  and  the 
public.  Through  efficient  communication  we  can  reduce  inflation  uncertainty  and  the  costs 
associated  with  such  uncertainty  for  consumers  and  investors.  Therefore  it  has  immediate 
economic  benefits  for  society.  We achieve  this  by  being  clear  about  our  definition  of  price 
stability and by being transparent in our actions. The economic agents and public need to be 
convinced  that  the  central  bank’s  monetary  policy  decisions  are  consistently  focused  over 
time on achieving the announced aim. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2007
In a market-based economy the central bank can directly influence only short-term interest 
rates  through  its  monetary  policy  instruments.  However,  consumption  and  investment 
decisions,  and  thus  medium-term  price  developments,  are  to  a  large  extent  influenced  by 
longer-term  interest  rates,  which  depend  on  private  expectations  regarding  future  central 
bank  decisions  and  future  inflation.  It  is  important  that  these  developments  in  longer-term 
rates support the objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. This in turn 
requires that the central bank is regarded as credible and predictable. A central bank which 
does  not  succeed  in  communicating  the  principles  underlying  its  monetary  policy  and  is 
perceived  as  acting  in  a  non-systematic,  discretionary  manner  will  over  time  endanger  its 
reputation. 
Therefore,  the  central  bank’s  communication  should  ensure  that  markets  understand  the 
systematic  responses  of  monetary  policy  to  economic  developments  and  the  current 
assessment  of 
the  central  bank.  Successful  central  bank  communication  supports 
predictability  and  correct  price  formation  in  financial  markets,  contributes  to  efficient 
allocation  of  funds  and  reduces  uncertainty  about  future  interest  rates.  In  an  environment 
where 
their  relation  with  key 
macroeconomic  developments  is  well  understood,  firms  can  better  manage  their  balance 
sheets. This reduces both their vulnerability to economic shocks and their risk management 
costs and creates the conditions for better investment decisions. 
interest  rate  movements  and 
the  predictability  of 
Transparency of the BoU 
Let me now turn to the BoU and its concept of transparency and external communication. In 
the BoU, it was understood at an early stage that external communication would be crucial 
for  the  activities  of  the  bank.  Consequently,  the  BoU  management  adopted  some 
communication  policy  objectives  and  principles.  Since  then  we  have  communicated  to 
enhance  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  our  monetary  policy  and  to  make  the  BoU, 
accountable. 
On this score, the publication of the key elements of the monetary policy strategy constitute 
in itself a major step towards monetary policy transparency. One element of the strategy is to 
quantify  what  the  BoU is  aiming  at  in  terms  of  price stability,  namely  a  below  5%  inflation 
rate. 
It  is  also  important  for  the  BoU  to  clearly  communicate  what  monetary  policy  can,  and 
cannot,  achieve.  For  example,  monetary  policy  cannot  offset  short-term  changes  in  the 
inflation  rate,  which  are  caused  by  economic  shocks,  such  as  sharp  oil  price  increases  or 
higher  administrative  costs.  It  is  thus  a  permanent  challenge  to  explain  any  deviations  in 
inflation from the definition of price stability. At the same time, it is essential for the public to 
be confident that such shocks do not call into question the determination and ability of the 
BoU to deliver price stability over the medium term. 
Bank of Uganda’s communication in practice 
The BoU, use a wide range of communication tools. I will mention only a few of them here:  
The  BoU  publishes  a  large  array  of  reports  ranging  from  monthly,  quarterly  and  annual 
reports  on  key  economic  developments.  We  also  use  press  briefings  as  a  way  of 
communicating  the  bank’s  position  and  future  actions.  Lastly,  the  BoU  management  gives 
interviews and makes speeches to many different audiences. Most of this information is also 
posted on the BoU website. In them they explain the decisions taken and the BoU’s view on 
current topics within our sphere of competence. 
In  all  this  communication,  it  is  the  intention  of  BoU  to  send  out  various  messages  to  the 
public on wide ranging issues and events. We for example at periodic intervals, issue papers 
on  the  state  of  the  Economy.  We  also  issue  annual  Banks  Supervision  reports.  It  is  our 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 3
expectation  that  in  the  near  future  we  shall  begin  issuing  regular  reports  covering 
developments in the payment system. 
I should finally inform you that much as the media and indeed the public have the right to 
access  public  information,  the  nature  of  our  operations  sometimes  compels  us  to  keep  to 
ourselves some of the information that comes to our knowledge through the execution of our 
work. 
Banking, by its very nature, revolves around confidentiality. To give a practical example, one 
can only imagine how one would feel if details of one’s personal bank account were to be 
given out to a third party without the account holder’s express permission. 
Likewise, Bank of Uganda, as banker to Government and to commercial banks is bound by 
the confidentiality and trust that exists between a bank and its customers. Most important of 
all, the Central bank as the supervisor and regulator of the financial sector is charged with 
the responsibility of ensuring that the financial sector is healthy and sound at all times so that 
depositors’ funds are safe. The relationship between the financial institutions we supervise 
and the Bank of Uganda can, in this regard, only be compared to that of a patient and his or 
her doctor. Reckless disclosure of information about the financial sector can end in disruption 
and in the end cause a run on a bank. You should be informed that while it takes decades to 
build and attain depositor confidence in the financial sector, it only takes a wink to get this 
confidence shattered through irresponsible disclosures. 
There have, therefore been occasions when we have had thoughtful inactions. In brief, we 
have  had  open  market  operations,  open  mouth  operations  and  open  only  eyes  and  ears 
operations in regard to threats to financial stability. 
Let me now address myself to what I regard to be the challenges to the media. In assessing 
the  contribution  of  the  media  to  the  financial  sector  as  a  public  good,  I  would  like  to 
distinguish among at least four types of effects. The first type is characterized as “the news 
effect”, which would normally reflect factual or formal positions or events. In a sense, the 
media’s reporting would be faithful and non-controversial. 
A  second  type  can  be  identified  as  rumour  effect.  Often  rumours  carry  with  them  a 
destabilising effect and in some cases have the potential to degenerate into self-perpetuating 
or  self-fulfilling  events.  The  rumour  effect  can  result  into  unintended  losses  or  gains  and 
people may suspect that there are some vested interests behind such rumours. Needless to 
say, the media’s role will, on the whole, tend to be negative in this channel. 
The third type is the survey effect. It is common for the media to carry out opinion polls. 
These polls or surveys could have methodological and other problems in terms of reflecting 
the true picture. These surveys have a tendency of influencing the perception of markets and 
at times, the general public. In such a case, the contribution of the media would depend on 
the  scientific  methodology  adopted,  transparency  of  assumptions  and  objectivity  in  the 
presentation of results. Adequate care is a pre-condition to ensure a positive effect through 
this channel. 
Lastly, there is the interpretation effect. Here the media tries to interpret the stand taken by 
policy makers or markets. The interpretation effect may be positive or negative depending on 
professional  skills  as  well  as  commitment  to  objectives.  Responsibility  and  accountability 
would  be  key  to  ensure  positive  effect  through  this  channel.  It  is  my  conviction  that  the 
media’s responsibility is not confined only to their shareholders or to their subscribers, but 
extends to a larger section of the public. It is therefore apparent that the challenges before 
the media are not less than those before the central bank. 
It  is  also  fair  to  recognize  that  the  media  faces  several  dilemmas.  There  are  always 
pressures to be the first to report – a race to be the Number One and they also have several 
stakeholders to cater for. 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2007
Let me end with a quote from the late Dr. I. G. Patel, former Governor of the Reserve Bank of 
India: 
“Communication  is  not  just  about  transparency.  It  is  also  about  education,  guidance  and 
steering this in the right direction. In this, the central bank can be an honest broker between 
government and the public and even the parliament”. 
I thank you. 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 5
