Irma Rosenberg: Riksbank to introduce own path for the repo rate 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Danske  Bank, 
Stockholm, 17 January 2007. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak  about  monetary  policy.  The  Riksbank  is 
constantly working on improving the bases for monetary policy decisions and its communication. As 
part of this work, we on the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided yesterday that we will publish 
our own views on what is a suitable development of the repo rate in connection with the presentation 
of the inflation forecasts.1 I intend to devote my speech today to explaining why we have made this 
decision and also to mention some other changes we are making in connection with this. However, I 
will not on this occasion discuss the current economic situation. 
The Riksbank is considered by many experts to be one of the most transparent central banks in the 
world.2 We were amongst the first to introduce a numerical inflation target and to publish our inflation 
forecasts and the minutes from our monetary policy meetings. This is so that the general public will 
understand the reasons for our decisions and also to enable our monetary policy to be evaluated. It 
further enables accountability and gives legitimacy to an independent central bank like the Riksbank. 
Now we have decided to publish our own forecast for how we believe the repo rate will develop. We 
began discussing whether this would be an appropriate direction to take as early as last spring. The 
Governor  of  the  Riksbank  also  signalled  in  several  speeches  made  in  spring  2006  that  there  was 
reason to look more closely into this possibility. It is my hope that with this change we will become 
more open and clear in our communication and that it will make it even easier for the general public to 
understand how we reason when making our monetary policy decisions. 
Let me describe the background to the changes we are now making in the monetary policy analysis 
and our communication. 
Modern monetary policy is based on openness and clarity 
Monetary policy today is largely concerned with influencing the economy through expectations. There 
is therefore good reason for the central bank to be clear about how it views future developments in 
inflation and also the real economy. Modern academic research into monetary policy also indicates 
that monetary policy functions better the clearer and more open the central bank is with regard to its 
forecasts and monetary policy considerations. 
One question that has been much discussed in recent years both in academic circles and the central 
banking world is how clear central banks with a price stability target should be with regard to their own 
view  of  future  developments  in  the  policy  rate.  This  discussion  is  also  connected  with  which 
assumption for the policy rate the central bank should use when making forecasts of inflation and the 
real  economy.  Three  different  approaches  exist:  (i)  That  the  policy  rate  is  assumed  to  remain 
unchanged  during  the  forecast  period,  (ii)  that  the  policy  rate  is  assumed  to  follow  market 
expectations,  or  (iii)  that  the  policy  rate  is  assumed  to  follow  a  path  that  the  central  bank  itself 
considers to reflect a reasonable future development.3 Regardless of which of these three interest rate 
assumptions  is  used  to  produce  the  inflation  forecast,  the  monetary  policy  decisions  made  by  the 
central banks always refer only to the current level of the policy rate, that is, the level that is to apply 
until  the  next  decision-making  point.4  However,  the  monetary  policy  discussion  and  communication 
differ slightly, depending on which interest rate assumption is used. 
                                                      
1   See the minutes of the Executive Board meeting on 16 January 2007. 
2   See, for instance, Eijffinger, S. and P., Geerats, (2006), as well as van der Cruijsen, C. and M., Demertzis (2005). 
3   See, for instance, Blinder, A., (2006), and Kontulainen, J., D., Mayes and J., Tarkka, (2004). 
4   There  are  special  exceptions  to  this  normal  procedure.  For  example,  during  the  deflation  crisis  in  Japan,  the  Japanese 
central  bank  undertook  to  maintain  its  policy  rate  at  a  low  level  during  a  certain  period.  For  another  exception,  see  the 
statement in a press release from the Federal Reserve, Board of Governors, 12 August 2003, in connection with fears that 
inflation would be too low. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 1
The first two approaches mean that a particular path for the development of the policy rate is taken for 
granted by the central bank when making its inflation forecasts. The latter approach instead means 
that the central bank makes its own assessment of what might be a reasonable future development in 
the policy rate at the same time as it makes the inflation forecast. 
The assumption of a constant policy rate has been the most common approach, although the trend at 
present  is  for  the  central  banks  to  be  clearer  as  to  how  they  envisage  future  interest  rate 
developments. Several central banks have changed over to basing their inflation forecasts on market 
expectations  of  future  developments  in  the  policy  rate.  When  the  inflation  forecasts  are  published, 
there may also be a comment, phrased in general terms, on how the bank views market expectations. 
So far, only a few central banks have taken the step of publishing their own forecasts for their policy 
rates. 
Arguments for and against own forecasts for the repo rate 
There are currently discussions, both in academic research and in central bank circles, as to whether it 
is appropriate for central banks to publish their own forecasts for the policy rate. In a moment, I shall 
describe  some  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  such  an  approach.  At  the  same  time,  one  must 
remember  that  there  are  a  number  of  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  all  of  the  approaches  I 
mentioned earlier, and these must be weighed against one another. 
When  we  changed  over  from  keeping  the  repo  rate  constant  in  our  forecasting  work  to  basing  the 
forecasts on market expectations, we had made the assessment that the advantages of this system 
outweighed  the  disadvantages,  compared  with  using  a  constant  repo  rate  assumption.  The 
assumption of a constant repo rate worked well in as far as it made communication simple, which I 
believe was particularly important when establishing the new monetary policy regime and building up 
credibility for the inflation target. At the same time, it was of course usually an unrealistic assumption 
that  made  it  difficult  for  us  to  make  good  forecasts.  This  applied  in  particular  in  cases  where  there 
were  expectations  of  substantial  repo  rate  adjustments.  Normally,  changes  in  the  repo  rate  are 
required to guide inflation towards the target. If we had kept to this assumption for the interest rate, 
these difficulties would have been particularly prominent when we changed over to making forecasts in 
a  slightly  longer  time  perspective.  Of  course,  the  assumption  of  a  constant  repo  rate  also  made  it 
difficult to compare our forecasts with those of other forecasters and to evaluate our monetary policy. 
But,  perhaps  even  more  importantly,  it  gave  no  clear  guidance  as  to  how  we  viewed  interest  rate 
developments  in  the  long  term.  The  general  public’s  and  the  markets’  expectations  of  the  future 
interest  path  are  at  least  as  important  for  the  way  monetary  policy  influences  the  economy  as  the 
expectations around the decision on the current interest rate. 
We  left  most  of  these  problems  behind  us  when  we  began  making  forecasts  based  on  market 
expectations,  as  reflected  in  the  so-called  implied  forward  rates.  This  was  because  market 
expectations in most cases provide a much more realistic forecast for the future development of the 
repo rate. The changeover from a constant repo rate to the markets’ expected interest rate path was 
also a natural step on the route to publishing our own forecast for the repo rate. We then began talking 
more systematically about future interest rate developments by commenting on the plausibility of the 
interest rate path given by market expectations. In my opinion this was when we took the major step 
towards increased clarity with regard to our view of future interest rate developments. 
The  method  of  basing  forecasts  on  market  expectations  is  not  without  its  problems,  either.  One 
problem  concerns  how  expectations  are  measured.  Other  problems  are  related  to  communication 
regarding the interest rate path. Let me explain what I mean here. 
Changes in the policy rate have a direct effect on the shortest interest rates in the economy. Monetary 
policy can therefore also affect financial market expectations of future short-term interest rates. It is 
these expectations that the implied forward rates are meant to capture. The implied forward rates can 
be interpreted as the financial markets’ ”average” forecast for the future repo rate. If, for instance, the 
annual interest rate for government bonds is higher for long durations than for short ones, this could 
be interpreted as the market expecting the repo rate to be raised. 
One problem when interpreting implied forward rates in this way is that they do not solely measure 
expectations of the repo rate. They may also contain premiums that can be regarded as compensation 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2007
for differences between securities with regard to duration, credit risk and degree of liquidity. Estimating 
the size of these premiums can be complicated and can be done in different ways.5 It is therefore not 
possible to calculate market expectations of repo rate developments in a clear-cut manner, which may 
create confusion. 
Another  problem  is  that  the  implied  forward  rates  may  vary  substantially  in  the  short  term.  The 
question is therefore when market expectations should be read. 
A further problem that is sometimes highlighted is that there may be a risk of the central bank allowing 
itself to be steered by financial market agents when inflation forecasts are based on implied forward 
rates.6 Personally, I am convinced that this is not normally any great problem. When we have had a 
different  opinion  from  the  market,  we  have  said  so.  On  these  occasions  we  have  also  influenced 
market  pricing.  This  was  the  case,  for  instance,  with  the  monetary  policy  decisions  we  made  in 
December 2005 and June 2006. 
Another problem sometimes mentioned is that there may be difficulties in communication in the cases 
where the central bank has a different view from the market as to what constitutes a reasonable future 
development for the policy rate.7 The forecasts for developments in the real economy and inflation that 
are published will under such circumstances not be the ones that the central bank believes to be the 
most likely and the value of the published forecast is therefore diminished. This is the same type of 
problem as with constant repo rate forecasts, although the problem is probably less on average over 
time. 
Most of these problems can be avoided if the central bank instead bases its inflation forecasts on its 
own forecast for the development of the policy rate.8 However, the primary reason for publishing one’s 
own interest rate forecast is that it makes it easier for the central bank to steer expectations. With this 
assumption for the interest rate, the central bank can explain more clearly to the general public and 
the  financial  markets  how  it  envisages  future  interest  rate  developments  and  how  it  reasons  when 
making  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  interest  rate  development  that  follows  on  from  market 
expectations  does  not  always  give  a  good  picture  of  all  of  the  considerations  a  central  bank  must 
make when discussing what provides a reasonable development in interest rates.9 At the same time, it 
may be worth pointing out that our forecasts for the repo rate will not normally deviate very much from 
market expectations. 
This is essentially the background to why we are now choosing to go over to using our own interest 
rate forecast when forecasting inflation and other macro variables. Although I am convinced that this 
means increased openness and clarity in monetary policy, it has not been an entirely self-evident step 
to take. This is because we have been forced to manage a number of practical problems. These are 
primarily related to the fact that we are six persons on the Executive Board who together must agree 
on  what  could  be  considered  to  be  a  reasonable  repo  rate  development  in  the  future,  while 
safeguarding our responsibility as individuals for how we vote.10
To make a forecast for the development in the repo rate, we Executive Board members must together 
make an assessment of what would be a desirable path for the repo rate during the forecast period, 
even though our interest rate decision only refers to the level of the repo rate applying until the next 
monetary policy meeting. The different members of the Executive Board may have differing opinions 
on,  for  instance,  the  current  situation  in  the  economy  and  at  what  pace  inflation  should be  brought 
back on target, giving consideration to the real economy and various risks. It goes without saying that 
                                                      
5   See, for instance, Alsterlind, J. and H. Dillén, (2005). 
6   See, for instance, Giavazzi, F. and F.S. Mishkin (2006). 
7   See, for instance, Giavazzi, F. and F.S. Mishkin (2006). 
8   However, it is not possible to entirely rule out similar problems sometimes arising even when the central bank publishes its 
own forecast for the policy rate. If new information is received in connection with making a decision on the interest rate and 
this  information  changes  the  conditions  for  decision-making,  the  decision  may  be  different  from  what  might  have  been 
expected on the basis of the inflation forecasts (which have to be completed before the interest rate decision is made). 
9   The  advantages  of  the  central  banks  publishing  their  own  interest  rate  forecasts  are  discussed  in  more  detail  in,  for 
instance, a number of essays presented at a conference organised by the Riksbank in June 2005. See in particular Archer, 
D. (2005), Faust, J. and E., Leeper (2005), Svensson, L.E.O., (2005) and Woodford, M., (2005). 
10   See  Goodhart,  C.,  (2001)  and  Mishkin,  F.  S.,  (2004)  for  a  detailed  argument  against  central  banks  publishing  their  own 
interest rate forecasts. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 3
this is not a simple matter. However, we Executive Board members have made the assessment that 
these problems are not in practice so great as to prevent us from agreeing on a path that a majority of 
the Executive Board members can support. We have previously managed to agree on interest rate 
messages with information on our future intentions when we have commented on the plausibility of the 
interest rate path given by market expectations. 
There are also some other problems that have been put forward as arguments against central banks 
publishing their own interest rate forecasts. One such argument is that it makes communication with 
the general public more difficult. If the central bank first announces a particular interest rate path and 
then  new  information  is  received,  which  leads  to  a  policy  rate  decision  that  differs  from  the  path 
published  earlier,  this  could  be  perceived  as  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  central  bank  and  it  could 
damage the bank’s credibility.11
Personally, I do not believe that this will be a major problem. On the contrary, one of the main points of 
publishing one’s own interest rate path is that it should improve communication with the general public. 
We have always carefully emphasised that there is considerable uncertainty in the assessments and 
explained that new information may come in later which could radically change the conditions for our 
monetary policy assessments.12 To emphasise this even more strongly, it is important to illustrate the 
uncertainty  in  different  ways,  for  instance  by  calculating  the  uncertainty  interval  around  the  interest 
rate  path.  This  we  intend  to  do.13  Just  as  when  we  based  our  forecasts  on  market  expectations, 
publishing our own interest rate forecast does not involve any commitment from the Riksbank that the 
repo rate will then actually follow this path. It is important to bear this in mind. 
A further argument that has been put forward against publishing a forecast for the development of the 
repo rate is that the financial markets, if given access to the central bank’s views on the interest rate 
level in the slightly longer term, would stop trying to find other information that is significant for long-
term interest rates. The central bank would then lose an important source of information, namely how 
market prices reflect the markets’ views on economic prospects in the longer term. 
Neither do I find this argument particularly convincing. The financial market agents know that we live in 
an  uncertain  world  and  will  continue  to  look  for  other  sources  of  information  on  long-term 
developments via other channels than the central bank and make independent assessments. 
What defines a good interest rate path? 
When  we  make  our  forecasts  of  the  repo  rate,  we  must  of  course  consider  what  would  be  a  well-
balanced  monetary  policy  given  the  developments  we  foresee.  What  is  meant  by  a  well-balanced 
monetary  policy?  Let  me  answer  this  by  briefly  summarising  how  we  describe  our  monetary  policy 
strategy in the special document on monetary policy published in May 2006.14 Our new assumption for 
the interest rate does not change the way we conduct monetary policy. 
“A desirable monetary policy is characterised by inflation under normal circumstances being close to 
the inflation target in a two-year time perspective while at the same time the paths for inflation and the 
real economy do not exhibit excessively large fluctuations.” Given this reasoning, I think it is possible 
to identify some important characteristics of a good interest rate path. 
Firstly, the interest rate should be set so that inflation remains close to the 2 per cent target. If inflation 
were to deviate from target from the start, we should normally choose a path for the repo rate that 
brings inflation back on target within two years. Moreover, this path should be chosen so that inflation 
is  close  to  target  even  beyond  the  two-year  horizon.  This  way  of  conducting monetary  policy  helps 
reduce uncertainty and anchor inflation expectations around the target. 
The interest rate should also be set to achieve as far as possible a stable, sustainable development in 
the  real  economy,  as  long  as  this  is  compatible  with  the  price  stability  target.  Let  us  say  that  the 
                                                      
11   See, for instance, Giavazzi, F., and F. S. Mishkin (2006). 
12   See also Rudebusch, G.D. and J.C. Williams (2006). 
13    See the box ”Uncertainty regarding future interest rate movements” in Inflation Report 2006:1 for some examples of how to 
produce such uncertainty intervals. 
14   See  the  memorandum  "Monetary  policy  in  Sweden”  which  can  be  downloaded  from  the  Riksbank’s  website, 
www.riksbank.se or ordered as a printed document. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2007
economy  was  in  a  situation  where  inflation  deviated  from  target.  This  would  mean  that  when  we 
conduct our monetary policy we must assess how quickly it is appropriate to bring inflation back to 2 
per cent. Several factors need to be taken into account; the reasons for the deviation from target, the 
size  of  the  deviation  and  how  we  expect  real  economy  factors  such  as  growth  and  employment  to 
develop. The two-year horizon should be regarded as a restriction as to how much consideration can 
normally  be  given  to  real  economic  developments.  Situations  may  arise  where  the  deviations  are 
substantial and it is reasonable to allow longer than two years for inflation to return to target. In this 
way we can avoid excessive fluctuations in real economic activity. However, I would like to emphasise 
that this kind of strategy only comes into question when it will not jeopardise the credibility of monetary 
policy. 
A desirable monetary policy should also be predictable in order to make it easier for households and 
companies to adapt to new economic conditions. Changes in the repo rate should therefore normally 
be made gradually and not in large steps, as I see it. Of course, there may be other reasons to avoid 
large changes in interest rates. Changing the interest rate gradually gives, for instance, some scope to 
give  consideration  to  the  real  economy,  while  enabling  us  to  wait  for  and  analyse  new  economic 
information. The fact that no central bank knows exactly how the economy functions and the effects of 
monetary policy also means that one normally proceeds cautiously in changing interest rates. 
Finally, a desirable interest rate path should also be determined with consideration to an assessment 
of different types of risks and the consequences for inflation and the real economy if they are realised. 
Some risks may be difficult to quantify and capture in our normal forecasts. In my opinion, they should 
nevertheless be included in the balance when shaping monetary policy. One recent example is the 
risks linked to a rapid increase in property prices and household indebtedness as a result of a longer 
period of expansionary monetary policy; a problem many central banks around the world have faced. 
Let me also, for the sake of clarity, point out that when we publish our own forecast for the repo rate it 
will indicate a smoother development in the repo rate than the policy that will be conducted. This is 
because interest rate decisions must in practice be taken in stages and at particular points in time. It is 
difficult to build this into the forecasting work. 
Changes to the Inflation Report 
Let  me  mention  another  new  item,  before  I  round  off.  Our  inflation  report  will  involve  a  change  of 
name, to "Monetary Policy Report”. One reason for the name change and the most important change 
is that the reports will from now on contain not merely inflation forecasts, but also a monetary policy 
message.  There  will  be  a  clear  link  between  the  forecasts  and  the  monetary  policy  considerations 
made  directly  in  the  report  in  that  the  forecasts  are  based  on  an  interest  rate  path  chosen  by  the 
Executive Board. A more detailed account of the discussion held in connection with the decision on 
the level of the interest rate that will apply until the next monetary policy meeting will be included in the 
minutes of the meeting, which will be published as usual around two weeks after the meeting. 
In addition, the arrangement of the report will be altered with the aim of becoming even clearer and 
more efficient in our communication. The purpose is to make it easier for external parties to follow, 
understand  and  assess  our  monetary  policy.  The  report  will  also  have  a  new,  and  hopefully  more 
readable, layout. 
The routines for publishing the report will also be changed slightly. The report will be published, as 
usual, on the Riksbank’s website the day following the monetary policy meeting, at 9.30 a.m. However, 
the  printed  version  will  be  published  slightly  later,  as  the  report  will  now contain  information  on  the 
monetary policy decision and must therefore go to print after the Executive Board meeting. 
Concluding remarks 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  we  at  the  Riksbank  are  constantly  working  on  improving  our 
communication  and  the  bases  for  making  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  fact  that  we  are  now 
going to publish our own forecast for the repo rate is an important step in this process. I would like to 
emphasise once again that this is a question of a forecast for the future development of the repo rate. 
Forecasts are, as we know, always uncertain and new information and changed circumstances can 
lead to assessments changing. The new interest rate assumption does not entail any commitment on 
the part of the Riksbank that the repo rate will actually follow a particular path. Nor does this involve a 
new way of conducting monetary policy. 
BIS Review 6/2007 
 5
When  we  chose  to  replace  the  assumption  of  a  constant  repo  rate  with  an  assumption  based  on 
market expectations, we took a large step towards increased openness and clarity. Now we are taking 
a further step in the same direction. I hope that this will enable us to become even better at explaining 
to the general public how we reason when making our monetary policy decisions. 
Thank you! 
List of references 
Alsterlind,  J.  and  Dillén,  H.,  “Monetary  policy  expectations  and  forward  premia”,  Sveriges  Riksbank 
Economic Review 2, 2005.  
Archer, D. (2005), “Central-bank communication and the publication of interest rate projections”, article 
presented  at  the  Riksbank’s  conference  “Inflation  targeting:  implementation,  communication  and 
effectiveness”, June 2005.  
Blinder,  A.,  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  Today:  Sixteen  Questions  and  about  Twelve  Answers”,  paper 
presented at the Banco de España Conference on “Central Banks in the 21st Century, Madrid, June 
8-9, 2006.  
van der Cruijsen, C. and M., Demertzis (2005).”The impact of central bank transparency on inflation 
expectations”, Working Paper no. 031/2005, De Nederlandsche Bank, 2005.  
Eijffinger,  S.  and  P.  Geerats,  (2006),  “How  transparent  are  central  banks?”  European  Journal  of 
Political Economy, vol. 22.  
Faust, J. and E. Leeper (2005), “Forecasts and inflation reports: An evaluation”, article presented at 
the  Riksbank’s  conference  “Inflation  targeting:  implementation,  communication  and  effectiveness”, 
June 2005.  
Goodhart,  C.  (2001)  “Monetary  Transmission  Lags  and  the  Formulation  of  the  Policy  Decision  on 
Interest Rates”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August 2001.  
Giavazzi, F. and F.S. Mishkin (2006), ”An evaluation of Swedish monetary policy 1995-2005”, Reports 
from the Riksdag 2006/07:RFR 1, Committee on Finance.  
Kontulainen,  J.,  D.  Mayes  and  J.  Tarkka,  (2004),  “Monetary  Policy  Assumptions  in  Central  Bank 
Forecasts”, Bank of Finland Bulletin 4, 2004.  
Mishkin, F. S. (2004) “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?” NBER working paper no. 10829.  
Rudebusch,  G.D.  and  J.C.  Williams  (2006),  "Revealing  the  Secrets  of  the  Temple:  The  Value  of 
Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections”, NBER Working Paper, 12638.  
Svensson,  L.E.O.  (2005),”Further  Developments  of  Inflation  Targeting",  article  presented  at  the 
Riksbank’s  conference  “Inflation  targeting:  implementation,  communication  and  effectiveness”,  June 
2005.  
Woodford, M. (2005), “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness", article presented at the 
Riksbank’s  conference  “Inflation  targeting:  implementation,  communication  and  effectiveness”,  June 
2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2007
