Radovan Jelašić: The National Bank of Serbia – creating a stable economic 
environment 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at a Roundtable on “Stable 
Currency for a Healthy Economy”, Belgrade, 16 February 2007.  
 the  NBS  shall  be 
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Yves Thibault de Silguy, 
The  role  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  is  well  defined  by  the  Law  adopted  in  mid-2003,  maybe 
because that particular point was copied from EU Treaty provisions on the European Central Bank. 
The definition reads as follows: 
“The  primary  objective  of 
to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability. 
In  addition  to  its  primary  objective,  the  NBS  shall  also  pursue  the  objective  of  financial  stability.  
Without  prejudice  to  its  primary  objective,  the  NBS  shall  support  the  economic  policy  of  the 
Government of the Republic of Serbia, acting in accordance with the principle of a market economy.”  
Hence,  the  Law  clearly  defines  the  main  objective  –  “to  achieve and  maintain  price  stability”  –  and 
says  nothing  about  growth,  employment,  exports,  wages,  roads,  etc...  The  reason  why  almost  all 
developed countries adopted this law – and why we thankfully copied it – is simple enough: there is 
nothing that contributes more to growth and economic development, higher employment and growth in 
exports than stability of prices. This assertion has been proved right in all developed countries in the 
course  of  the  last  two  decades.  All  other  arguments  remind  me  of  stories  from  1860s  when  Prince 
Mihailo  reigned  in  Serbia  and  people  were  debating,  believe  it  or  not,  whether  Serbia  needed 
railroads.  The  comments  were  like:  “Foreign  machines,  foreign  machine  drivers,  foreign  managers, 
and all of it at our expense."  
And, while there is a clearly defined objective that we as a central bank need to achieve, the means for 
achieving it are not strictly specified – though in Serbia, like in other countries of the region, it is often 
much  more  important  to  find  a  good  excuse  than  to  face  reality.  In  simple  words,  the  law  clearly 
defines our assignment without delineating the means to realize it!  
“Experts”  in  Serbia  still  engage  in  theoretical  discussions  about  monetary  policy  while,  at  the  same 
time, thinking in terms of exchange rate only! The facts relating to the exchange rate, however, show 
that the role of the NBS in setting the exchange rate was never as insignificant as in 2006 while the 
volume of interbank trade in foreign exchange was never more vigorous than last year – increasing by 
as  much  as  189%.  Of  course,  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  to  achieve  a  fully  market-determined 
exchange rate, like for example Switzerland, but we are on the right track and we are getting there 
fast! We need a) a still deeper forex market, b) buyers and sellers who engage in forward trade and 
have abandoned the "euro costs what it costs" principle, c) exchange dealers who trade exclusively 
with  banks.  Moreover,  after  the  first  two  weeks  this  year  when,  as  we  had  expected,  demand  for 
foreign currency went up substantially, the NBS intervened in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market 
session on one day only. Do we need another proof that the exchange rate is freely formed?  
Last year's inflation of 6.5% in Serbia matches the level achieved by its neighbours. To illustrate, by 
applying  the  foreign  exchange  regime  of  the  currency  board,  Bulgaria  recorded  6.5%  also,  Bosnia 
6.0%,  while  Hungary  reached  6.5%  and  Romania  4.9%.  Building  on  this,  and  primarily  on  the  low 
inflation recorded in the final quarter of 2006, in 2007 the National Bank of Serbia will target the lower 
band of the 4-8% core inflation corridor, set already in August 2006.  
Let us now note the role of the monetary policy. Last year was a key year for Serbia, as it was finally 
recognized that monetary policy represents a significant and powerful tool whose importance cannot 
be overstated! This is a very important point to make, especially in Serbia, where I can in all honesty 
say this is the first time a modern and proper monetary policy has been pursued! I find it quite normal 
and understandable that a person may come up to me in the streets of Čačak, Novi Sad or Belgrade 
and  ask  me  why  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  only  one  objective  and  why  this  objective  is  “to 
achieve and maintain price stability” and not “to achieve growth and development, higher employment 
rates, exports, etc,” or why it is that the NBS needs to sterilize excess money and how it finances this 
sterilization. But when such questions are raised by “economists” and “experts” – well, that is a cause 
for much concern! I get the feeling that these people are trying to ignore a very valuable experience 
from  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Many  experts  seem  to  have  slept  through  the  past  20  years  –  but  the 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
economic science has been developing regardless! Experiences from that time were well summarized 
at  a  conference  in  Budapest  about  a  month  ago,  on  19  January  2007,  by  Jacques  de  Larosière, 
former  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF  and  EBRD  President  and  former  Governor  of  the  Banque  de 
France:  
Stage one: Before the 1980s, governments were convinced that there was a trade off between “a little 
more inflation” and less unemployment. This policy eventually led to double digit inflation in advanced 
economies  and  galloping  inflation  in  a  number  of  developing  countries.  High  inflation  was  finally 
recognized  as  inimical  to  growth  and  socially  disruptive.  In  1979-1980,  the  game  of  systematically 
seeking employment at the expense of price stability came to an end. The whole process had entailed 
high economic and social costs;  
Stage two: In 1980s and 1990s, monetary policy managed to reduce inflation. Most central banks were 
gradually made independent from governments and acquired new credibility. This was the period of 
the  triumph  of  central  bankers.  US  inflation  came  down  from  13%  in  1979-1980  to  2.2%  in  1999.” 
Inflation has been a part of our lives for the last thirty years and it has become practically impossible to 
imagine living without it. It is always on our minds – when buying things or planning our future, when 
borrowing  or  giving  presents  –  and  it  would  feel  strange  not  to  count  with  the  increase  in  prices! 
Because it has been with us for over 3 decades, an abnormal situation has become normal and it is 
now feels abnormal that there is no inflation. True, if there is inflation, it is easier to do the budgeting, 
to plan, to breathe, etc. because if your prices are changing all the time and your exchange rate is 
unstable,  you  will  never  really  be  comparable  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  as  today’s  calculation  will 
simply not apply tomorrow, let alone the day after. The same is true of my role as the NBS Governor: 
my job would be far easier if I chose to cover up my own and the institution’s inefficiency by means of 
inflation and currency depreciation. But times are changing, for, let me remind you, Serbia is still in the 
process of transition and it will take some time yet to complete! If nothing else, the stability of prices 
and currency has at least impelled many to come up with much more creative “explanations” for price 
rises.  Only  a  year  ago,  the  increase  in  prices  of  milk,  cable  TV  and  public  transport  services  was 
blamed on the exchange rate…  
In  the  course  of  the  past  year,  the  NBS  created  a  stable  economic  environment  and  successfully 
slashed  inflation,  forcing  the  Government  and  policy  makers  to  face  the  reality.  And  the  reality  is 
unyielding: inflation does not create jobs, it does not push GDP up, and, perhaps most importantly, 
inflation  has  not  created  welfare  anywhere  in  the  world!  Is  it  then  possible  that,  even  after  the 
devastating consequences of the 1992-1993 hyperinflation on the country’s economy, Serbia has still 
not grasped how damaging the effects of inflation can be?  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2007
