Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review June 2007 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the press 
briefing on the occasion of the publication of the June 2007 ECB Financial Stability Review, Frankfurt 
am Main, 15 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
I.  
My colleagues and I welcome you to today’s press conference on the occasion of the publication of 
the  June  2007  edition  of  the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability  Review.  The  financial  stability  assessment 
contained  in  the  Review  has  been  prepared  with  the  close  involvement  of  the  ESCB  Banking 
Supervision Committee. It is based on information that was available up until 11 May 2007, the “cut-
off” date for this Review.  
The primary objective of the semi-annual ECB Financial Stability Review is to review the main sources 
of  risk  and  vulnerability  for  euro  area  financial  system  stability  and  to  provide  a  comprehensive 
assessment  of  the  capacity  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  to  absorb  adverse  disturbances.  In 
addition to the financial stability assessment, the June 2007 edition of the Review addresses several 
topical issues in 17 boxes and it also includes five Special Feature articles. In my introduction, I will 
first  focus  on  risks  and  vulnerabilities  we  have  identified  in:  (i) the  external  environment;  (ii)  global 
financial markets; (iii) the euro area corporate and household sectors; and (iv) the euro area financial 
institutions. I will then discuss some potential risk triggering factors and will conclude with an overall 
assessment of the outlook for financial stability.  
Overview of the main developments since December 2006 
2.  
Let me start by recalling some of the key developments since our previous assessment in December 
2006.  Overall,  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  continued  to  be  favourable.  Global  growth  has 
remained robust and some rebalancing of activity among the main economic areas has occurred. In 
the euro area, economic growth has exceeded expectations, leading to upwards revisions to our own 
growth projections and to the Consensus GDP forecasts (as shown in the chart on the left of slide 3).  
In both the banking and insurance sectors, profitability continued improving. Moreover, global financial 
markets  have,  for  the  most  part,  been  characterised  by  unusually  subdued  volatility,  while  credit 
spreads have remained low.  
Notwithstanding this favourable background, between late February and early March 2007, the shock-
absorbing  capacity  of  the  global  and  euro  area  financial  systems  was  again  tested  by  the  third 
significant  burst  of  market  volatility  in  the  past  two  years.  This  was  comfortably  weathered  and  the 
stock  market  recovered  quickly  (seen  on  the  right  chart  of  slide  3).  Improvements  in  the  risk 
management practices of financial firms appear to have contributed to ensuring that higher financial 
market volatility did not prevent capital markets from facilitating the intermediation of capital.  
The  fact  that  the  global  and  euro  area  financial  systems  have  so  far  proved resilient  to  a  series  of 
adverse disturbances is comforting, but it does not provide any ground for complacency. The episodes 
of market volatility were triggered by relatively small and transitory disturbances in an environment of 
strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  abundant  financial  market  liquidity.  Therefore,  these 
episodes do not provide sufficient guidance on how the financial system would perform in the event of 
a  larger  shock  that  could  trigger  a  more  material  and  longer-lasting  reappraisal  of  risks  at  a  less 
favourable  stage  of  the  credit  cycle.  However,  they  have  served  to  reaffirm  concerns  about  pre-
existing vulnerabilities and potential risks.  
External environment 
3.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  vulnerabilities  we  have  identified  in  the  external  environment.  Overall,  risks 
stemming from global imbalances have remained broadly unchanged over the past six months. The 
chart  on  the  left  of  slide  4  shows  that  persistently  large  US  current  account  deficits  have  not  fully 
accumulated into the net foreign asset position of the US, largely because of exchange rate and asset 
price changes. Valuation effects – primarily a weaker US dollar – have played some role in containing 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 1
US external indebtedness. Nevertheless, the negative US net foreign asset position still remains very 
large in historical terms by comparison.  
Since  the  previous  assessment,  concerns  have  increased  about  the  possible  implications  of  carry 
trades in the foreign exchange markets, driven by relatively low short-term interest rates in Japan and 
in  Switzerland  and  very  low  exchange  rate  volatility.  An  indicator  commonly  used  to  highlight 
speculative  pressures  on  exchange  rates  is  the  net  short  non-commercial  positions  in  currency 
futures. As shown in the chart on the right of slide 4, this indicator reached unprecedented levels in 
early  2007  for  the  Japanese  yen,  suggesting  that  carry  trading  has  grown  significantly  since  the 
beginning of 2006.  
In Box 4 of the FSR, a close look is taken at the evolution of the foreign exchange carry trades. The 
conclusion is that, from a financial stability perspective, large outstanding carry trade positions may be 
a  concern  if  they  make  the  targeted  financial  markets  vulnerable  to  unexpected  changes  either  in 
short-term interest rates in the funding currency or exchange rate volatility. 
A pertinent issue for the outlook for financial stability is whether there have been signs of a turn in the 
US credit cycle. The assessment of the markets and banks appears, on the face of it, to be somewhat 
divided. For example, credit spreads on sub-investment grade bonds have narrowed further, but US 
banks are no longer easing their credit standards on loans granted to firms. The fundamentals of US 
firms have overall remained strong. Although rating downgrades have outpaced upgrades in the US 
credit market, this deterioration of credit quality has not translated into higher default rates. It has been 
suggested that the existence of abundant market liquidity is one of the reasons why rating agencies 
have, since late 2004, consistently revised their forecasts of rising global default rates, pushing them 
further into the future (see the chart on the left of slide 5). In particular, due to the growing presence of 
new  participants  in  credit  markets  with  greater  risk  tolerances,  it  seems  that  firms  with  lower 
creditworthiness (credit ratings) may have found it easier to refinance and restructure their debt. This 
refinancing activity has included the greater use of weaker loan covenants than in the past. Thus, to a 
certain extent, firms may only be deferring their financial difficulties into the future. When the credit 
cycle finally turns, the consequences could be more abrupt and severe than past experience might 
suggest. 
In this context, the recent episode of re-appraisal of credit risk pricing in the US sub-prime mortgage 
market may provide some guidance on how the credit market could behave in a broader downturn. 
Since mid-2005, the combined effect of resets of initial borrowing terms to higher interest rates and 
reduced  abilities  of  borrowers  to  avoid  such  resets  through  house  sales  or  to  carry  out  cash-out 
refinancing,  has  been  associated  with  rising  delinquency  rates  on  securitised  sub-prime  mortgage 
loans.  The  impact  of  sub-prime  mortgage  delinquencies  on  the  lower-quality-end  of  the  credit  risk 
transfer (CRT) market has been substantial. Early this year, the concern of market participants about 
deteriorating sub-prime credit quality led to a significant and, so far, persistent increase in the cost of 
credit  protection  associated  with  sub-prime  non-agency  residential  mortgage-backed  securities 
(RMBS), as shown in the chart on the right of slide 5.  
Box  2  of  the  Review  contains  a  more  detailed  assessment  of  the  potential  risks  of  the  sub-prime 
episode.  It  concludes  that  there  is  some  concern  that  the  deteriorating  performance  of  sub-prime 
RMBS  could  affect  the  broader  market  for  structured  credit  instruments,  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
concentration of sub-prime mortgage loans as collateral for collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) is 
very high. It cannot be ruled out that further poor performance of this type of collateral could trigger 
rating downgrades of CDO tranches themselves and lead to a reassessment of risk in other segments 
of structured credit markets.  
Financial market liquidity 
An overarching theme, pertaining to several sources of risk and vulnerability in the financial markets, is 
the abundant liquidity characterising global markets. Indeed, there appears to be a consensus among 
market participants that market liquidity has reached unprecedented levels. Financial market liquidity 
is a measure of the ability of market participants to undertake securities transactions without triggering 
large changes in their prices. The concept of financial market liquidity is distinct from the concept of 
monetary  liquidity,  but  there  can  be  links  between  the  two.  Although  the  measurement  of  market 
liquidity is rather complex, symptoms of the abundance of liquidity include high leverage, low yields, 
low  market  volatility,  narrow  credit  spreads,  and  high  market  turnover.  Overall,  abundant  liquidity 
seems to be intertwined with the “search for yield” which has been discussed in past issues of the FSR 
and it appears to be dependent on confidence remaining in the smooth functioning of the market.  
2 
 BIS Review 69/2007
The chart on the left of slide 6 introduces a composite indicator of financial market liquidity in the euro 
area  equity,  bond,  foreign  exchange  and  credit  markets.  It  is  constructed  to  gauge  three  different 
dimensions of market liquidity. The first dimension is tightness , that is the magnitude of risk premiums 
required  by  market-makers  for  holding  inventories  of  securities,  and  it  is  measured  by  the  bid-ask 
spread.  The  second  dimension  is  depth  and  resiliency  ,  that  is  the  degree  to  which  the  volume  of 
transactions impacts on asset prices, and it is measured by using ratios of asset price movements to 
transactions. The third dimension relates to liquidity risk premia, that is, the compensation required by 
investors  for  the  risk  that  attempts  to  unwind  positions  could  be  challenged  by  uncertain  market 
conditions in the future. This is measured using yield spreads between securities which are known to 
have varying degrees of liquidity.  
The  evolution  of  this  indicator  over  time  confirms  that  financial  market  liquidity  has  increased 
significantly since 2001. It rose sharply in 2003 and 2004 and markets have remained very liquid since 
then. The increase in market liquidity may reflect structural changes in financial markets; for example, 
the liberalisation of international flows of capital, the securitisation of loans, the development of new 
financial  instruments,  and  the  rapidly  growing  market  presence  of  highly  active  financial  market 
participants, such as hedge funds.  
However, buoyant market liquidity could also reflect excessive risk appetite, indicating that liquidity risk 
could be under-priced, as well as high leverage. To the extent that high risk appetite is an important 
determinant  of  market  liquidity,  the  current  favourable  liquidity  conditions  could  suddenly,  and 
unexpectedly, fade away, if there were a loss of confidence or an abrupt and lasting increase in risk 
aversion. This could expose several underlying vulnerabilities in the financial system on which I will 
elaborate later on.  
Global financial institutions 
Turning to global financial institutions, with the exception of the fact that the hedge fund industry has 
grown  further  in  size,  all  other  backward-looking  indicators  suggest  that  potential  risks  to  financial 
stability posed by hedge funds have not changed materially since the December 2006 FSR.  
However,  market  risks  posed  by  hedge  funds  remain.  They  arise  largely  from  information  which 
suggests  that  over-capacity,  and  indeed  over-crowding,  could  be  taking  place  in  the  sector  after  a 
simultaneous increase in the number of funds and a reduction of profitable trading opportunities over 
the last couple of years. On the one hand, as illustrated in the chart on the left of slide 7, average 
hedge fund returns have been on a downward trend since the early 1990s. This trend could point to 
overcapacity  and  to  a  consequent  lowering  of  the  amount  of  profitable  investment  opportunities 
available, although other explanations are also possible. At the same time, the degree of correlation 
between  hedge  fund  returns  across  different  strategies,  shown  in  the  chart  on  the  right  of  slide  7, 
remained  around  the  same  relatively  high  level  as  in  mid-2006.  There  are  concerns  about  the 
implications  for  market  dynamics  if  there  was  to  be  an  event  which  would  prompt  many  funds  into 
“rushing towards the exit” at the same time due to the crowding of trades, i.e. that many funds are 
positioned similarly.  
4.  
Euro area financial system 
Euro area corporate sector 
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  euro  area  corporate  sector.  Against  a  background  of  strong  economic 
conditions, low financing costs and abundant market liquidity, the rate of borrowing by the euro area 
corporate sector began to quicken after mid-2005. As a result, key indicators of the leverage of the 
sector had reached unprecedented heights. However, as analysed in Box 7, the recent re-leveraging 
in  the  euro  area  corporate  sector  has  not  been  broad-based,  but  rather  it  has  been  concentrated 
among unlisted firms – including not only small and medium-sized enterprises, but also firms which 
have  been  de-listed  through  private  equity  deals.  Data  is  obviously  lacking  on  unlisted  firms,  but 
comparing trends in the debt-to-asset ratio for listed non-financial corporations and the debt-to-GDP 
ratio for the non-financial corporate sector suggests that a sharp rise has taken place in the debt-to-
asset ratio of unlisted firms in the period since 2004 (see chart on the left of slide 8).  
Increasing  corporate  sector  leverage  in  the  euro  area  has  also  begun  to  raise  questions  about  the 
likelihood of an adverse turn in the credit cycle and its possible consequences for the financial system. 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 3
Although  closely  related  to  business  cycles,  credit  cycles  are  also  driven  by  the  criteria  applied  by 
banks and other  investors  when  extending credit.  By  this  yardstick,  a  long  period of  inertia  in  bank 
lending  standards  since  mid-2004  and  the  persistent  tightness  of  credit  spreads  suggest  that  euro 
area firms have not been facing financing constraints (as shown in the chart on the right of slide 8). On 
the contrary, as banks placed greater emphasis on the so-called “originate and distribute” business 
model, new opportunities have emerged for other financial institutions to acquire exposures to credit. 
This development has further improved firms’ access to bank credit.  
Euro area household sector 
Turning to the euro area household sector, the pace of net borrowing by the household sector has 
slowed since spring 2006, but has remained at high levels (see the chart on the left of slide 9). There 
have also been signs of moderation of house price inflation in a number of euro area housing markets. 
The risk of potentially disruptive property price declines in the future appears limited in the euro area 
as  a  whole,  although  differences  continue  to  exist  among  individual  Member  States.  However, 
concerns  remain  about  the  sustainability  of  unprecedented  levels  of  mortgage-related  leverage  in 
those parts of the euro area where, ceteris paribus, housing valuations appear stretched, where the 
debt  build-up  has  been  pronounced,  and  where  the  majority  of  debt  is  financed  at  variable  interest 
rates.  
While  measures  of  leverage  compared  to  income  can  provide  a  rough  indication  of  the  ability  to 
service debt, it is also important to evaluate the sustainability vis-à-vis assets, as this can provide an 
indication of the capacity of households to repay their debts in full at an aggregate level. The value of 
household assets – which is much larger than that of their debt – has grown more than their liabilities, 
especially after 2002, as the stock market has recovered the losses from the bursting of the high-tech 
bubble and as house prices have also risen. As a result, as shown in the chart on the right of slide 9, 
households have seen a notable rise in their net wealth over this period, driven in particular by the 
housing wealth component, which accounted for about 60% of total household wealth in 2006.  
Euro area large and complex banking groups 
The financial soundness of large and complex banking groups (LCBGs) in the euro area strengthened 
further  in  the  second  half of  2006, consolidating  on  the  steady  and  broad-based  improvement  from 
2003  onwards.  Profitability  continued  to  rise,  underpinned  by  favourable  macroeconomic  conditions 
and, for the most part, very low levels of financial market volatility. The chart on the left of side 10 
shows  that  compared  to  the  situation  in  2005,  the  distribution  of  returns  on  equity  for  large  and 
complex  banking  groups  (LCBGs)  has  become  more  compressed  around  the  mean  with  the 
profitability of the institutions in the lower quantiles remaining unchanged or increasing slightly. At the 
same  time,  Tier  1  capital  bases  comfortably  exceeded  the  regulatory  minima  for  solvency  ratios, 
pointing to a reassuring shock-absorbing capacity. Risk management among LCBGs is expected to 
improve further as the Basel II capital rules are being implemented in the course of the current year.  
Special  Feature articles  B  and  C  in  this  edition  of  the  FSR  introduce  a  model  for stress-testing  the 
resilience  of  euro  area  LCBGs  in  the  face  of  a  wide  range  of  adverse  shocks  to  the  global  macro-
financial  environment.  The  results  suggest  that  the  corporate  credit  quality  of  LCBGs  tends  to 
deteriorate  following  negative  shocks  to  GDP  and  oil  prices  as  well  as  an  appreciation  of  the  euro 
against the US dollar. The worsening credit quality, in turn, can have a rather marked negative impact 
on banks’ solvency as measures by Tier 1 capital ratios.  
In recent years, euro area LCBGs have faced challenges in increasing, or at least maintaining, interest 
income as a share of total income, but they have enjoyed further improvements in fee, commission 
and  especially  trading  income.  Indeed,  the  share  of  banks’  trading  income  in  net  operating  income 
rose  significantly  in  2006.  For  some  LCBGs  with  sizeable  capital  market  operations,  the  share  of 
trading income accounted for nearly half of net operating income in 2006 and corresponded to more 
than 45% of their Tier 1 capital, as shown in the chart on the right of slide 10.  
Special Feature article A looks at the relationship between bank income diversity and systemic risk. It 
finds that a measure of systemic risk is positively correlated with bank size and the share of trading 
income, while it is negatively correlated with revenues from (traditional) interest income sources.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2007
Euro area insurance sector 
In the euro area insurance sector, there was a broad-based improvement in profitability in 2006 (see 
the  chart  on  the  left  of  slide  11).  The  positive  assessment  is  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  the 
profitability of the weaker performers in 2005 also improved in 2006. Underlying this improvement was 
a  strengthening  of  investment  income,  mainly  owing  to  buoyant  stock  markets  and  higher  interest 
rates. 
Moreover,  favourable  developments  in  the  financial  conditions  of  primary  insurers  and  reinsurers  in 
2006, together with a greater focus on risk management and risk-adjusted prices, support a positive 
outlook for the euro area insurance sector as a whole. These positive developments continued to be 
priced into expected default frequencies (as shown in the chart on the right of slide 11). However, risks 
and challenges for the sector remain, as greater financial market risks could pose a challenge to the 
life insurance and non-life insurance sectors. 
Triggering factors for the materialisation of risks and the exposure of vulnerabilities 
Funding liquidity challenges for highly leveraged financial institutions; 
Unwinding of carry trades and possible unwinding of global imbalances;  
Increasing credit spreads across the credit quality spectrum;  
Increased asset price volatility in financial markets more generally; and  
Reduced bank profitability as a result of lower trading revenues.  
5.  
I will now consider some possible factors that could trigger the materialisation of certain risks and the 
exposure of identified vulnerabilities. An important issue highlighted in the FSR relates to the existing 
ample  financial  market  liquidity  and  the  prevailing  very  low  risk  premia.  One  possibility  is  that  an 
abrupt  and  sharp  increase  in  risk  aversion  and  a  loss  of  confidence  could  lead  to  a  substantial 
reduction in financial market liquidity which, as stressed, is currently abundant. Such a decline could 
expose several underlying vulnerabilities and trigger an adverse scenario which could involve:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A second adverse scenario could be triggered by a turn in the credit cycle or by a large credit event. 
This could lead to an unravelling of vulnerabilities in the corporate and household sectors and in credit 
markets that could involve:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
In  this  context,  the  “triangle  of  vulnerability”,  identified  in  the  December  2006  FSR,  connecting  the 
state  of  the  credit  cycle,  credit  derivatives  and  highly  leveraged  institutions,  could  have  grown  in 
relevance in the recent period. A shock involving any element of this triangle could have implications 
for the other two. For example, a sharp turn in the credit cycle could mean that credit risk protection-
sellers, such as hedge funds, would have to make payments to banks which are protection-buyers, but 
hedge funds might not be capable of paying. Although many hedge funds have attempted to extend 
their investor lock-up periods, their positions are typically marked-to-market, implying that their funding 
remains vulnerable to any losses suffered because it could significantly impact on the willingness of 
banks  to  continue  to  grant  credit.  At  the  same  time,  a  turn  in  the  credit  cycle  could  represent  a 
challenging test for the functioning of the credit derivatives markets. Similarly, if widespread problems 
were to emerge in hedge funds active in credit risk transfer markets, this could spark a downturn in the 
credit  cycle  itself,  as  it  could  impair  the  “originate  and  distribute”  business  model  upon  which  large 
banks have become reliant.  
defaults of low credit-quality, high-leveraged households and firms; 
significant challenges in the structured credit and CRT markets;  
losses and potential failures of high leveraged financial institutions; and  
counterparty risks for banks. 
Overall assessment of the financial stability outlook 
6.  
Let  me  now  conclude  with  the  overall  assessment  of  the  financial  stability  outlook.  Comparing  the 
current assessment with that presented in the December 2006 FSR, the main scenario for euro area 
financial stability remains broadly favourable:  
BIS Review 69/2007 
 5
     The  current  macroeconomic  environment  is  benign  and  global  and  euro  area  economic 
activity it is expected to remain robust;  
In February and March 2007, the resilience of the financial system was tested by the third 
significant burst of market volatility in two years, which it comfortably weathered; 
Euro area credit quality, overall, remains high and should be underpinned by a favourable 
economic outlook; 
Pockets of vulnerability in the euro area household and corporate sectors have most likely 
increased, but, on average, financial positions remain sound; 
The  profitability  of  euro  area  financial  institutions  further  improved  and  solvency  is 
comfortable relative to regulatory requirements.  
However, pre-existing sources of risk and vulnerability remain and some have grown:  
• 
The recent market jitters have confirmed concerns regarding previously identified risks and 
vulnerabilities and have revealed the relevance of some new risk exposures;  
Vulnerabilities  could  be  quickly  unearthed  if  market  liquidity  were  to  abruptly  and  sharply 
decline, possibly triggered by a wane in risk appetite caused by a change in risk perceptions; 
Re-leveraging in the corporate sector and the process of credit risk transfer from the banking 
system  to  other  financial  institutions  and  market  participants  which  is  associated  with  a 
greater emphasis on the “originate and distribute” business model by banks, could constitute 
vulnerabilities in a less benign market environment. 
In  addition,  global  imbalances  remain  a  medium-term,  low-probability  but  potentially  high 
impact risk for financial stability.  
   Therefore,  despite  the  strong  performance  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  benign  macroeconomic 
outlook, there is no room for complacency, given the potential risks and the identified vulnerabilities. 
This conclusion also reflects the fact that the materialisation of risks and the triggers that could expose 
vulnerabilities can not be predicted with any degree of certainty. The main message for the financial 
institutions  is  to  prepare  to  mitigate  potential  disturbances  through  appropriate  risk  management 
arrangements  including  through  stress-testing  and  vigilant  monitoring  of  the  financial  soundness  of 
their counterparties. 
 
6 
  BIS Review 69/2007
     BIS Review 69/2007 
 7
   BIS Review 69/2007
 8 
     9
 BIS Review 69/2007 
   10 
   BIS Review 69/2007
    BIS Review 69/2007 
 11
   12 
 BIS Review 69/2007
