Davíð Oddsson: The challenges of globalisation for small open economies with 
independent currencies 
Opening address by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland,  at  a  conference  on  The  Challenges  of  Globalisation  for  Small  Open  Economies  with 
Independent Currencies, Reykjavík, 1 June 2007. 
 On  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  I  welcome  the  cooperation 
between  the  Bank  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  on  organising  the  conference  that  is  now 
commencing. In fact I consider the theme of this conference very apt and take the liberty of stating that 
a better location for such discussion could hardly be found. This claim is not only based on the fact 
that Iceland is currently staging a kind of practical experiment in this field. While it can be argued that 
such experiments are taking place in many other countries, the advantage of Iceland’s experiment is 
that its economic developments happen to have been quite notable over the past few years. Certain 
aspects of recent events raise significant questions for this conference.  
There  is  no  question  that  Iceland  was  a  relative  latecomer  to  the  top  league  of  active  market 
economies:  for  a  long  time,  Iceland’s  rules  and  norms  did  not  qualify  it  for  inclusion.  But  Iceland’s 
economic framework has been completely transformed in the space of a relatively few years and its 
business world has undergone enormous upheavals at the same time. Looking at just the past four or 
five years, there is no doubt that certain laws of economics have been stretched to their limits and, in 
order to convince outsiders that the stakes have not been set too high, we have had to insist – and 
rightly  so,  I  hope  –  that  Iceland’s  economic  environment  has  various  advantages  that  are  not 
immediately  obvious  to  those  who  are  accustomed  to  operating  in  larger  and  more  restrictive 
conditions.  Here  there  is  great  flexibility,  official  measures  are  very  transparent  and  channels  of 
communication  are  shorter,  which  enables  easier  decision-making  so  that  households,  businesses 
and  the  authorities  are  quicker  to  respond  to  economic  incentives  or  challenges  than  is  the  case 
elsewhere.  
To  give  you  all  a  more  complex  and  interesting  topic  to  discuss  at  a  conference  such  as  this,  the 
government itself promoted a number of measures that will benefit Iceland and its people in the long 
run. However, their timing and scope may have been more questionable. Thus the government itself 
was mostly responsible for attracting the largest single investment that has ever been made in Iceland, 
to  which  the  state-owned  power  company,  Landsvirkjun,  had  to  respond  by  matching  it  with  an 
investment  of  its  own  on  the  same  scale.  The  inflow  of  capital  was  enormous.  As  if  this  was  not 
enough,  public  sector  involvement  in  housing  finance  was  reformed  around  the  same  time;  this 
structural  reorganisation  had  unexpected  multiplier  effects  when  the  recently  privatised  commercial 
banks  eagerly  followed  that  lead  and  ran  ahead  along  the  same  path  even  faster  than  the  policy 
makers had expected.  
At the same time, Icelandic banks and financial institutions have been establishing their influence in 
neighbouring  foreign  markets  and,  to  some  degree,  more  distant  ones.  The  banks  have  expanded 
rapidly and are now very large relative to Iceland’s domestic economy, and in fact by any measure. 
Their international activities have also created a new situation that has sometimes been called “the 
problem of explaining the Icelandic economy”. Although I feel that this problem is overstated because 
it must surely be temporary, it cannot be denied that the Icelandic currency itself, and its small size, 
are  recurrent  themes.  The  economic  factors  I  mentioned  earlier  have  driven  strong  inflationary 
pressures in Iceland, which have partly appeared in the form of higher measured inflation, but have to 
some  extent been  contained  by  Central  Bank  policy  rate  decisions, which  in turn have affected  the 
exchange  rate  of  the  Icelandic  króna,  at  least  for  some  while  now.  And  in  combination,  these  two 
factors have raised yet another question that is relevant to this conference.  
That is to say, these special conditions have inspired new investors, the carry traders, to venture to 
our shores. These modern-day Vikings try their fortune in distant places in the hope of quick gain and 
handsome returns, which they can no longer find closer to home. What will happen when these bold 
hunters of yields and expectations suddenly lose their nerve? Or their appetite? Regardless of whether 
this is caused by events that have occurred somewhere else and under completely different conditions 
from here, or due to persistent rumours, speculation and theories about the situation in Iceland and 
risks that have little or no foundation at that time. Will they load everything aboard and sail off, like the 
Vikings in the past, with what they have managed to gather up, and look for shelter with their bounty 
against real or imaginary threats? If this happens, might the high-yield countries suffer a shock? And if 
so, will that shock be felt the most by the smallest countries, where investors naturally have the least 
knowledge and confidence? Then the question will arise about the impact that all this will have on the 
effectiveness  of  the  Central  Bank’s  policies  for  controlling  inflation  developments,  and  whether  we 
might be better off locked away inside one of the super-currencies, obeying the laws that apply there 
and at the mercy of the decisions of others.  
All these considerations and many others can stoke the fires of debate at this conference in Iceland. 
Some people maintain that the incredible gains that Iceland has made over a very few years could 
only  have  been  achieved  because  the  country  had  its  own  currency.  Others  say  that  the 
consequences may be more difficult to deal with and more persistent precisely because the country 
has its own currency and is not under the wing of a large currency area. Yet others claim that if Iceland 
fixes itself against another currency and obeys the laws of others – interest rates based on what is 
happening in France, Italy and Germany and not in Iceland – that this will produce a more cautious 
attitude up here in the frozen north, the appetite for risk will diminish and economic developments will 
take a healthier turn. Thus there are countless questions, of which I have mentioned only a few. Of 
course I have taken care in these opening remarks to leave all these questions open for those who 
follow.  It  is  a  particular  pleasure  to  have  lured  so many  distinguished  guests  here  to  do  theoretical 
battle about these questions. It is equally welcome to give our leading experts the opportunity and time 
to  ponder  these  issues  and  present  their  own  views.  So  everything  promises  a  rewarding  outcome 
from this conference. It has been organised with ample reason, in the right place and at the right time, 
and with exceptionally qualified speakers.  
