Jean-Claude Trichet: Some reflections on the development of credit derivatives 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
22nd Annual General Meeting of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA), Boston, 
18 April 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a privilege and pleasure to be here at the 22nd ISDA Annual General Meeting in Boston in front of 
such a distinguished global audience.  
Looking back at what is already history, I would like to express my gratitude to ISDA for its substantial 
contribution towards the smooth introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999. The conversion of the 
original  11  national  currencies  into  one  single  currency,  the  euro,  represented  an  enormous 
operational and legal challenge that had significant implications for the global markets, particularly for 
the cross-currency and interest rate derivatives markets. ISDA played an important role in contributing 
to  the  development  of  the  legal  framework  which  ensured  the  continuity  of  contracts,  both  in  the 
European Union and in the United States.  
I  would  also  like  to  mention  the  crucial  role  that  ISDA  currently  plays  in  promoting  the  smooth 
functioning  of  all  derivatives  market  segments,  especially  by  mitigating  legal  risks  and  supporting 
industry-driven initiatives to promote market integrity and efficiency. I will come back to this point later.  
The  main  theme  of  my  speech  today  is  credit  derivatives,  in  their  different  forms.  The  credit 
derivatives  market  segment  has  probably  been  one  of  the  most  innovative  and  fastest-growing  in 
recent years. Most notably, during the last mid-year review, ISDA recorded a 52% rise in the notional 
outstanding  amount  of  credit  default  swaps,  which  rose  to  $26  trillion.  Moreover,  according  to  the 
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the issuance of collateralised debt obligations 
almost tripled between 2004 and 2006, amounting to $489 billion in 2006. The rapid development and 
the share of this market segment is a very important feature of today’s global finance, and I would like 
to share with you some reflections on the developments of credit derivatives. 
My objective is twofold: first, I would like to emphasise the importance of central banks’ monitoring of 
developments in credit derivatives in terms of three interlinked perspectives:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Second,  I  would  like  to  take  advantage  of  your  AGM  to  make  a  call  in  favour  of  market-driven 
initiatives that may lead to greater transparency.  
the conduct of monetary policy,  
financial stability and  
market standards.  
Credit derivatives and the conduct of monetary policy  
1)  
Let me now turn to the development of credit derivatives from a monetary policy perspective. Empirical 
evidence  and  theoretical  reasoning  on  this  subject  are  admittedly  still  limited.  However,  there  is 
growing consensus that credit derivatives have implications for the conduct of monetary policy. The 
question  I  will  try  to  address  is:  do  credit  derivatives  affect  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism?  
Let me first say that the precise impact is difficult to estimate at this stage, given the scarcity of reliable 
data. It could be argued that there may be changes in the nature of the credit channel of monetary 
policy, which can be divided into a “bank lending” and a “borrower balance sheet” channel.  
The  nature  of  the  traditional  bank  lending  channel  is  probably  changing  progressively  owing  to 
technological  innovations,  which  have  significantly  enhanced  the  ability  of  banks  to  grant  credit. 
However, it is still too early to assess in what way this channel may be affected. 
The so-called borrower balance sheet channel focuses, instead, on the impact which changes in the 
policy  rate  have  on  the  premium  between  external  and  internal  finance.  This  channel  traditionally 
worked because monetary policy decisions typically drive changes in bank lending spreads and, more 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
recently  have  also affected  corporate bond spreads.1  Nowadays  rates  on credit  default  swaps may 
also play a crucial role. Indeed, some empirical evidence shows that credit derivatives’ premia respond 
more  to  changes  in  the  availability  and  cost  of  financing  compared  with  corporate  bond  spreads.2 
Credit derivatives could therefore make the economy, and thus monetary policy, increasingly sensitive 
to credit market movements. At the same time, credit derivatives’ activity increases the information on 
borrowers’ default risk and may contribute to compressing the external finance premium.  
In fact, three structural implications emanating from the use of credit derivatives might have affected 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
First,  credit  derivatives  and  structured  credit  markets  affect  banks’  decision-making  processes 
when granting credit.3 Just consider in this regard the enhanced capability to manage both pricing 
and liquidity risks. Price discovery in the credit derivatives market reduces the risk of mispricing loans. 
Moreover,  securitisation,  which  is  another  credit  risk  transfer  instrument,  offers  the  possibility  of 
managing more effectively the liquidity risk of traditionally illiquid loans in the balance sheet.  
Second, credit derivatives and structured credit markets are transforming the way banks operate in 
the market. Credit portfolio management practices have indeed profound implications for the banking 
business  model.  Banks  are  moving  from  the  traditional  “buy-and-hold”  model  to  the  “originate-and-
distribute” model4, whereby they distribute portfolios of credit risks and assets to other market players. 
In this respect, banks are increasingly performing the role of risk managers in addition to pure credit 
providers.  In  particular,  they  increasingly  find  credit  derivatives  a  highly  attractive  mechanism  for 
reducing exposure concentrations in their loan books, while simultaneously allowing them to meet the 
needs of their corporate customers.  
The  third  structural  implication  is  that  credit  derivatives  and  structured  credit  markets  are 
transforming the financial system, whereby efficient risk allocation is becoming just as important as 
capital  allocation.  It  is  a  valid  question  to  wonder  if  we  are  converging  towards  a  new  “integrated” 
financial system, whereby the traditional categories of bank-based or market-based financial systems 
may have to be revisited. Such an integrated system could be built on the competitive advantages of 
different market participants. On the one hand, banks would still maintain their superior capability to 
assess and originate idiosyncratic credit risk and risky assets, provided of course that informational 
advantages and the appropriate incentives to screen borrowers remain in place. On the other hand, 
subsequent  aggregation  and  structuring  of  credit  risks  would  increasingly  allow  these  risks  to  be 
transferred to market participants with different investment horizons, asset/liability structures and risk 
appetites  who  may  be  less  vulnerable  than  banks  in  terms  of  managing  liquidity,  interest  rate  and 
systemic credit risks.  
Overall,  these  three  structural  implications  of  credit  derivatives  may  have  brought  about  increased 
opportunities  and  productivity  in  the  banking  intermediation  business,  which  in  turn  implies  a 
substantial reduction in costs. Whether this partially explains the fast growth of bank loans in the euro 
area, which exceeds what can be explained on the basis of traditional determinants, is a conjecture 
which to me seems reasonable, albeit one that has still to be substantiated. Indeed, some evidence 
from the United States, based on individual loan data, supports the idea that banks are increasing the 
supply of credit as they obtain additional credit protection through credit derivatives.5  
A  consequence  of  the  possible  impact  of  credit  derivatives  on  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism is that central banks have to adapt their market monitoring and analytical tools6. June 
2004  marked  a  significant  milestone  in  the  world  of  credit  risk,  with  the  launch  of  the  two  single 
European  and  US  credit  default  swap  indices,  iTraxx  and  CDX.  Credit  risk  has  now  become  a 
separate  asset  class,  and  price  discovery  for  this  risk  is  increasingly  taking place  in  the  derivatives 
market segment, as it has been the case for interest rate and inflation risk.  
                                                      
1   de Bondt (2004). 
2   Zhu (2006). 
3   See also ECB (2004), ECB (2007) and CGFS (2003). 
4  ECB, Financial Stability Review, Box 12, December 2006. See also Welling (2007). 
5   Hirtle (2007). 
6   See also Kohn (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
Credit derivatives and financial stability  
2)  
Let  me  now  consider  credit  derivatives  from  a  financial  stability  perspective.  There  is  growing 
consensus7 that the flexibility provided by derivatives, whereby risks can be traded separately, has the 
potential  to  facilitate  risk-sharing,  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  risk  management,  and  to  promote 
market completeness.  
Credit derivatives, in particular, may offer investors a tool enabling them to exploit their comparative 
advantage in terms of assuming different types of risk as well as the corresponding remuneration for 
these risks. As already stated, banks are using credit risk transfer instruments, including securitisation, 
to distribute credit risk exposures acquired in their lending business to non-banks.  
All innovations, however, encompass advantages as well as risks.. The core question is under what 
conditions do credit derivatives enhance the resilience of the financial system. 
I  believe  that  at  least  three  conditions  need  to  be  fulfilled  under  both  normal  and  stressed  market 
conditions:  first,  risks  must  be  accurately  measured  and  priced;  second,  risks  must  be  properly 
managed; third, an appropriate heterogeneity of both investors’ behaviour and risk appetite must be 
preserved in all market circumstances in order for trading and sharing of risk to preserve liquidity even 
under stressed market conditions – so-called systemic liquidity.8 Taking an extreme scenario, if all 
investors were to attempt to take the same position at the same time, then the homogeneity of their 
behaviour would cause liquidity to evaporate.  
Assuming  these  three  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  possibility  of  trading  risks  separately  will  result  in 
their better allocation, making the financial system more resilient. 
However, we are at present not sure that the three conditions are indeed always met. In particular, as 
the instruments for sharing credit risk have not yet really been stress-tested, it is extremely difficult to 
ascertain  the  resilience  of  the  market  accurately.  Aggressive  investors  display  a  more  volatile  risk-
taking  attitude,  and  their  balance  sheets  are  not  necessarily  resilient  enough  to  withstand  major 
shocks or increases in volatility. In response to unanticipated events, their investment strategies may 
react  in  a  way  that  can  suddenly  lead  to  dangerous  herding  behaviour  and/or  counterparty  risk 
problems for banks. Such situations are also a matter of concern from a systemic liquidity viewpoint, 
and  may  take  two  extreme  forms:  market  liquidity  could  temporarily  dry  up  or  individual  funding 
liquidity  problems  may  affect  a  significant  market  player.9  Such  liquidity  problems  are  typically  low-
probability events, but the potential loss to the financial system if they were to materialise is great. In 
today’s financial markets, the fear is that a large proportion of market participants may have become 
excessively complacent; a situation which may well have been exacerbated by high levels of liquidity, 
the stability of which is difficult to predict.  
What then can be done to enjoy the advantages of credit derivatives, while simultaneously minimising 
the systemic risks they could generate?  
First,  we  need  to  understand what  the  main  problem  is.  Here,  it  should  be  acknowledged  that  the 
opacity  of  the  credit  derivatives  market,  and  especially  of  structured  synthetic  instruments,  is  a 
potential source of concern. The complex interaction between cash instruments and credit derivatives 
has made it increasingly difficult to monitor where different, possibly sizeable, positions are taken and 
where  risks  are  concentrated.  It  is  similarly  difficult  to  monitor  whether  and  when  simultaneous 
attempts by market participants to unwind their positions could have an impact on market prices and 
systemic  liquidity.10  It  is  therefore  becoming  increasingly  important  for  risk  managers,  in  both  the 
private  and  the  public  sectors  to  understand  which  risks  are  being  accumulated  by  what  financial 
entities.  
Second,  since  there  is  no  simple  solution  to  the  problem  of  opacity, what  is  the  right  direction  to 
take? The challenge is to work towards an adequate transparency framework. More and improved 
data on net credit risk exposures and on the concentration of positions – which tend to build up easily 
in  highly  leveraged  and  opaque  markets  –  could  help  to  mitigate  sizeable  shortcomings  in  both 
                                                      
7   See, for example, IMF GFSR (2005), Geithner FED of NY (2006). 
8   See Laganá et al. ECB (2006) and ECB Financial Stability Review, Box 9, December 2006. 
9   See Institute of International Finance (2007) and Joint Forum (2006) for further details and definitions. 
10   ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2006. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 3
counterparty and systemic liquidity risk management. In fact, such data could help market participants 
and  competent  authorities  to  value,  price  and  manage  more  effectively  the  increasing  risks  posed 
when investors behave in a homogenous way. However, it is important to note that there is as yet no 
broad consensus on how such a framework would be best implemented in order to provide timely and 
relevant information. 
Third,  who  should  take  action  in  this  direction?  It  should  be  acknowledged  that  the  reduction  of 
systemic risk is not an objective for central banks exclusively. Here, I would like to praise the joint 
initiatives of market experts from a number of leading institutions around the world in response to calls 
from the central bank community: the reports by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group11 
and the recent report released by the Institute of International Finance Special Committee on Liquidity 
Risk.  Both  documents  call  for  “greater  transparency  and  an  incremental  collaborative  mechanism 
between the public and private sector in contingency planning”. They also draw attention to the fact 
that standard methods for valuing contracts with defaulting counterparties under the close-out netting 
provisions  of  master  agreements  for  derivatives  transactions  could  be  difficult  to  implement  during 
periods  of  market  stress.  As  noted  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems, 
market associations such as ISDA are well placed to develop common understandings regarding the 
use of these methodologies, taking into account existing market practices and laws. 
In addition, there is also scope for more private and public sector cooperation on stress-testing and 
gathering data that are relevant for regulatory purposes concerning the proper evaluation of systemic 
risk.  For  instance,  the  work  on  stress-testing  by  regulators,  central  banks  and  international 
organisations  (such  as  the  IMF’s  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  activities),  has  revealed 
the  difficulties  for  banks  to  introduce  into  their  internal  models  a)  scenarios  which  affect  systemic 
liquidity, or b) assumptions on the behaviour/failure of large market participants under stress. 
Fourth, how can we move forward? On the one hand, policy-makers are increasingly acknowledging 
the risk of a certain trade-off between liquidity and transparency in the credit derivatives market when 
the transparency framework is inappropriately designed. This can materialise under normal conditions 
but  also  under  stressed  conditions.  To  avoid  the  emergence  of  this  trade-off  requires  a  careful 
understanding  of  the  market  microstructure  and  its  functioning,  in  order  to  build  a  transparency 
framework which can be adapted to the global, dynamic and complex nature of the credit risk transfer 
market. On the other hand, expectations with regard to market-driven initiatives are growing, which is 
a point that I will consider again later. In any case, it is crucial to bear in mind that the problem is not 
credit derivatives instruments per se, but how they are used, and especially the size, distribution and 
concentration of risks they allow. Increased transparency on these three issues could be useful for risk 
managers in both the private and public sectors, and for the market in general.  
Credit derivatives and common market standards  
3)  
Let me now move to the third and last point, namely to try to understand the main developments in 
credit derivatives with regard to market practices.  
Given  that  the  credit  derivatives  market  has  a  global,  innovative,  complex  and  predominantly 
wholesale nature, it may be argued that global market standards are particularly well suited to meet 
related regulatory challenges.  
ISDA  is  widely  recognised  as  playing  a  crucial  role  in  promoting  market  standards  and  mitigating 
legal risk. In this regard, there can be no doubt that the development of ISDA’s library of standard-
form contracts for credit derivatives has played a substantial role in promoting the development of this 
market. It is important that market participants  clearly understand the precise rights and obligations 
which  they assume when  entering  into  credit  derivatives  transactions, as standardised contracts  do 
not always work out in the way that contracting parties anticipate. Also, in some instances, case law 
has demonstrated that the courts can take divergent views regarding the meaning of ISDA’s definitions 
of credit derivatives. These matters have been swiftly addressed by ISDA. 
Turning to the overarching legal framework within which these standard-form contracts operate, the 
legal enforceability of close-out netting and collateral arrangements plays a central role in the smooth 
functioning of all over-the-counter derivatives markets, reducing counterparty risk. The need for a high 
                                                      
11   Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2007
degree of legal certainty regarding the validity and enforceability of such arrangements has long been 
reflected  in  the  regulatory  capital  requirements  under  the  Basel  Capital  Accords.  Legislative 
recognition  of  close-out  netting  and  collateral  arrangements  plays  a  positive  role  in  supporting  the 
evolution  of  derivatives  markets.  I  note  that  the  European  Commission,  echoing  the  views  of  the 
European Financial Market Lawyers Group and ISDA, has recently stated that it intends to explore the 
possibility of further improving the general EU framework for netting.  
Concerning other relevant ongoing initiatives, I would like to recall the current debate on international 
accounting  standards.  The  ECB  is  contributing  to  the  debate12  and  is  aware  that  accounting 
standards  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  financial  system,  in  particular  via  their  potential 
influence  on  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents.  The  ECB’s  opinion  is  that  the  introduction  of  the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS),  if  implemented  consistently  and  reliably,  should 
lead  to  a  substantial  increase  in  comparability  and  transparency.  This  should  enhance  the  level 
playing-field between banking institutions and strengthen market discipline. In this way, the IFRS can 
also provide various stakeholders with some early warning signals concerning exposures or risks. This 
holds particularly true for investment banking activities and for the use of risk transfer instruments.  
Finally, I would like to return to my second objective today, and raise some suggestions on possible 
future market-driven initiatives, especially regarding transparency. These questions directly follow 
from what I said earlier about the risks of opaque markets. 
The credit derivatives market is of a global nature, and the ECB welcomes joint initiatives driven by 
market  participants.  Is  there  scope  in  these  initiatives  for  enhanced  transparency?  What  are  the 
obstacles to making available, in a form that also considers the impact on systemic liquidity, individual 
volumes  of  single  name  credit  default  swaps  as  well  as  regularly  surveying  net  credit  risk 
exposures  and  concentration  of  positions?  The  ISDA  initiative  in  conducting  a  survey  on 
concentration risk in early 2004 might, for example, may be worth revisiting in this regard.  
Moreover, there have recently been some market-driven initiatives which resulted in a consolidation of 
post-trade information, such as the DTCC trade information warehouse. In view of these initiatives, is 
there  not a  business case  for  investigating  how relevant  information can  allow  the private sector  to 
monitor, value and manage trade concentration risks more effectively?  
I  strongly  believe  in  responsible  private  sector  initiative.  In  the  global,  dynamic,  and  complex  credit 
derivatives market, industry initiatives are of the essence. Therefore the ECB seeks to encourage joint 
initiatives to promote transparency, especially to:  
1. 
reduce pricing risks for illiquid products,  
enhance risk management capabilities, and  
2. 
3. 
support market discipline regarding counterparty risks, especially non-regulated entities.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
References 
Angeloni,  I.,  Kashyap,  A.  and  Mojon,  B.  (eds.)  (2003),  “Monetary  Policy  Transmission  in  the  Euro 
Area”, Cambridge University Press. 
Bondt, G.J. de (2004), “The balance sheet channel of monetary policy: first empirical evidence for the 
euro area corporate bond market”, International Journal of Finance and Economics, Volume 9, Issue 
3, pp. 219-228. 
CGFS-BIS (2003), “Credit risk transfer”, Committee on the Global Financial System, January. 
Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005), “Toward greater financial stability: A private 
sector perspective”, July.  
De Nederlandsche Bank (2002), “Credit growth underestimated owing to increasing securitisations”, 
Statistical Bulletin, December, pp. 17-21. 
                                                      
12   ECB (2006). 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 5
Donald L. Kohn (2007), “Asset-pricing puzzles, credit risk, and credit derivatives” Central Bank Articles 
and Speeches, March. Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, 
at the Conference on Credit Risk and Credit Derivatives, Washington, D.C. 
ECB, “Credit risk transfer by EU banks: activities, risks and risk management”, May 2004. 
ECB, “Assessment of accounting standards from a financial stability perspective”, December 2006. 
ECB, “Corporate finance in the euro area”, 2007 (forthcoming). 
Estrella,  A.  (2002),  “Securitization  and  the  Efficacy  of  Monetary  Policy”.  Economic  Policy  Review, 
Volume 8, No 1. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York. May, pp. 243-255. 
FitchRatings, Global Credit Derivatives Survey, September 2006. 
Geithner,  “Implications  of  Growth  in  Credit  Derivatives  for  Financial  Stability”,  President  and  Chief 
Executive Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 16 May 2006. 
Hirtle,  B.  (2007),  “Credit  Derivatives  and  Bank  Credit  Supply”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York 
Staff Reports, No 276, February. 
IMF Global Financial Stability Report, “The influence of credit derivative and structured credit markets 
on financial stability”, Chapter II, April 2006. 
Institute of International Finance (2007), “Principles of Liquidity Risk Management”, March.  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, The Joint Forum (2006), “The management of liquidity risk 
in financial groups”, May. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, The Joint Forum (2005), “Credit Risk Transfer”, March. 
Marco  Laganá,  Martin  Peřina,  Isabel  von  Köppen-Mertes  and  Avinash  Persaud,  “Implications  for 
liquidity from innovation and transparency in the European corporate bond market” ECB Occasional 
Paper No 50, August 2006.  
Nout  Wellink  (2007),  “Risk  management  &  financial  stability  –  Basel  II  &  beyond”  President  of  De 
Nederlandsche  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  GARP 
2007 8th Annual Risk Management Convention & Exhibition, New York, 27 February. 
Speyer, B. (2006), “Credit derivatives – short-term challenges and long-term implications”, Journal of 
Financial Transformation, Volume 16, pp. 143-152. 
Zhu, H. (2006), “An empirical comparison of credit spreads between the bond market and the credit 
default swap market”, Journal of Financial Services Research, Volume 29, No 3 / June, pp. 211-235. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2007
