Njuguna Ndung’u: Regulation and supervision of the forex bureau 
industry in Kenya 
Talking  notes  of  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  for  the 
meeting with the Kenya Forex Bureaus Association (KFBA), Nairobi, 22 August 2007. 
 The chairman, KFBA; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
1. Let me take this opportunity to invite you all to the CBK during this very important occasion 
to meet the forex bureau industry representatives as part of our partnership and to discuss 
and share experiences on industry matters. 
2. Before I proceed, let me thank the association for honouring our invitation and my staff for 
the presentation, which has clearly laid down the industry landscape and set the stage for 
our meeting. I hope this does form a platform through which we share experiences as well as 
challenges. 
3.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  first  and  foremost,  let  me  emphasize  the  role  of  regulation  and 
supervision of the forex bureaus in Kenya, which aims to: 
• 
• 
• 
develop a strong, stable and viable forex bureau industry; 
inculcate good corporate governance practices in forex bureaus; 
ensure there is adequate internal control and management information systems in 
forex bureaus; and 
ensure forex bureaus to comply with the Act and Guidelines. 
• 
All these factors enhance healthy developments for any firm in business. 
But since bureaus are special, we shall continue to attach a lot of importance to compliance 
and enforce the Act and Guidelines including suspension and revocation of licences. 
4. However, we expect forex bureaus to cooperate and partner with the Central Bank in the 
development of the forex bureau industry. 
5. Let me now turn to specific matters that touches on certain specific issues on the industry. 
These include:  
a) 
Moratorium:  As  you  are  aware,  the  Central  Bank  had  in  the  past  imposed  a 
moratorium on licensing new forex bureaus. This was done in order to:  
• 
 allow  newly  established  forex  bureau  industry  to  grow  and  individual 
bureaus to consolidate 
ensure  market  discipline  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  by  developing 
appropriate frameworks for regulation and supervision; and 
enforce  Government  concerns  on  money  laundering  and  related  financial 
crimes. 
    After a careful assessment, the Central Bank has lifted the moratorium on licensing 
of  new  forex  bureaus  including  those  to  be  located  in  the  Nairobi  and  Mombasa 
Central Business Districts. 
Industry  image:  The  continued  existence  of  the  moratorium  can  have  negative 
implications on the industry image and the Bank, including creating opportunities for 
b) 
BIS Review 125/2007 
 1
c) 
d) 
“rent  seeking”  and  corrupt  practices.  This  has tended  to  create  a  screen  between 
the licensing authority and potential investors in this market. 
Licensing procedures: On licensing of new bureaus, you note that the Bank has 
introduced  new  licensing  procedures  that  involve  a  two  stage  process,  which 
include: 
i) 
In the first stage, applicants are expected to submit application documents 
including:  
• 
Certified copy of Certificate of Incorporation and Memorandum and 
Articles of Association; 
A feasibility study of the proposed forex bureau; 
Particulars  and  “fit  and  proper  forms”  of  proposed  shareholders 
and directors; 
Declaration  and  confirmation  that  no  shareholder  and/or  director 
has a similar position or role in any other forex bureau in Kenya; 
and 
Provide  evidence  of  non-interest  bearing  deposit  of  US$  30,000 
and core capital of US$ 30,000. 
   ii) 
In  the  second  stage,  the  Central  Bank  will  issue  a  Letter  of  Intent  to 
prospective bureaus to enable them commit funds by paying the requisite 
fees and deposits, and prepare premises for inspection before issuance of 
licence and approval to commence operations. 
The  Central  Bank  has  cleaned  up  the  process  and  I  do  promise  you  an  efficient 
licensing procedure. 
Compliance: let me take this opportunity to once again urge the industry to ensure 
that  they  have  sound  and  effective  internal  control  and  management  information 
systems to enable prompt and accurate submission of returns. 
6.  In  conclusion,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  invite  the  industry 
association  chairman/  representative  to  make  some  remarks.  Thereafter,  we  shall  have  a 
short discussion on industry concerns. I also urge you to continue to work together with my 
staff in development of the industry and in seeking solutions to the various challenges that 
will arise from time to time. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2007
