Axel A Weber: Current challenges for monetary policy 
Concluding remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
the  Conference  Deutsche  Bundesbank/Suomen  Pankki  “Designing  Central  Banks”,  Eltville, 
9 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
1 
In delivering the concluding remarks after two days of in-depth and productive discussions 
my  working  assumption  is  that  you  all  expect  me  to  interpret  the  Roman  philosopher  and 
dramatist  Seneca  correctly  who  believed  that  It  is  a  great  thing  to  know  the  season  for 
speech and the season for silence. 
And as it is one of our most important tasks as central bankers to take due account of public 
expectations as an input for our decisions I shall adhere to this principle and be as brief as 
possible.  But  I  think  that,  looking  back  over  the  past  two  days,  listening  to  all  your 
contributions has clearly been worthwhile. 
One  of  the  issues  we  touched  upon  was  “What  kind  of  research  should  central  banks 
conduct?”. Here, opinions might differ. There is no doubt, however, that for a decentralised 
system  like  the  Eurosystem,  pooling  research  efforts  and  organising  conferences  like  this 
one with our colleagues from Finland is a course that we should follow and will be following 
more closely in the future. Therefore, I want to thank the organisers at both the Bundesbank 
and  Suomen  Pankki  for  matching  such  an  impressive  number  of  outstanding  researchers 
with  a  well-focused  and  structured  programme.  Particularly,  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organisers  Heinz  Hermann  and  David  Mayes  for  their  formidable  effort  and  success  in 
putting this event together. 
As  my  final  introductory  remark,  allow  me  thank  our  conference  staff.  As  usual,  it  has 
mastered the whole range of logistical and operational issues behind the scenes. 
Current challenges for monetary policy 
2  
Forrest  Capie  started  his  paper  (“Some  scattered  thoughts  from  history  on  evolution  and 
design  in  central  banking”)  on  the  history  of  central  banking  by  asking  whether  there  is 
anything left to say. In the past few days, presentations and discussions have clearly shown 
that there are still important challenges in terms of the nitty-gritty business of central banking. 
This holds true despite all the documented progress in central banking concerning the trend 
towards  independent  central  banks,  and  the  widespread  consensus  on  the  merits  of  price 
stability as a primary objective of monetary policy. 
But a historical tour de table as provided by Forrest Capie and Alex Cukierman (in his paper 
“Central  bank  independence  and  monetary  policy  making  institutions  –  past,  present  and 
future”)  serves  an  important  purpose.  It  reminds  us  that,  for  colleagues  who  have 
experienced at least one complete cycle in monetary theory, what some younger colleagues 
call a current challenge is, in fact, just a forgotten lesson from the past. I therefore certainly 
agree with him that it is useful for us to be reminded of an old truth. 
Forrest  Capie  identified  two  core  purposes  in  the  history  of  central  banking:  price  and 
financial  stability.  The  focus  in  the  nineteenth  century  was  financial  stability  and  in  the 
twentieth century the focus changed to price stability. For most central banks, price stability 
has become the primary objective. It is well accepted nowadays that inflation is ultimately a 
monetary phenomenon and that there is no long-run trade-off between output and inflation. 
Thus,  central  bank  independence  became  something  of  a  “great  mantra”  in  the  twentieth 
century. But this seems to be no reason for politicians to call into question the independence 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
of  central  banks  from  time  to  time.  Public  backing  of  the  central  bank’s  quest  for  price 
stability is indispensable for a sustained culture of low inflation. And, in an era of historically 
low  inflation  rates,  the  damaging  effects  of  inflation  might  easily  be  forgotten.  One  of  the 
current  challenges  facing  central  banks  is  to  uphold  public  acceptance  for  achieving  price 
stability. 
2.1 
Price stability as the primary objective 
Price stability and output stabilisation 
One  closely  related  aspect  in  this  context  was  pointed  out  by  Alex  Cukierman  in  his 
comprehensive survey on central bank independence: once the public becomes accustomed 
to  low  inflation  rates,  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  central  banks  feel  more  inclined  to 
concentrate their instruments on other goals, such as stabilising output. 
I do not want to dig too deeply into this issue, but just focus on what – in my view – seems to 
be  a  fair  account  of  the  existing  literature.  While  globalisation  has  had  some  impact  on 
inflation in industrialised countries, it is certainly a more stability-oriented monetary policy that 
deserves the main credit for the decline in inflation rates worldwide over the past 15 years. 
Then, however, we should be highly sceptical about interpretations based on reduced form 
estimates  of  flatter  Phillips  curves  indicating  a  possibly  more  lax  attitude  towards  risks  to 
inflation. Because not reacting in a timely manner in the face of those risks entails the danger 
that  the  very  reasons  for  a  seemingly  more  benign  inflationary  impact  of  shocks  –  solidly 
anchored  inflation  expectations  due  to  improved  monetary  policy  –  are  jeopardised.  This 
would entail a loss of credibility. 
Given the clear mandate of the Eurosystem, the Governing Council has to take into account 
the increased inflation risks. At the current juncture, the sharp increase of inflation – due to 
high oil and food prices, along with some signs of increase in manufactured goods prices and 
service  prices  and  ongoing  strong  monetary  expansion  –  is  of  particular  concern  to  the 
Governing Council. We will do our utmost and we stand ready to act in a timely manner to 
make sure that it does not affect inflation expectations. This objective automatically entails 
that we will not tolerate the emergence of second round effects. 
But let me deliver some more insights into the Governing Council’s decision making process: 
Yesterday, we cross-checked the information from our economic and monetary analysis. The 
sharp rise in inflation has fully confirmed our assessment that the outlook for prices is subject 
to  upside  risks.  By  contrast,  the  economic  fundamentals  have  remained  sound  and  the 
medium-term  outlook  is  still  favourable,  with  real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  being  expected  to 
grow at around trend potential in 2008, albeit subject to downside risks. 
Monetary policymakers have two eyes: one for the baseline scenario and the other for the 
associated risks and uncertainty. In that respect, ongoing financial market turbulence and a 
continuing  reappraisal  of  risks  increases  the  uncertainty  surrounding  our  inflationary 
assessment. 
All in all, our analysis has shown that we face upside risks to price stability and downside 
risks to economic growth and – in my view – that both risks have augmented in comparison 
to the September staff projections. At the same time, uncertainty is at the current juncture 
somewhat  larger  than  usual  in  prognostic  terms.  As  you  know,  these  staff  projections  are 
part of our information gathering process. They are set up and made public four times a year, 
hence the next projection will be available in December. 
In  a  period  of  rapidly  moving  markets,  our  September  assumptions  are  likely  to  undergo 
substantial changes. So far, oil prices have continued to hike and reached new record highs. 
Moreover,  the  euro  has  continued  to  appreciate  since  September,  both  vis-à-vis  the  US-
Dollar,  but  also  against  a  broad  number  of  trading  partners.  The  recent  financial  market 
turmoil is likely to decelerate the pace of economic growth in several economies – although 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
the global economy as a whole is still on a growth path. Thus, the driving forces tend to shift 
from the USA to Asia and Europe (which, by the way, will help to reduce global imbalances). 
Given these changes in the euro area’s economic environment, chances are that both upside 
risks to inflation and downside risks to output growth will continue to remain elevated in the 
next few weeks. Given this outlook, we have reiterated that we will act in a firm and timely 
manner in order to deliver price stability over the medium term. 
At this point, it is of particular relevance that second-round effects are avoided and that long-
term inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with price stability. 
Appropriate measures of price stability 
But back to my original subject: The aspect of volatile energy and food prices has been taken 
up in this conference from another angle – one that is highly relevant to monetary policy: the 
question of the appropriate measure of inflation (see: Mark A. Wynne: How should central 
banks define price stability). 
The  appropriate  treatment  of  supply  shocks  by  central  banks  with  price  stability  as  their 
primary goal certainly does not mean that monetary policy should counteract each and every 
short-term  price  shock.  Owing  to  the  well-known  time  lags  of  monetary  policy,  this  would 
introduce  short-term  volatility  in  interest  rates  and  output  that  might  be  regarded  as 
unwelcome. 
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  takes  this  aspect  into  account  in  that  it 
defines price stability as a medium-term objective. This, in my view, goes a long way towards 
reaping  the  postulated  benefits  of  defining  price  stability  by  core  measures  rather  than  by 
headline  figures,  while  avoiding  some  of  the  pitfalls  of  targeting  core  inflation,  such  as 
communication  and  accountability 
in  excluded 
components, e.g. oil prices. 
Thus,  I  completely  agree  with  Mark  A.  Wynne  when  he  states  that  measures  of  headline 
inflation  at  the  consumer  level  are  best  for  defining  price  stability.  In  addition,  Mark  A. 
Wynne’s  paper  touches  upon  a  highly  relevant  issue  in  the  context  of  asset  prices  when 
discussing the treatment of owner-occupied housing. 
Here,  I  have  repeatedly  argued  that  the  euro  area  HICP  should  include  owner-occupied 
housing. But, just as an aside, I would prefer not to discuss this issue in the context of asset 
prices. Including owner-occupied housing using the net acquisition approach is focused on 
housing as a consumption good, not as an asset price. 
issues  or  observable 
inflation 
trend 
2.2 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
Central banks as liquidity providers 
As  Forrest  Capie  already  outlined  in  his  survey  paper,  financial  stability  has  been  a  key 
defining  historical  feature  of  central  banking.  Central  banks  acted  and  continue  to  act  as 
lender of last resort, that is, as the institution which comes to the aid of markets in times of a 
liquidity shortage. This is still relevant nowadays, as the recent financial market turbulence 
has shown. 
The  Eurosystem  has  been  called  on  as  a  “liquidity  provider  of  last  resort”.  And  our 
interventions have had a stabilising effect on euro money markets. Our focus in this respect 
is not on helping financial markets per se or even on bailing-out distressed institutions, but on 
alleviating  tensions  in  financial  markets  where  malfunctioning  would  pose  a  serious 
macroeconomic risk to achieving our objective of price stability. 
Therefore, contrary to comments that are sometimes made to the effect that the central bank 
can  do  more,  namely  reduce  interest  rates  below  the  level  normally  deemed  appropriate, 
there are good economic reasons why we make a strict separation between the two aspects 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 3
of liquidity provision, on the one hand, and signals about our general policy stance, on the 
other.  In  short,  a  central  bank’s  interest  rate  policy  is  the  wrong  instrument  for  combating 
tensions in money markets. 
While  our  liquidity  providing  operations  helped  to  smooth  difficult  market  conditions,  the 
financial turbulence of the past few months will certainly offer the opportunity for some further 
debate on the appropriate lessons to be learnt for monetary policy in general. 
increases  unrelated 
financial  system.  Undoubtedly,  asset  price 
Monetary policy and asset prices 
One  aspect  that  has  been  debated  throughout  the  past  couple  of  years  and  also  at  this 
conference – a debate which, at a first guess, will intensify – is the question of the proper role 
of asset prices in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Boom-bust  cycles  in  asset  prices  with  ensuing  liquidity  crises  are  of  special  concern  for 
monetary policymakers for (at least) two reasons. First, to the extent that changes in asset 
prices  affect  consumption  and  investment,  there  might  be  spill-over  effects  on  inflation. 
Second, the transmission of monetary policy actions to the economy works largely through 
the 
to  economic 
fundamentals have the potential to reduce the overall welfare of an economy and should be 
avoided wherever possible. 
However,  there  remains  the  question  of  how  far  this  is  feasible  and  how  it  should  be 
achieved.  Financial  market  imbalances  are  often  the  result  of  underlying  structural 
imbalances which should be appropriately addressed through policies other than monetary 
policy. In particular, regulatory measures represent an obvious candidate for suitable ex ante 
action. 
Nonetheless, it has been argued that central banks might prevent asset price bubbles in the 
first place by responding to asset prices over and above their expected effect on inflation. 
Yet, such an approach requires that the central bank is able to identify an asset price bubble 
in real time, which means it has to resolve the “diagnosis problem” and must be able to affect 
the path of asset prices, which means it has to overcome the “policy problem”. In general, 
central banks will not be able to recognise bubbles in real time with a sufficient degree of 
confidence. This applies even more forcefully to the early stages of a bubble, when monetary 
policy should be most effective. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  the  proposal  that  central  banks  should  respond  very  cautiously  to 
asset prices because there is some probability that a bubble might be at the root of asset 
prices  changes.  According  to  this  argument,  a  central  bank  that  leans  against  changes  in 
asset prices would buy some insurance in case a bubble is on the way. 
However,  this  argument  remains  debatable.  First,  raising  interest  rates  to  prevent  bubbles 
does not come without cost. Second, it is far from obvious whether monetary policy is at all 
effective in dealing with bubbles. Even a comparatively sharp rise in interest rates may be no 
more than a minor nuisance to investors; on the other hand, such an upsurge in the policy 
rate may already be a serious burden in other parts of the economy. Moreover, it might entail 
the risk of not meeting our traditional primary objectives. Making an insurance analogy, the 
premium may simply be too costly relative to its benefit. In other words, the adoption of other 
policy measures may be more appropriate in times of potential bubbles. 
In summary, in a world in which asset price bubbles are very difficult to identify and in which 
it may be very costly in terms of inflation and output to lean against asset prices, the central 
bank should remain focused on price stability. 
Of course, this does not mean that central banks are ignorant of what is going on in financial 
and real estate markets. At the Bundesbank, as at other central banks, we observe a large 
number  of  indicators  which  give  us  an  idea  of  financial  imbalances  and  also  help  us  to 
predict macroeconomic conditions. Just to remind you, in the Eurosystem we have a strategy 
that deliberately takes account of credit and monetary factors. 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2007
Financial stability, central banks and banking supervision 
Let me finally elaborate on some of the policy implications or lessons learnt from the recent 
financial turmoil. During the past few months, it has proved useful that central banks play an 
active  part  in  banking  supervision.  Access  to  supervisory  information  has  enabled  us  to 
respond  quickly  and  appropriately  to  the  liquidity  demands  of  the  banking  system.  As  I 
pointed out earlier, the lessons learnt for central banks are more on the regulatory side. It is 
not  an  issue  of  reassessing  our  general  monetary  strategy.  Some  of  the  most  pressing 
regulatory issues include the role of credit rating agencies, the treatment of off-balance-sheet 
conduits, and valuation issues of highly complex structured products. 
This conference has taken up another hot topic in banking supervision and financial stability, 
that  is  appropriate  regulation  in  a  world  of  cross-border  banking  institutions  (see:  Mattias 
Persson: Achieving financial stability in a world of cross-border institutions). He has given us 
a comprehensive overview of the challenges and open issues in the supervision and crisis 
management of cross-border banking groups in Europe. I would agree with the bottom line of 
Mattias Persson’s paper: supervisory structures should follow market structures and not vice 
versa. 
Acknowledging that cross-border banking structures in Europe will increase in the future, I 
also see possible future challenges in supervision arrangements. But, at the current juncture, 
I would argue that the structures currently in place are appropriate to dealing with regulatory 
issues. And, as these structures are relatively new, they should be allowed to demonstrate 
their functionality and to evolve over time rather than being subject to a quantum leap to a 
unified European supervisory agency. This is even more important as many key issues are 
not  yet  resolved  yet,  for  example,  the  harmonisation  of  deposit  insurance  schemes  or 
bankruptcy laws. 
Conclusions 
3  
All this makes clear, that important challenges for monetary policy remain and they certainly 
will influence the future design of central banks. Arguably, the current design of central banks 
has  been  influenced  by  academic  research  more  than  that  of  any  other  public  institution. 
Thus,  conferences  like  this,  in  which  policy  makers  and  academics  come  together  to 
exchange  views,  are  of  utmost  importance.  Thus,  let  me  thank  once  again  all  participants 
involved and the organisers. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 5
