Y V Reddy: Some perspectives on the Indian economy 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Peterson Institute 
for International Economics, Washington DC, 17 October 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman and Friends, 
I  am  greatly  honored  by  the  invitation  extended  to  me  by  the  Peterson  Institute  for 
International Economics to share some of my thoughts on the Indian economy. This meeting 
is reflective of the recently observed growing interest and confidence in the status and future 
of  the  Indian  economy.  Today,  I  intend  to  submit  that,  since  independence  in  1947,  the 
Indian economy has been on the whole, on a path of gradually self-accelerating development 
accompanied by reasonable stability. There has been a noticeable acceleration in the level of 
confidence and the performance of the Indian economy in the 21st century. The short-term 
prospects, despite recent global uncertainties, continue to be, by and large, benign for India. 
Over  the  medium-term,  there  are  several  challenges  and  opportunities.  The  public  policy 
may,  therefore,  have  to  specially  focus  on  these  aspects  in  order  to  meet  not  only  the 
expectations  of  the  global  community,  but  also,  and  more  importantly,  the  aspirations  of 
millions  of  people  in  India,  particularly  the  poor  and  the  underprivileged  from  diverse 
backgrounds. 
Self-accelerating growth since independence and in the new millennium 
I.  
Before independence, during the first five decades of the 20th century (1900-01 to 1946-47), 
the annual average growth performance of the Indian economy was dismal, averaging 0.9 
per cent. Since the beginning of the planned development process in the early 1950s, the 
GDP growth displayed a self-accelerating tendency reaching a level of around 6.0 per cent in 
the 1990s. Two exceptions during this phase were the dipping of the growth rate in the 1970s 
to 2.9 per cent and during the crisis year of 1991-921 when the growth was as low as 1.4 per 
cent.  The  record  of  inflation  in  India  has  been  satisfactory.  Since  independence,  the 
wholesale  price  inflation,  on  an  average  basis,  was  above  15  per  cent  in  five  out  of  fifty 
years. In thirty six years, out of fifty, inflation was in single digit and on most occasions high 
inflation was due to external and domestic shocks such as sharp rise in fuel and food prices.  
In the new millennium, the GDP growth rate has accelerated further averaging 6.9 per cent 
during the seven-year period 2000-01 to 2006-07, while the growth rate in the last four years 
(2003-04  to  2006-07)  averaged  8.6  per  cent.  In  2005-06  and  2006-07,  it  has  grown  still 
higher  at  9.0  per  cent  and  9.4  per  cent,  respectively.  During  this  phase  too,  in  one  year 
during 2002-03, the growth rate dipped to 3.8 per cent due to drought conditions in several 
parts of the country leading to significant fall in agricultural production. The acceleration of 
growth  during  this  period  has  been  accompanied  by  a  significant  moderation  in  volatility, 
especially  in  industry  and  services  sectors.  It  is  also  useful  to  recognize  that  the  growth 
process  in  India  is  mainly  driven  by  domestic  consumption,  which  contributed,  on  an 
average, to almost two-thirds of the overall demand. 
The strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent 
increase in gross domestic investment rates from 24.3 per cent of GDP in 2000-01 to 33.8 
per cent in 2005-06 and domestic saving rate from 23.7 per cent in 2000-01 to 32.4 per cent 
during 2005-06. It may also be noted that over 90 per cent of investment during this period 
was financed by domestic savings. 
                                                 
1  
In India, the fiscal year is from April 1 to March 31. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 1
In  tandem  with  acceleration  in  the  rate  of  investment  in  the  economy,  there  has  been 
evidence of a pickup in productivity and efficiency of capital use. Some of the recent studies 
relating to India have indicated an increase in total factor productivity (TFP) growth in recent 
years. For instance, Rodrick and Subramanian, in an IMF working paper of 2004, point out 
that  India  seems  to  have  achieved  a  large  amount  of  productivity  growth  from  relatively 
modest reforms.  
While growth rate has picked up in the new millennium, the inflation rate has moderated to 
still lower levels ensuring price stability. Since 2000-01, annual inflation rate as measured by 
Wholesale Price  Index  has  averaged  below  5  per  cent,  despite  the  recent  oil  price  shock. 
The highest annual inflation, on a point-to-point basis recorded in the new millennium was for 
2002-03  (6.5  per  cent)  when  the  growth  rate  was  adversely  affected  due  to  drought 
conditions  in  some  parts  of  the  country.  More  recently,  the  wholesale  price  inflation  after 
reaching  a  peak  6.7  per  cent  at  end-January  2007,  mainly  due  to  food  price  shocks,  has 
edged downwards to 3.3 per cent during the week ended September 29, 2007.  
The high growth in GDP has been accompanied in more recent years by increase in the rate 
of growth of money supply and non-food credit, mainly reflecting the surge in capital flows 
into  the  country.  These  developments  led  to  a  lively  debate  on  the  evidence  of  signs  of 
overheating in the economy, but subsequent moderation in inflation has been helpful. The 
Reserve  Bank  contributed  to  the  moderation  through  timely  and  appropriate  monetary 
measures  and  also  certain  prudential  measures  such  as  enhancing  the  provisioning 
requirements  and  risk  weights  for  select  categories  of  banking  assets,  namely  consumer 
finance, real estate, housing and capital market exposures. These measures were needed to 
specifically address the issues of rapid credit growth and the possible impact of asset price 
movements on banks’ balance sheets in a bank-dominated financial sector.  
The  fiscal  management  in  the  country  has  significantly  improved  with  the  combined  fiscal 
deficit of Centre and States declining from 9.5 per cent of GDP in 2000-01 to 6.4 per cent in 
2006-07. However, combined public debt of the Centre and the States, as proportion of GDP, 
remains high at over 70 per cent.  
India’s external sector has become resilient with the current account deficit being maintained 
at very modest levels after a few years of marginal surplus during 2001-02 to 2003-04. The 
value  of  both  exports  and  imports,  in  US  dollar  terms,  have  tripled  by  2006-07  relative  to 
2000-01, and the current account deficit remained modest at 1.1 per cent of GDP or below 
for four out of the seven years, while there was a surplus in the remaining years. India is, de 
facto, a very open economy with value of trade in goods and services having increased from 
29.2 per cent of GDP in 2000-01 to 49.2 per cent in 2006-07. On account of strong capital 
flows, there have been accretions to foreign exchange reserves, which, at US $ 251.3 billion 
as on October 5, 2007 are currently higher than the external debt (US$ 165.4 billion at end-
June 2007). Exchange rate displayed a two-way movement for most of the period, both in 
nominal and real terms. 
Financial sector reforms, which were introduced in the early 1990s as a part of the structural 
adjustment  and  economic  reforms  programme,  had  a  profound  impact  on  the  Indian 
economy.  With  a  view  to  making  the  reform  measures  mutually  reinforcing,  the  reform 
process  was  carried  forward  by  adopting  the  international  best  practices  through  a 
consultative  and  gradual  process.  While  the  main  objective  was  the  enhancement  of 
efficiency in the financial system, a concomitant goal was to impart stability in a new market 
oriented environment.  
Major  policy  measures  in  the  financial  sector  relate  to  phased  reductions  in  statutory  pre-
emption  like  cash  reserve  ratio  and  statutory  liquidity  requirement  and  deregulation  of 
interest rates on deposits and advances, except for a select segment. The Reserve Bank has 
endeavoured  to  establish  an  enabling  regulatory  framework  supported  by  effective 
supervision,  and  development  of  legal,  technological  and  institutional  infrastructure.  The 
regulatory  norms  with  respect  to  capital  adequacy,  income  recognition,  asset  classification 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2007
and provisioning have progressively moved towards convergence with the international best 
practices.  The  Basel-II  capital  adequacy  framework  is  being  implemented  in  a  phased 
manner with effect from March 2008. The diversification of ownership of banking institutions 
has been enabled through private shareholding in the public sector banks and competition 
has been enhanced with the entry of private and foreign entities and foreign capital in the 
financial  sector.  The  banking  sector  reform  combines  a  comprehensive  reorientation  of 
competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner.  
Development  of  financial  markets  received  a  strong  impetus  from  financial  sector  reforms 
since  the  early  1990s. The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  engaged  in  developing,  widening  and 
deepening  of  money,  government  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets  along  with  the 
development  of  an  efficient  and  robust  payments  and  settlement  system.  A  wide  range  of 
regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  was  introduced  in  a  planned  manner  over  a  period  to 
improve  the  efficiency  of  these  financial  markets.  These  included  development  of  market 
micro  structure,  removal  of  structural  bottlenecks,  introduction  and  diversification  of  new 
players and instruments, free pricing of financial assets, relaxation of quantitative restrictions, 
better  regulatory  regimes, 
trading 
infrastructure,  clearing  and  settlement  practices  and  greater  transparency.  On  the  whole, 
equity markets, forex markets and government securities markets are in alignment with the 
global best standards, while early development of a healthy corporate debt market has been 
accorded highest priority. 
introduction  of  new 
improvement 
technology, 
in 
Short-term prospects 
II. 
For  monetary  policy  purposes,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  its  Annual  Policy  Statement  of  April 
2007, placed the real GDP growth for 2007-08 at around 8.5 per cent, assuming no further 
escalation in international crude prices and barring domestic or external shocks. The policy 
preference  for  the  period  ahead  is  strongly  in  favour  of  price  stability  and  well-anchored 
inflation expectations with the endeavour being to contain inflation close to 5.0 per cent in 
2007-08  and  to  the  range  of  4.0-4.5  per  cent  over  the  medium-term.  For  the  purpose  of 
monetary  policy  formulation,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  projected  the  growth  rate  of  money 
supply (M3) at around 17.0-17.5 per cent and non-food credit at 24-25 per cent for 2007-08 
in  consonance  with  the  outlook  on  growth  and  inflation.  While  retaining  the  stance  of  the 
monetary  policy,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  flagged  the  importance  of  financial  stability  in  the 
First Quarter Review of the Annual Policy Statement issued on July 31, 2007.  
According to the Central Statistical Organisation, during the first quarter of the financial year 
2007-08 (April-June, 2007), the real GDP grew by 9.3 per cent on the back of 9.1 per cent in 
the last quarter of 2006-07 (January- March, 2007) and 9.6 per cent in the first quarter of the 
previous  year  (April-June,  2006).  The  wholesale  price  index  inflation,  on  a  year-on-year 
basis, decreased to 3.3 per cent during the week ended September 29, 2007 from 5.4 per 
cent a year ago. The consumer price index inflation (for industrial workers) was 7.3 per cent 
in August 2007 as against 6.3 per cent during the same period of the previous year. As on 
September 28, 2007, the broad money (M3) supply growth was 21.0 per cent on a year-on-
year basis (19.0 per cent last year). Though non-food credit growth was buoyant and broad 
based, it declined to 22.1 per cent as on September 28, 2007 from 31.6 per cent a year ago. 
While exports continued the momentum, imports rose sharply, leading to widening of trade 
deficit to US $ 32.5 billion during April-August 2007 as against US $ 19.9 billion during the 
same  period  last  year.  Currently,  the  cash  reserve  ratio,  which  is  the  unremunerated 
reserves kept with the Reserve Bank, is at 7.0 per cent, while the repo rate and reverse repo 
rate are at 7.75 per cent and 6.0 per cent, respectively. 
Risks  from  global  developments  continue  to  persist,  especially  in  the  form  of  inflationary 
pressures, re-pricing of risks by financial markets and the possibility of a downturn in some of 
the asset classes. Excessive leveraging has enhanced the vulnerability of the global financial 
system.  Large  changes  in  liquidity  conditions  are  obscuring  the  assessment  of  risks,  with 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 3
attendant  uncertainty.  Given  the  flux  associated  with  both  the  financial  markets  and  the 
monetary policy settings globally, India cannot be immune to these developments. The policy 
challenge for the Reserve Bank, now, is to manage the current transition to a higher growth 
path while containing inflationary pressures and focusing on financial stability. Contextually, 
we in the Reserve Bank are, therefore, maintaining enhanced vigilance to be able to respond 
appropriately  to  the  prevailing  heightened  uncertainties  in  global  financial  as  well  as 
monetary conditions.  
We expect to provide a detailed assessment of the evolving macroeconomic conditions as 
part of the Mid-Term Review of the Annual Policy due to be released on October 30, 2007. 
The  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Monetary  Policy  is  meeting  on  October  25,  2007, 
which will, as usual, provide valuable guidance for the Review.  
Medium term: challenges and prospects 
III.  
For a large and diverse economy like India, with a low per capita income that is undergoing 
structural transformation in a highly uncertain global environment, challenges for public policy 
are manifold. I would like to focus on a few challenges that have been articulated in the latest 
Annual  Report  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  –  a  document  that  reflects  the  views  of  the 
distinguished members of our Board of Directors on the subject. 
First,  the  recent  upward  trends  in  global  prices  of  major  food  items  have  significant 
implications  for  the  domestic  agricultural  sector  and  overall  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability. Although the share of agriculture in overall GDP has declined over the years from 
around 38 per cent in 1980-81 to less than 20 per cent in 2006-07, agriculture continues to 
play  an  important  role  in  the  Indian  economy.  The  proportion  of  the  population  dependent 
upon  agriculture  remains  large  at  almost  60  per  cent.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  however,  the 
growth  of  the  agricultural  sector  has  been  low  as  well  as  volatile.  Volatility  in  agricultural 
production has implications not only for overall growth but also, as the experience of 2006-07 
amply demonstrated, for maintaining low and stable inflation. Thus, enhanced growth of the 
agricultural sector is vital for ensuring food security, poverty alleviation, price stability, overall 
inclusive  growth  and  sustainability  of  growth  of  the  overall  economy.  In  view  of  significant 
weather and price risks, appropriate risk mitigation policies would need to be put in place to 
provide relief to distressed farmers as well as enhance the efficiency of production. In view of 
small and fragmented farm holdings, the population dependent upon agricultural activity will 
have  to  increasingly  rely  on  non-farm  sources  of  income  in  future.  Thus,  diversification 
towards activities such as poultry, food processing and other rural industries will be critical for 
the betterment of living standards in rural areas. 
Second,  the  absence  of  modern  infrastructure  and  shortage  of  skilled  manpower  are  the 
most  critical  barriers  to  the  growth.  It  is  imperative  to  augment  the  existing  infrastructure 
facilities, particularly roads, ports and power to provide an enabling environment for industry 
to prosper. There has been a mixed progress in the infrastructure sector so far. The telecom 
sector has witnessed a significant progress as reflected in the growing mobile telephony in 
the  country.  Railways  and  ports  have  also  witnessed  some  improvement.  However,  the 
progress  remains  less  than  adequate  in  other  sectors  such  as  power,  coal,  water,  roads, 
urban infrastructure and rural infrastructure. Despite having significant reserves of coal – the 
third largest in the world, after the United States and China – the country continues to suffer 
from inadequate domestic supplies and problems of coal shortages. Further reforms in the 
mining  sector  may  be  necessary  to  increase  the  mining  growth  and  ease  constraints  on 
industrial growth. Higher electricity generation will need assured fuel supplies. The demand 
for coal, thus, is expected to be significantly higher than that in the recent past. Again, urban 
infrastructure is a vital element in the growth process. Studies show that increase in the size 
of  urban  agglomerations  is  associated  with  large  productivity  gains.  Strengthening  the 
management  of  cities  will  enable  improvement  in  urban  infrastructure  facilities  across  the 
country.  
4 
 BIS Review 118/2007
that  cannot  be  adequately  provided  by 
Third,  the  impressive  performance  of  the  services  sector  was  attributable  largely  to  the 
availability of skilled and cheap labour. However, the sustained acceleration in the services 
and  the  manufacturing  activities  is  leading  to  incipient  pressures  on  the  supply  of  good 
quality skilled labour. While its demographic profile places the country favourably in terms of 
manpower  availability,  there  are  reports  of  emerging  talent  supply  shortages.  Only  10  per 
cent  of  the  relevant  age  group  is  getting  enrolled  into  institutions  of  higher  learning  in  the 
country as compared with 40-50 per cent in most developed countries. Less than a half of 
the secondary school students pursue college education. Moreover, the quality of education 
imparted in several colleges and universities in the country remains less than adequate to 
meet  the  emerging  demands  for  skilled  professionals.  In  order  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the 
demographic dividend, substantial expansion and reforms in the education sector would be 
needed on an urgent basis. 
Fourth,  reprioritisation  of  expenditures  towards  social  sectors  and  improvement  in  the 
operational  efficiency  of  the  Government  are  essential.  Higher  public  spending  on  social 
services, coupled with a focus on quality, would improve the social infrastructure and provide 
productivity gains. For the current growth momentum to be entrenched on a durable basis, 
there is a need for a significant enhancement in capacity building and in the availability of 
public  services 
the  private  sector.  Fiscal 
empowerment  would  allow  higher  outlays  for  boosting  infrastructure  and  social  sector 
spending,  which  will  have  a  beneficial  impact  on  domestic  productivity,  growth  and 
employment.  
Finally,  to  meet  the  growing  credit  demand,  banks  need  to  widen  their  deposit  base.  In 
particular, banks need to bring more and more financially excluded people within their fold. 
Apart from helping the low-income households, this would also help strengthen the financial 
deepening and provide necessary resources to the banks to expand credit and sustain high 
economic growth. 
The  Indian  economy  has  some  inherent  strengths,  both  quantifiable  and  non-quantifiable, 
which would facilitate meeting the challenges ahead. Apart from the quantifiable strengths, 
which  I  alluded  to  earlier,  in  my  view,  there  are  certain  “not  easily  quantifiable  strengths”, 
which India possesses. A vast pool of science and technology graduates and the millions of 
people  who  are  familiar  with  English  language  are  some  of  the  sources  of  strength.  The 
familiarity  with  multiple  languages  in  India  prepares  the  people  to  adapt  better  to  multi-
cultural situations, making it easier for them to adapt in an international environment. As the 
largest  democracy  of  the  world,  the  existence  of  a  free  Press  provides  some  insurance 
against  excesses  and  makes  the  Governments  at  all  levels  more  accountable  than 
otherwise. Impressive are the initiatives of many States for empowerment of women, which 
help  them  to  defend  their  rights  and  gain  greater  self-esteem  and  control  over  their  own 
personal lives and social relationships. The political climate in India is characterized by what 
may  be  termed  as  political  system  stability,  despite  the  coalition  cabinets  and  periodic 
elections,  both  at  the  Centre  and  in  several  States.  India’s  "demographic  dividend"  for  the 
next  few  decades  is  seen  as  an  advantage  provided  the  prerequisites  such  as  effective 
mechanisms  for  skill-upgradation  and  sound  governance  to  realise  the  dividend  are  put  in 
place.  In  terms  of  business  environment,  the  impressive  growth  coupled  with  the  market 
orientation of the economy has been a bottom-up exercise. This trend is perhaps reflective of 
a  penchant  for  innovation  by  the  already  large  and  growing  entrepreneurial  class  in  India, 
imbued with professionalism and seeking to be globally competitive. 
To  conclude,  one  of  the  determining  factors  in  India,  for  moving  forward,  would  be  the 
reforms  in  governance,  that  are  critical  to  strengthen  State  capacity  to  perform  its  core 
functions  more  effectively  and  equitably.  The  business  community  has  a  vital  stake  in  the 
improvement of the quality of governance by empowering the public institutions, since good 
governance can prevail only when public institutions function fairly and efficiently.  
BIS Review 118/2007 
 5
Let me conclude by thanking the Institute, in particular Dr. Arvind Subramanian, for giving me 
the privilege of making the presentation. 
I now eagerly look forward to the interactive session that follows. 
Thank you. 
 6 
  BIS Review 118/2007
 BIS Review 118/2007 
  7
 8 
 BIS Review 118/2007
BIS Review 118/2007 
  9
 10 
  BIS Review 118/2007
