Ben S Bernanke: Monetary policy under uncertainty 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the 32nd Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis, (via videoconference), 19 October 2007.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Bill Poole's career in the Federal Reserve System spans two decades separated by a quarter 
of a century. From 1964 to 1974 Bill was an economist on the staff of the Board's Division of 
Research and Statistics. He then left to join the economics faculty at Brown University, where 
he  stayed  for  nearly  twenty-five  years.  Bill  rejoined  the  Fed  in  1998  as  president  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, so he is now approaching the completion of his second 
decade in the System.  
As it happens, each of Bill's two decades in the System was a time of considerable research 
and  analysis  on  the  issue  of  how  economic  uncertainty  affects  the  making  of  monetary 
policy, a topic on which Bill has written and spoken many times. I would like to compare the 
state of knowledge on this topic during Bill's first decade in the System with what we have 
learned during his most recent decade of service. The exercise is interesting in its own right 
and has the added benefit of giving me the opportunity to highlight Bill's seminal contributions 
in this line of research. 
Developments during the first period: 1964-74 
In  1964,  when  Bill  began  his  first  stint  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  policymakers  and 
researchers were becoming increasingly confident in the ability of monetary and fiscal policy 
to  smooth  the  business  cycle.  From  the  traditional  Keynesian  perspective,  which  was  the 
dominant viewpoint of the time, monetary policy faced a long-term tradeoff between inflation 
and unemployment that it could exploit to keep unemployment low over an indefinitely long 
period  at  an  acceptable  cost  in  terms  of  inflation.  Moreover,  improvements  in  econometric 
modeling  and  the  importation  of  optimal-control  methods  from  engineering  were  seen  as 
having the potential to tame the business cycle. 
Of  course,  the  prevailing  optimism  had  its  dissenters,  notably  Milton  Friedman.  Friedman 
believed that the inherent complexity of the economy, the long and variable lags with which 
monetary  policy  operates,  and  the  political  and  bureaucratic  influences  on  central  bank 
decisionmaking  precluded  policy  from  fine  tuning  the  level  of  economic  activity.  Friedman 
advocated the use of simple prescriptions for monetary policy – such as the k percent money 
growth rule – which he felt would work reasonably well on average while avoiding the pitfalls 
of attempting to fine-tune the economy in the face of pervasive uncertainty (Friedman, 1968).  
Other economists were more optimistic than Friedman about the potential benefits of activist 
policies.  Nevertheless,  they  recognized  that  the  fundamental  economic  uncertainties  faced 
by  policymakers  are  a  first-order  problem  and  that  improving  the  conduct  of  policy  would 
require  facing  that  problem  head  on.  During  this  decade,  those  researchers  as  well  as 
sympathetic  policymakers  focused  especially  on  three  areas  of  economic  uncertainty:  the 
current  state  of  the  economy,  the  structure  of  the  economy  (including  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy), and the way in which private agents form expectations about 
future economic developments and policy actions. 
Uncertainty about the current state of the economy is a chronic problem for policymakers. At 
best, official data represent incomplete snapshots of various aspects of the economy, and 
even then they may be released with a substantial lag and be revised later. Apart from issues 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 1
of  measurement,  policymakers  face  enormous  challenges  in  determining  the  sources  of 
variation in the data. For example, a given change in output could be the result of a change 
in aggregate demand, in aggregate supply, or in some combination of the two. 
As  most  of  my  listeners  know,  Bill  Poole  tackled  these  issues  in  a  landmark  1970  paper, 
which  examined  how  uncertainty  about  the  state  of  the  economy  affects  the  choice  of  the 
operating instrument for monetary policy (Poole, 1970). In the simplest version of his model, 
Bill  assumed  that  the  central  bank  could  choose  to  specify  its  monetary  policy  actions  in 
terms  of  a  particular  level  of  a  monetary  aggregate  or  a  particular  value  of  a  short-term 
nominal interest rate. If the central bank has only partial information about disturbances to 
money  demand  and  to  aggregate  demand,  Bill  showed  that  the  optimal  choice  of  policy 
instrument depends on the relative variances of the two types of shocks. In particular, using 
the  interest  rate  as  the  policy  instrument  is  the  better  choice  when  aggregate  demand  is 
relatively  stable  but  money  demand  is  unstable,  with  money  growth  being  the  preferable 
policy instrument in the opposite case. 
Bill was also a pioneer in formulating simple feedback rules that established a middle ground 
between  the  mechanical  approach  advocated  by  Friedman  and  the  highly  complex 
prescriptions  of  optimal-control  methods.  For  example,  Bill  wrote  a  Federal  Reserve  staff 
paper  titled  "Rules-of-Thumb  for  Guiding  Monetary  Policy"  (Poole,  1971).  Because  his 
econometric  analysis  of  the  available  data  indicated  that  money  demand  was  more  stable 
than aggregate demand, Bill formulated a simple rule that adjusted the money growth rate in 
response to the observed unemployment rate. Bill was also practical in noting the pitfalls of 
mechanical adherence to any particular policy rule; in this study, for example, he emphasized 
that the proposed rule was not intended "to be followed to the last decimal place or as one 
that is good for all time [but] . . . as a guide – or as a benchmark – against which current 
policy may be judged" (p. 152). 
Uncertainty about the structure of the economy also received attention during that decade. 
For  example,  in  his  elegant  1967  paper,  Bill  Brainard  showed  that  uncertainty  about  the 
effect  of  policy  on  the  economy  may  imply  that  policy  should  respond  more  cautiously  to 
shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist. Brainard's analysis has often 
been cited as providing a theoretical basis for the gradual adjustment of policy rates of most 
central banks. Alan Blinder has written that the Brainard result was "never far from my mind 
when I occupied the Vice Chairman's office at the Federal Reserve. In my view, . . . a little 
stodginess at the central bank is entirely appropriate" (Blinder, 1998, p. 12). 
A key source of uncertainty became evident in the late 1960s and 1970s as a result of highly 
contentious debates about the formation of expectations by households and firms. Friedman 
(1968)  and  Ned  Phelps  (1969)  were  the  first  to  highlight  the  central  importance  of 
expectations formation, arguing that the private sector's expectations adjust in response to 
monetary  policy  and  therefore  preclude  any  long-run  tradeoff  between  unemployment  and 
inflation. However, Friedman and Phelps retained the view that monetary policy could exert 
substantial  effects  on  the  real  economy  over  the  short  to  medium  run.  In  contrast,  Robert 
Lucas  and  others  reached  more  dramatic  conclusions,  arguing  that  only  unpredictable 
movements in monetary policy can affect the real economy and concluding that policy has no 
capacity to smooth the business cycle (Lucas, 1972; Sargent and Wallace, 1975). Although 
these studies highlighted the centrality of inflation expectations for the analysis of monetary 
policy,  the  profession  did  not  succeed  in  reaching  any  consensus  about  how  those 
expectations evolve, especially in an environment of ongoing structural change.  
Developments during the second period: 1998-2007 
Research  during  the  past  ten  years  has  been  very  fruitful  in  expanding  the  profession's 
understanding  of  the  implications  of  uncertainty  for  the  design  and  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2007
On the issue of uncertainty about the state of the economy, Bill's work continues to provide 
fundamental insights regarding the choice of policy instrument. Money demand relationships 
were relatively stable through the 1950s and 1960s, but, in the wake of dramatic innovations 
in  banking  and  financial  markets,  short-term  money-demand  relationships  became  less 
predictable, at least in the United States. As a result, consistent with the policy implication of 
Bill's  1970  model,  the  Federal  Reserve  (like  most  other  central  banks)  today  uses  the 
overnight interbank rate as the principal operating target of monetary policy. Bill's research 
also raised the possibility of specifying the operating target in other ways, for example, as an 
index  of  monetary  or  financial  conditions;  and  it  provided  a  framework  for  evaluating  the 
usefulness of intermediate targets – such as core inflation or the growth of broad money – 
that are only indirectly controlled by policy. 
More generally, the task of assessing the current state of the economy remains a formidable 
challenge. Indeed, our appreciation of that challenge has been enhanced by recent research 
using  real  time  data  sets.1  For  example,  Athanasios  Orphanides  has  shown  that  making 
such real-time assessments of the sustainable levels of economic activity and employment is 
considerably  more  difficult  than  estimating  those  levels  retrospectively.  His  2002  study  of 
U.S. monetary policy in the 1970s shows how mismeasurement of the sustainable level of 
economic activity can lead to serious policy mistakes.  
On a more positive note, economists have made substantial progress over the past decade 
in developing new econometric methods for summarizing the information about the current 
state of the economy contained in a wide array of economic and financial market indicators 
(Svensson and Woodford, 2003). Dynamic-factor models, for example, provide a systematic 
approach  to  extracting  information  from  real-time  data  at  very  high  frequencies.  These 
approaches have the potential to usefully supplement more informal observation and human 
judgment  (Stock  and  Watson,  2002;  Bernanke  and  Boivin,  2003;  and  Giannone,  Reichlin, 
and Small, 2005). 
The past decade has also witnessed significant progress in analyzing the policy implications 
of  uncertainty  regarding  the  structure  of  the  economy.  New  work  addresses  not  only 
uncertainty about the values of specific parameters in a given model of the economy but also 
uncertainty about which of several competing models provides the best description of reality. 
Some  research  has  attacked  those  problems  using  Bayesian  optimal-control  methods 
(Brock,  Durlauf,  and  West,  2003).  The  approach  requires  the  specification  of  an  explicit 
objective function as well as of the investigator's prior probabilities over the set of plausible 
models  and  parameter  values.  The  Bayesian  approach  provides  a  useful  benchmark  for 
policy  in  an  environment  of  well-defined  sources  of  uncertainty  about  the  structure  of  the 
economy,  and  the  resulting  policy  prescriptions  give  relatively  greater  weight  to  outcomes 
that have a higher probability of being realized. In contrast, other researchers, such as Lars 
Hansen and Thomas Sargent, have developed robust-control methods – adapted from the 
engineering  literature  –  that  are  aimed  at  minimizing  the  consequences  of  worst-case 
scenarios, including those with only a low probability of being realized (Hansen and Sargent, 
2007). 
An  important  practical  implication  of  all  this  recent  literature  is  that  Brainard's  attenuation 
principle  may  not  always  hold.  For  example,  when  the  degree  of  structural  inertia  in  the 
inflation  process  is  uncertain,  the  optimal  Bayesian  policy  tends  to  involve  a  more 
pronounced  response  to  shocks  than  would  be  the  case  in  the  absence  of  uncertainty 
(Söderstrom,  2002).  The  concern  about  worst-case  scenarios  emphasized  by  the  robust-
control approach may likewise lead to amplification rather than attenuation in the response of 
the optimal policy to shocks (Giannoni, 2002; Onatski and Stock, 2002; and Tetlow and von 
zur Muehlen, 2002). Indeed, intuition suggests that stronger action by the central bank may 
                                                 
1   A recent example is Faust and Wright (2007). 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 3
be warranted to prevent particularly costly outcomes.  
Although  Bayesian  and  robust-control  methods  provide  insights  into  the  nature  of  optimal 
policy, the corresponding policy recommendations can be complex and sensitive to the set of 
economic models being considered. A promising alternative approach – reminiscent of the 
work  that  Bill  Poole  did  in  the  1960s  –  focuses  on  simple  policy  rules,  such  as  the  one 
proposed by John Taylor, and compares the performance of alternative rules across a range 
of possible models and sets of parameter values (Levin, Wieland, and Williams, 1999 and 
2003). That approach is motivated by the notion that the perfect should not be the enemy of 
the good; rather than trying to find policies that are optimal in the context of specific models, 
the  central  bank  may  be  better  served  by  adopting  simple  and  predictable  policies  that 
produce reasonably good results in a variety of circumstances.  
Given  the  centrality  of  inflation  expectations  for  the  design  of  monetary  policy,  a  key 
development  over  the  past  decade has  been  the  burgeoning  literature on  the  formation  of 
these  expectations  in  the  absence  of  full  knowledge  of  the  underlying  structure  of  the 
economy.2 For example, considerations of how the public learns about the economy and the 
objectives  of  the  central  bank  can  affect  the  form  of  the  optimal  monetary  policy  (Gaspar, 
Smets, and Vestin, 2006; Orphanides and Williams, 2007). Furthermore, when the public is 
unsure about the central bank's objectives, even greater benefits may accompany achieving 
a stable inflation rate, as doing so may help anchor the public's inflation expectations. These 
studies also show why central bank communications is a key component of monetary policy; 
in a world of uncertainty, informing the public about the central bank's objectives, plans, and 
outlook can affect behavior and macroeconomic outcomes (Bernanke, 2004; and Orphanides 
and Williams, 2005). 
Conclusion 
Uncertainty – about the state of the economy, the economy's structure, and the inferences 
that  the  public  will  draw  from  policy  actions  or  economic  developments  –  is  a  pervasive 
feature  of  monetary  policy  making.  The  contributions  of  Bill  Poole  have  helped  refine  our 
understanding  of  how  to  conduct  policy  in  an  uncertain  environment.  Notably,  we  now 
appreciate that policy decisions under uncertainty must take into account a range of possible 
scenarios about the state or structure of the economy, and those policy decisions may look 
quite different from those that would be optimal under certainty. For example, policy actions 
may be attenuated or augmented relative to the "no-uncertainty benchmark," depending on 
one's judgments about the possible outcomes and the costs associated with those outcomes. 
The  fact  that  the  public  is  uncertain  about  and  must  learn  about  the  economy  and  policy 
provides  a  reason  for  the  central  bank  to  strive  for  predictability  and  transparency,  avoid 
overreacting to current economic information, and recognize the challenges of making real-
time assessments of the sustainable level of real economic activity and employment. Most 
fundamentally, our discussions of the pervasive uncertainty that we face as policymakers is a 
powerful reminder of the need for humility about our ability to forecast and manage the future 
course of the economy.  
References 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). "Fedspeak", speech delivered at the Meetings of the American 
Economic Association, San Diego, January 3, 
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/200401032/default.htm. 
                                                 
2   Bernanke (2007) and the references therein. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2007
_________ (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting", speech delivered at the 
Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer 
Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10, 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070710a.htm. 
Bernanke, Ben S., and Jean Boivin (2003). "Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment", 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 525-46. 
Blinder,  Alan  S.  (1998).  Central  Banking  in  Theory  and  Practice.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT 
Press. 
Brainard,  William  C.  (1967).  "Uncertainty  and  the  Effectiveness  of  Policy",  American 
Economic Review, vol. 57 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 411-25.  
Brock,  William  A.,  Steven  N.  Durlauf,  and  Kenneth  D.  West  (2003).  "Policy  Analysis  in 
Uncertain Economic Environments", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 
1), pp. 235-322. 
Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2007). "Comparing Greenbook and Reduced Form 
Forecasts Using a Large Realtime Dataset (259 KB PDF)," paper presented at "Real-Time 
Data Analysis and Methods in Economics," a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia, April 19-20, 
www.phil.frb.org/econ/conf/rtconference2007/papers/Paper-Wright.pdf. 
Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy", American Economic Review, vol. 58 
(March), pp. 1-17. 
Gaspar, Vitor, Frank Smets, and David Vestin (2006). "Adaptive Learning, Persistence, and 
Optimal Monetary Policy", Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4 (April-May), 
pp. 376-85. 
Giannone,  Domenico,  Lucrezia  Reichlin,  and  David  Small  (2005).  "Nowcasting  GDP  and 
Inflation: The Real-Time Informational Content of Macroeconomic Data Releases", Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2005-42. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, October, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2005. 
Giannoni,  Marc  P.  (2002).  "Does  Model  Uncertainty  Justify  Caution?  Robust  Optimal 
Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model", Macroeconomic Dynamics, vol. 6 (February), 
pp. 111-44. 
Hansen,  Lars  Peter,  and  Thomas  J.  Sargent  (2007).  Robustness.  Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press. 
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John Williams (1999). "Robustness of Simple Monetary 
Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty", in Taylor, John, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 263-99. 
_________  (2003).  "The  Performance  of  Forecast-Based  Monetary  Policy  Rules  under 
Model Uncertainty", American Economic Review, vol. 93 (June), pp. 622-45. 
Lucas,  Robert  E.,  Jr.  (1972).  "Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money",  Journal  of 
Economic Theory, vol. 4 (June), pp.103-24. 
Onatski,  Alexei,  and  James  H.  Stock  (2002).  "Robust  Monetary  Policy  under  Model 
Uncertainty  in  a  Small  Model  of  the  U.S.  Economy",  Macroeconomic  Dynamics,  vol.  6 
(March), pp. 85-110. 
Orphanides, Athanasios (2002). "Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation", American 
Economic Review, vol. 92 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 115-20. 
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005). "Inflation Scares and Forecast-based 
Monetary Policy", Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 8 (April), pp. 498-527. 
BIS Review 118/2007 
 5
_________ (2007). "Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge", Journal of Monetary 
Economics, vol. 54 (July), pp. 1406-35. 
Phelps, Edmund S. (1969). "The New Microeconomics in Inflation and Employment Theory", 
American Economic Review, vol. 59 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 147-60. 
Poole,  William  (1970).  "Optimal  Choice  of  Monetary  Policy  Instruments  in  a  Simple 
Stochastic Macro Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (May), pp. 197-216. 
_________ (1971). "Rules-of-Thumb for Guiding Monetary Policy", in Open Market Policies 
and Operating Procedures – Staff Studies. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, pp. 135-89. 
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace (1975). "'Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary 
Instrument,  and  the  Optimal  Money  Supply  Rule",  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  83 
(April), pp. 241-54. 
Söderstrom, Ulf (2002). "Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters", Scandinavian Journal 
of Economics, vol. 104 (February), pp. 125-45. 
Stock,  James,  and  Mark  Watson  (2002).  "Forecasting  Using  Principal  Components  from  a 
Large  Number  of  Predictors",  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  vol.  97 
(December), pp. 1167-79. 
Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (2003). "Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy", 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 691-720. 
Tetlow,  Robert,  and  Peter  von  zur  Muehlen  (2001).  "Robust  Monetary  Policy  with 
Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?" Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 25 (June), pp. 911-49. 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2007
