Zamani Abdul Ghani: Malaysia’s role as an international Islamic financial 
centre 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Takaful  Summit  2007  "Mainstreaming  Islamic  Finance: 
Malaysia as International Islamic Financial Centre", London, 1 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I am indeed pleased to be invited to this International Takaful Summit 2007 hosted by the 
Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  of  Malaysia  (IBFIM).  The  occasion  of  this  forum  is 
indeed  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  regulators,  industry  practitioners  and  investors  to 
discuss  recent  developments  and  key  issues  in  Islamic  finance,  particularly  on  takaful.  It 
would also serve as an excellent platform in providing greater awareness on the innovative 
products  and  services  available  in  the  takaful  and  retakaful  market.  IBFIM  has  certainly 
played  an  important  role  in  harnessing  the  critical  talent  needs  of  the  Islamic  financial 
industry, not only in Malaysia, but has extended its role internationally as evidenced by this 
inaugural  Summit  in  Europe.  This  Summit  also  signifies  an  important  strategic  shift  in  our 
promotional  approach  for  the  takaful  and  retakaful  industry.  This  shift  is  towards  a  more 
active initiative to heighten competitive elements and to draw greater foreign participation in 
this industry where  Malaysia has a strong edge, and we are positive that this industry will 
grow stronger with a win-win partnership with the right partners.  
My  remarks  today  will  dwell  on  three  areas.  The  first  is  to  share  with  you  selected  major 
developments  in  the  Malaysian  Islamic  finance  industry  that  signify  the  vast  potential  for 
continued strong growth of Islamic banking and takaful in Malaysia. I will then endeavour to 
provide some highlights on how Malaysia has strengthen its position as a preferred platform 
for global takaful and retakaful activities, within a broader aspiration for Malaysia to be one of 
the  key  international  Islamic  financial  centres.  Finally,  I  will  present  some  areas  in  the 
development of global Islamic finance, including takaful and retakaful, where Malaysia can 
play a major role. 
II.  
Significant developments in Malaysian economy and Islamic financial industry 
A  decade  after  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  the  Malaysian  economy  including  its  financial 
system is at its strongest position. With this growth, Malaysia has greater economic flexibility 
to  shift  to  new  areas  of  growth  and  thus  sustain  the  development  momentum.  Economic 
growth has been achieved with relative price stability, low unemployment and strong external 
balances. The level of savings remains high at 37 percent as a percentage to the GDP while 
the  level  of  external  reserves  remains  strong  at  nearly  USD100  billion.  GDP  per  capita  at 
current  prices  has  increased  to  about  USD  6,000  in  2006.  Malaysia  has  also  taken 
advantage  of  globalization  to  strengthen  its  economic  and  financial  relationships  with  the 
major trading blocs across the globe. In 2006, the total value of the external trade exceeded 
for  the  first  time  the  RM1  trillion  mark.  Malaysian  investment  abroad  has  also  grown  in 
strength.  Foreign  direct  investment  has  been  sustained,  particularly  into  the  new  areas  of 
growth.  The  private  sector  continues  as  the  main  driver  of  economic  growth  for  the  fifth 
consecutive year, while the public sector plays a supportive role.  
While Malaysia continues to attract investment, both domestic and foreign from the traditional 
sectors, new sectors such as the services, manufacturing and oil and gas sectors are gaining 
in importance. The services sector such as information technology services, shared services 
and outsourcing as well as financial services, in particular Islamic finance, has increased its 
market share.  
BIS Review 129/2007 
 1
The  Malaysian  Islamic  banking  system  saw  strong  performance  in  2006  with  higher 
profitability, and has remained well capitalized. Islamic banking assets amounting to about 
USD34 billion or 13 percent in terms of market share. The takaful sector stands at USD1.7 
billion,  with  the  assets  growing  at  an  average  rate  of  27%  per  annum  since  the  past  five 
years. 
The performance of the Malaysian Islamic capital market has been equally encouraging. Our 
capital market has depth and breadth that is supported by an active secondary bond market. 
Islamic corporate bonds, or sukuk, now amount to USD36 billion or 48 percent of the total 
outstanding  corporate  bond  issuance  in  Malaysia.  The  multinationals  and  multi-lateral 
institutions such as the International Finance Corporation and the World Bank has begun to 
tap  funds  from  the  Malaysian  capital  market  by  issuing  ringgit  sukuks,  thus  increasing  the 
market's depth and diversity. The Malaysian private debt securities market, both conventional 
and Islamic, is now the second largest market in Asia, the largest being Japan. 
More than a quarter century of experience in Islamic finance has set the foundation for the 
Malaysian  Islamic  finance  industry  to  evolve  into  a  competitive  industry,  providing  efficient 
platform for innovation. Increased foreign-local collaboration has further accelerated the pace 
of  innovation.  It  is  within  the  last  five  years,  in  fact,  that  major  innovative  initiatives  have 
taken  place.  In  2005,  Malaysia  became  the  first  jurisdiction  in  the  world  to  put  in  place  a 
Shariah-compliant deposit insurance scheme. We do have a comprehensive range of Islamic 
financing  instruments  under  both  fixed  and  floating  rate  product  structures  to  meet  the 
demand of consumers.  
MIFC initiatives and Malaysia as takaful & retakaful hub 
III.  
Malaysia is also well-positioned to provide the linkages through Islamic finance to support the 
increasing  flow  of  investment  between  Asia  and  other  parts  of  the  world,  particularly  the 
Middle  East.  While  world  trade  has  on  average  expanded  by  10%  over  the  period  2001-
2005, Asia's trade with the Middle East has increased on average by 24%. More than half of 
the exports from the Gulf States go to Asia and more than one-fifth of its imports are from 
Asia.  Situated  centrally  in  the  Asian  time  zone,  Malaysia  offers  to  serve  as  an  investment 
gateway to the region, specializing in Islamic fund and wealth management, and providing a 
platform for the issuance of sukuks. For this, we have put in place a comprehensive Islamic 
financial  system  that  includes  Islamic  banking,  takaful  and  Islamic  money  and  capital 
markets. These activities are adequately supported by the legal, human capital, Shariah and 
regulatory infrastructure, a diversity of players and a wide range of products and services.  
To further promote the international dimension of Islamic finance in Malaysia, the Malaysian 
Government  has  also  launched  an  initiative  known  as  the  Malaysia  International  Islamic 
Financial  Centre  or  MIFC.  The  MIFC  initiative  is  specifically  undertaken  by  the  collective 
efforts of the country's financial and market regulators, including Bank Negara Malaysia, the 
Securities  Commission,  the  Labuan  Offshore  Financial  Services  Authority  (LOFSA)  and 
Bursa  Malaysia,  together  with  the  participation  of  the  industry  representing  the  banking, 
takaful  and  capital  markets.  It  is  aimed  towards  building  greater  intermediation  linkages 
between  the  East  Asian  and  Middle  East  regions  which  will  in  turn,  further  expand  inter-
regional trade and cross border investment flows.  
As part of the MIFC initiatives, local and foreign financial institutions are allowed to establish 
International  Islamic  Banks  (IIBs),  International  Takaful  Operator  (ITOs),  as  well  as 
International Currency Business Unit (ICBUs) to undertake international currency business in 
Islamic  finance  with  non-residents  through  either  a  locally  incorporated  entity  or  a  branch. 
This entity is granted attractive tax packages in terms of a 10-year tax holiday. The Foreign 
Investment  Committee rules have been further  relaxed to allow 100 percent foreign equity 
ownership in these financial institutions. In continuously creating an enabling environment for 
the efficient functioning of the MIFC, the Malaysian commercial banks and investment banks 
are allowed to establish International Currency Business Units (ICBUs) to carry out Islamic 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2007
banking business under their existing entities. Foreign institutions are also allowed to take up 
to 49% of the equity of domestic takaful operators and Islamic banks. 
To  enhance  the  delivery  system,  an  executive  committee  of  key  government  officials, 
financial  regulators  and  industry  players  has  been  set  up  for  the  effective  and  efficient 
implementation of the MIFC initiatives. Among others, an "executive green lane" has been 
accorded  to  expedite  applications  by  expatriates  for  long-term  employment  passes  with 
multiple entry visas. To allow greater operational flexibility within the Shariah parameters, the 
Islamic financial system adopt a conducive stance on Shariah interpretations and practices, 
consistent  with  its  international  dimensions.  It  mutually  recognizes  and  accommodates  the 
various juristic reasoning that has been approved by recognized Shariah advisers. 
To accord better access to MIFC information, Bank Negara Malaysia has launched the MIFC 
Portal at www.mifc.com as the primary source of comprehensive on-line information on the 
MIFC.  It  provides  information  on  the  latest  initiatives,  incentives  and  developments  in  the 
MIFC,  and  enables  convenient  access  to  application  forms,  procedures  and  guidelines 
related to entrance and participation in the MIFC.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  received  positive  response  from  the  local  and  foreign  financial 
institutions to participate in the MIFC, particularly in the establishment of International Islamic 
Banks  (IIBs),  International  Takaful  Operators  (ITOs),  as  well  as  International  Currency 
Business  Units  (ICBUs)  of  Islamic  banks  and  takaful  operators.  To  date,  14  financial 
institutions have been granted approval to set up ICBUs. 
Critical areas of contribution – Malaysia's role 
IV.  
In  this  last  segment  of  my  address  this  morning,  allow  me  to  share  several  key  areas  in 
Islamic finance where Malaysia can play major roles, particularly by capitalizing on various 
initiatives and incentives under MIFC banner.  
The  first  area  is  retakaful.  The  Malaysian  Government  has  focused  efforts  towards  the 
development  of  the  retakaful  sector  in  complementing  the  encouraging  growth  and 
expansion of the takaful industry. This is a critical response to the challenge of the shortage 
of strong and credible retakaful capacity globally which poses an impediment to the growth 
momentum  of  the  takaful  sector.  Besides  fulfilling  the  need  for  retakaful  support  from  the 
takaful  operators,  and  reducing  the  industry's  dependency  on  conventional  reinsurance 
support, the retakaful operators will also play key roles in enhancing the technical knowledge 
in  the  market,  as  well  as  in  promoting  product  development  and  innovation  in  the  takaful 
industry. For this, Bank Negara Malaysia has taken a strategic move to further strengthen 
Malaysia's edge as a retakaful hub by inviting strong and qualified applicants, both local and 
foreign, to make Malaysia as their platform for retakaful activities. A strong takaful market in 
Malaysia,  supported  by  the  experience  and  expertise  of  several  niche  players  in  retakaful 
operation  during  the  last  two  decades,  would  provide  a  strong  base  for  a  global  retakaful 
operation to flourish.  
Under  this  initiative,  qualified  local  and  foreign  applicants  will  be  allowed  to  conduct  both 
Malaysian  and  international  currencies  retakaful  business.  Flexibility  is  accorded  to  the 
retakaful operators to conduct its retakaful business in Malaysia by way of an incorporated 
either entity or a branch. Foreign applicants are also welcomed to conduct retakaful business 
in  Malaysia  through  a  joint-venture  with  Malaysian  companies.  It  is  anticipated  that  this 
measure would serve as a catalyst in our efforts for Malaysia to become the centre for takaful 
and  retakaful  business  through  the  establishment  of  a  significant  number  of  strong  and 
reputable retakaful operators. 
For  the  potential  investors  in  these  ventures,  I  wish  to  highlight  that  Malaysia  maintains  a 
liberal  foreign  exchange  administration  regime  where  investors  are  freely  able  to  obtain 
ringgit  and  foreign  currencies  to  fund  their  investments  in  Malaysia.  Please  do  forget  the 
foreign exchange administration rules introduced during the 1997/1998 Asian financial crisis. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 3
We have even further relaxed the foreign exchange administration rules to allow resident and 
foreign  issuers  to  raise  foreign  currency-denominated  bonds,  including  Islamic  bonds  or 
sukuks.  Foreigners  investing  in  Malaysia  are  also  free  to  hedge  with  onshore  banks  their 
committed  flow  of  funds  such  as  the  repatriation  of  investment  proceeds,  dividends  and 
profits  from  Malaysia  as  well  as  the  purchase  of  ringgit  assets  in  Malaysia.  There  is  free 
mobility of inward and outward movement of funds relating to both foreign direct investment 
and portfolio capital investments.  
The second key area that Malaysia can play a major role is sukuk issuance, origination 
and  trading.  The  sukuk  market  serves  as  an 
important  platform,  complementing 
conventional  bonds  in  enhancing  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  for  the  mobilization  and 
allocation of funds within national financial systems and in the international financial system. 
Significant  economic  growth  is  taking  place  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  following 
privatization  and  implementation  of  infrastructure  projects.  This  opens  up  tremendous 
opportunities 
for  government  entities,  multinational  corporations  and  multinational 
development institutions to raise funds through the issuance of sukuks to meet their financing 
needs. The phenomenal demand for sukuks has been spurred by the high levels of surplus 
savings  and  reserves  in  Asia  and  Gulf  regions  coupled  with  a  rising  demand  for  Islamic 
banking instruments from a growing Muslim population in Europe. Apart from the issuance of 
a sovereign Islamic sukuk by the Government  of Malaysia, and the governments  of Dubai 
(UAE), Qatar, Bahrain and Pakistan, an increase in number of multilateral agencies are also 
issuing sukuks to finance development projects. These developments signify the key role of 
the sukuk market in facilitating the economic development process.  
Significant progress has in fact been achieved in the development of the Malaysian sukuk 
market,  underpinned  by  strong  collaboration  among  the  Government,  regulatory  agencies, 
players  and  investors.  By  early  2007,  Malaysia  accounted  for  67  per  cent,  or  about  two-
thirds,  of  the  global  outstanding  sukuk  amounting  to  about  USD47  billion.  Malaysia  is 
important  for  the  global  sukuk  market,  not  only  because  it  represents  the  largest  sukuk 
market in terms of outstanding size, but also in terms of number of issuance which signifies a 
strong edge in market vibrancy.  
Malaysia's strong performance in sukuk activities can be attributed to several key factors that 
may be similarly leveraged by other issuers and players participating in the Malaysian Islamic 
capital market. These are: 
(i) 
Firstly, Malaysia has the strong edge by having an efficient platform for sukuk 
issuance  and  trading  activities  covering  the  infrastructure  and  facilitative  rules 
that  contribute  towards  efficient  price  discovery  and  shorter  time  to  market.  The 
established  legal,  regulatory  and  Shariah  frameworks  in  the  Islamic  financial 
infrastructure  are  key  competitive  advantage  for  Malaysia.  These  initiatives  have 
been  reinforced  by  the  supporting  financial  infrastructure  including  the  settlement 
and bond information systems. There is no restriction on the use of proceeds, ability 
to  use  international  rating  services,  ability  to  hedge  positions  and  ability  to  swap 
issuance proceeds into foreign currencies. Submission for foreign currency sukuks 
from  qualified  issuers  with  at  least  a  single  “A-”  credit  rating  would  be  deemed 
approved upon proper filing of documents with the Securities Commission. 
Secondly,  Malaysia  also  has  an  edge  in  product  innovation.  In  2006,  the 
Malaysian  market  continued  to  embrace  innovative  elements  with  the  launch  of 
sukuk  using  concepts  such  as  Mudharabah,  Musyarakah  and  Ijarah.  Landmark 
issuance such as exchangeable sukuk Musyarakah by Khazanah Nasional Berhad, 
marked the world's first issue of its kind, incorporating full convertibility features. The 
derivatives market has also been developed with the introduction of Islamic currency 
swap and Islamic profit rate swap. An important enabling factor for innovations is the 
availability  of  a  pool  of  experienced  talent  and  resources.  In  the  parallel  financial 
system existing in Malaysia, the talent and expertise for sukuk and Islamic financial 
(ii) 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2007
activities does not derive solely from the 9,000 staff of Islamic financial institutions. It 
is  also  well  supported  by  the  workforce  of  domestic  and  foreign  conventional 
financial  institutions.  Leveraging  of  expertise  is  critical  in  pioneering  innovative 
products so as to ensure that the product design and structure, as well as the risk 
management aspects, are thoroughly addressed. 
Moving forward, several initiatives were already in place to further support the international 
dimension of the Malaysian sukuk market, such as tax incentives and customized forex rules. 
For  example,  Malaysia  has  further  liberalized  our  foreign  exchange  administrative  rules  to 
allow multilateral financial institutions, multinational and national corporations to issue both 
ringgit and non-ringgit denominated instruments in our capital market. A number of legal and 
regulatory  requirements  have  been  further  customized  to  drive  down  the  cost  of  sukuk 
issuance. These measures are key MIFC measures and incentives and these include:  
(i) 
Profits  and  dividends  received  by  non-resident  investors  from  holding  of  RM  and 
non RM Islamic instruments issued in Malaysia are exempted from withholding tax; 
A  special  purpose  vehicle  (SPV)  for  Islamic  financing  purposes  via  the  Islamic 
capital market is not required to comply with the administrative procedures under the 
Income Tax Act 1967; 
A company that establishes a SPV is given a tax deduction on the issuance cost of 
the Islamic securities incurred by the SPV; 
Tax deduction on issuance cost for all Islamic securities approved by the Securities 
Commission; and 
Stamp  duty  exemption  for  10  years  on  instruments  relating  to  Islamic  securities 
under the MIFC. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Third area is outsourcing, insourcing and white labeling activities. Malaysia's more than 
two  decades  of  experience  in  takaful  operation  and  product  design  can  be  systematically 
structured as a complete solution to be offered to new takaful operators. Takaful operators in 
other  jurisdictions  may  leverage  on  the  services  and  experience  of  the  Malaysian  Islamic 
finance  and  takaful  industry  by  outsourcing  certain  operational  functions,  such  as  product 
design  and  investment  activities,  thereby  allowing  them  to  focus  their  currently  limited 
resources to important tasks of expanding the business. Strategic alliance by Malaysians can 
also be forged with takaful operators in other jurisdictions to provide total product solution in 
the form of white labeling arrangement. I hope more Islamic financial institutions will join over 
700  shared  services  and  outsourcing  companies  currently  operating  in  Malaysia  based  on 
the  country's  proven  political,  social  and  economic  stability,  IT  and  physical  infrastructure, 
deep pool of skilled work force, liberal foreign exchange rules, proficiency in languages and 
government continued commitment1.  
At this stage, I wish to inform that Malaysia has developed a credible, robust and effective 
anti money laundering and counter the financing of terrorism or AMLCFT regime. A group of 
international assessors had in early 2007 assessed Malaysia's AMLCFT regime, both at the 
financial  and  non-financial  sectors  as  well  as  on  the  conventional  and  Islamic  financial 
institutions. This assessment is based on the new and more robust FATF or Financial Action 
Task  Force  40+9  Recommendations.  So  far,  globally,  40  countries  have  been  evaluated 
based on this new FATF Assessment Template. The assessment on Malaysia was ratified at 
the  APG's  (Asia  Pacific  Group  on  Money  Laundering)  July  2007  Annual  Meeting  in  Perth. 
                                            
1   A.T. Kearney's ranked Malaysia as the 3rd most attractive outsourcing centre, after India and China, in the 
Global Services Location Index for three years (2004, 2005 and 2007. There was no ranking in 2006). Frost 
and  Sullivan  ranked  Malaysia  as  the  5th  most  attractive  SSO  location  after  India,  China,  Ireland  and 
Singapore  in  2007.  Frost  and  Sullivan  identified  Malaysia's  niche  areas  in  the  energy,  finance  and  logistic 
sectors. 
BIS Review 129/2007 
 5
The  full  report  on  the  assessment  on  Malaysia  is  published  in  the  APG's  website 
www.apgml.org. The report shows that Malaysia has performed very well. Malaysia received 
only one (1) non-compliance (NC) and is among three (3) countries that have achieved zero 
(0)  or  a  single  NC  grading.  Malaysia  is  also  among  3  countries  that  had  achieved  a  LC 
(largely complied) grading with no country receiving full compliance grading on customer due 
diligence  assessment.  Notwithstanding  this  good  performance,  we  will  continue  to  ensure 
that  Malaysia  collaborate  with  the  international  community  to  stamp  out  the  activities  of 
money launderers, terrorist finances or other criminal elements.  
Conclusion 
V.  
In the decade to the present, Malaysia has significantly transformed our financial sector. The 
restructuring,  consolidation  and  reform  of  the  financial  sector  have  strengthened  the 
capacity,  flexibility  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  there  has  been 
substantial deepening in several segments of the financial system, including those in takaful, 
the  sukuk  market  and  Islamic  banking.  Malaysia  has  also  continued  to  progressively 
liberalize its already open financial system to further enable the free flow of funds into and 
out  of  the  system.  This  transformation  has  opened  up  the  potential  for  a  range  of  new 
opportunities  for  participation  in  the  Islamic  financial  sector  in  Malaysia  and  for  facilitating 
greater financial flows within the region and from other regions. 
In conclusion, I wish to invite the business and financial communities attending this Summit 
to capitalize on this event to arrange for business meetings on the sideline of this Summit. 
Please  do  explore  potential  strategic  alliance  opportunities  in  Islamic  finance,  especially  in 
takaful and retakaful with your Malaysian counterparts. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2007
