Emsley D Tromp: Tourism in the Netherlands Antilles from a 
macroeconomic perspective 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  VERA  Conference,  Willemstad, 
8 November 2007. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
It is with pleasure that I accept the invitation to address you this afternoon. Let me start by 
wishing you a fruitful and productive seminar. Ladies and gentlemen, the theme of this VERA 
conference  as  you  know  is  “Accountancy  and  Tourism”.  While  instinctively  there  does  not 
seem to be a relationship, at least in the conventional sense, between these two sectors as 
the topic of this conference indicates, a careful analysis may lead you to conclude otherwise. 
Usually  when  we  deal  with  the  topic  of  accountancy,  on  the  one  hand,  we  discuss  the 
standards, rules, and regulations in this professional field. The tourism industry, on the other 
hand, is usually discussed in terms of its economic impact, marketing efforts, and recent and 
future  developments.  Nevertheless,  these  two  sectors  have  an  important  interrelationship. 
Firms in the tourism sector rely on accounting and tax services provided by the accounting 
firms.  The  tourist  sector  is  also  becoming  an  important  client  base  for  the  accounting 
profession. By enhancing their mutual understanding, it will allow both sectors to better serve 
each  other.  It  will  also  become  possible  to  better  structure  one’s  services  to  meet  both 
present and future needs. 
A growing tourism industry generates more business opportunities for the accounting firms. 
Therefore, I do applaud the initiative of the VERA to organize this conference and to discuss 
the developments within the tourism industry, and their implications for the accounting sector. 
Today, I would like to add to this discussion by reviewing with you the developments within 
the tourism industry in the Netherlands Antilles from a macro-economic perspective.  
First, I will deal with the developments on the global and the regional levels, followed by a 
discussion of the developments in the tourism sector in the Netherlands Antilles. Secondly, I 
will make an attempt to shed some lights on the challenges and opportunities the sector is 
facing  and  the  necessary  macro-economic  environment  conducive  for  the  growth  of  the 
tourism sector. Last, I will discuss the outlook for the tourism sector. 
Tourism,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  a  thriving  industry.  As  the  world  economy  expands, 
consumers are willing to spend an increasing share of their income on leisure activities like 
travel. On a global level, the tourism sector has indeed benefited from the world economic 
growth  of  recent  years.  According  to  the  World  Tourism  Organization  846  billion  persons 
around the world traveled for leisure or business in 2006. This represents a growth of 5.4% 
compared to 2005. (Figure 1 presents the development in tourism arrivals on a global level 
over  the  period  1990-2005.)  During  the  past  15  years,  the  tourism  sector  has  been 
expanding, except for North America. This lack of growth in the North American market, may 
be the result of the 9-11 attack and its aftermath, and natural disasters that occurred during 
the period 2000-2005. In spite of that, the tourism industry remains one of the largest and 
fastest growing sectors of the global economy.  
One of the key characteristics of the tourism industry is its contribution to foreign exchange 
earnings.  The  World  Tourism  Organization  estimates  that  the  worldwide  receipts  from 
international tourism reached US$733 billion in 2006. International tourism receipts increased 
by US$57 billion in 2006. (In Figure 2, the development in international tourism receipts is 
presented for the period 2002 – 2006).  
BIS Review 134/2007 
 1
For many countries, foreign exchange receipts from tourism are an important contributor to 
economic development. It is widely acknowledged that the sector contributes to the economy 
in  terms  of  job  creation,  investments,  and  income  for  the  government.  In  addition,  the 
industry has indirect spin-off effects across all other sectors of the economy. Therefore, the 
tourism sector is an important development tool especially for developing economies. 
Because  tourism  contributes  to  economic  development  and  growth,  national  economies 
compete  against  each  other  to  obtain  a  larger  share  in  international  tourist  arrivals  by 
exploiting their competitive advantages. In fact, traditional tourist destinations, such as North 
America,  Western  Europe,  Southern  Europe,  and  the  Caribbean,  are  facing  increased 
competition  from  emerging  tourist  destinations  including  Asia  and  the  Pacific,  Central  and 
Eastern  Europe,  Africa,  and  the  Middle  East.  The  increase  in  the  number  of  tourist 
destinations is a result of the higher demand for tourist destinations. Fueled by the strength 
of the global economy, demand has emanated from new markets, such as China, India, and 
Russia.  (Figure  3  shows  the  market  shares  in  international  stay-over  tourist  arrivals  by 
region.) 
The Caribbean has continued to experience growth in international tourist arrivals. In most 
Caribbean  economies,  tourism  expansion  has  played  a  key  role  in  economic  growth  and 
development. According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, the Caribbean is the most 
tourism intensive region in the world. Evidence also suggests that in all Caribbean countries, 
tourism  is  a  highly  labor  intensive  sector  that  provides  opportunities  for  many  small  and 
medium enterprises that produce or supply products and services to the industry.  
The impact of tourism is especially strong in the retail trade, hotels and restaurants, and the 
construction sectors. In most Caribbean economies it is a major generator employment and 
foreign  exchange.  According  to  the  World  Travel  and  Tourism  Council,  tourism  now 
contributes to approximately 15 percent of the Caribbean’s Gross Domestic Product and 16 
percent of total employment.  
However,  growth  in  the  Caribbean  tourism  industry  has  been  lagging  behind  the  global 
expansion  largely  because  of  the  small  scale and  vulnerability  of  Caribbean  economies  to 
external shocks. In fact, growth in 2006 was partially offset by damages to the infrastructure 
that were caused by hurricanes in 2005. Moreover, problems in attracting additional airlift to 
the  region  also  negatively  influenced  the  regional  expansion  of  tourist  arrivals  in  2006. 
Tourism  sector  growth  in  the  Caribbean  region  has  also  been  hampered  by  some 
weaknesses in the investment climate in the region. Because the tourism industry is a major 
source  of  income  for  most  Caribbean  countries,  any  threats  to  the  sustainability  of  the 
industry  must  be  addressed  in  a  timely  way.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  to  maintain  a  good 
investment climate. 
Ladies and gentlemen, a good investment climate will lead to investment, jobs creation, and 
expansion of economic activities. More investments in the tourism industry will not only raise 
activities in the sector, but will also stimulate additional investments in related sectors, and 
hence contribute to economic expansion. Therefore, it is crucial that the investment climate 
give the correct signals and encourage high quality and more productive private investment.  
With  regard  to  the  investment  climate,  Caribbean  economies  face  more  or  less  similar 
weaknesses. These weaknesses include: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
A qualitative mismatch in the labor market 
Inefficient public sector 
Infrastructure deficiencies 
Complex taxation systems 
Crime 
Macro-economic instability, and 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2007
Natural disasters 
- 
Needless to say, the economies in the region should address these issues if they want to 
enhance their investment climate and thereby stimulate growth of the tourism sector and the 
economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Netherlands Antilles is no exception in the Caribbean. Similar to 
most countries in the region, tourism is one of the most important sectors in the Netherlands 
Antilles’ economy.  
In 2006, the Netherlands Antilles received about 2.6 million tourist visitors – stay-over and 
cruise – which is a growth of 36 percent compared to the year 2000. Visitors to St. Maarten 
represented 73 percent of total visitors in the Netherlands Antilles, followed by Curaçao with 
22 percent and Bonaire with 5 percent. (Figure 4 shows the development in stay-over tourist 
in Curacao, St. Maarten and Bonaire.) As illustrated, the number of stay-over visitors in the 
Netherlands  Antilles  has  increased  on  average  by  1.3  percent  during  the  past  six  years. 
Meanwhile, Curacao’s stay-over tourism has risen on average by about 3 percent per year 
during this period. 
The number of cruise tourists has also been growing in the Netherlands Antilles. (Figure 5 
presents the development in cruise tourism for each island for the period 2000-2006.) The 
cruise  tourism  market  is  the  largest  in  St.  Maarten,  which  accounts  for  79  percent  of  total 
cruise tourism, followed by Curaçao with 18 percent and Bonaire with 3 percent. 
The tourism industry contributes directly and indirectly to the economy. Tourism expenditures 
stimulate  economic  activity  and  create  additional  business  sales,  employment,  and 
household income, and government revenues. (In Figure 6, the share of tourism receipts in 
total foreign exchange revenues is depicted.) Tourism receipts account for 39 percent of the 
total foreign exchange revenues from the exports of goods and services. (Figure 7 presents 
the share in foreign exchange revenues from tourism in Curacao, St. Maarten and Bonaire.) 
St.  Maarten  has  the  largest  share  of  foreign  exchange  receipts  from  tourism,  followed  by 
Curaçao and Bonaire. Tourism is the main foreign exchange earner, whereas bunkering, and 
re-exports by the free-zone generate about 15 percent of the foreign exchange earnings.  
(Figure 8 illustrates the development in foreign exchange revenues from tourism in Curacao, 
St.  Maarten  and  Bonaire  over  the  period  2000-2006.)  Foreign  exchange  revenues  from 
tourism over the period 2000-2006 have increased on all islands of the Netherlands Antilles 
in the past six years.  
Tourism has an influence on several sectors in the economy, but is felt mostly in the hotels & 
restaurants and wholesale & retail sectors.  
Based  on  the  weights  of  tourism-related  activities  in  these  sectors  we  estimated  that  the 
tourism  industry  contributes  approximately  7  percent  to  Gross  Domestic  Product  of  the 
Netherlands Antilles. Meanwhile, tourism accounts for about 6 percent of GDP in Curaçao.  
According to estimates of the World Travel & Tourism Council, the tourism industry accounts 
for  approximately  4,500  jobs,  representing  8.3  percent  of  total  employment  in  Curaçao. 
Tourism’s share of total employment is greater than its share in gross value added. This is 
because on average, tourism tends to be more labor-intensive than other forms of economic 
activity.  
When  tourism-related  businesses  purchase  goods  and  services  from  other  domestic 
companies, we speak of the indirect impact of tourism on the economy. Moreover, individuals 
employed  at  the  hotels,  restaurants,  and  other  tourism-related  businesses  will  spend  their 
income locally, which will create more jobs and spending in the economy. The combination of 
the direct and indirect impacts of tourism creates a spin-off effect in the economy contributing 
to a higher level of growth. 
Like  most  economies  in  the  region,  the  Netherlands  Antilles  is  characterized  by  some 
weaknesses that negatively influence the development and growth of the tourism sector.  
BIS Review 134/2007 
 3
One of the drawbacks on the tourism industry is the qualitative mismatch in our labor market. 
This mismatch is common on all the islands of the Netherlands Antilles.  
The main reason for the structural unemployment is not so much the absence of jobs, but a 
qualitative mismatch between labor supply and demand. However, according to the recent 
vacancy survey by the Central Bureau of Statistics, there is a high demand for workers with a 
low  level  of  education,  such  as  the  MAVO,  LBO,  and  VSBO.  Fifty-two  percent  of  the  job 
openings require individuals with a low level of education. On the other hand, the majority of 
the  unemployed  jobseekers  have  a  low  level  of  education.  Thus,  a  paradoxical  situation 
seems to exist in the labor market, as the high unemployment often coexists with vacancies 
in the low skilled labor-intensive occupations. Lack of motivation and or loss of skills due to a 
protracted period of unemployment may be the underlying causes.  
As we all are very aware, tourism depends heavily on the skills level and professionalism of 
the  labor  force  to  make  the  sector  more  productive  and  competitive.  Therefore,  human 
resources requirements in the tourism sector are a critical factor for the industry. Moreover, 
the  tourism  sector  requires  more  flexible  labor  laws  to  account  for  seasonality,  daily  flows 
and the specific characteristics of an industry that operates on 24-hour 7-days a week basis.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  private  and  public  partnerships  are  crucial  to  shape  and  ensure  a 
sustainable  future  growth  for  one  of  the  world’s  largest  industries  –  tourism.  Due  to  the 
economic  importance  of  the  sector,  the  government  has  a  key  role  as  a  facilitator  and 
mediator  rather  than  a  financier.  In  the  past,  our  government  has  also  taken  the  role  of 
financier  by  offering  grants  or  even  taking  over  the  management  of  hotels  in  order  to 
safeguard employment in the tourism industry.  
It is clear that the public and private sectors have different interests and roles in the tourism 
industry. Yet there is a strong need for them to complement each other through partnerships 
at all levels to exploit the tourism sector’s full potential. The private sector can and must play 
the driving role in tourism development, ensuring quality products and competitive services 
geared towards rapidly changing demand, while the government needs to show leadership 
by  stimulating  and  facilitating  investment,  streamlining  and  clarifying  regulations,  and 
developing the much-needed infrastructure and human capital. 
Public – private partnerships have proven to be an effective tool in the development of many 
industries.  The  Netherlands  Antilles  has  the  potential  to  realize  the  economic  and  social 
benefits  from  tourism  if  the  government  and  the  industry  join  in  efforts  to  address  the 
obstacles and constraints that hamper the further development of the tourism sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, to improve our investment climate, the government should tackle its 
weaknesses, thus creating an environment conducive to investment, including investment in 
the tourism sector. Sound public finances are indispensable for sustained economic growth, 
the  creation  of  jobs,  and  social  progress.  Fiscal  discipline  is  not  only  needed  for  macro-
economic stability, but also to preserve funds  essential for public investment, especially in 
education, infrastructure, and social safety nets.  
Another  weakness  of  our  investment  climate  is  the  current  administrative  barriers  or  high 
degree of bureaucracy.  
In this respect, it is important that the government streamline its administrative procedures by 
removing all unnecessary bureaucracy and simplifying the procedures for obtaining business 
and work permits and business visas. 
The  other  policy  area  that  needs  our  attention  is  the  tax  system,  which  also  plays  an 
important role in shaping the investment climate. In my view, the new tax system of the future 
country  of  Curacao  should  be  simple  and  transparent.  These  reforms  are  needed  to 
encourage  consumer  spending  and  investment  by  raising  disposable  income  that  is  by 
lowering  the  marginal  tax  rate.  This  increase  in  disposable  income  will  lead  to  more 
economic activities, which will broaden the tax base and hence raise sufficient revenues to 
cover government expenditures. In addition, a more effective and efficient assessment and 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2007
collection system should also be an important component of the new tax system, since it can 
ensure budget neutrality in the face of the reduction in direct tax rates.  
Another  important  issue  is  to  balance  the  expansion  in  tourism  with  the  protection  of  our 
natural resources. In recent years, researchers around the globe devoted quite some time to 
raise  our  awareness  about  achieving  a  sustainable  tourism  expansion.  Preserving  nature 
and  launching  eco-projects  are  the  latest  trend.  This  trend  has  also  reached  Curaçao,  as 
eco-projects  and  environmental  friendly  projects  are  being  developed.  Furthermore,  it  is 
essential that we develop and promote our national heritage designations, which will further 
improve our tourism environment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as can be appreciated, the tourism industry represents an important 
pillar of the Netherlands Antilles economy.  
It has registered important growth during the last few years. In order to sustain that, we have 
to continue to invest in our investment climate. Moving forward, we can also conclude that 
the long-term prospects of the tourism industry look promising. According to the World Travel 
and  Tourism  Council,  global  tourism  is  projected  to  expand  by  approximately  5  percent 
annually  over  the  next  seven  years,  while  the  tourism  sector  in  the  Caribbean  area  is 
expected  to  grow  at  4  percent  annually.  As  part  of  the  Caribbean  area,  the  Netherlands 
Antilles tourism sector will undoubtedly share in this growth.  
Therefore, it is safe to say that the firms in the tourist sectors will continue to increase and 
will increasingly become important players in our economy. To the accounting profession it 
means more and hopefully financially healthier clients. The need to have more people in the 
accounting  profession  with  increased  knowledge  of  this  sector  is  becoming  self-evident. 
Seminars like this one, is a very important step in meeting this objective. It is with this in mind 
that  I  once  more  would  like  to  congratulate  the  organizer  of  this  seminar  who  took  the 
initiative to address this important topic for our economy. 
As we all know, on the constitutional scene, the Netherlands Antilles is due to be disbanded 
on  December  15,  2008.  This  change  in  status  will  also  bring  its  pressure  to  bear  on  the 
prospects  for  the  tourism  sector.  One  of  the  main  changes  accompanying  the  new 
constitutional status of Curaçao is the elimination of the double layer of government. This will 
reduce the administrative barriers in the government apparatus considerably, facilitating the 
decision-making process of policies and projects. 
The  outlook  for  Curacao’s  tourism industry  as a  consequence  of  this may  be  substantially 
enhanced.  A  continuous  and  increasing  flow  of  investment  is  already  noticeable  in  this 
sector, with the numerous promising projects in the pipeline. The World Travel and Tourism 
Council  estimates  average  annual  gains  of  6  percent  in  the  total  employed  in  Curacao’s 
tourism sector over the next seven years. I hope sincerely that the benefits of this expansion 
will sustainable and will higher living standards for all especially those that were marginalized 
in our society. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 134/2007 
 5
35
20
5
-10
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
International tourist arrivals
(% change over 5 year period)
Figure 1
World
Europe
Caribbean
North America
1990/95
1995/00
2000/05
 International tourism receipts 
(% change)
Figure 2
2003/02
2004-03
2005/06
2006/05
World
Europe
North America
Caribbean
   6 
 BIS Review 134/2007
Market share of 
international tourist arrivals (%)
2.6
16.4
12.9
60.2
1990
2.6
15.1
15.4
58.0
1995
Figure 3
2.5
13.4
16.2
57.4
2.3
10.7
19.8
54.4
2000
2006
Europe
Asia & the Pacific
North America
Caribbean
  Stay-over tourism: 2000 – 2006
(% change)
Figure 4
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Curacao
Bonaire
St. Maarten
  BIS Review 134/2007 
 7
Cruise Tourism: 2000 – 2006
(% change)
Figure 5
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
St Maarten (L)
Bonaire (R)
Curaçao (L)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
 Share in foreign exchange
in the
Netherlands Antilles
Re-exports 
freezone
12%
Bunker
3%
Figure 6
Refining
9%
Other services
20%
Transportation
6%
In'l financial 
bussiness sector
11%
Tourism
39%
   8 
 BIS Review 134/2007
Share in tourism receipts (%)
Figure 7
67.8
64.5
63.3
64.1
66.9
66.6
63.9
24.3
7.9
2000
27.0
8.6
2001
28.1
8.5
2002
26.1
9.8
2003
23.9
9.2
2004
24.7
8.8
2005
27.2
8.9
2006
Bonaire
Curacao
Windward Islands
 Tourism receipts: 2001 – 2006
(% change )
 Figure 8
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Bonaire
Curacao
Windward islands
  BIS Review 134/2007 
 9
