Toshiro Muto: The 50-year-long good relationship between Hong Kong 
and the Bank of Japan 
Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the reception for the 
50th  anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Representative  Office  in  Hong  Kong,  Hong  Kong, 
24 September 2007. 
 Good Evening. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  Mr.  Yam, 
Consul-General and Ambassador Mr. Sato, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Bank of Japan, let me extend our gratitude to all of you for our long-standing 
friendship and your cooperation with our Hong Kong Office. 
In 2004, I was invited to join the Visitors Programme sponsored by the government of Hong 
Kong, and enjoyed a candid exchange of views with senior officials in the government. The 
bird's-eye view of Hong Kong's dynamic economic activities which I saw from a helicopter is 
really unforgettable. Since then, I have felt deeply attached to this great city. 
By coincidence, this year is also the 10th anniversary of Hong Kong's handover to China. It is 
my  great  honor  to  visit  Hong  Kong  again  today,  and  hold  our  50th  anniversary  reception, 
celebrating  Hong  Kong's  closer  economic  ties  with  the  mainland  and  its  prosperity  as  an 
international financial centre. 
Pioneer days of the Hong Kong Office 
There is an interesting story behind the establishment of the Hong Kong Office. In 1953, four 
years  before  the  opening  of  the  Hong  Kong Office,  the Bank  planned  to  open an  office  in 
Calcutta, India. At that time, the Indian city was important for Japan as a source of iron ore 
and  cotton.  Unfortunately,  however,  two  senior  Bank  staff  sent  to  Calcutta  became  ill, 
probably due to the difference in climate between India and Japan. Hence, the Bank gave up 
the plan. 
After this incident, Hong Kong was chosen as the location for the Bank's first representative 
office  in  Asia.  At  the  time,  Hong  Kong  was  already  the  information  hub  in  Asia,  including 
China,  owing  to  its  trading  and  financial  expertise.  In  retrospect,  the  decision  was 
appropriate, given Hong Kong's current prosperity as a leading financial centre in Asia and 
Oceania. 
However, the new-born Hong Kong Office faced adverse winds in the early stages. Until the 
early  1970's,  due  to  lack  of  diplomatic  relationship  between  China  and  Japan,  staff  in  the 
Office were not even allowed to have official contacts with banks with mainland origins, let 
alone to visit the mainland.  
Following  the  normalization  of  Sino-Japanese  relationships  in  1972,  business  trips  to  the 
mainland  became  possible.  In  addition,  the  Bank  started  to  send  its  staff  to  Hong  Kong 
University to let them study Chinese language. Since then, Hong Kong has played a role as 
a cradle to foster experts on China at the Bank.  
In  1978,  Hong  Kong  resumed  granting  licenses  to  eligible  foreign  banks,  thereby 
strengthening its status as an international financial centre. Along with these developments, 
the importance of the Hong Kong Office to the Bank was firmly established. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 1
Hong Kong over the last decade 
The history of Hong Kong has always been spectacular, but I am convinced the last decade 
has been the most challenging one. Let me mention just a few particularly significant events. 
The first is the Asian currency crisis. Since Asia had been praised at that time as a "growth 
centre," the fact that the crisis occurred in Asia surprised us. It also reminded us of the risk 
for central banks of drifting into complacency. As you know, this experience led to closer co-
operation between the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the Bank of Japan and other Asian 
central banks. This co-operation bore fruit in the shape of the Asian Bond Fund, which aims 
to  create  a  more  advanced  bond  market  in  Asia,  and  the  swap  arrangements  called  the 
Chiang Mai initiative which act as a safeguard against any future crisis. 
When  there  was  mounting  selling  pressure  on  the  Hong  Kong  dollar,  the  Hong  Kong 
Monetary Authority, under the leadership of Chief Executive Yam, adopted various measures 
to  further  strengthen  the  currency  board  system.  The  decisive  actions  remain  vivid  in  my 
mind. Although Japan's currency system differs from Hong Kong's, we would like to express 
our respect for the Authority's strong belief in achieving the ultimate goal for a central bank, 
namely to safeguard the currency system. 
The  second  is  the  SARS  epidemic  of  2003.  It  is  understandable  that  some  people  lost 
confidence in Hong Kong, as the city faced this appalling epidemic just as the wounds of the 
Asian currency crisis had begun to heal. However, Hong Kong coped successfully with this 
epidemic by implementing strict hygiene control measures. In addition, the increased number 
of visitors from the mainland to Hong Kong, supported by deregulation in the mainland, gave 
renewed  vigor  to  the  tourism  industry,  severely  hit  by  SARS,  thereby  strengthening  ties 
between Hong Kong and the mainland. 
Last but not least, let me highlight once again Hong Kong's current rapid growth, with closer 
economic ties with the mainland. Hong Kong enjoys solid growth with low inflation, a sound 
fiscal position and a competitive financial system. Financial markets are booming. Although 
some  were  anxious  about  the  possible  outcome  of  handover  to  China  ten  years  ago, 
fortunately, this anxiety proved unfounded. 
Looking ahead 
Hong  Kong  seems  to  make  constant  efforts  toward  a  more  prosperous  future,  and  seems 
never  to  be  tempted  towards  complacency.  A  good  example  would  be  the  fostering  of 
Renminbi-related  financial  business  through  issuances  of  Renminbi  bonds  in  Hong  Kong, 
while maintaining a currency peg to the U.S. dollar. 
Hong Kong is blessed with an enviable geographic advantage, being located in the centre of 
a rapidly-growing Asia. Hong Kong is also rich in the most important production factor for any 
industry,  namely  talented  human  resources  like  all  of  you  here  at  this  reception.  This  is,  I 
believe  an  indispensable  strength  of  Hong  Kong.  How  Hong  Kong  develops  further  as  an 
international financial centre is of enormous interest to everyone. 
Finally, I thank again all our guests for your friendship and co-operation. Recently, everyone 
in  the  Asian  financial  markets  is  talking  about  the  "unwinding"  of  the  so-called  yen  carry 
trades. However, there will definitely be no "unwinding" of the 50-year-long good relationship 
between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  I  am  fully  convinced  the  co-operation  and 
mutual trust between us will accumulate further. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2007
