Shyamala Gopinath: Indian derivatives market – a regulatory and 
contextual perspective 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Euromoney Inaugural India Derivatives Summit 2007, Mumbai, 24 October 2007. 
 Let me first thank Euromoney for inviting me for this seminar on Indian derivatives market. 
The  esoteric  world  of  derivatives  has  come  into  sharp  focus  in  recent  times  precisely  on 
account of their complexity and recent events have triggered a debate on their impact on the 
financial system stability.  
My discussion today will be confined to the regulatory framework in India in regard to forex, 
debt  and  credit  derivative  markets  and  the  regulatory  imperatives  arising  in  dealing  with 
these  instruments  and  their  future  development,  particularly  in  the  context  of  global 
developments.  
The  financial  markets,  including  derivative  markets,  in  India  have  been  through  a  reform 
process  over  the  last  decade  and  a  half,  witnessed  in  its  growth  in  terms  of  size,  product 
profile,  nature  of  participants  and  the  development  of  market  infrastructure  across  all 
segments – equity markets, debt markets and forex markets. 
Derivative markets worldwide have witnessed explosive growth in recent past. According to 
the BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity 
as of April 2007 was released recently and the OTC derivatives segment, the average daily 
turnover of interest rate and non-traditional foreign exchange contracts increased by 71 % to 
$2.1 trillion in April 2007 over April 2004, maintaining an annual compound growth of 20 per 
cent witnessed since 1995. Turnover of foreign exchange options and cross-currency swaps 
more  than  doubled  to  $0.3  trillion  per  day,  thus  outpacing  the  growth  in  “traditional” 
instruments such as spot trades, forwards or plain foreign exchange swaps. The traditional 
instruments  also  show  an  unprecedented  rise  in  activity  in  traditional  foreign  exchange 
markets  compared  to  2004.  Average  daily  turnover  rose  to  $3.2  trillion  in  April  2007,  an 
increase of 71% at current exchange rates and 65% at constant exchange rates. Relatively 
moderate  growth  was  recorded  in  the  much  larger  interest  rate  segment,  where  average 
daily  turnover  increased  by  64  per  cent  to  $1.7  trillion.  While  the  dollar  and  euro  clearly 
dominate activity in OTC interest rate derivatives, their combined share has fallen by nearly 
10 percentage points since the 2004 survey, to 70 per cent in April 2007, as turnover growth 
in several non-core markets outstripped that in the two leading currencies. 
Indian forex and derivative markets have also developed significantly over the years. As per 
the  BIS  global  survey  the  percentage  share  of  the  rupee  in  total  turnover  covering  all 
currencies increased from 0.3 percent in 2004 to 0.7 percent in 2007. As per geographical 
distribution  of  foreign  exchange  market  turnover,  the  share  of  India  at  $34  billion  per  day 
increased from 0.4 in 2004 to 0.9 percent in 2007. The activity in the forex derivative markets 
can also be assessed from the positions outstanding in the books of the banking system. As 
of August end, 2007, total forex contracts outstanding in the banks' balance sheet amounted 
to USD 1100 billion (Rs. 44 lakh crore), of which almost 84% were forwards and rest options.  
As regards interest rate derivatives, the inter-bank Rupee swap market turnover, as reported 
on  the  CCIL  platform,  has  averaged  around  USD  4  billion  (Rs.  16,000  crore)  per  day  in 
notional  terms.  The  outstanding  Rupee  swap  contracts  in  banks’  balance  sheet,  as  on 
August  31,  2007,  amounted  to  nearly  USD  1600  billion  (Rs.  64,00,000  crore)  in  notional 
terms. Outstanding notional amounts in respect of cross currency interest rate swaps in the 
banks’ books as on August 31, 2007, amounted to USD 57 billion (Rs. 2,24,000 crore).  
BIS Review 122/2007 
 1
The size of the Indian derivatives market is clearly evident from the above data, though from 
global  standards  it  is  still  in  its  nascent  stage.  Broadly,  Reserve  Bank  is  empowered  to 
regulate  the  markets  in  interest  rate  derivatives,  foreign  currency  derivatives  and  credit 
derivatives. Until the amendment to the RBI Act in 2006, there was some ambiguity in the 
legality of OTC derivatives which were cash settled. This has now been addressed through 
an  amendment  in  the  said  Act  in  respect  of  derivatives  which  fall  under  the  regulatory 
purview of RBI (with underlying as interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit rating or credit 
index or price of securities) provided one of the parties to the transaction is RBI, a scheduled 
bank  or  any  other  entity  regulated  under  the  RBI  Act,  Banking  Regulation  Act  or  Foreign 
Exchange Management Act (FEMA).  
Current regulatory framework 
In the light of increasing use of structured products and to ensure that customers understand 
the nature of the risk in these complex instruments, RBI  after extensive consultations with 
market  participants  issued  comprehensive  guidelines  on  derivatives  in  April  2007,  which 
cover the following aspects: 
• 
Participants have been generically classified into two functional categories, namely, 
market-makers  and  users,  which  would  be  specific  to  the  position  taken  by  the 
participant  in  a  transaction.  This  categorisation  was  felt  important  from  the 
perspective of ensuring Suitability & Appropriateness compliance by market makers 
on users.  
The  guidelines  also  define  the  purpose  for  undertaking  derivative  transactions  by 
various participants. While Market-makers can undertake derivative transactions to 
act  as  counterparties  in  derivative  transactions  with  users  and  also  amongst 
themselves,  Users  can  undertake  derivative  transactions  to  hedge  –  specifically 
reduce or extinguish an existing identified risk on an ongoing basis during the life of 
the  derivative  transaction  –  or  for  transformation  of  risk  exposure,  as  specifically 
permitted by RBI.  
The  guidelines  clearly  enunciate  the  broad  principles  for  undertaking  derivative 
transactions :  
o 
Any derivative structure is permitted as long as it is a combination of two or 
more of the generic instruments permitted by RBI and  
Market-makers  should  be  in  a  position  to  mark  to  market  or  demonstrate 
valuation of these products based on observable market prices.  
Further,  it  is  to  be  ensured  that  structured  products  do  not  contain 
derivative(s), which is/ are not allowed on a stand alone basis. This will also 
apply in case the structure contains “cash” instrument(s).  
All  permitted  derivative  transactions  shall  be  contracted  only  at  prevailing 
market rates.  
o 
o 
o 
The guidelines set out the basic principles of a prudent system to control the risks in 
derivatives activities. It is required that all risks arising from derivatives exposures 
should  be  analysed  and  documented  and  the  management  of  derivative  activities 
should  be  integrated  into  the  bank’s  overall  risk  management  system  using  a 
conceptual framework common to the bank’s other activities.  
The critical importance of “suitability” and “appropriateness” policies within banks for 
derivative products being offered to customers (users) have been underlined. It is 
imperative  that  market-makers  offer  derivative  products  in  general,  and  structured 
products,  in  particular  only  to  those  users  who  understand  the  nature  of  the  risks 
BIS Review 122/2007
    2 
 inherent in these transactions and further that products being offered are consistent 
with users’ internal policies as well as risk appetite.  
Within  the  above  broad  framework,  the  specifics  of  the  forex  and  interest  rate  derivatives 
permitted are explained below: 
Forex derivatives 
I.  
Economic entities in India currently have a menu of OTC products, such as forwards, swaps 
and options, for hedging their currency risk and the markets for the same are fairly deep and 
liquid,  as  reflected  in  the  volumes  and  bid-offer  spreads.  The  origin  of  the  forex  market 
development in India could be traced back to 1978 when banks were permitted to undertake 
intra-day trades. However, the market witnessed major activities only in the 1990’s with the 
floating of the currency in March 1993, following the recommendations of the Report of the 
High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan). 
In  respect  of  forex  derivatives  involving  rupee,  residents  have  access  to  foreign  exchange 
forward  contracts,  foreign  currency-rupee  swap  instruments  and  currency  options  –  both 
cross  currency  as  well  as  foreign  currency-rupee.  In  the  case  of  derivatives  involving  only 
foreign currency, a range of products such as IRS, FRAs, option are allowed. While these 
products can be used for a variety of purposes, the fundamental requirement is the existence 
of  an  underlying  exposure  to  foreign  exchange  risk  whether  on  current  or  capital  account. 
While initially the forward contracts could not be rebooked once cancelled, greater flexibility 
has now been given for booking cancellation and rebooking of forward contracts. In the case 
of exporters and importers, they are also allowed to book forward contracts based on past 
performance and the delivery condition has also been gradually liberalized.  
In order to simplify procedural requirements for Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) sector, 
RBI  has  recently  granted  flexibility  for  hedging  both  underlying  as  well  as  anticipated  and 
economic exposures without going through the rigours of complex documentation formalities. 
In order to ensure that SMEs understand the risks of these products, only banks with whom 
they have credit relationship are allowed to offer such facilities. These facilities should also 
have  some  relationship  with  the  turnover  of  the  entity.  Similarly,  individuals  have  been 
permitted to hedge upto USD 100,000 on self declaration basis.  
AD  banks  may  also  enter  into  forward  contracts  with  residents  in  respect  of  transactions 
denominated in foreign currency but settled in Indian Rupees including hedging the currency 
indexed  exposure  of  importers  in  respect  of  customs  duty  payable  on  imports.  ADs  have 
been delegated powers to allow residents engaged in import and export trade to hedge the 
price risk on all commodities in international commodity exchanges, with few exceptions like 
gold, silver, and petroleum. Domestic producers/users are allowed to hedge their price risk 
on  aluminum,  copper,  lead,  nickel and  zinc  as  well  as  aviation  turbine  fuel  in  international 
commodity exchanges based on their underlying economic exposures.  
Facilities for non-residents  
Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (FII),  persons  resident  outside  India  having  Foreign  Direct 
Investment (FDI) in India and Non-resident Indians (NRI) are allowed access to the forwards 
market  to  the  extent  of  their  exposure  in  the  cash  market.  FIIs  are  permitted  to  hedge 
currency risk on the market value of entire investment in equity and/or debt in India as on a 
particular  date  using  forwards.  For  FDI  investors,  forwards  are  permitted  to  (i)  hedge 
exchange rate risk on the market value of investments made in India since January 1, 1993 
(ii) hedge exchange rate risk on dividend receivable on the investments in Indian companies 
and  (iii)  hedge  exchange  rate  risk  on  proposed  investment  in  India.  NRIs  can  hedge 
balances/amounts  in  NRE  accounts  using  forwards  and  FCNR  (B)  accounts  using  rupee 
forwards as well as cross currency forwards.  
BIS Review 122/2007 
 3
Currency futures 
In the context of growing integration of the Indian economy with the rest of the world, as also 
the  continued  development  of  financial  markets,  there  is  a  need  to  allow  other  hedging 
instruments to manage exchange risk like currency futures. The Committee on Fuller Capital 
Account Convertibility had recommended that currency futures may be introduced subject to 
risks  being  contained  through  proper  trading  mechanism,  structure  of  contracts  and 
regulatory environment. Accordingly, Reserve Bank of India in the Annual Policy Statement 
for the Year 2007-08 proposed to set up a Working Group on Currency Futures to study the 
international experience and suggest a suitable framework to operationalise the proposal, in 
line with the current legal and regulatory framework. 
The  group  has  had  extensive  consultations  with  a  cross  section  of  market  participants 
including  bankers  associations,  banks,  brokers,  exchanges,  both  Indian  and  international, 
and is in the process of finalizing its report. Given that India is not yet fully convertible on 
capital  account,  various  options  are  available  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  reconciling  the 
regulatory  framework  in  the  cash  and  OTC  forward  market  with  the  currency  futures 
segment. The international experience in this regard is mostly from OECD countries except 
for  one  single  exception  of  South  Africa  which  has  very  recently  introduced  domestic 
currency  futures.  The  draft  report  of  the  group  will  be  placed  in  public  domain  for  wider 
dissemination and feedback.  
Rupee Interest rate derivatives 
II.  
Rupee derivatives in India were introduced in July 1999 when RBI permitted banks/FIs/PDs 
to  undertake  Interest  rate  swaps  and  Forward  rate  agreements.  These  institutions  were 
allowed to offer these products to corporates for hedging interest rate risk as well as deal in 
these  instruments  for  their  own  balance  sheet  hedging  and  trading  purposes.  Since  then, 
many initiatives have been undertaken to deepen and broaden the market.  
The  rupee  interest  rate  derivatives  presently  permissible  are  Forward  Rate  Agreements 
(FRA),  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS)  and  Interest  Rate  Futures  (IRF).  The  permitted 
benchmarks  for  FRA/IRS  are  any  domestic  money  or  debt  market  rupee  interest  rate;  or, 
rupee interest rate implied in the forward foreign exchange rates, as permitted in respect of 
MIFOR  swaps.  While  both  banks  and  PDs  are  allowed  as  market  makers  in  the  swap 
market,  all  business  entities  (including  banks  and  PDs)  are  permitted  to  hedge  their 
underlying exposures using these instruments. PDs have been also permitted to hold trading 
position in IRF, subject to internal guidelines in this regard. The interest rate swap market 
has grown rapidly with participation from banks and corporates. The market is liquid and bid-
offer spreads are narrow.  
Transparency and reporting 
In order to have a mechanism for transparent capture and dissemination of trade information, 
the Clearing Corporation of India, at the instance of RBI, has recently developed a reporting 
system for OTC interest rate swaps. The reported deals are processed by CCIL which also 
offers certain post trade processing services like resetting interest rates, providing settlement 
values etc. to the reporting members. Information in regard to traded rates and volumes are 
made available through CCIL's website. 
Once  things  stabilize,  the  next  phase  could  be  development  of  post-trade  processing 
infrastructure to address some of the attendant risks. 
Interest rate futures 
While  FRA/IRS  markets  have  shown  phenomenal  growth,  the  interest  rate  futures,  first 
introduced on NSE in 2003, have not picked up on account of certain structural factors. A 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2007
sub-group of the RBI Technical Advisory Committee on Markets having representatives from 
the  industry  and  academia,  has  been  constituted  to  examine  the  issues,  including  the 
following: 
(i) 
Review  the  experience  with  the  Interest  Rate  Futures  so  far,  with  particular 
reference  to  product  design  issues  and  make  recommendations  for  activating  the 
Interest Rate Futures. 
Examine whether regulatory guidelines for banks for Interest Rate Futures need to 
be aligned with those for their participation in Interest Rate Swaps. 
Examine  the  scope  and  extent  of  the  participation  of  non-residents,  including 
Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (FIIs),  in  Interest  Rate  Futures,  consistent  with  the 
policy applicable to the underlying cash bond market. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The draft report of the group would be placed in the public domain for comments.  
Structured credit and credit derivatives 
III. 
The  structured  credit  market  internationally  has  grown  phenomenally  into  a  distinct  asset 
class, encompassing a slew of complex products which have facilitated risk transfer across 
multiple  chain  of  investors,  leveraging  several  times  on  the  original  loan  amount.  The 
downside of this model has been eloquently demonstrated in the US sub-prime related fallout 
globally, which I will discuss later. In India, the structured credit market is still in its infancy, 
primarily  constituting  securitization  products,  and  the  lessons  of  recent  events  can  hold 
important lessons for the future development of this market here.  
Securitization  in  India  has  been  in  existence  for  over  a  decade  confined  mainly  to  a  few 
banks  and  non-banking  finance  companies.  Both  mortgage  backed  securities  and  asset-
backed  securities  are  in  vogue.  The  securitization  market  has  matured  over  the  last  few 
years  and  there  is  now  an  established  investor  community  and  regular  issuers.  As  per 
ICRA's estimates, the structured issuance volumes have grown from Rs. 77 billion in 2003 to 
Rs.  369  billion  in  2006-07.  The  growth  in  2006-07  has  been  primarily  on  account  of 
securitization  of  single  corporate  loans,  which  accounted  for  nearly  a  third  of  the  total 
volume. However, ABS is the largest product class at more than 60%, with securitization of 
retail loans remaining popular. The growth of ABS market can be attributed to a number of 
factors  such  as  the  growing  retail  loan  portfolios  held  by  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, investors' familiarity with the underlying assets class the relatively short tenor of 
such issues. Growth of the MBS market has been slower despite the growth in the underlying 
housing  finance  market  mainly  due  to  the  relatively  long  tenor,  lack  of  secondary  market 
liquidity and the risk arising from prepayment/repricing of the underlying loans.  
In  the  light  of  the  differing  practices  followed  by  banks  in  India  and  certain  concerns  on 
accounting,  valuation  and  capital  treatment,  the  RBI  issued  formal  guidelines  in  February 
2006 after extensive consultation with market participants. The guidelines are largely in line 
with those issued by other supervisors internationally and envisage the following:  
• 
Detailed set of guidelines to ensure “arms” length relationship between the originator 
and the SPV  
Credit enhancements provided by the originator for first as well as second losses to 
be deducted from the capital. For the first loss facility, the deduction is capped at the 
amount of capital that the bank would have been required to hold for the full value of 
assets. Thus a disincentive is created for an originator trying to provide second loss 
facility  also.  (However,  the  proposed  Basel  II  guidelines  envisage  risk  weight  for 
securitized exposures, depending upon rating, will range from 20% to 400% or even 
deduction from capital)  
 BIS Review 122/2007 
 5
   Any profit/premium arising on account of sale not allowed to be booked upfront and 
is to be amortised over the life of the securities issued or to be issued by the SPV.  
Provision of liquidity facility to be treated as an off-balance sheet item  and attract 
100% credit conversion factor as well as 100 % risk weight.  
Disclosure by the originator, as notes to accounts, presenting a comparative position 
for two years:  
o 
o 
total number and book value of loan assets securitised;  
sale consideration received for the securitised assets and gain/loss on sale 
on account of securitisation;  
form and quantum (outstanding value) of services provided by way of credit 
enhancement, liquidity support, post-securitisation asset servicing, etc.  
o 
In the context of recent global events, the above guidelines will go a long way in laying the 
foundation of a healthy structured credit market.  
In respect of distressed assets, the legal framework was provided by the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interests Act, 2002", more 
commonly  called  SARFAESI  Act.  This  led  to  the  constitution  of  asset  reconstruction 
companies  specializing  in  securitizing  distressed  assets  purchased  from  banks.  The 
issuance  of  security  receipts  has  since  grown  significantly,  though  the  secondary  market 
acitivity  has  not  been  large  enough.  To  encourage  proper  market  valuation,  securitization 
companies have been advised to take into account rating of instruments by SEBI registered 
rating  agencies,  based  on  “recovery  ratings”  for  declaring  the  NAV  of  the  issued  security 
receipts.  
Recently,  The  Securities  Contracts  (Regulation)  Amendment  Act,  2007  has  amended 
Securities Contract (Regulation) Act to include "securitised instruments" in the definition of 
"securities" as defined in Securities Contract (Regulation) Act. The amendment is made to 
allow  listing  of  securitised  debt  on  stock  exchanges  and  therefore,  make  the  market  more 
liquid. 
Credit derivatives 
The issue of allowing credit derivatives in India is under consideration for some time now. 
The  draft  guidelines  for  introduction  of  credit  default  swaps  were  put in  public  domain  this 
year  and  feedback  from  various  quarters  have  since  been  received.  These  basically 
envisaged  introduction  of  single  entity  CDS  instruments,  allowing  protection  selling  and 
buying to resident financial entities (banks, PDs and other entities as permitted by respective 
regulators)  under  the  overall  ISDA  framework.  Special  Investment  Vehicles  (SIV)  and 
conduits are not envisaged. Banks that are active in the credit derivative market are required 
to have in place internal limits on the gross amount of protection sold by them on a single 
entity as well as the aggregate of such individual gross positions. These limits shall be set in 
relation to the bank’s capital funds. Banks shall also periodically assess the likely stress that 
these  gross  positions  of  protection  sold,  may  pose  on  their  liquidity  position  and  their 
options/ability to raise funds, at short notice. Banks have to determine an appropriate liquidity 
reserve to be held against revaluation of these positions. This is important especially where 
the reference asset is illiquid like a loan. 
Learning from the global experience in this regard, it will be of utmost importance that proper 
disclosure  and  reporting  framework,  accounting  and  valuation  policies  and  clearing  & 
settlement system for these OTC transactions develops concomitantly with the market. This 
would go a long way in addressing some of the associated concerns. 
6 
 BIS Review 122/2007
Concluding thoughts 
IV. 
The  recent  episode  of  financial  turbulence  has  provoked  debate  about  the  measurement, 
pricing  and  allocation  of  risk  by  way  of  derivatives,  which  can  have  important  lessons  for 
India. I wish to conclude by flagging some of these issues: 
Credit risk transfer 
(i)  
Over the past decade or so, the business models of global banks have evolved from a "buy-
and-hold" to an "originate-to-distribute" model. Instruments to transfer risks from the balance 
sheets  of  the  originating  institution  have  developed  in  size  and  in  complexity.  Risks  have 
been repackaged and spread throughout the economy. The greater part of these risks is sold 
to other banks and to leveraged investors, very often the originating bank itself funding the 
investors. Small and regional banks, in particular, were significant buyers of subprime and 
other structured products. Insurance companies are also increasingly using such instruments 
to  securitise  their  liabilities.  This  wider  distribution  of  credit  risks  within  the  global  financial 
system should in principle limit risk concentrations and reduce the risk of a systemic shock. 
Recent  events,  however,  suggest  some  reservations  about  this  positive  assessment.  One 
reservation  is  that  banks  have  become  increasingly  able  to  sell  quickly  even  the  equity 
tranches  of  their  loan  portfolios  (retaining  no  exposures).  This  means  they  have  fewer 
incentives to effectively screen and monitor borrowers. A systematic deterioration in lending 
and collateral standards would of course entail losses greater than historical experience of 
default  and  loss-given-default  rates  would  indicate,  and  it  is  not  clear  that  current  risk 
management practices make enough allowance for this. Further the gap between the original 
borrower and the ultimate investors widened with a number of vehicles in between. 
Secondly, events may force banks to re-assume risks they had assumed transferred to other 
parties – either to preserve a bank’s reputation (eg related to investment funds sponsored by 
a bank) or to honour contingency liquidity/credit lines. In a crisis, major banks could therefore 
end up holding a larger share of exposures that they had planned to securitise. 
Ratings for structured products 
(ii)  
Ratings on structured finance products provide investors with an independent assessment of 
risks  embedded  in  them.  Given  the  complexity  of  such  products,  some  form  of  expert 
assessment is desirable. Nevertheless, some investors failed to appreciate that ratings did 
not purport to cover market risk. And the use of ratings in investment mandates may have 
tempted  some  fund  managers  to  "reach  for  yield"  without  altering  their  measured  risk 
exposures.  The  investment  grade  status  given  to  tranches  of  highly  leveraged  structures 
(such as CPDOs) has also raised questions. Some have argued that ratings should put more 
emphasis  on  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  rating  of  a  given  structured  product  – 
especially those involving the leveraged exposure to market and liquidity risk. Others argue 
that ratings should cover more than just the dimension of the probability of default. 
Valuation of financial assets 
(iii)  
A growing share of the assets of financial firms has now to be measured at "fair-value". This 
fosters  more  active  risk  management  but  also  makes  reported  earnings  and  capital  more 
sensitive to the volatility of asset prices. In the absence of traded prices, fair-value estimates 
are  determined  using  a  chosen  pricing  model.  An  intrinsic  problem  is  that  the  parameter 
values  used  in  all  such  models  (especially  default  correlations  and  recovery  rates)  are 
inevitably  matters  of  judgment  given  limited  historical  data.  This  can  bias  conclusions  as 
default correlations inevitably rise during periods of market stress, when confidence in mark-
to-model prices is undermined. As uncertainty about the true market value of securities with 
model-driven prices rose, trading in these securities almost ground to a halt. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 7
A  final  aspect  is  that  historical  data  available  before  recent  events  may  not  have  been 
representative of a full credit cycle. The recent experience may go some way to correcting 
this shortcoming, and make model-driven estimates more reliable in the future. This could in 
turn induce a significant change in the behaviour of investors for some time. 
Value at risk (VaR) 
(iv)  
Most financial firms use VaR and stress tests to measure market risks and assign position 
limits. Despite declining financial market volatility during recent years, most large banks have 
nevertheless  reported  a  trend  rise  in  the  aggregate  VaR  of  their  trading  book.  This 
presumably implies that they have taken larger positions. This is not necessarily a matter of 
concern because trading profits and capital increased broadly in line with higher VaRs. 
Yet  the  marked  movements  in  the  absolute  VaRs  of  large  firms  over  time  does  raise 
questions. These changes could reflect: (a) underlying market volatility; (b) frequent changes 
in the firm’s positioning; or (c) changes in various aspects of methodology. If firms, conscious 
of methodological shortcomings, frequently modify how they compute their VaRs, changes 
over time may not be a good guide to changes in underlying risk exposures. This would also 
make it harder for counterparties to keep accurate track of how underlying risks are evolving. 
Stress tests 
(v)  
Stress tests used by banks probably do not adequately reflect their substantial reliance on 
liquid capital and money markets for managing, distributing and hedging risks. Some of the 
problems (eg., difficulties in the leveraged loan market, the valuation of complex products) 
are  not  typically  incorporated  in  stress  tests.  Stress  tests  at  many  banks  also  may  fail  to 
adequately  capture  the  potentially  significant  growth  in  balance  sheet  exposures  resulting 
from contingent credit and liquidity facilities to ABCP conduits. Moreover, stress tests tend to 
focus on a few risks and thus often fail to capture the potential interactions between many 
different risk factors. And in such stress tests, banks frequently assume an ability to unwind 
positions  across  a  wide  range  of  asset  classes  –  including  structured  credit  and  other 
complex products – that may not be feasible in stressed conditions. In addition, attempts to 
reduce risk exposures during a credit event can further impair market liquidity. 
This failure to take into consideration the likelihood that leveraged firms (during a period of 
market  stress)  would  attempt  to  reduce  exposures  in  virtually  identical  ways  might  explain 
why large financial shocks have been more frequent during the past 10 years than models 
predicted – even as underlying macroeconomic conditions have become more stable. 
It is thus clear that recent bouts of market uncertainty have been aggravated by the lack of 
information about the distribution of risks in the global financial system and the risk profiles of 
individual  institutions.  New,  complex  financial  instruments  have  increased  linkages  across 
financial institutions and made the assessment of their exposures more difficult. It has also 
become harder to update the valuation of collateral as market developments have unfolded. 
Incomplete and differing disclosures also complicate attempts to draw comparisons between 
them.  This  insufficient  transparency  at  the  firm  level  probably  undermined  ex  ante  market 
discipline. These issues, which have been well-known to the regulators and the industry for 
some  years,  become  pressing  mainly  in  a  crisis.  Lending  institutions  find  it  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  to  simultaneously  review  in  a  thorough  manner  a  large  proportion  of  their 
exposures.  How  effectively  ex  post  market  discipline  is  allowed  to  operate  will  have  a 
significant impact on the future conduct of financial firms. 
To conclude, the derivatives market in India has been expanding rapidly and will continue to 
grow. While much of the activity is concentrated in foreign and a few private sector banks, 
increasingly public sector banks are also participating in this market as market makers and 
not just users. Their participation is dependent on development of skills, adapting technology 
and  developing  sound  risk  management  practices.  Corporates  are  also  active  in  these 
8 
 BIS Review 122/2007
markets. While derivatives are very useful for hedging and risk transfer, and hence improve 
market  efficiency,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  risks  of  excessive  leverage,  lack  of 
transparency  particularly  in  complex  products,  difficulties  in  valuation,  tail  risk  exposures, 
counterparty  exposure  and  hidden  systemic  risk.  Clearly  there  is  need  for  greater 
transparency  to  capture  the  market,  credit  as  well  as  liquidity  risks  in  off-balance  sheet 
positions and providing capital therefore. From the corporate point of view, understanding the 
product  and  inherent  risks  over  the  life  of  the  product  is  extremely  important.  Further 
development of the market will also hinge on adoption of international accounting standards 
and disclosure practices by all market participants, including corporates. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 9
