Yandraduth Googoolye: Implementation of Basel II in Mauritius 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the Special Banking Committee on  the implementation of Basel II in Mauritius, Port Louis, 
21 September 2007. 
 Chairman 
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association 
Chief Executive of the Mauritius Bankers Association 
Chief Executives of banks 
Representatives of banks 
Dear colleagues 
It gives me great pleasure to address you on the implementation of Basel II. As we all know, 
Basel II is a major challenge for small economies like ours. However, we must take pride in 
the fact that all our banks, regardless of their size, are committed to the implementation of 
Basel II. 
Right  at  the  outset,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  favoured  a  consultative  approach  to  the 
implementation  of  Basel  II.  Since  the  setting  up  of  the  Main  Committee,  I  must  say  that 
considerable work has been achieved. We take pride in the fact that we are having recourse 
to our in-house expertise and as we move forward we are creating synergies for nurturing 
our local jurisdiction. 
As you are well aware, the implementation of Basel II is a daunting and challenging task for 
all regulators the world over. It is also the case for Mauritius. Much progress has been made 
by our in-house staff and the representatives of banks, at the level of the working groups. 
Despite  uncertainties  at  some  stage,  we  are  confident  that  the  project  has  regained 
momentum and that we will reach the March 2008 target for the parallel run. The Bank has 
set up a new Basel II Unit, the members of which are present here today. 
May  I  seize  the  opportunity  to  extend  our  appreciation  to  the  dedicated  representatives  of 
banks that have relentlessly put in efforts to reach where we are today. We look forward to 
their ongoing collaboration. 
Basel II framework 
Today,  I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  upon  the  evolution  of  the  revised  framework,  its  broad 
structure and the preparatory measures taken by the Bank for implementing this framework, 
and the challenges facing the industry in its migrating to Basel II. We must bear in mind that 
the Basel II framework allows for flexibility and we, at the Bank of Mauritius, will exercise our 
discretion  to  adapt  the  new  framework  to  the  specificities  of  our  jurisdiction.  The  need  to 
achieve  greater  financial  inclusion  and  to  provide  an  efficient  credit  delivery  mechanism 
remains our overriding consideration. 
The Basel I Accord dates back to 1988 when the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
released  a  framework  for  capital  adequacy.  Mauritius  adopted  the  framework  in  1993  at  a 
time where it was felt that the local jurisdiction should align itself to international standards of 
banking supervision. Our banks have since then maintained capital adequacy ratios higher 
than the 10 per cent minimum required. 
Over  the  years,  the  international  banking  sector  has  evolved,  so  has  our  local  banking 
industry. It was observed at the presentations made by banks on their progress towards the 
implementation of Basel II that advances have been made in risk management, information 
systems, and banks’ internal processes. Our banking industry is on track. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 1
With its three pillars, Basel II provides a rigorous framework that ties the amount of capital 
that banks require to maintain with their specific risks, thus establishing an enterprise-wide 
risk management framework. 
Pillar I provides a range of approaches to calculate the capital charges for credit, market and 
operational risk. Pillar 2 requires banks to develop an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment 
Process (ICAAP) that set capital targets that are commensurate with the banks’ risk profile 
and control environment. 
Pillar  3,  Market  Discipline,  complements  the  minimum  capital  requirement  and  the 
supervisory review process. It aims at encouraging banks to disclose to market participants 
essential information. In other words banks are also monitored by the markets. 
State of readiness of our banks 
The presentations organized by the Bank of Mauritius turned out to be very fruitful exercise. I 
wish  to  thank  the  banks  for  their  participation  in  this  exercise.  I  have  to  mention  here  my 
regrets for not being able to attend the presentations made by the banks during the last two 
weeks. 
Nonetheless  I  have  been  duly  briefed  by  my  staff  of  the  Basel  Unit  who  were  present,  on 
progress made by individual banks with respect to the implementation of Basel II. 
A  number  of  issues  were  raised  that  would  need  to  be  taken  up  at  the  level  of  the  Main 
Committee  and  Working  Groups.  Some  of  them  would  be  addressed  today  in  the 
presentation to be made by the Basel Unit in the course of this Special Banking Committee 
meeting. 
It came out during the presentations that banks are striving to build up their capabilities to 
move to the new framework. We noted the contrast in approach between the international 
banks and the local banks. The former are getting full support from their head office while 
some local banks are having recourse to the service of consultants to upgrade their systems. 
Overall most banks, with the exception of one or two banks, will be able to meet the March 
2008 target for the parallel run. It was also felt that individual banks had a number of issues 
specific  to  their  banks  that  they  would  wish  to  discuss.  It  was  reported  to  us  during  the 
presentations  that  banks  were  more  willing  to  share  their  individual  views  with  us,  which 
enabled us to have a better understanding of real issues. We should pull our efforts together 
to get all banks on board. Accordingly, the Bank of Mauritius invites banks to solicit individual 
meetings during which those issues could be discussed. 
Challenges ahead 
Following the issue of the Guideline on Operational Risk Management and Capital Adequacy 
Determination,  banks  have  made  significant  progress  in  the  setting  of  an  operational  risk 
management framework. Some of them have been ambitious enough to set the stage for the 
transition to the more advanced approaches. The setting up of an operational risk database 
would be an important tool in this transition. However, there exists a number of issues that 
need to be addressed. I have in mind the GOLD database of the British Bankers Association 
which is operated by the banks in the UK. We could draw our inspiration from this concept in 
the  building  of  our  own  operational  loss  database.  We  urge  the  Mauritius  Bankers 
Association to examine this issue. 
Our  concern  as  regulators  is  to  have  a  stable  financial  system  with  well-capitalised  banks 
that are stable and able to withstand periods of financial distress. The recent subprime loan 
crisis reminds us of the necessity to build up a financial system that is resilient to shocks. 
Risk-taking is the essence of banking. However, banks should manage their risks so as to 
preserve depositors’ interests. This crisis has triggered issues like the necessity to regulate 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2007
rating  agencies.  The  Basel  Committee  would  have  to  review  its  approach  towards  the 
reliance on the external ratings of credit agencies. The focus would then be on the advanced 
approaches of the Basel II framework where banks would have o rely on their own internal 
models  for  the  calculation  of  their capital  requirements.  In  this  context,  the  setting up  of  a 
centralized database for credit risk is more than ever on our agenda. However, a number of 
overarching issues need to be addressed at the level of the CEOs, which will be enumerated 
during the presentation to be made shortly. 
To conclude, I wish to comment on an issue, which is of interest to all of you. The Bank is 
sensitive to the representations made by banks to reduce the capital adequacy ratio. During 
the  course of  the  supervisory  review  process, the  Bank  shall  assess  the  capital  adequacy 
ratio of banks taking due consideration to the risks and the capital requirements of banks. 
Any  trade  off  in  capital  would  have  to  be  matched  by  better  risk  management  systems.  A 
policy  decision  for  a  reduction  would  have  to  be  taken  in  consultation  with  the  banking 
industry in the light of the ICAAP assessment. 
The new framework provides an incentive for better risk management. Banks should seize 
this opportunity. 
I now leave the floor to the Mr Chinniah, Assistant Director Supervision for a presentation. 
BIS Review 110/2007 
 3
