Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 5 December 2007. 
 For  some  years,  the  global  financial  system  has  been  characterised  by  high  growth  and 
increasing business volumes. There has been considerable innovation, many new products 
and business concepts have emerged. Earnings have been high. The largest global banks' 
return on equity has been steadily increasing for a number of years and exceeded 20 per 
cent on average in the 1st half of 2007.  
A sudden setback came over a few days in the summer. For a while the US housing market 
had been regarded as vulnerable. Losses on subprime mortgages were increasing, but this 
market  was  not  assessed  to  be  sufficiently  large  to  have  an  impact  on  global  financial 
stability. Moreover, the launch of new financial instruments seemed to have helped to spread 
the subprime risk among many different investors.  
This assessment proved to be wrong.  
Via structured credit products, investment vehicles had invested in subprime mortgages. To 
finance  these  investments,  they  had  issued  short-term  securities.  It  turned  out  that  large 
banks were closely linked to these investment vehicles via liquidity lines and/or ownership. 
Consequently,  it  was  also  difficult  to  assess  the  banks'  potential  losses  on  subprime 
mortgages, and uncertainty arose as to who ultimately bore the subprime risk.  
In  next  to  no  time,  some  of  the  most  liquid  markets  with  the  highest  ratings  came  to  a 
standstill  and  it  became  difficult  to  issue  short-term  securities  guaranteed  by  gilt-edged 
banks. Throughout most of the world, banks concentrated on securing their own liquidity and 
were hesitant to lend excess liquidity to other banks – especially if the maturities exceeded a 
few days. Two German banks experienced difficulties as a result of exposures to investment 
vehicles. One UK bank was brought to its knees, not by subprime mortgages, but because its 
business  model  was  based  on  regular  access  to  financing  in  the  financial  and  money 
markets. We even saw the unusual sight of depositors queuing outside a bank to withdraw 
their deposits! 
This marked the beginning of the liquidity crisis that has – to varying degrees – characterised 
the  financial  and  money  markets  in  large  parts  of  the  world  since  July.  Over  the  last  four 
months,  the  central  banks  in  the  USA,  the  euro  area  and  the  UK  have  regularly  provided 
collateralised liquidity to the market in order to stabilise short-term interest rates and smoothe 
the functioning of the money market.  
There  is  still  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the  size  of  the  losses  and  the  future 
development.  Now  and  then  new  skeletons  rattle  out  of  the  closets  as  banks  announce 
further  subprime  losses.  Share  prices  have  dropped  for  banks  exposed  to  subprime 
mortgages.  In  the  financial  markets,  there  are  fears  that  the  losses  will  spread  to  other 
segments  of  the  US  mortgage  market.  Consequently,  the  spread  between  uncollateralised 
and collateralised money-market interest rates at long maturities remains unusually wide in 
many countries. Finally, the liquidity crisis has led many euro area and US banks to tighten 
their credit terms for several customer groups.  
What are the consequences of the financial turmoil for Denmark? I will focus on two issues. 
Firstly, how has the development affected the Danish financial system? And secondly, what 
is the cyclical impact of the turmoil?  
At the very short end of the money market, the international financial turmoil has not reduced 
the Danish banks' readiness to lend kroner to each other. There are indications of a certain 
increase in precautionary liquidity, but there have been no signs of tension in the short end of 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
the money market, and Danmarks Nationalbank has not had to conduct extraordinary open 
market operations in this connection.  
Danmarks  Nationalbank's  normal  open  market  operations  take  place  via  a  so-called  open 
window.  The  demand  for  loans  and  certificates  of  deposit  is  met  at  the  rate  of  interest 
determined by Danmarks Nationalbank. In other words, the counterparties have a fairly wide 
scope for structuring their liquidity vis-à-vis Danmarks Nationalbank. The development in the 
banks'  and  mortgage-credit  institutes'  accounts  with  Danmarks  Nationalbank  does  not 
indicate any substantial increase in precautionary liquidity via this channel. 
Longer-term  uncollateralised  money-market  interest  rates  in  kroner  have  increased  due  to 
the  international  turmoil.  The  fluctuations  in  the  spread  between  uncollateralised  and 
collateralised money-market interest rates have, however, been less pronounced in Denmark 
than in the euro area and especially the USA. Even in normal circumstances the turnover in 
this segment of the Danish money market is relatively limited, but naturally the higher interest 
rates  have  affected  the  numerous  financial  products  linked  to  CIBOR  and  similar  interest 
rates. 
From  time  to  time,  Danish  banks  have  had  difficulties  in  raising  dollar-denominated  loans. 
This  is  not  an  isolated  Danish  phenomenon;  banks  in  other  European  countries  have 
experienced the same difficulties. Danmarks Nationalbank cannot provide liquidity facilities to 
cover borrowing requirements in foreign exchange since its role is primarily linked to krone-
denominated  liquidity.  Banks  with  large  business  volumes  in  foreign  exchange  must 
themselves ensure adequate contingency funding plans in the relevant currencies.  
Overall,  the  Danish  money  market  has  navigated  fairly  successfully  through  these  rough 
waters,  which  ultimately  shows  that  the  Danish  financial  system  is  in  good  shape. 
Nevertheless, Denmark has been affected by the international turmoil. Financial statements 
for  the  3rd  quarter  showed  that  Danish  banks  were  also  exposed  to  investment  vehicles, 
liquidity  lines  and  structured  credit  products.  The  exposures  and  losses  were,  however, 
relatively small in size.  
Lending by Danish banks has increased substantially in recent years, and some have seen 
growth rates in excess of 30 per cent. Earnings have been high and losses low. Particularly 
mortgage loans to homeowners have grown significantly.  
Growth  in  lending  has  been  so  strong  that  a  large  deposit-loan  gap  of  more  than  kr.  400 
billion  has  accumulated.  This  is  the  amount  by  which  the  banks'  lending  exceeds  the 
deposits from customers. Consequently, the Danish banks have to rely on the financial and 
money markets as sources of financing. Developments abroad over the summer have shown 
that it can be risky to base one's business on such financing. The price of market financing 
may  change  rapidly,  and  the  markets  may  "dry  up".  The  international  liquidity  crisis  has 
provided  an  opportunity  to  test  the  contingency  funding  plans  and  review  the  business 
strategy in the light of the findings.  
It is not as easy as it used to be for the Danish banks to finance their growth via the financial 
and  money  markets.  Financing  has  become  more  expensive,  and  the  rising  costs  of 
financing  will  undoubtedly  be  reflected  in  the  banks'  earnings  and  the  prices  charged  to 
customers. Growth in lending remains high, but declining. Some banks have adopted a less 
aggressive business strategy and put their expansion plans on hold. Others have expressed 
intentions to reduce their commitments to international investment vehicles, liquidity lines and 
structured credit products due to reputational risk.  
Developments have shown that strategies based on double-digit growth rates cannot simply 
be extended. The strong growth in lending to the corporate sector entails a greater risk of 
losses to the banks. This risk is rising, but from a very low level.  
Unpleasant  surprises  can  never  be  ruled  out,  but  the  economy  is  still  favourable.  And  the 
financial statements for the 3rd quarter also showed that the banks' earnings remain high. 
Solvency is generally sound, and writedowns are low. Viewed in that perspective, Danmarks 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2007
to 
for 
the  Danish  banks.  The  necessary  adaptations 
Nationalbank is currently of the opinion that the international turmoil may serve as a "useful" 
wake-up  call 
the  changing 
circumstances  can  be  made  in  a  timely  manner  without  any  serious  costs  to  the  large 
majority of the banks or to the economy as a whole. 
What is the cyclical impact of the turmoil?  
Growth in the global economy has been unusually high in recent years. However, the turmoil 
in the financial markets has given rise to concern about the future development.  
Growth  has  declined  in  the  USA,  although  the  crisis  in  the  US  mortgage  market  and  the 
derived financial turmoil has not yet been fully reflected in the rest of the economy. So far, 
the upswing is set to continue in Europe and Asia, and the outlook is also positive for Africa 
and Latin America. Oil prices have risen strongly in recent months and have put a damper on 
growth prospects while also adding to inflationary pressures.  
Until  now,  the  international  organisations  have  reduced  their  growth  forecasts  only 
moderately – except in respect of the USA, where growth in 2008 is now predicted to be less 
than 2 per cent – but no recession is foreseen. Clear concerns are expressed as to whether 
the uncertainty linked to the financial markets and the downturn in the housing market – not 
only in the USA – will spread to the rest of the economy, thereby further curbing growth in the 
USA and also affecting Europe.  
In  a  Danish  perspective,  the  outlook  for  the  export  markets  remains  positive,  but  with  a 
downward trend.  
Denmark is still in a strong boom with a hot labour market and capacity pressures on large 
parts of the economy.  
The rate of unemployment remains surprisingly low.  
The tight labour market means that the capacity pressure will remain high, although growth in 
demand is expected to moderate somewhat. This pressure has led to a surge in imports and 
in recent quarters also to a higher rate of wage increase and higher domestic price pressure, 
reflecting  the  fact  that  wages  and  prices  normally  react  to  cyclical  developments  with  a 
substantial time lag. A potential setback may therefore be prolonged if the cost level at the 
outset is too high compared with abroad.  
The high temperature in the economy at the moment entails a major risk that this will be the 
case.  
On  account  of  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy,  interest  rates  in  Denmark  are  aligned  with 
those of the euro area, which is not as far into the economic cycle as Denmark is. Contrary to 
expectations, interest rates have not risen recently. This is due to the turmoil in the financial 
markets.  
In this situation it would be somewhat remarkable if the Danish government still proposes an 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  in  2008.  When  preparing  the  new  Finance  Bill  for  2008,  the 
government  should  reassess  its  fiscal  policy  with  a  view  to  easing  the  pressure  on  the 
economy. Omitting to do so may entail tougher requirements at a later stage.  
Next  spring  will  bring  collective  bargaining  within  the  public  sector.  Among  public-sector 
employees there are expectations of sizeable pay rises, supported by recent years' shortage 
of labour and focus on the quality of public-sector services.  
Several political parties have spoken in favour of an extraordinary wage boost for large or 
small  groups  of  public-sector  employees  via  a  special  pool  of  funds  earmarked  for  this 
purpose.  
I would like to issue a strong warning against making wage bargaining in the public-sector 
labour  market  a  parliamentary  issue  at  this  stage.  The  risk  that  the  parties  will  attempt  to 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 3
outdo  one  another  is  imminent,  and  premature  intervention  by  the  politicians  prevents 
genuine bargaining. This could set a very unfortunate precedent.  
As  if  that  was  not  enough,  next  spring  will  also  see  collective  bargaining  in  the  financial 
sector. I therefore take this opportunity to point out that the results in this sector may send a 
signal to the rest of the labour market.  
Finally, I would like to thank the Danish Bankers Association for our fine cooperation. I look 
forward to continuing along the same positive lines.  
4 
 BIS Review 145/2007
