Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing interlinkages and opportunities – the role of 
Islamic finance 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Islamic 
Finance  Conference  "Islamic  Finance  in  Southeast  Asia:  Local  Practices,  Global  Impact"; 
Georgetown University, Washington DC, 18 October 2007. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here in Washington D.C. to speak at this important conference 
which  has  brought  together  policymakers,  market  practitioners,  members  of  the  academia 
and the business community to discuss the new opportunities in Islamic finance and its role 
in enhancing international financial linkages. It is exactly five years ago, when I spoke on this 
very subject of Islamic Finance at the First International Islamic Finance Conference that was 
held in Washington D.C. in 2002. The issues discussed at that time were on the challenges 
faced in developing an efficient and robust Islamic financial system. Five years hence, the 
Islamic financial system has evolved significantly to become a dynamic and competitive form 
of  financial  intermediation  in  the  global  financial  system.  This  transformation  has  been 
achieved in an increasingly challenging environment.  
My remarks today will focus on this transformation that has taken place in these five years in 
both  the  national  and  international  Islamic  financial  system.  Most  significant  has  been  the 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  markets,  the  increase  in  the  range  of  the  financial 
products and services, the increasing significance of the international dimension of Islamic 
finance, the development of the international Islamic financial architecture, and the enhanced 
international inter-linkages that has been brought about by these developments.  
Transformation of the Islamic financial landscape  
As recent as five years ago, the development of Islamic finance was regarded as an infant 
industry striving to prove its viability and competitiveness. At that time, the growth of Islamic 
finance was organic and largely concentrated in countries where the Muslim population was 
significant.  In  these  five  years,  Islamic  finance  has  recorded  dramatic  growth  and  has  a 
presence in more than 75 countries both in Muslim and non-Muslim dominated communities. 
There are also a growing number of the international financial centres that are beginning to 
offer Islamic financial products and services such as in London, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
The number of Islamic banking institutions worldwide including conventional banks that are 
offering Islamic banking services have doubled to more than 300. The total Islamic financial 
assets  under  their  management  is  now  estimated  to  exceed  one  trillion  US  dollars,  about 
fivefold its magnitude five years ago. 
Islamic  finance  is  now  among  the  fastest  growing  financial  segments  in  the  international 
financial system with an estimated average annual growth of between 15 to 20 percent. More 
recently,  there  has  been  a  growing  diversity  in  the  range  of  products  and  services  being 
offered and in the markets that have been developed. The sukuk market, that is the Islamic 
bond  market  denominated  in  international  currencies,  has  registered  a  remarkable  growth, 
having doubling in size to amount to USD28 billion compared to a year ago. Including sukuks 
denominated in domestic currencies, the size of the market is now about USD82 billion. This 
market  is  expected  to  continue  to  expand  significantly  given  the  massive  financing 
requirements for infrastructure investment and other private sector investment by countries 
that have shown interest in Islamic funding. 
There  has  also  been  significant  innovation  in  Islamic  financial  products.  This  has  been 
especially evident in the sukuk products. Following the Malaysian Government issuance of 
the  world's  first  global  sovereign  sukuk  in  2002,  there  has  been  several  other  sovereign 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 1
sukuks  issued  by  other  countries.  This  development  has  also  encouraged  the  issuance  of 
international  corporate  sukuks  by  multinational  and  domestic  corporations.  Innovative 
instruments  that  have  been  developed  include  the  landmark  issuance  in  2006  of  the 
exchangeable  sukuk  by  Khazanah Nasional,  the  Malaysian  sovereign wealth  management 
entity. In this arrangement, the sukuk can be exchanged for other shares held by Khazanah. 
In the same year, a convertible sukuk, in which the sukuk can be converted to the issuer's 
own shares upon initial public offering, was issued by a Middle Eastern-based corporation. 
The  derivative  market  has  also  been  developed  with  the  introduction  of  Islamic  currency 
swaps and profit rate swaps. 
There has also been significant growth in Islamic asset and wealth  management following 
the development of diverse and innovative structures of Islamic investment funds, including 
Islamic hedge funds. There are now more than 250 Shariah-compliant mutual funds that are 
managing an estimated USD300 billion in assets. Other developments include the creation of 
benchmark  indices  such  as  the  Dow  Jones  Islamic  Market  Indexes  –  covering  more  than 
USD10  trillion  market  capitalisation  in  over  40  countries,  the  Financial  Times  Stock 
Exchange  Global  Islamic  Index  Series,  and  the  listing  of  Islamic  financial  instruments  on 
international  exchanges.  These  developments  have  enhanced  the  depth  of  the  Islamic 
financial markets as an attractive asset class for investment. 
Another  important  development  in  Islamic  finance  during  this  period  has  been  the 
strengthening  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  architecture.  In  2002,  a  major  structural 
enhancement was the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB), which 
formulates  the  international  regulatory  and  prudential  standards  for  Islamic  finance.  It  has 
since  issued  the  standards  for  capital  adequacy,  risk  management  and  corporate 
governance.  Among  the  standards  that  are  currently  being  formulated  include  market 
conduct and rules for financial disclosure, transparency, the Shariah governance framework 
and the supervisory review process. This is to ensure best practices and the soundness and 
stability of the Islamic financial system.  
The IFSB now has 137 members that include 35 regulatory and supervisory authorities, five 
international inter-government organisations including the BIS, World Bank and the IMF, and 
97 market players and professional firms from 22 jurisdictions. Of significance to note is that 
the membership of the IFSB comprises several authorities and international institutions from 
the non-Muslim countries. The IFSB complements the Accounting and Auditing Organisation 
for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) which was established earlier in 1991, to set the 
accounting  standards  to  ensure  that  the  true  and  fair  value  are  reflected  in  the  financial 
transactions  and  to  ensure  greater  accountability  and  responsibility  of  the  financial 
institutions.  
Finally,  these  developments  have  been  reinforced  by  greater  liberalisation  to  increase  the 
international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance.  With  increased  international  participation  in 
Islamic financial markets, it has prompted increased cross-border Islamic financial flows. In 
addition, Islamic financial institutions that had previously operated only in their own domestic 
jurisdictions have begun to venture abroad to tap new growth opportunities in other regions. 
This  new  international  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  has  enhanced  further  the  international 
inter-linkages in this more globalised environment. 
Islamic finance: operating in a challenging and evolving environment 
The evolution and expansion of Islamic finance has occurred in a fast changing and dynamic 
international environment. In the context of a more challenging and competitive environment, 
the  issue  of  financial  stability,  viability  and  competitiveness  are  paramount.  This  is 
particularly  evident  in  the  recent  developments  experienced  in  the  international  financial 
system.  An  important  element  of  Islamic  finance  is  the  strength  and  soundness  it  derives 
from its Shariah principles. Islamic finance has an inbuilt dimension that promotes soundness 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2007
and stability, underpinned by the Shariah injunctions. These Shariah injunctions essentially 
interweave the financial transactions with genuine productive activities.  
The  soundness  and  viability  of  Islamic  finance  as  a  form  of  financial  intermediation  is 
premised  on  the  fundamental  requirement  that  Islamic  financial  transactions  need  to  be 
supported  by  an  underlying  productive  activity.  There  is  therefore  always  a  close  link 
between financial and productive flows. The financial transaction has to be accompanied by 
genuine trade or lease-based and business related transactions where interest is eliminated 
and profits or rentals are the economic rewards. Alternatively, the Islamic financial institution 
may enter into a joint venture as a means of financing, in which it becomes a joint partner in 
the economic activity based on a pre-specified profit sharing arrangement. In addition, there 
are also explicit restrictions on unethical and speculative financial activities.  
The  intrinsic  nature  of  Islamic  finance  also  encourages  risk  management  and  provides 
confidence  through  explicit  disclosure  and  transparency  of  the  roles  and  responsibilities 
defined  in  the  contract.  In  Islamic  finance,  strategies  to  minimize  and  manage  the  risks 
involve  integrating  the  risks  in  the  real  activities.  The  real  activities  thus  need  to  generate 
sufficient  wealth  to  compensate  for  such  risks.  In  contrast,  conventional  instruments 
generally separate the risks from the underlying assets. As a result, risk management and 
wealth  creation  may,  at  times,  move  in  different  or  even  opposite  directions.  Conventional 
financial  instruments  also  allow  for  the  commoditisation  of  risks,  leading  to  its  proliferation 
through  multiple  layers  of  leveraging  and  disproportionate  distribution.  This  could  result  in 
higher systemic risks, increasing the potential for instability and inequitable concentration of 
wealth.  
The intrinsic principle of governance also contributes towards insulating the Islamic financial 
system from potential risks from excessive leverage and speculative financial activities. The 
explicit  and  transparent  nature  of  Islamic  financial  contracts  and  the  greater  disclosure  of 
information are important in contributing to the stability of the system. The focus of Islamic 
investment  also  not  only  involves  riba  free  activities  but  also  extends  to  include  issues 
related  to  ethical  values  and  fair  trade.  The  Islamic  investment  guidelines  thus  share  a 
number of similarities with socially responsible investment (SRI) principles.  
New opportunities and linkages offered by Islamic finance 
Islamic  finance  is  now  at  the  threshold  of  a  new  dimension  in  which  it  has  an  increased 
potential  role  to  strengthen  international  financial  inter-linkages  between  nations.  Islamic 
finance  has  the  potential  to  contribute  towards  the  efficient  mobilization  and  allocation  of 
funds across regions. Regions with surplus savings may channel funds to regions with deficit 
savings  and  to  bring  about  a  more  inclusive  global  financial  integration.  Financial  linkages 
are now gaining ground as intra-regional financial flows are increasing in significance. In this 
context,  Islamic  finance  has  become  a  new  vehicle  contributing  to  increasing  the  financial 
linkages  within  Asia  thereby  facilitating  cross-border  allocation  of  capital  in  the  region. 
However, it not only has a potential role in strengthening integration and linkages within Asia, 
but also more importantly in forging linkages with other dynamic emerging regions such as 
the Middle East.  
Several  economies  within  Asia  are  now  beginning  to  participate  in  these  trends  thus 
strengthening  further  economic  and  financial  linkages  between  these  two  dynamic  growth 
regions.  This  enhanced  inter  regional  linkages  between  Asian  and  the  Middle  East  has 
created  an  environment  of  activity  reminiscent  of  the  Old  Silk  Road.  This  suggests  that  a 
New  Silk  Road  has  emerged  in  which  financial  services  providers  across  continents  now 
operate on this new route. While the New Silk Road reflects the linkages between Asia and 
the Middle East, the Silk Road has always been extended to the rest of the world. There is 
thus the potential for greater participation by global investors and the international financial 
community. 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 3
Islamic finance essentially presents value propositions for both investors and issuers in the 
respective markets, in particular, the sukuk market. For investors, Islamic financial products 
offer  portfolio  diversification  and  new  investment  opportunities  in  the  form  of  new  asset 
classes.  For  issuers,  Islamic  finance  allows  access  to  a  new  source  of  funds  and  liquidity 
besides providing, new risk management options and new mechanisms for price discovery. A 
number of international financial centres have recognised Islamic finance as an integral part 
of  their  financial  markets  in  order  to  complete  the  suite  of  financial  products  and  services 
available,  and  are  therefore  actively  developing  this  segment.  This  trend  is  envisaged  to 
stretch the New Silk Road from Asia and Middle East and extend to the West and to other 
parts of the world.  
Further opportunities: the Sukuk market 
Among the more significant developments in Islamic finance in the recent period has been 
the development of the Sukuk market. Although the size of the Sukuk market is modest by 
global  standards,  the  Sukuk  market  has  experienced  remarkable  growth,  increasing  at  an 
average annual rate of growth of 40 percent. This growth is spurred in part by the growing 
funding  requirements  in  emerging  market  economies,  in  particular,  in  Asia  and  the  Middle 
East in which there has been increased investment activity. There has also been significant 
demand for the Sukuk spurred by the high levels of surplus savings and reserves in Asia and 
in the Middle East. This strong demand has also has been reinforced by the strong financial 
flows  in  the  international  financial  system  that  is  in  search  of  higher  returns  and  greater 
diversification of risks.  
It  has  been  estimated  however  that  about  80  percent  of  the  sukuks  issued  have  been 
subscribed by conventional international investors. Besides the intrinsic value of the sukuk 
which  are  largely  asset-backed,  convertible  for  shares  or  exchangeable  with  shares,  such 
issuances are attractive as they have a wider investor base that comprise conventional and 
Islamic  investors.  With  the  rising  wealth  of  global  investors  seeking  Shariah  compliant 
investments  the  market  has  become  highly  competitive.  More  recently,  it  has  prompted 
corporations  worldwide  including  global  multinational  companies  to  consider  this  as  a 
financing option.  
The development of the sukuk market in Malaysia has involved extensive and wide ranging 
initiatives that include facilitating an efficient issuance process, enhancing the price discovery 
process, establishing of a benchmark yield, broadening of the investor base, promoting the 
liquidity  in  the  secondary  market  and  strengthening  further  the  legal,  regulatory  and  the 
Shariah framework. These initiatives have also been supported by the development of the 
financial infrastructure including the settlement system and the bond information system.  
To  position  Malaysia  as  a  centre  for  origination,  distribution  and  trading  of  sukuk,  further 
steps  have  been  taken  to  liberalise  the  market  to  allow  foreign  corporations  including 
multinational  corporations  and  multilateral  agencies  to  raise  funds  in  the  Malaysian  bond 
market. Funds raised by these entities may be used to finance investment activities in other 
jurisdictions. The inaugural ringgit denominated Sukuk issue was in 2004 by the International 
Finance Corporation, and followed by an issue by the IBRD World bank in 2005. In 2006, the 
market  was  further  liberalized  to  allow  foreign  currency  denominated  sukuks  to  be  issued 
from  the  Malaysian  market.  These  sukuk  issues  have  attracted  foreign  investors,  thereby 
strengthening our inter-linkages with other international financial markets. Profits or income 
received by non-residents for investments in ringgit and non-ringgit Islamic securities issued 
in Malaysia are also exempted from withholding tax. In addition, the Government has granted 
tax neutrality measures to accommodate the sukuk issuance.  
To further enhance Malaysia's international financial linkages with other parts of the world, 
the domestic Islamic banking sector was liberalised further in 2004 with the issuance of new 
licenses to foreign Islamic financial institutions. In addition, the allowed foreign shareholding 
in Islamic financial institutions was raised to 49 percent of the total equity in existing Islamic 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2007
financial institutions. New licenses are also extended to entities to conduct Islamic banking 
business  and  takaful  and  retakaful  business  in  international  currencies.  These  institutions, 
which may have up to 100% foreign equity ownership, are given operational flexibility to be 
established as a branch or subsidiary and enjoy a tax holiday for 10 years under the Income 
Tax Act.  
Concluding remarks 
The foundations for the sustainable global development of Islamic finance have now been 
put  in  place.  Going  forward,  three key  elements  will  be  important  in sustaining  the  current 
momentum. These include the investment in research and development and hence promote 
innovation, the development of the pool of talent, and the greater use of technology in Islamic 
finance. 
Islamic  finance  as  an  emerging  form  of  financial  intermediation  would  require  tremendous 
investment in research and development to promote innovation. Of importance is to develop 
a broader range of Islamic financial market instruments that include instruments with equity 
ownership features, Islamic asset-backed securities, inclusion of permissible forms of credit 
enhancements as well as Shariah-compliant risk mitigating instruments. The development of 
an Islamic derivatives market for hedging is required for market-making activities to support 
the  development  of  secondary  markets.  Malaysia  has  recently  established  a  Shariah 
Scholar's  fund  to  fund  such  research  and  development  efforts.  The  fund  also  aims  to 
promote greater engagement among the international Shariah scholars and thus provide a 
platform  for  deliberation  on  the  Shariah  compatibility  of  newly  developed  Islamic  financial 
instruments and markets.  
As Islamic finance continues its robust international expansion, an adequate supply of talent 
and expertise is vital to support the growth. While shortages in talent are now being felt, this 
is  being  addressed  on  several  fronts.  To  develop  the  expertise  to  meet  the  increasing 
manpower  requirements  of  Islamic  finance,  Malaysia  has  in  2006  established  the 
International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF). It is envisioned that INCEIF 
acts as a professional certification body and education institute for post-graduates in Islamic 
Finance.  Reinforcing  this  is  the  International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance  (ICLIF)  in 
Malaysia  that  provides  for  leadership  and  management  programmes  for  the  financial 
services sector including for Islamic finance.  
As  Islamic  finance  forges  ahead,  successful  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  be  those  that 
have the scale and are able to exploit the full potential and opportunities that arise from the 
advances  in  information  technology  (IT).  In  embracing  new  leading  edge  technology,  the 
potential  for  the  Islamic  financial  industry  to  provide  new  products  and  services  will  be 
enhanced. It also represents the potential to increase access through a wider range of new 
delivery  channels,  including  enhancing  efficiency  while  reducing  costs  for  consumers  and 
businesses. IT needs to be leveraged on in making strategic decisions in the alignment of the 
business, in elevating the institutional capacity and operational efficiency and strengthening 
risk management capabilities. 
Despite the more challenging and dynamic environment we have seen, Islamic finance has 
continued  to  emerge  as  a  vibrant  and  resilient  form  of  financial  intermediation  that  is 
increasingly being embraced on a global scale to become an integral part of the international 
financial  system.  In  the  process  of  its  development,  it  has  further  expanded  the  set  of 
opportunities for the participation by the international financial community and thus increases 
the  inter-linkages  both  within  and  between  economic  regions  of  the  world.  In  enhancing 
these  new  linkages  and  greater  integration,  Islamic  finance  is  envisaged  to  contribute 
towards unlocking new potentials that would bring mutual benefits, and in doing so, enhance 
our overall prospects. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 121/2007 
 5
