Guy Quaden: The outlook for the European economy, the turmoil in 
financial markets and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  a  business 
dinner, Dubai, 31 October 2007. 
 I thank you very much for your invitation to this business dinner. I am very pleased to have 
the  opportunity  to  spend  a  few  days  in  the  United  Arab  Emirates,  one  of  the  most  quickly 
developing regions in the world and in my eyes one of the most fascinating places to be. 
I  will  present  some  remarks  about  the  outlook  for  the  European  (eurozone)  economy,  the 
consequences of the turmoil in financial markets (but not about the causes of the turbulence 
and the first lessons to be drawn: it will be the subject of another speech) and the stance of 
the monetary policy. 
The latest news from Europe is not bad. 2006 was an excellent year and prospects for this 
year  and  next  year  remain  positive.  However  the  uncertainty  surrounding  these  prospects 
has increased. 
The  world  has  been  experiencing  a  fairly  long  period  of  economic  good  times.  For  a  few 
years the strong activity has been driven only by the United States and the emerging markets 
whereas Europe seemed to stand back. However the pace of global economic activity has 
become more balanced across the main economic regions. 
After having gone through a protracted period of subdued growth and short-lived recoveries, 
Europe  was  in  the  upswing  of  a  cycle  since  early  2005,  backed  in  particular  by  the  long-
awaited recovery in the largest economy of the zone, Germany. 
In  2006,  real  GDP  expanded  by  2.9  %  in  the  eurozone,  twice  the  rate  recorded  in  the 
previous  year.  Investment  increased  by  5.2  %  and  private  consumption  also  picked-up. 
Gross exports rose by an impressive 8.2 %. However the contribution of net exports to GDP 
growth was relatively moderate (0.3 %) because imports also rose significantly. 
Therefore last year GDP growth in the eurozone was mainly driven by the faster increase in 
domestic demand, sustained in particular by a steady improvement in the labour market. The 
number  of  employed  people  rose  by  around  2  million  (1.4  %)  and  the  unemployment  rate 
dropped  in  2007  to  the  lowest  level  since  1993.  Moderate  wage  developments  have  also 
contributed to stronger employment growth. 
That  said,  the  level  of  unemployment  in  the  eurozone  (close  to  7  %)  is  still  high  in 
comparison with other regions and there remain inefficiencies and rigidities in labour markets 
to be tackled through further structural reforms. 
Until this summer, the diagnosis of the economic situation in the eurozone was bright. The 
outlook  was  seen  as  favourable,  supported  by  both  the  external  and  internal  pillars  of 
demand. According to the June 2007 Eurosystem staff projections, GDP growth in the euro 
area was projected to be close to 2.6 % in 2007 and 2.3 % in 2008. 
Obviously the turbulence in financial markets has clouded the prospects to some extent. The 
potential  impact  of  this  turmoil  on  the  real  economy  is  still  difficult  to  assess.  So  far  the 
effects  have  been  limited.  While  euro  area  consumer  and  business  confidence  indicators 
declined in September, and most of the early indicators available fell slightly in October too, 
they were still above their historical averages and continued to point to ongoing sustained 
growth  during  the  second  half  of  2007.  Very  recently,  the  IMF  staff  forecasted  real  GDP 
growth in the euro area at 2.5 % in 2007 and 2.1 % in 2008 and most private sector forecasts 
are close to these numbers. 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 1
As regards the short – and medium – term outlook, I would make a distinction between the 
main scenario, which is the most likely outcome, and the risk assessment. The most likely 
scenario remains favourable with growth still close to our potential but it is now surrounded 
by much more uncertainty than usual. And that applies to other regions of the world. 
World  economic  growth  is  expected  to  remain  robust  over  the  medium  term,  despite  the 
slowdown of the US economy, because the emerging market economies should continue to 
expand at a rapid pace. As the recent IMF World Economic Outlook points out, China, India 
and Russia have together accounted for half of global growth over the past year, and further 
strong expansion is also expected in other emerging markets and developing countries. This 
trend should improve living conditions and income for a large part of the world's population. It 
is also a source of continued support for euro area exports and investment. 
However  the  slowdown  in  the  US  economy  could  be  more  pronounced  and  the  US  dollar 
exchange  rate  could  come  under  renewed  downward  pressure.  In  these  conditions,  it 
remains to be seen whether the recent signs of emerging economies de-coupling from US 
developments  will  usher  in  a  sustainable  process.  Another  crucial  question  is  whether  the 
euro will continue to bear more than its share in the resorption of global imbalances. Here I 
refer to the continuous strengthening of the exchange rate of the euro not only vis-à-vis the 
US dollar but also vis-à-vis the currencies of countries recording year after year large current 
account surpluses. 
Domestic  demand  for  its  part  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  strong  corporate  sector 
earnings,  healthy  balance  sheets,  still  moderate  interest  rates  (lower  than  in  the  US)  and 
better  labour  market  conditions.  The  central  scenario  assumes  financial  markets  gradually 
returning  to  normal,  which  does  not  mean  that  we  should  expect  risks  to  be  underpriced 
again,  but  simply  that  the  current  liquidity  crunch  will  not  turn  into  a  fully-fledged  credit 
crunch. This view is supported inter alia by the resilience of major financial institutions and 
more generally of the global financial system. True, profits have recently been deteriorating. 
Nevertheless  this  downturn  in  profitability  starts  out  from  a  very  high  position.  So  far, 
potential credit losses appear to be manageable and banks' capital bases being largely in 
excess  of  regulatory  requirements  seem  to  be  sufficiently  solid  to  face  additional  stress. 
Nonetheless,  the  uncertainty  about  the  exact  magnitude  and  distribution  of  these  losses 
remains and is a major cause of the persistent liquidity squeeze. 
Therefore  less  benign  scenarios  cannot  be  ruled  out  altogether  and  the  financial  turmoil 
might affect bank lending conditions for households and non-financial corporations, through 
higher  costs  of  financing  or  more  restrictive  credit  standards,  as  well  as  corporate  bond 
spreads.  To  a  certain  extent  this  seems  to  be  happening  already,  although  the  levels 
reached so far do not seem really worrying. All in all, credit standards and bond spreads are 
still  well  below  the  situation  seen  in  2001-2003.  Furthermore,  the  tightening  of  credit 
conditions is expected to affect mainly M & A activities, more than fixed investments. 
Finally, greater uncertainty could curb both entrepreneurs' and consumers' confidence. It is 
up  to  policy-makers  to  ensure  sound  economic  conditions  and  thus  contribute  to  the 
preservation of economic agents' confidence. For its part, the Eurosystem – the European 
Central  Bank  and  the  national  central  banks  associated  in  the  single  European  monetary 
policy – has faced up to its responsibilities in this respect. 
As  the  other  central  banks,  the  Eurosystem  has  to  conduct  the  European  monetary  policy 
with  a  clear  medium-term  orientation.  It  therefore  sets  interest  rates  with  the  aim  of 
preserving price stability. This action hinges on a macroeconomic assessment of the risks to 
price stability. On the other hand, the Eurosystem conducts money market operations that 
provide  liquidity  to  ensure  the  orderly  functioning  of  the  money  market.  Monetary  policy 
decisions  are  about  the  level  of  official  interest  rates.  Once  the  level  of  interest  rates  is 
decided,  the  Eurosystem  has  the  responsibility  of  ensuring  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
segment of the money market that it is able to influence. It should be very clear that these 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2007
two responsibilities should not be confused. However in fulfilling these two responsibilities, 
they reinforce each other, to the benefit of both macroeconomic and financial stability. 
In order to restore orderly conditions on the money markets, the Eurosystem injected liquidity 
over and above what is needed by the banking system under normal circumstances, through 
regular  MRO  allotments,  ad  hoc  fine-tuning  operations  and  supplementary  longer-term 
refinancing operations (LTROs). These injections allowed banks to front-load the fulfilment of 
their reserve requirements and eased the tensions on the overnight interbank market. The 
Eurosystem also absorbed excess reserves  when needed to avoid downward pressure on 
overnight rates. 
While the Eurosystem's liquidity-providing and absorbing operations had a stabilising effect 
on euro money markets at the shortest end, market liquidity remains thin and activity limited 
in the unsecured interbank market. Recently, the ECB clearly communicated to the markets 
that it will reinforce its policy of allocating sufficient liquidity to accommodate the demand of 
counterparties to meet reserve requirements early within the maintenance period. This policy 
will be followed as long as necessary. However, the restoration of normal conditions over the 
whole  maturity  spectrum  depends  mainly  on  the  return  of  confidence  and  trust  by  market 
participants,  both  in  the  other  participants  and  in  their  own  ability  to  access  funding  in 
sufficient amounts. 
It  must  be  emphasised  that  the  Eurosystem  conducted  these  operations  through  standard 
market-compliant procedures and without changing the overall stance of monetary policy. Let 
me now turn to an assessment of the monetary policy stance at the current juncture. 
The primary mandate of the Eurosystem is to deliver price stability in the medium term. On 
the basis of a thorough economic and monetary analysis and by acting in a firm and timely 
manner,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  to  ensure  that  medium-  and  long-term 
inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability, thereby favouring an 
environment conducive to sustained economic growth and well-functioning markets. 
The  rise  of  many  commodities  prices  –  in  particular  oil  –,  the  dynamism  of  monetary 
developments  and  the  emergence  of  capacity  constraints,  implied  upside  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term. This led us to issue in the summer a new message of "strong 
vigilance". 
However,  since  then,  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  which  is  never  pre-commited,  has  not 
changed policy rates. What happened ? The incoming macroeconomic data remained in line 
with our baseline scenario and confirmed that risks to price stability are mainly on the upside 
over the medium term, as identified by both our economic and monetary analysis. However, 
the continued financial market volatility and ongoing reappraisal of risk has undoubtedly led 
to an increase in uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook, due to the possible effects of 
these financial developments on the real economy. Therefore, it was appropriate to gather 
additional information before drawing further conclusions for monetary policy. 
This  (very  attentive)  "wait  and  see"  attitude  did  not  jeopardise  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability  over  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  a  market-driven  tightening  of  monetary  conditions 
could  be  observed,  as  money  market  rates  have  risen,  lending  standards  have  somewhat 
tightened and the euro exchange rate has again appreciated. By the way, let me remind you 
that  the  Eurosystem  has  no  target  for  the  euro  exchange  rate,  as  the  primary  objective 
concerns  internal  stability.  However,  the  exchange  rate  is  an  important  indicator  in  the 
economic analysis, in particular to the extent that it influences the overall outlook for price 
stability. 
At its last meeting on 4 October, the ECB Governing Council still considered this outlook for 
price stability over the medium term to be subject to upside risks. It gave itself a period of 
time  to  analyse  incoming  information  in  order  to  refine  and  update  its  risk  assessment.  In 
particular,  should  financial  market  tensions  persist  or  intensify,  they  would  affect  financing 
conditions more significantly and eventually economic activity too. These downside risks are, 
BIS Review 124/2007 
 3
I think, relevant both for the growth and the inflation outlook, as they have the potential to 
alleviate some of the expected upward pressure on prices of a cyclical nature embedded in 
the baseline scenario. Conversely, should the financial turbulence fade away and the main 
scenario  be  confirmed,  our  monetary  policy  should  be  and  would  be  ready  to  counter 
possible upside risks to price stability. 
Uncertainty having increased, times have once again become more challenging for central 
bankers.  More  than  ever  they  require  from  us  to  make  appropriate,  overall  and  forward-
looking judgments. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2007
