Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – economic outlook and perspectives  
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Federation 
of Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FPCCI), Karachi, 26 November 2007. 
 Let  me  start  off,  by  first  thanking  the  Federation  of  Pakistan  Chamber  of  Commerce  and 
Industry (FPCCI) and its office bearers and other members for inviting me at FPCCI.  
The economy of Pakistan continues to perform well. This is commendable given the political 
noise  in  the  country  and  the  growing  challenges  in  international  economic  and  financial 
markets.  2000  onwards  by  and  large  world  economy  enjoyed  a  fairly  benign  economic 
environment. However it is now certain, more than in the last few weeks that financial and 
economic vulnerabilities have grown across the world and is likely to impact global outlook. 
Upfront it has to be acknowledged that despite these adverse developments by all accounts 
the  world  thus  far  has  persevered  recent  shocks  quite  well  given  that  underlying  financial 
health and macroeconomic fundamentals of both advanced and emerging economies were 
quite strong.  
Among the key factor impacting global economy is the financial market turmoil. It originated 
in  U.S  Subprime  mortgage  markets  in  2006  but  spread  with  incremental  speed  from  June 
2007  into  the  money  markets  and  transcended  boundaries  hitting  Europe  and  other 
economies and resulting in unprecedented liquidity crisis in advanced financial markets as 
manifested  by  the  rising  spreads  in  credit  markets.  Financial  and  economic  costs  of  this 
episode are still being unfolded but are large. It has already caused US and Europe central 
banks to inject liquidity and prompted losses of close to $300 billion in US subprime markets 
(of  $1.2  trillion).  The  losses  are  bound  to  further  rise  as  interest  rates  resets  on  these 
transactions  hit  the  borrowers  further.  Furthermore,  profitability  of  a  number  of  large  and 
strategic commercial banks has been lowered as banks had to write off and provision for the 
losses on their own balance sheets of sub-prime and other asset backed commercial paper 
as  well  as  assume  loss  making  off  balance  sheet  transactions,  while  rescuing  structured 
vehicles and/or troubled affiliates. The financial market turmoil has impacted private equity 
and debt markets where spreads have risen. The problems of subprime mortgages market 
are now well acknowledged to drag the housing sector of U.S and its growth.  
Additional  risks  which  cloud  global  economic  prospects  are  rise  in  inflationary  pressures 
given volatile oil markets and rise in commodity prices going beyond precious and industrial 
metals  to  foods  such  as  wheat,  soybean  oil  and  palm  oil  that  have  reached  record  highs 
during  2007.  Weakening  dollar  has  further  amplified  the  oil  price  surge.  Combined  with 
financial turbulence this is now inducing investors to diversify away from dollar denominated 
financial assets to commodities – this second round impact carries risks of magnifying the 
inflationary pressures. 
With this backdrop, I propose to provide briefly Pakistan’s economic update attempting to lay 
down  some  emerging  trends  for  FY08  which  require  stronger  vigilance  at  economic  policy 
making level and industry and private sector to be more responsive. In general, it has to be 
underscored  that  despite  domestic  and  international  events,  Pakistan  economic  prospects 
remain strong. 
Barring  impact  of  international  commodities  prices  which  I  will  discuss  shortly,  Pakistan 
financial markets have remained by and large insulated from the financial market turmoil as it 
did  not  have  exposure  to  mortgage  or  other  asset  backed  securities.  The  external  sector 
which has thus far been manageable could however see some spill over impact of US slow 
down if it turns out to be more severe.  
Notwithstanding this conjecture, some emerging trends could have implications for economic 
outcome  of  FY08.  On  production  side,  growth  is  likely  to  be  impacted  by  setback  to  two 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 1
major crops i.e. cotton and rice as they were hit by pest attacks and other problems. Part of 
the  agriculture  crop  shortfalls  could  be  offset  by  the  higher  than  expected  other  crops,  for 
instance  sugarcane  harvest  is  likely  to  touch  new  high  level  of  62.3  million  tons  –  up  by 
13.5% relative to last year.  
July-October  2007  data  for  industrial  production  while  preliminary  reflects  mixed  picture. 
Production  growth  in  construction  related  industries  appear  reasonable  including  cement, 
wood, paints and varnish units, followed by fertilizer, pharmaceuticals, petroleum refining and 
few  metal  and  engineering  good.  In  these  sectors,  Pakistan  can  reduce  rate  of  import 
dependency  (such  as  petroleum  refining  where  production  capacity  is  13.2  million  tons 
relative  to  consumption  which  is  18  million  tons)  through  capacity  augmentation  and  even 
consider exploiting export markets. In contrast to some of these sectors, first quarter results 
of some industries reflect slower growth. For instance deceleration in cotton yarn and cloth, 
which  has  a  weight  of  20.6%  in  large  scale  manufacturing  value  added,  and  footwear, 
automobile,  edible  oil  and  vegetable  ghee  is  evident.  While  demand  remained  strong, 
slowdown  in  manufacturing  sector  emerged  because  of  combination  of  reasons  including 
demand for import substitutes (as Government relaxed imports of automobile), slowdown in 
export  demand  and  increase  in  raw  material  prices  such  as  palm  oil  which  recorded  73% 
growth in value of imports.  
Both  local  manufactures  and  the  Government  need  to  take  measures  to  improve 
competitiveness  of  domestic  goods.  Ensuring  quality  through  innovation,  skill  development 
and technological up-gradation, reducing costs through scale, diversifying product-line in line 
with the market demand, and achieving self sufficiency in raw materials etc. are some of the 
areas where entrepreneurs need to concentrate. Adversities in production sectors is however 
likely to be offset by the continued buoyant performance of services sector which accounts 
for over half of value added of GDP.  
Down turn in inflation, despite its slippage from target, was notable in FY07 relative to trends 
in preceding couple of years. However, surge in food prices is visible. Consumer price index 
(CPI) rose to 9.3% in October 2007 on YoY basis mainly due to a jump in food-CPI by 14.7% 
on  YoY  basis.  Seasonal  factors  such  as  Ramazan,  higher  international  food  prices,  and 
domestic supply shortages contributed to the pressures on food-CPI. 
Consequently  divergence  between  headline  and  core  inflation  grew;  core  inflation  which 
came down to almost 5% in May 07 and remained below average inflation forecast of 6.5% 
has shown signs of picking up. Pressure on core inflation reflect (i) the lingering impact of 
significant growth in monetary expansion in the last few weeks of FY07 as was predicted in 
the Monetary Policy Statement of July 2007 and (ii) the second round impact of food prices.  
As inflationary pressures mount, debates on effectiveness of monetary policy on inflation are 
triggered afresh. Central bank is undoubtedly able to more directly impact core inflation and 
evidence in FY06-07 has shown that monetary policy has paid dividends in bringing down 
core inflation. Higher non-core inflation penetrates economy in different ways  (i) it impacts 
consumer purchasing powers since cutting down essentials is difficult and there is low price 
elasticity of food and energy, (ii) even if the Government delays the direct pass through of 
energy  prices  to  consumers,  businesses  often  pass  through  immediately  higher  costs  of 
energy  on  to  their  consumers,  and  (iii)  with  inflationary  trends  persisting  consumers  and 
producers  higher  inflationary  expectations  set  in  trends  too.  Higher  inflation  expectations 
have become self fulfilling as they have impacted wage setting and pricing decisions now.  
Inflation currently is a global phenomena and driven largely by commodity price trends both 
in energy and food. Inflationary pressures are likely to persist as international wheat prices 
are  up  by  50-60%  because  of  Australian  drought,  low  world  stock  and  continued  high 
demand.  Similarly  palm  oil  prices  are  up  by  94%  in  international  markets  and  soybean  by 
57% due to low production, rising consumption and its application for feed and energy uses. 
In the same way, prices of milk and its products have risen by almost 100% in some markets 
because of reduced EU subsidies, short global supplies and rise in consumption.  
2 
 BIS Review 140/2007
Inflationary  pressures  could  rise,  since  fiscal  imperatives  now  demand  for  Government  to 
pass through the impact of the recent oil prices that reached close to $100 bpl in international 
markets. The direct effect of the recent oil price rise on headline inflation in the United States 
is estimated to be around ½ percentage point by the end of the year.  
But for the tight monetary policy that curbed demand pressures and kept core and headline 
inflation in check, inflationary trends would have been more significant in Pakistan. However, 
SBP may find that it has less room for maneuver if the higher fuel costs have second round 
effects on other prices and wages.  
Macroeconomic sustainability during the course of inflationary period is critical. July to early 
November data reveals that money supply is growing at 3.2% (compared to 2.5% in July-Nov 
FY07), and at 20.1 percent on YoY basis largely because of the pressures of Government 
borrowing and improvement in net foreign assets (NFA). M2 growth is still manageable given 
that in the first 5 months, private sector credit demand grew slower than preceding year.  
Fiscal  pressures  appear  to  be  strong  as  the  Government  despite  higher  receipts  from  the 
National Savings Schemes and the Pakistan Investment Bonds has resorted to central bank 
borrowing. The Government budgetary borrowings from the banking system during July-10 
November  2007  rose  by  Rs  146  billion  compared  to  Rs101  billion  over  the  corresponding 
period  in  2006.  Recent  requirements  have  meant  higher  recourse  to  the  central  bank 
borrowing which is infusing pressure on core inflation.  
Abstracting  from  medium  term  challenges,  the  external  current  account  deficit  over  July-
October,  2007  has  reflected  modest  level  of  contraction  over  the  last  year.  Trade  deficit 
remained high but did benefit from export pick up (though growth remained below FY04-06 
trends)  import  compression  and  was  financed  by  the  continued  growth  in  remittances  by 
22%. During July-October 2007, Pakistan recorded a surplus of $3.2 billion in the capital and 
financial account compared to $2.8 billion last year.  
Most of the surplus emerged from debt flows as the equity flows were impacted by outflows 
in SCRA restricting the net inflow to US$ 124.4 million during July-21 to November 2007 and 
postponement  of  launching  of  new  privatization.  Given  the  commitments  in  pipeline, 
momentum  in  foreign  flows  will  pick  up  further  in  the  last  quarter  supported  also  by  the 
floatation  of  global  deposit  receipts  whose  timing  is  now  coordinated  with  the  settling  of 
domestic scenario and world financial markets which currently exhibit high spreads.  
Strong  economic  activities  along  with  increasing  foreign  exchange  flows  have  resulted  in 
visible  changes  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  recent  years.  In  FY07,  the  foreign 
exchange market grew substantially in both capacity and volumes. Market volumes of foreign 
exchange  transactions grew  steadily  during  the  year,  and  reached  US$  68.5  billion  in  Q4-
FY07, compared to US$ 55.4 billion during the same period last year.  
SBP took a number of initiatives in response to the changing market dynamics. The business 
hours  for  the  foreign  exchange  market  were  extended  in  January  2007,  thus  enabling  the 
banks  to  cater  to  their  customers’  needs  more  effectively.  In  addition,  the  bases  for 
calculating Foreign Exchange Exposure Limit (FEEL) of banks was revised from 10% to 15% 
of  their  paid-up  capital  in  March  2007,  which  increased  the  overall  exposure  limit  of  the 
commercial  banks  from  US$200  million  to  approximately  US$325million,  thus  facilitating 
banks to more effectively manage and price large volume transactions for their customers.  
The  USD/PKR  Exchange  Rate  continued  to  be  market-determined,  and  any  market 
intervention  is  always  aimed  at  moderating  the  rate  of  change  or  diluting  any  excessive 
volatility  in  the  exchange  rate,  rather  than  establishing  any  level  for  it.  SBP  as  a  policy 
doesn’t target any specific exchange rate level and the rate is driven by prevailing demand 
and supply conditions.  
The stability of the exchange rate, though with healthy two-way volatility, has helped bring 
more  confidence  to  the  international  investors  to  attract  long-term  investment  into  the 
economy as well as to our local corporate to amicably price their goods & services. On the 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 3
current FY’08 YTD basis, PKR showed marginal weakness against the USD with a point-to-
point nominal depreciation of about 1.28% as compared to depreciation of 0.25% and 0.97% 
in the last two fiscal years.  
The  PKR  was  amongst  the  few  currencies  of  the  region,  which  depicted  a  marginal 
depreciation, compared to number of other regional currencies such as Indian Rupee, Thai 
Baht, Malaysian Ringitt, and Chinese Yuan gained significant strength against USD during 
the  period.  Hence  in  relation  to  the  regional  currencies  PKR  weakened  significantly  which 
brought price competitiveness to our exporters. 
 PKR
CURRENCY
PAKISTAN
INR
INDIA
BDT
B' DESH
LKR
MYR
S' LANKA
MALAYSIA
CNY
CHINA
THB
THAILAND
%  ∆  FY 081
%  ∆  Since June 06
%  ∆  FY 07
1   Up to Nov 26, 2007       
-1.28%
-0.82%
-0.25%
2.58%
14.62%
11.54%
0.73%
-0.18%
-1.28%
1.58%
16.77%
17.06%
* -ve % shows depreciation against USD, +ve show appreciation against USD
0.88%
-7.85%
-7.20%
2.81%
6.31%
4.75%
2.78%
8.96%
6.05%
 To continue providing stimulus, SBP has facilitated banks liquidity management by regular 
and  effective  auction  and  open  market  operations.  The  rise  in  discount  rate  in  July  2007 
helped  sterilization  of  foreign  inflows  that  in  June  2007  alone  shot  to  Rs  214  billion  and 
added 5 percentage point to monetary expansion. Weekly weighted average overnight rate 
remained within the interest rate band on two percentage points over July-November 2007 
and  below  the  discount  rate.  In  the  first  few  months,  the  demand  for  credit  was  low  but 
because  of  a  variety  of  factors  including  seasonality  and  timing  of  crop  procurement,  wait 
and  see  attitude  for  new  investments,  and  banks  positioning  themselves  to  develop  their 
systems in wake of growing defaults in selected sectors particularly consumer financing and 
agriculture where lending did grow exceptionally.  
However credit for private sector is gaining momentum, as it has started to pick up since the 
last  week  of  September  2007.  First,  there  is  substantial  room  for  banks  to  lend  as  credit-
deposit  ratio  is  around  60-65%  and  liquidity  position  of  banks  is  eased  by  OMOs  as  and 
when required. Second, private sector IPPs are now maturing for drawdown of credit. Third, 
banks that had slowed down because of merger and acquisition activity such as Standard 
Chartered  Bank  and  ABN  Amoro  are  likely  to  regain  their  credit  growth  activity  with  more 
vigour.  Fourth,  companies  which  met  their  demand  from  external  borrowings  are  likely  to 
revert to domestic markets given the widening of spreads overseas. Finally, banks are now 
provisioning  for  loan  losses  which  remain  manageable.  With  these  developments  private 
sector credit is expected to gain momentum.  
Growing liquidity and competition forced banks to lend close to and in some instances below 
KIBOR and overall there was softening of lending rates. Resultantly, the benchmark KIBOR 
has also shown rationalization and 6-month KIBOR has registered a decrease of 61bp on a 
Y-o-Y basis and is currently around 10.0%, despite the increase in Discount Rate by 50bp. 
Banks  have  also  been  responsive  on  deposit  side  to  the  central  bank  calls.  In  November, 
Pakistan Banking Association announced a consensus view of the industry to raise deposit 
rates for saving accounts to minimum of 4% and also prior to that there have been series of 
announcement  of  new  products  for  investors  holding  certain  balances  with  commercial 
banks. These measures along with the zero CRR for long dated deposits and moral suasion 
of central banks has resulted in growth in share of time deposits and rise in weighted deposit 
rates by 181 bps on fresh deposits / 157 bps on outstanding deposits, relative to December 
2005.  
SBP has further been facilitating both the export and long term refinancing. The outstanding 
funds provided by the State Bank and banks to Exporters at 7.5% reached Rs132 billion as 
on 3-11-2007 – which is higher than last year’s trends. SBP has honoured applications for 
around Rs 6.8 billion LTFEOP contracted prior to July 2007. At the same time, it announced 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2007
the implementation of 3% interest rate subsidy for spinning sector and continued to pay R&D 
support  expeditiously  which  has  now  reached  Rs25  billion  on  a  cumulative  basis  since  its 
introduction and SBP disposed off almost 270,000 cases of it. The scheme for Long Term 
Financing  Facility  will  be  operationalized  in  January  2008  as  soon  as  the  details  of  its 
workings have been well understood by the commercial banks. This is a broad based facility 
which  will  make  available  long  term  credit  for  fabric,  garments,  made  up,  towels  ,  rice 
processing, leather & leather garments, sports goods, carpet & wool, surgical instruments in 
the  core  categories,  and  fisheries,  poultry  &  meat,  engineering  goods  etc  in  the 
developmental categories of industrial sectors and is expected to finance both domestic and 
imported plant and machinery equipment for all exporters reporting exports of Rs 300 million 
annually or fifty percent of their production capacity whichever is lower. In order to facilitate 
matters banks are now allowed to make advance payments upto 100% of fob or cfr value of 
goods  against  firm  registered  contracts  and  LCs.  Exporters  are  allowed  issuance  of  bill  of 
lading on document acceptance and document payment basis and also can retain 10% of 
export proceeds in the foreign currency accounts. 
In  conclusion,  our  economic  assessment  and  support  for  industry  should  help  provide  for 
clear  direction  of  economic  trends  and  expectation,  while  positioning  industry  to  plan  its 
futuristic investment in accordance with market incentives. 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 5
