Radovan Jelašić: Key challenges for Serbia and the surrounding region 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Conference 
of  Economist  Media  Group  “Financial  Services  in  the  South  East  Europe”,  Belgrade, 
5 December 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As Serbia slowly but finally returns to Europe, the issues we face are becoming more and 
more “European” and even “international”. Allow me to share with you today my thoughts on 
some of the current topics which represent key challenges not only to us in the NBS, but to 
almost all neighbouring countries! 
Stable  and  efficient  banking  sector  represents  the  key  prerequisite  and  a  guarantee  of 
macroeconomic stability in Serbia today. However, no supervisory measure is more efficient 
in “levelling off” the margins or “convincing” institutions to cut down credit growth than a crisis 
situation in the financial sector. Whereas bank supervisors are constantly vigilant and keep 
taking measures to avert a crisis, crises still happen all the time. And they all have something 
in  common:  1)  they  are  never  planned  though  risk  trends  are  more  or  less  common 
knowledge, 2) they come as a result of operations that are almost impossible to predict, 3) 
their  initial  impact  is  always  underestimated,  but  soon  4)  goes  into  the  other  extreme,  i.e. 
becomes overestimated! 
For seven years now, namely ever since I began attending Annual Meetings of the IMF and 
the World Bank in Washington, G-8 member countries and the IMF staff have been giving 
their semi-annual reports on “orderly winding down of global imbalances”. Almost everybody 
seems  convinced  that  what  we  have  been  going  through  in  recent  months  is  actually  the 
beginning of orderly winding down of global imbalances, though neither the length nor the 
depth of the process can be predicted with any precision yet! 
Strong financial sector in terms of the volume of its capital and reserves, and/or ownership 
structure is more than indispensable against the background of growing external and internal 
risks. On the eve of 2008, we are faced with many more challenges and unknowns both in 
Serbia and wider. Allow me to name just a few: 
• 
Risk  revaluation  in  the  world  market  –  while  most  of  us  remained  quite  unaware, 
only  a  few,  like  the  UK-based  Northern  Rock  Bank,  realized  that  we  had  stepped 
from excess liquidity into the opposite extreme practically overnight. The terms on 
which Serbia borrowed in the world financial market only six months ago seem quite 
unattainable today even to some countries that recently joined the EU. Besides, the 
financial market is expected to be much more critical of some banks which until only 
recently managed to quite easily cleanse their balance sheets through securitization! 
In  all,  “seven  years  of  fat  cows,  i.e.  high  liquidity”  is  already  long  behind  us,  and 
even if it still prevails in some isolated spots, it is exclusively due to massive support 
primarily from the central banks in the Euro Zone, England, Switzerland, and more 
recently the USA!  
Inflation challenges, primarily in the Euro Zone, seem to be ever more present, and 
the  ECB  is  sailing  between  the  Scylla  and  Haribda.  Inflation  in  Germany  has 
reached its 13 year high, M3 continues to grow fast – and these are the two main 
signals used by the ECB when deciding on the level of its reference rate. On the 
other hand, economic growth is losing its momentum, financial sector issues seem 
more and more complicated every day, and the currency is getting stronger with all 
its positive (e.g. cheaper imports of energy products) and negative effects (loss of 
competitiveness, primarily in the USA). It has been long since the money, i.e. cash, 
 BIS Review 148/2007 
 1
 was as expensive as it is in today’s market notwithstanding the above injection of 
liquidity by central banks!  
The issue of home – host supervision comes back as a boomerang with every new 
crisis in the banking sector. Be it BACAG in Austria or IKB in Germany, the issue 
remains the same – distribution of responsibilities is being redesigned, both within 
the country (Austria) and at the level of the EU (e.g. Northern Rock bank).  
 We have been scrutinizing all of the above factors primarily from the aspect of their impact 
on  Serbia,  in  which  a)  relatively  easy  and  cheap  borrowing  abroad  represents  the  key 
prerequisite to financing of the BOP deficit, b) inflationary pressures in the Euro Zone due to 
high  level  of  eurization  spill  over  into  Serbia  relatively  quickly,  and  c)  80%  of  the  banking 
sector is in the majority ownership of well ranked strategic owners from EU countries. 
Internal factors: 
• 
Inflationary pressures in Serbia are growing under the influence of both external and 
internal factors. And while the possibility to influence external factors seems quite 
negligible even by much bigger countries than Serbia, I am of the opinion that we 
should  focus  on  issues  which  are  exclusively  under  our  control.  Pleasant  words, 
“stunts”  from  the  past  or  delaying  price  increases  cannot  do  the  trick,  not  in  the 
medium run, and even less in the long run. Though we in the NBS are satisfied with 
the  core  inflation  result  achieved  in  the  course  of  the  current  year  despite  the 
untimely elections and the related fiscal expansion, doubling of the price of oil, and 
the drought, on the eve of 2008 we are more than concerned and put a question to 
ourselves:  Should  the  prevailing  tendencies  persist,  can  the  NBS  reach  its 
objectives with the instruments at its disposal or must there be new ones added? 
One thing is for sure, to achieve our objectives, we shall use all the instruments at 
our disposal, both old and new, but that shall not make us popular. That much I can 
tell in advance.  
High exposure to foreign currency risk creates additional risks to the financial sector 
as confirmed by the developments during last two weeks. If arguments extended by 
the NBS on the need to borrow in dinars do not seem plausible enough, I sincerely 
hope that recent developments in the market shall force many to reconsider which 
currency  they  should  borrow  in,  namely,  how  to  minimize  their  exposure  to  the 
foreign  currency  risk.  The  role  of  banks  is  of  the  highest  importance  in  terms  of 
warning  against  foreign  currency  risk  exposure,  if  not  for  the  sake  of  their  clients 
than for the sake of their own balance sheet results!  
In the absence of adequate market competition, price signals are transferred slowly 
and  inaccurately.  This  is  most  evident  in  the  case  of  prolonged  and  high 
appreciation of the dinar which is transferred to retail prices with a significant delay. 
World practice points to the rigidity of prices, but it seems that they are practically 
“cemented”  in Serbia today. I sincerely hope that something shall be done in that 
respect,  and  done  exclusively 
the 
macroeconomic  point  of  view,  both  internal  and  external  challenges  require  that 
banks, unless they have already done so, reassess which way and how to proceed.  
In his biography, Alan Greenspan says that market produces constant stress as in order for 
someone  to  gain,  someone  else  has  to  lose.  I  fear  that  many  are  not  yet  aware  that  the 
market is not a guarantee, but a chance to make money! 
And finally, allow me to go back to where I started from. Strong and stable banking sector, 
primarily  in  terms  of  high  quality  and  reliable  ownership  structure,  represents  a  solid 
foundation for macroeconomic stability. Despite all the risks, I remain optimistic that we shall 
be successful in overcoming all of the above challenges. 
for  economic  reasons.  All 
in  all, 
from 
 2 
 BIS Review 148/2007
