V Leeladhar: Basel II and credit risk management 
Inaugural address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
programme on Basel II and Credit Risk Management, organised by the Centre for Advanced 
Financial  Learning 
the  commercial  banks,  Goa, 
15 September 2007. 
the  whole-time  directors  of 
for 
 Mr. Gordy, Mr. Bhattacharya, distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  with  you  this  morning  at  the  inaugural  of  the  third  programme  in  the 
series being organised under the aegis of the Centre for Advanced Financial Leaning (CAFL) 
on the theme of Basel II and Credit Risk Management. I am indeed thankful to the organisers 
for providing me this valuable opportunity to share my thoughts on this very topical subject 
with this august audience – which, needless to say, has a pivotal role to play in implementing 
the Basel II framework in the Indian banking system. In fact, this programme itself, which has 
been tailor made for the whole-time directors of the Indian banks, signifies the importance 
the  RBI  attaches  to  sensitising  the  top  management  of  the  banks  to  the  conceptual 
constructs underpinning the new framework. 
2. I am inclined to believe that the Basel II framework is no longer a novelty for most of you. 
While  the  technical  aspects  of  credit  risk  management  in  the  Basel  II  environment  will  be 
covered during the course of this two-day seminar, I would like to present a brief bird’s eye 
view of the evolution of the capital adequacy norm for the banks over the decades so as to 
put the new framework in perspective, the imperatives that led to its refinement in the form of 
Basel  II,  the  expectations  of  the  RBI  from  the  banking  system  during  the  implementation 
phase and beyond, and the issues and challenges facing us that will need to be addressed in 
implementing the new framework in a non-disruptive manner.  
The evolution of capital standards 
3. It is interesting to note that till the 1980s, the risk-weighted approach to capital adequacy 
was not in vogue but the bank’s capital was measured through the traditional gearing ratios. 
During  the  1980s,  the  increasing  competition  amongst  the  international  banks  and  rapid 
growth  in  their  assets  had  led  to  concerns  about  their  deteriorating  capital  levels.  This 
concern  was  aggravated  by  the  debt  crisis  in  some  of  the  emerging  markets.  While  the 
national authorities and regulators in many countries began exhorting their banks to improve 
their  capital  ratios,  it  was  realised that  varying  approaches  to  capital measurement  across 
countries  made  international  comparisons  difficult  and  there  was  a  need  to  evolve  an 
internationally  consistent  approach 
the  market 
developments  by  the  mid-1980s,  coupled  with  the  regulatory  pressures  for  improving  the 
capital  ratios  for  the  on-balance  sheet  activities  of  the  banks,  had  also  witnessed  a 
phenomenal growth in the banks’ off-balance sheet business – which, at that time, was not 
subject to regulatory capital charge. In this background, the efforts were intensified in 1986 to 
evolve  a  common  and  risk-weighted  approach  to  capital  measurement  rather  than  the 
traditional gearing measure. During 1987, the “Basle Committee on Banking Regulations and 
Supervisory Practices”, as it was then named, arrived at a consensus on 8% as the minimum 
capital adequacy ratio. After a period of consultation with the banks around the world, this 
framework  was  formally  adopted  in  1988  and  was  widely  endorsed  by  the  supervisory 
community, world-wide. This standard came to be commonly known as the Basel Accord or 
Basel I Framework. It was the first ever attempt at harmonising the banks’ capital standards 
across  the  countries,  for  securing  greater  international  competitive  equality  and  to  obviate 
regulatory capital as a source of competitive inequality. 
to  capital  measurement.  Moreover, 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 1
4. The Accord, in its original form, addressed only the credit risks in the banks’ operations. It 
was only in 1996 that an amendment was made to cover the market risks also. The Accord 
had adopted a risk-sensitive approach for making the banks’ capital more responsive to the 
riskiness of their operations. This meant that a bank with a higher risk profile would have to 
maintain  a  higher  quantum  of  regulatory  capital  while  also  ensuring  the  minimum  capital 
ratio. The framework also stipulated, for the first time, a regulatory capital charge for the off-
balance  sheet  business  of  the  banks  so  as  to  capture  their  risk  exposures  more 
comprehensively.  Pursuant  to  the  recommendations  of  the  Committee  on  the  Financial 
System (the first Narsimham Committee, 1991), this framework was implemented in India in 
1992 in a phased manner.  
The imperatives for Basel II 
5.  With  the  passage  of  time,  it  was  realised  that  the  Basel  I  framework  had  several 
limitations.  The  limitations  related  mainly  to  the  underlying  approach  as  also  a  less-than-
comprehensive  scope  of  the  Accord  in  capturing  the  entire  risk  universe  of  the  banking 
entities. Let me dwell a little more on these aspects.  
First,  the  Accord  had  a  broad-brush  approach  under  which  the  entire  exposures  of  banks 
were categorised into three broad risk buckets viz., sovereign, banks and corporates, with 
each category attracting a risk weight of zero, 20 and 100 per cent, respectively. Such a risk 
weighting scheme did not provide for sufficient calibration of the counterparty risk since, for 
instance,  a  corporate  with  “AAA”  rating  and  one  with  “C”  rating  would  attract  identical  risk 
weight  of  100  per  cent  and  require  the  same  regulatory  capital  charge,  despite  significant 
difference in their credit standing. This, in turn, engendered a rather perverse incentive for 
the banks to acquire higher-risk customers in pursuit of higher returns, without necessitating 
a higher capital charge. Such bank behaviour could potentially heighten the risk profile of the 
banking systems as a whole. The design of the Accord was, therefore, viewed as distorting 
the incentive structure in the banking markets and dissuading better risk management. 
Second, the Accord addressed only the credit risk and market risk in the banks’ operations, 
ignoring  several  other  types  of  risks  inherent  in  any  banking  activity.  For  instance,  the 
operational risk, that is, the risk of human error or failure of systems leading to financial loss, 
was not at all addressed – as were the liquidity risk, credit concentration risk, interest rate 
risk in the banking book, etc.  
Third,  since  1988,  the  emergence  of  innovative  financial  products  had  transformed  the 
contours  of  the  banking  industry  and  its  business  model  the  world  over.  The  credit-risk 
transfer  products,  such  as  securitisation  and  credit  derivatives,  enabled  removal  of  on-
balance  sheet  exposures  from  the  books  of  the  banks  when  they  perceived  that  the 
regulatory  capital  requirement  for  such  exposures  was  too  high  and  hiving  off  such 
exposures  would  be  a  better  strategy.  The  Basel  I  framework  did  not  accommodate  such 
innovations and was, thus, outpaced by the market developments.  
6.  In  this  background,  a  need  was  felt  to  create  a  more  comprehensive  and  risk-sensitive 
capital  adequacy  framework  to  address  the  infirmities  in  the  Basel-I  Accord.  The  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  therefore,  after  a  world-wide  consultative 
process  and  several  impact  assessment  studies,  evolved  a  new  capital  regulation 
framework,  called  “International  Convergence  of  Capital  Measurement  and  Capital 
Standards:  A  Revised  Framework”,  which  was  released  in  June  2004.  The  revised 
framework  has  come  to  be  commonly  known  as  “Basel  II”  framework  and  seeks  to  foster 
better risk management practices in the banking industry.  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2007
The objectives of Basel II 
7.  In  order  to  better  appreciate  the  impact  of  Basel  II  on  the  banking  industry,  it  is  worth 
recalling  the  objectives  of  the  Basel  Committee  regarding  the  overall  level  of  capital 
requirements. According to the revised framework, issued in June 2004:  
“The  objectives  are  to  broadly  maintain  the  aggregate  level  of  minimum 
capital  requirements,  while  also  providing  incentives  to  adopt  more 
advanced risk-sensitive approaches of the revised framework”.  
Governor Susan Schmidt Bies of the Federal Reserve System of the USA has described the 
objectives of Basel II a little more elaborately in the following words:  
“The major objectives of Basel II include creating a better linkage between 
the  minimum  regulatory  capital  and  risk,  enhancing  market  discipline, 
supporting a level playing field in an increasingly integrated global financial 
system, establishing and maintaining a minimum capital cushion sufficient 
to  foster  financial  stability  in  periods  of  adversity  and  uncertainty,  and 
grounding  risk  measurement  and  management  in  actual  data  and  formal 
quantitative  techniques.  Let  me  emphasize  that  last  objective,  since  it  is 
often  overlooked.  Critical  to  Basel  II  is  the  effort  to  improve  risk 
measurement  and  management,  especially  at  our  largest,  most  complex 
organizations.”1  
Thus,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  main  focus  of  the  new  framework  is  on 
providing the right incentives to the banks to adopt data-based, quantitative risk management 
systems  to  be  able  to  adopt  the  advanced  risk-sensitive  approaches  of  the  revised 
framework,  which,  in  turn,  would  contribute  to  systemic  and  financial  stability.  Hence, 
inducing  the  adoption  of  advanced  risk  management  systems  by  the  banking  institutions 
would seem to lie at the heart of the new framework.  
Select aspects of Basel II framework 
8. Given the foregoing objectives of the new framework, it may be useful to take a brief stock 
of  the  salient  aspects  of  this  dispensation,  which  could  be  of  particular  interest  to  this 
audience.  
A comprehensive approach 
9. One of the unique aspects of Basel II is its comprehensive approach to risk measurement 
in  the  banking  entities,  by  adopting  the  now-familiar  three-Pillar  structure,  which  goes  far 
beyond the first Basel Accord. To recapitulate, these are: Pillar 1 – the minimum capital ratio, 
Pillar  2  –  the  supervisory  review  process  and  Pillar  3  –  the  market  discipline.  The  Pillar  1 
provides a menu of alternative approaches, from simple to advanced ones, for determining 
the regulatory capital towards credit risk, market risk and operational risk, to cater to the wide 
diversity in the banking system across the world. Pillar 2 requires the banks to establish an 
Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process  (ICAAP)  to  capture  all  the  material  risks, 
including those that are partly covered or not covered under the other two Pillars. The ICAAP 
of the banks is also required to be subject to a supervisory review by the supervisors. The 
Pillar  3  prescribes  public  disclosures  of  information  on  the  affairs  of  the  banks  to  enable 
effective market discipline on the banks’ operations.  
                                                 
1   Enhancing Risk Management Under Basel II; Remarks by Ms. Susan Schmidt Bies; at the Risk USA 2005 
Congress on June 8, 2005. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 3
10. As you are aware, RBI has already issued the guidelines for the new capital adequacy 
framework in regard to Pillar 1 and Pillar 3 on April 27, 2007. As regards Pillar 2, the banks 
have been advised to put in place an ICAAP, with the approval of the Board. A two-stage 
implementation of the guidelines is envisaged to provide adequate lead time to the banking 
system.  Accordingly,  the  foreign  banks  operating  in  India  and  the  Indian  banks  having 
operational presence outside India are required to migrate to the Standardised Approach for 
credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk with effect from March 31, 
2008. All other Scheduled commercial banks are encouraged to migrate to these approaches 
under Basel II in alignment with them, but, in any case, not later than March 31, 2009. It has 
been  a  conscious  decision  to  begin  with  the  simpler  approaches  available  under  the 
framework, having regard to the preparedness of the banking system. As regards the market 
risk, under Basel II also, the banks will continue to follow the Standardised-Duration Method 
as already adopted under the Basel I framework. For migration to the advanced approaches 
available under the framework, prior approval of the RBI would be required.  
Pillar 2 considerations 
11.  While  the  implications  of  Pillar  1  and  Pillar  3  are  fairly  well  known  in  the  banking 
community,  the  importance  of  Pillar  2  in  the  new  framework  is  perhaps  not  that  well 
understood.  I  would,  therefore,  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  dwell  a  little  more  on  the 
criticality  of  effective  implementation  of  Pillar  2  by  the  banks  while  adopting  the  new 
framework, in view of its importance. 
12. As I mentioned earlier, the Pillar 2 of the framework deals with the “Supervisory Review 
Process” (SRP). The objective of the SRP is to ensure that the banks have adequate capital 
to  support  all  material  risks  in  their  business  as  also  to  encourage  them  to  adopt 
sophisticated risk management techniques for monitoring and managing their risks. This, in 
turn,  would  require  a  well-defined  internal  assessment  process  within  the  banks  through 
which they would determine the additional capital requirement for all material risks, internally, 
and would also be able to assure the RBI that adequate capital is actually held towards their 
all material risk exposures. The process of assurance could also involve an active dialogue 
between the bank and the RBI so that, when warranted, appropriate intervention could be 
made to either reduce the risk exposure of the bank or augment / restore its capital. Thus, 
ICAAP is an important component of the Supervisory Review Process. What is important to 
note here is that the Pillar 1 stipulates only the minimum capital ratio for the banks whereas 
the Pillar 2 provides for a bank-specific review by the supervisors to make an assessment 
whether all material risks are getting duly captured in the ICAAP of the bank. If the supervisor 
is not satisfied in this behalf, it might well choose to prescribe a higher capital ratio, as per its 
assessment.  
13. I would like to emphasise that the ICAAP under the Pillar 2 is the element which makes 
the Basel II framework comprehensive in its sweep by addressing the entire risk domain of 
the  banks.  As  I  mentioned,  the  ICAAP  is  expected  to  address  all  material  risks  facing  the 
bank but the three main areas in particular viz., those aspects not fully captured under the 
Pillar 1 process; factors not taken into account by Pillar 1 process; and the factors external to 
the bank. Another dimension of the ICAAP would be to monitor compliance with the Pillar 1 
and  Pillar  3  requirements.  Thus,  illustratively,  we  would  expect  the  banks’  ICAAP  to  take 
account of the credit concentration risk, interest rate risk in the banking book, business and 
strategic  risk,  liquidity  risk,  and  other  residual  risks  such  as  reputation  risk  and  business 
cycle risk. The challenge for the banks would be to quantify these risks and then, to translate 
those  consistently  into  an  appropriate  amount  of  capital  needed,  commensurate  with  the 
bank’s  risk  profile  and  control  environment.  Needless  to  say,  this  would  call  for  instituting 
sophisticated  risk  management  systems,  including  a  robust  stress-testing  and  economic 
capital  allocation  framework,  coupled  with  strong  validation  mechanisms  to  ensure  the 
integrity of the entire ICAAP, to be able to achieve the objectives underpinning the ICAAP 
and the Supervisory Review envisaged under Pillar 2. I am sure, the Pillar 2 dimension would 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2007
be  receiving  the  high  priority  it  deserves  in  the  implementation  strategy  of  the  banks.  It  is 
useful to note that the ICAAP, as its name suggests, is envisaged to be essentially a bank-
driven process, which would of course be subject to a supervisory review.  
The parallel run 
14. Another aspect which I would like to mention here today is the parallel run prescribed by 
the  RBI  which  the  banks  were  required  to  carry  out  since  June  2006,  as  a  prelude  to 
migration to the simpler approaches of Basel II. The objective was to familiarise them with 
the  requirements  of  the  new  framework.  During  the  period  of  parallel  run,  the  banks  are 
required  to  compute,  parallely,  on  an  on  going  basis,  their  capital  adequacy  ratio  –  both 
under Basel I norms, currently applicable, as well as the Basel II guidelines to be applicable 
in future. This analysis of the capital adequacy ratio is to be placed before the Boards of the 
banks  every  quarter  and  is  also  transmitted  to  the  RBI.  In  addition,  an  assessment  of 
compliance  with  the  Board-approved  policies  on  collateral  management,  credit  risk 
mitigation, disclosures and ICAAP, adequacy of the management information system, impact 
of various elements of the portfolio on the capital adequacy ratio, as also the results of the 
process  for  validating  the  CRAR  are  also  to  be  placed  before  the  Board.  The  validation 
mechanism,  to  my  mind,  would  be  a  critical  element  of  the  parallel  run  as  it  would  help 
ensuring the accuracy and integrity of the entire process. I would urge all of you to pay due 
attention to the parallel run exercise in the interest of smooth migration to Basel II on the cut 
off date.  
Migration to advanced approaches under Basel II 
15. As I mentioned earlier, the Basel II framework provides a menu of alternative approaches 
for determination of regulatory capital for credit, market and operational risks. While in India, 
we  have  decided  to  implement  the  simpler  approaches  within  the  stipulated  timeframe,  as 
regards  migration  to  the  advanced  approaches,  the  RBI  has  not  indicated  any  specific 
timeframe. However, the banks that plan to migrate to the advanced approaches would need 
prior  approval  of  the  RBI  –  for  which  requisite  guidelines  would  be  issued  in  due  course. 
Nonetheless,  the  banks  planning  such  migration  would  be  well  advised  to  undertake  an 
objective and rigorous self-assessment vis-a-vis the qualifying criteria envisaged under the 
Basel  II  framework  for  adoption  and  ongoing  use  of  the  advanced  approaches.  Such  an 
assessment would be helpful for the banks in chalking out a realistic roadmap for a smooth 
switchover to the advanced approaches, as and when these are introduced by the RBI.  
16.  It  needs  to  be,  however,  borne  in  mind  that  implementation  of  advanced  approaches 
under Basel II, particularly for the credit risk, would be a data-intensive exercise. While the 
data needs under the simpler approaches would be largely similar to those under the Basel I 
framework, the data requirements of banks would be significantly higher to even qualify for 
adopting the Advanced Approaches as the banks would require adequate and acceptable-
quality historical data to compute the capital requirements under the Advanced Approaches. 
At the minimum, banks may need to have acceptable historical data for the past five to seven 
years for computing the risk parameters such as probability of default, loss given default and 
operational  risk  losses.  The  banks  which  consider  migration  to  advanced  approaches  will, 
therefore, need to first build up a comprehensive database for the purpose. 
Credit risk management under Basel II  
17.  Even  though  Basel-II  framework  has  a  broader  scope  and  includes  “operational  risk” 
under  Pillar  1  and  public  disclosures  under  Pillar  3,  the  credit  risk  still  claims  the  largest 
share of the regulatory capital. This underscores the significance of credit risk in the bank’s 
operations.  This  is  hardly  surprising  reckoning  that  the  several  banking  crises  in  many 
countries  had  their  roots  in  lax  credit  standards,  poor  portfolio  risk  management,  and  the 
inability  or  failure  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  the  changing  economic  environment  on  credit 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 5
worthiness  of  the  banks’  borrowers.  The  sub-prime  crisis  in  the  USA  is  the  most  recent 
example of the inadequate credit risk assessment. The advent of advanced approaches for 
credit risk in India under the Basel II Framework in the days to come, could be expected to 
provide  an  impetus  for  adopting  more  sophisticated  credit  risk  management  techniques  in 
banks.  
18. In this context, I would like to recall that as far back as in October 1999, the RBI had 
issued guidelines, with an integrated approach, on risk management in banks. Having regard 
to diversity of banks, they were advised to design their own risk management architecture, in 
tune with their size, complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perception and the level 
of  capital.  With  a  view  to  fine  tuning  the  risk  management  systems  in  banks  and  to  help 
smaller banks in achieving the minimum standards, RBI has also issued guidance notes on 
management of credit and market risk in October 2002. While the broad principles underlying 
the guidelines would still be valid, banks would be well advised to modernize and upgrade 
their risk management configuration in step with the market developments.  
The path ahead 
19. Before I conclude, let me briefly touch upon a few of the issues and challenges that could 
emanate from the adoption of Basel II framework, particularly, in the Indian context. 
First, it is understood that the Basel II framework provides for as many as about 130 areas of 
national discretion to be exercised by the country supervisors, as per local conditions. Thus, 
it has been argued that potentially, there could be 130 variations of the new framework under 
different jurisdictions. If that be the case, the international comparability of the bank-capital 
standards  would  be  difficult  to  achieve  across  the  countries  and  perhaps,  the  original 
objective  of  reducing  the  international  competitive  inequality  amongst  the  banks  could  get 
compromised.  
Second,  with  migration  to  the  advanced  approaches  in  future,  the  banks  following  the 
advanced  approaches  are  likely  to  have  a  more  risk-sensitive  architecture  for  capital 
computation compared to those on the standardised approach. This could potentially lead to 
the  riskier  assets  gravitating  towards  the  banks  on  the  less-risk-sensitive  Standardised 
Approach, which would need lower capital for such assets than the banks on the advanced 
approaches, while the high quality assets flowing to the banks on the advanced approaches. 
This  could  ultimately  result  in  a  lower  amount  of  capital  in  the  system  as  a  whole,  which 
might not be a very welcome prospect, specially from the supervisory perspective.  
Third,  while  the  Pillar  III  disclosures  could  be  quite  useful  for  the  market  analysts  and 
sophisticated  users  of  this  information,  the  utility  of  such  disclosures  for  the  common  man 
remains  a  moot  point.  Besides,  the  disclosures  under  Basel  II  will  also  need  to  be 
harmonised with those required under the International Financial Reporting Standards so as 
to avoid any conflicts and excessive burden of disclosure. 
Fourth, in the Indian context, the rating penetration is very low and is generally confined to 
the larger corporates while the smaller entities are generally unrated. With the adoption of 
the Standardised Approach in India, which places heavy reliance on the external rating of the 
bank clients, a view has been expressed that the small and medium enterprises, which are 
below  the  rating  threshold,  may  get  somewhat  handicapped  in  availing  bank  credit  in  the 
absence of credit rating. This may perhaps call for special efforts to maintain the credit flow 
to this segment of the borrowers.  
Fifth,  the  risk  sensitive  approach  of  the  Basel  II  Framework  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  pro-
cyclicality in the capital requirements of the banks since in an economic downturn, the capital 
requirements would rise but will decline during an economic boom. It is argued that such an 
impact on the banks could accentuate the effects of the cycle and could increase the volatility 
in the banking system.  
6 
 BIS Review 108/2007
Finally,  in  implementing  the  new  framework,  which  requires  specialised  skill  sets,  the 
challenge  of  human  resource  management  for  the  Indian  banking  sector  would  be  a 
constraint  to  reckon  with.  The  banks  would,  therefore,  need  to  evolve  innovative  HRM 
practices  to  be  able  to  attract  and  retain  the  right  mix  of  people  to  ensure  effective 
operationalisation and maintenance of sophisticated risk management infrastructure.  
Conclusion  
20.  In  conclusion,  I  would  only  like  to  stress  that  the  central  message  of  the  Basel  II 
Framework  is  the  progressive  refinement  and  sophistication  of  the  risk  management 
configuration of the banking system. The banks with better risk management skills would not 
only have competitive advantage in the market place but would also be better positioned to 
capitalise on the opportunities for organic and inorganic growth. While the Basel II framework 
creates an enabling environment for enhancing the risk management capability in the banks 
by providing the right incentives, it is entirely up to you to grasp the nettle and upgrade the 
risk governance in your organisation to achieve a sharper risk-reward profile. I am confident 
that  the  deliberations  at  this  two-day  seminar  would  provide  you  valuable  insights  into  the 
relevant  issues  to  enable  a  smoother  migration  to  the  new  framework.  I  wish  the 
deliberations at the seminar all success. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 7
