Caleb M Fundanga: The MDG-consistent monetary policies 
Talking  notes  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  official 
opening  of  the  UNDP  organised  workshop  on  Macroeconomic  Analysis  and  Modelling  in 
Support of Millenium Development Goals-Based Planning, Lusaka, 29 October 2007. 
 Introduction 
First and foremost, I would like to thank the UNDP through the Resident Representative, Mr 
Aeneas  C.  Chuma,  for  inviting  me  to  say  a  few  remarks  at  the  opening  of  this  important 
international workshop on “Macroeconomic Analysis and Modelling in support of Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG)-Based Planning”. Let me also welcome you all, especially those 
who have traveled from other countries to come and attend this workshop. 
I  understand  that  the  aim  of  this  workshop  is  to  strengthen  the  foundation  laid  for  MDG-
Based planning processes in Africa on the issues of pro-poor polices and macroeconomic 
modelling  and  to  explain  what  an  MDG-Consistent  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework 
(MTEF) is all about. The workshop is also intended to sensitise and enhance your knowledge 
of pro-poor policies in the context of MDG-Based planning and strengthen understanding and 
skills in MDG-Consistent Macroeconomic Modelling and MTEF. Furthermore, at the end of 
the workshop, participants should be able to: 
• 
Better understand the linkages between macroeconomic programming and strategic 
planning;  
Plan  steps  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  sustainable  capacity  development  for 
macroeconomic modelling and strategic budgeting at various country levels; and  
Strengthen  the  national  ownership  and  leadership  in  MDG-based  planning  and 
implementation process.  
  Mr  Chairman,  Central  banks  the  world  over  have  a  critical  role  to  play  in  a  country’s 
economic development. As you may all be aware, central banks’ monetary and supervisory 
policies  are  implemented  to  ensure  that  there  is  price  and  financial  system  stability  to 
promote macroeconomic development. In this regard, monetary policies or any other policy 
for  that  matter  that  are  not  consistent  with  the  MDGs  in  the  current  macroeconomic 
dispensation  should  be  considered  irrelevant  to  the  welfare  of  our  countries.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that,  without  exception,  monetary  policies  in  the  developing  countries  have  to  be 
MDG-consistent.  
Price stability 
The primary objective of most central banks is price stability, which is achieved through the 
implementation of appropriate monetary policy. High inflation is a major source of concern to 
any country as it poses a threat to economic development. It is in this context that a central 
bank’s primary role is to reduce inflation to low and stable levels.  
The  benefits  of  price  stability,  which  are  also  important  factors  to  the  attainment  of  MDGs 
are:  effective  planning;  lower  investment  costs;  increased  public  and  foreign  investor 
confidence  in  the  economy;  improved  external  sector  competitiveness;  and  accelerated 
economic growth needed to reduce poverty levels.  
Effective planning 
(a) 
When prices are stable, corporate institutions, governments, civil society and individuals are 
able to draw up their expenditure plans well into the future. In particular, companies will be 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 1
able  to  reliably  plan  with  some  degree  of  certainty  for  their  operations  and  long-term 
investment in fixed assets that will expand their production capacity and output and lead to 
increased employment as well as enhancement of incomes. Similarly, a government is able 
to make more accurate projections of revenues expected to be collected in future and thus 
more effectively plan its current and capital expenditures that are likely to benefit the poor. 
Lower cost of investment 
(b) 
Interest rates being the cost of funds will inhibit borrowing for investment if they are too high. 
Interest  rates,  therefore,  are  an  important  factor  in  attaining  price  stability.  Low  and  stable 
interest  rates,  which  are  possible  with  the  achievement  of  low  inflation,  create  conducive 
credit conditions that improve accessibility and availability of credit to the productive sectors. 
Improved  access  to  credit  by  the  private  sector  will  result  in  increased  investment  and 
production which ultimately leads to higher economic growth and improvement in standard of 
living.  
Increased public and investor confidence  
(c) 
Price stability in a country leads to investor and public confidence in the economy and results 
in increased foreign capital inflows. As alluded to earlier, a relatively stable exchange rate 
coupled with low inflation facilitates long-term planning for investors. 
Improved external competitiveness 
(d) 
In countries were there is low and stable inflation, exports become competitive and this has 
often  led  to  the  increase  in  export  earnings,  thereby  improving  the  Balance  of  Payments 
(BoP)  and  ultimately  contributing  to  accelerated  economic  growth.  In  this  context,  the 
benefits of a stable currency are clear as noted by Jeff Sachs in the UN’s recent report “A 
Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals” which states that: “The private 
sector  needs  a  supportive  macroeconomic 
International  and  domestic 
macroeconomic stability minimizes uncertainty for businesses. Businesses cannot buy inputs 
or sell products internationally when the local currency is unstable against other currencies – 
or if the country is experiencing high inflation with constant readjustment of prices and loss of 
confidence”1.  
framework. 
Sustained economic growth 
(e) 
Mr Chairman, when a country attains price stability, economic growth on sustained basis is 
likely  to  follow.  Accelerated  economic  growth,  of  at  least  8%  per  year,  is  a  sure  way  of 
ensuring  that  most  of  the  MDGs  are  attained  in  our  developing  countries.  This  has  the 
positive  impact  of  reducing  poverty  levels  of  the  people  as  it  increases  their  disposable 
incomes and eventually improve their standard of living.  
Reduction of poverty 
(f) 
Usually,  some  people  think  that  achievement  of  low  inflation  is  not  important  to  the 
achievement of MDGs.  This assertion should be dismissed using macroeconomic analysis 
and  modelling,  which  I  expect  the  participants  at  this  workshop  to  actively  be  involved  in. 
Even a simple econometric analysis will show that high inflation in a country erode peoples’ 
disposable  incomes  and,  therefore,  reduces  their  purchasing  power,  particularly  the 
vulnerable that may not have the resources and skills to hedge or protect themselves against 
                                                 
1   http://www.unmillennuimproject.org/reports/fullreport.htm. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2007
the effects of high inflation. Attainment of low and stable inflation, therefore, leads to people 
particularly  the  poor  being  able  to  afford  to  buy  the  goods  and  services  that  they  need  in 
order for them to lead a decent life. Low inflation implies that more people will have stable or 
improved income that may raise them above the poverty datum line and thus reduce the high 
incidences of poverty. 
Financial system stability 
In addition to the attainment of price stability using monetary policy, the central bank’s other 
pillar is the responsibility of ensuring financial system stability. Financial system stability is 
the prevention of disruptions to the financial sector that are likely to cause significant costs to 
real  output.  It  compliments  monetary  policy  implementation,  as  monetary  policies  are 
transmitted through financial institutions. If the financial system is unstable, monetary policy 
will not be effective. 
In summary, the central bank, such as ours, has a key role in the attainment of the MDGs 
through  the  implementation  of  appropriate  monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  ensure 
price  and  financial  system  stability.  Macroeconomic  analysis  and  modelling  are  key 
components in arriving at sound and effective macroeconomic policies which will contribute 
to  poverty  reduction  through  the  acceleration  of  economic  growth  and  facilitate  the 
achievement of the MDGs. 
In a nutshell, Mr Chairman, one can simply state that low inflation coupled with a developed 
and  stable  financial  system,  will  enhance  higher  economic  growth.  Sustained  and  higher 
growth  will  create  more  jobs  and  subsequently  increase  people’s  income.  An  increase  in 
people’s incomes will contribute to alleviation of poverty as it will improve their capacities to 
access the human basic needs such as food, shelter, education, and health. 
Further, with increased investment (and a growing economy) partly on account of price and 
financial system stability, Government revenue is more likely to rise, therefore enabling the 
Government  to  improve  the  provision  of  education  and  health  services,  the  two  which  are 
among the key tenets of poverty reduction. Furthermore, increased Government revenue will 
allow more investment in infrastructure such roads needed to transport produce from various 
production  centres  to  markets  thereby  enhancing  the  incomes,  particularly  those  of  rural 
communities. This would contribute to the achievement of MDGs. 
With  these  few  words,  Mr  Chairman,  I  would  like  to  urge  you,  the  participants,  to  be 
interactive in your discussions as this is one of the ways the workshop would add value to 
your  knowledge  and  skills.  I  wish  you  fruitful  discussions  as  you  share  your  valuable 
experiences in macroeconomic analysis and modelling in support of Millennium Development 
Goals. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 123/2007 
 3
