Radovan Jelašić: Social responsibility in Serbia and the UN “Global 
Compact” Initiative 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the launch of the 
United Nations Global Compact Initiative (UNGC) in Serbia, Belgrade, 6 December 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When did you last visit a hospital that cares for children with mental health disorders? Where 
did you throw the glass bottle after you drank your juice yesterday? Is the building you live in 
accessible to physically handicapped people? Have you ever been to the area where Roma 
people live under the Gazela Bridge? And, at risk of sounding sarcastic, have you convinced 
yourself again today that all problems in this country should be dealt with by the government 
and that you have the right to criticize that same government to your heart’s desire? Do you 
think  that  you  as  an  ordinary  citizen  have  some  kind  of  responsibility  for  all  those  events 
taking  place  outside  your  micro  cosmos?  When  was  the  last  time  you  walked  down  Knez 
Mihajlova street looking up to read the names of legacy donors and asked yourself how we 
compare to them? Have you shaken hands, opened the door, smiled or simply been nice to 
anybody today? 
What will our country look like in five or ten years time depends only on us and nobody else. 
If anyone should make our country more beautiful, it should be us, you and me, and we do 
not and can not have any excuse not to do something. You and I are those who not only 
have  the  opportunity  but  an  obligation  as  well.  We  have  the  good  will,  and  as  company 
managers,  some  money  on  our  hands  too.  So  “let  Serbia  rise”  as  Dositej  said,  but  not 
against somebody or something, but for a more beautiful, smiling and, above all else, happier 
Serbia. 
If  you  are  an  enterprise  that  feels  the  need  to  do  something  more  than  just  pay  taxes 
regularly, which is of course necessary but not enough, then you are in the right place today! 
We have gathered here today to meet and to get to know one another, to unite people and 
companies who care, who know how and are willing to do more to better not only their own 
lives, but also the lives of all the people in our country. As a start, a big step forward will have 
been made if we who have gathered here today were to unite as people of good will who feel 
the need to do something more, something better, and something nobler for our country. And 
our country will not, can not and should not be changed by either the IMF, the World Bank or 
the European Union, but by us – you and me, and Mr. Vice-President and the ministers – 
today in their official capacity, and tomorrow as ordinary citizens. 
The aim of today’s launch and cooperation of the UN and the NBS is getting the information 
through  to  companies  operating  in  Serbia  about  the  Global  Compact  initiative,  the  largest 
global  voluntary  association  dedicated  to  promoting  socially  responsible  operations.  The 
main  reason  for  our  participation  in  this  project  is  not  to  support  the  launching  of  this 
initiative,  but  to  learn  something  new  and  do  something  concrete  together  with  the  people 
who care about the future of our country and our planet. Cooperation of the public sector, 
non-government organizations, and companies is not only possible but also indispensable, 
and I am convinced that much more can be done to the benefit of all the participants. 
Our  research  has  shown  that  in  Serbia  today  there  is  awareness  of  socially  responsible 
operations, but more on conceptual level than in terms of concrete projects. What is lacking 
is the ignition spark, and I sincerely hope that today’s meeting will provide just that! 
There is a proverbial saying in our country that “Anything that can be bought for money is 
cheap.” So, in that spirit, it is not only the privatization receipts that matter in the context of 
foreign  direct  investments,  but  also  the  companies’  attitude  to  social  responsibility  issues 
BIS Review 147/2007 
 1
which  contributes  to  changing  our  country  for  the  better.  There  are  many  companies  in 
Serbia  that  have  not  yet  had  any  experience  with  projects  promoting  socially  responsible 
behavior, but what matters is their good will to join in. 
Many companies and institutions, including the NBS, are already engaged in many activities 
that  can  be  defined  as  socially  responsible:  waste  recycling  on  the  site,  free  of  charge 
training of the NBS ex-employees, financial support to handicapped children, etc. However, 
as members of the Global Compact we shall have the opportunity to share our experiences, 
to formulate our common platform and to become a part of a bigger family. 
And finally, let me be explicit: this is a voluntary gathering of people and companies – you 
have the opportunity but no obligation to join this initiative. You have no obligation but you 
have an opportunity to give, and give only as much as you think you ought to. You are not 
pressured in any way; there is no obligation on your part other than strictly moral, which I 
rank higher than any money-related obligation! But it feels good to be part of this initiative, as 
it creates positive energy and enables cooperation with people of good will who feel the need 
to do something more for Serbia. I wish you all welcome once again. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2007
