Njuguna Ndung’u: Survey on bank charges and lending rates in Kenya 
Speaking  notes  of  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
launch of the survey on bank charges and lending rates, Nairobi, 28 August 2007. 
 Mrs. Jacinta Mwatela, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya; 
Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chairman of the Kenya Bankers Association; 
Ms. Caroline Pulver, Representative of the Financial Sector Deepening Trust; 
Representatives of the Kenya Bankers Association; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I would like to start by first thanking all of you for accepting our invitation to attend the launch 
of this survey on bank charges and lending rates. Allow me at this early juncture to extend a 
special vote of thanks to the Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Trust, Kenya for partnering 
with us on this key initiative. 
I would also like to acknowledge the efforts of Research International, Tell-Em Ltd. and the 
Central Bank Team that worked on this project. 
We all appreciate that bank charges and lending rates continue to be of great public concern 
in  our  country.  The  issue  at  times  seems  to  take  an  emotive  stance  with  the  public  being 
“pitted” against the banks. At the Central Bank, we believe that this should not be the case 
and what we prefer to see is a healthy informed debate around this issue. 
It is with this in mind that the Central Bank has been at the forefront in measures aimed at 
enhancing  market  discipline  through  publication  of  charges  and  lending  rates  in  the  print 
media  and  the  survey  that  we  are  launching  today.  I  must  underscore that  the  aim  of  this 
launch is not to “name” any bank as the cheapest or “shame” another as the most expensive. 
Allow me to delve into the heart of the findings of the survey that are instructive in informing 
the way forward. First, the level of awareness of charges and lending rates amongst bank 
customers is generally low. Second, related to this, the survey also established that the level 
of ”comparison shopping” for banking services and products is also low. This alludes to an 
information asymmetry problem. Information is indeed critical to the effective functioning of 
markets.  It  is  not  in  doubt  that  when  information  on  alternatives  is  readily  available,  the 
outcomes will be customer driven products and competitive price offerings. 
It  therefore  behoves  the  Central  Bank  and  the  players  in  the  market  to  address  this 
information  asymmetry  problem  urgently  if  we  are  to  enhance  access  to  banking  services 
and customer satisfaction. The launch of the survey is the first step in this direction and is not 
a one-off event. We will endeavour to engage the public in conjunction with other key players 
particularly the banks and the media in educating them about the various product offerings in 
the market and their related cost. I am in this regard, delighted at the presence of both these 
key players here today. 
The  endgame  is  expected  to  be  more  competitive  product  offerings  that  will  draw  more 
Kenyans  into  the  banking  space.  As  you  may  be  aware,  the  Financial  Access  Survey 
released  in  January  this  year  indicates  that  38%  of  Kenya’s  bankable  population  is  totally 
excluded  from  financial  services  and  products.  It  is  also  instructive  that  only  19%  of  this 
populace is served by the formal banking sector. We must therefore collectively endeavour to 
push forward the “access” frontier and salvage Kenyans from the jaws of pyramid schemes 
and shylocks. 
These  schemes  are  capitalising  both  on  information  asymmetry  and  the  perception  by  the 
public that current formal financial services are expensive. 
BIS Review 126/2007 
 1
I must commend initiatives in the recent past by banks to introduce niche products such as 
those targeting Small and Medium Enterprises and bundled products charging a flat fee for a 
basket of services. But more needs to be done in this arena. We also need to reflect on other 
barriers to access beyond fees and charges such as minimum and operating balances on 
accounts, laborious account opening processes, branch locations and timings and customer 
service. 
I believe there is scope in this regard through the Kenya Bankers Association (KBA) for the 
development of a basic competitive “no frills” account that can be offered by all banks. Such 
an  account  would  have  low  or  nil  minimum  balances  as  well  as  minimal  charges  if  any. 
Indeed such an account would be a vehicle to bring more Kenyans into the banking system. 
India  and  South  Africa  have  developed  such  products  to  enhance  financial  inclusion.  My 
challenge  therefore  to  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  is  to  spearhead  an  initiative  in  this 
regard, to develop a uniquely Kenyan “Mzalendo” basic transactional account. The Central 
Bank stands ready to support this kind of innovation. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Another  possible  area  of  cost  cutting  is  through  innovations  that 
reduce the cost of delivery of banking products. In this regard, the Central Bank is seeking to 
facilitate the use of agents such as microfinance institutions by banks in the comprehensive 
review of the Banking Act that I have alluded to in my remarks in the recent past at other 
fora. The use of agents by banks should lower service delivery costs as they do not have to 
put  up  “brick  and  mortar”  structures  to  expand  their  footprint  across  the  country.  It  is  the 
Central  Banks’  expectation  that  savings  from  such  innovations  will  be  passed  on  to 
customers in the form of lower charges and lending rates. 
As I draw to a close, I wish to briefly dwell on credit products. Competition in the recent years 
coupled with aggressive marketing has increased personal loans by banks. As we have seen 
from the survey presentation this morning, the cost of credit is not just the lending rate but 
also  includes  other  costs  such  as  commitment  fees,  negotiation  fees,  legal,  valuation  and 
insurance fees. The challenge that we must then face is disclosure to consumers of the total 
effective cost of loans. In this regard, I would urge KBA to require in its’ code of conduct that 
banks  disclose  the  total  all  inclusive  “annual  percentage  rate”  of  credit  facilities  to  enable 
customers make informed choices and avoid “debt overloads”. 
The recent years have produced results that we will quote for many years to come: 
a) 
Lowering  barriers  to  entry:  threshold  of  minimum  balance,  loan  requirements,  etc, 
improves access to financial services. 
Lowering transactions costs attracts potential micro-savers to banks. 
Banks can make profits in downstream activities. 
b) 
c) 
Let me end by reiterating that the Central Bank remains committed to continued consumer 
education and sensitization on banking products and services in conjunction with banks, the 
media and other like minded players. We are convinced that this will bring on board more 
Kenyans  into  the  formal  financial  sector,  uplifting  their  well  being  and  enabling  them  to 
participate in and benefit from our national development aspirations. 
I thank you all once again for honouring our invitation and it is now my pleasant duty and 
honour to officially launch the Survey on Bank Charges and Lending Rates. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2007
