Joseph Yam: Current issues for monetary and financial stability in Hong 
Kong 
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
Hong  Kong  Management  Association  Annual  Fellowship  Dinner,  Hong  Kong, 
27 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
I feel especially honoured to have been asked to speak at this HKMA Fellowship Dinner, one 
particular  reason  being  that  the  Hong  Kong  Management  Association  and  the  Hong  Kong 
Monetary Authority share the same initials. I have, ever since the establishment of the Hong 
Kong  Monetary  Authority  in  April  1993,  felt  some  what  indebted  to  the  Hong  Kong 
Management  Association  in  its  acquiescence  to  our  use  of  that  symbol  of  excellence,  the 
HKMA, no doubt in the hope that we too would in time mature to deserve the respect that 
those initials command. About fifteen years on, I hope we have not disappointed you. 
This evening I would like to talk about the monetary and financial issues currently confronting 
Hong Kong. I have chosen to do so because what is going on around us on the monetary 
and  financial  fronts  appears,  to  me  at  least,  to  be  unusually  complex,  presenting  risks  to 
monetary  and  financial  stability  that  are  perhaps  less  well  understood  and  possibly  less 
benign  than  those  that  we  have  been  experiencing  since  the  economic  recovery  from  the 
second  quarter  of  2003.  And  I  believe  that  the  best  way  of  managing  risks  is  for  those 
concerned, not just the authorities responsible for the maintenance of systemic monetary and 
financial  stability  but  more  importantly  also  those  actually  assuming  risks,  whether  as 
investors or as financial intermediaries, to be alert to them, and to understand that they may 
have  peculiar  characteristics.  Then  there  are  importantly  those  innocent  parties  in  society, 
who  are  often  hard-pressed  to  make  ends  meet  or  struggling  to  acquire  a  dwelling  place, 
who could be further disadvantaged if there were monetary and financial instability, should 
the risks materialise to the extent of causing a shock of systemic dimension. 
Sub-prime crisis 
The  FIRST  such  issue  is  the  sub-prime  crisis  in  the  United  States.  The  use  of  the  word 
"crisis"  is  not  an  exaggeration  on  my  part,  notwithstanding  the  absence  so  far  of  anything 
approaching  a  crisis  in  Hong  Kong.  It  is  the  word  that  is  increasingly  being  used  in  the 
developed markets and in international finance when talking about the current difficulties in 
the United States and Europe that originated from sub-prime mortgages. At the risk of over-
simplifying something that is really quite complex, let me make a few observations that might 
help understand what is going on. 
First, sub-prime mortgages are really mortgages extended to those who are, to put it bluntly 
and simply, not credit worthy. And as mortgages are assets on the books of the lenders, sub-
prime mortgages are really sub-standard financial assets. 
Second, when property prices were rising and there was a clear expectation that they would 
continue to rise, those who were responsible for lending took comfort from the possibility of 
second  mortgages  providing  borrowers  with  funding  for  servicing  the  first,  sub-prime 
mortgages, in the event that the borrowers encounter difficulties in their mortgage payments. 
Indeed,  when  property  prices  were  on  a  rising  trend,  the  delinquency  rate  of  sub-prime 
mortgages was quite low and sub-standard financial assets were considered as good quality 
assets. 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 1
Third, through securitisation the lender was able to off-load the sub-standard financial assets 
to third parties quickly. This eroded the incentive of the lender to carefully assess the ability 
of the borrower to service the sub-prime mortgage. Instead, the lender was more interested 
in accelerating the production line in this “originate and distribute” model, earning a fee and 
providing  other  customer  services.  Ironically,  therefore,  financial  innovation  in  the  form  of 
securitisation  and  credit  risk  transfer  to  those  in  a  better  position  to  assume  risks,  while  it 
should  theoretically  enhance  financial  efficiency  and  promote  financial  stability,  has  led  to 
distortions  in  the  incentives  of  financial  intermediaries,  eroded  credit  standards  and 
undermined financial stability. 
Fourth, the powers of financial innovation continued to work after the sub-standard financial 
assets got into the hands of the third parties. Slicing, mixing and re-packaging came in and 
the  sub-prime  mortgages  were  buried  in  very  complex  financial  arrangements  to  become 
what  are  nicely  described  as  Collateralised  Debt  Obligations  (CDO),  or  generally  as 
structured products. 
Fifth, the complexity of many of these structured products and the risks involved were simply 
beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  ordinary  investors  and  perhaps  even  the  professional 
investors who did not have the time to look into the fine details of the financial arrangements. 
And so the rating agencies were relied upon, for a fee, to provide an objective view, or rather 
a rating that was as objective as it could be under the circumstances. But we all noticed the 
instability  of  these  ratings,  some  falling  from  AAA  to  junk  within  a  short  time  span,  which 
threw  doubt  not  so  much  on  the  integrity  of  the  rating  agencies  –  they  are  respectable 
organisations  essential  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  and  they  do  a  good  job 
generally – but, in my view, on the appropriateness of the models that they used. Relative 
ratings comparing the risks of different financial structures do not throw light on the absolute 
level of risk when different structures are taken together. This I think requires a wider market 
or general equilibrium view, taking account of the behaviour of the entire economy and the 
financial markets in particular. 
Sixth,  then,  the  structured  products  containing  sub-prime  mortgages  were  given  the 
necessary qualifications to get into the hands of different investors, high net-worth individuals 
who probably can assume the risk and take the hit, leveraged hedge funds that may be a lot 
more vulnerable, financial institutions with surplus liquidity, and so on. These investors had 
two characteristics: they knew very little about having bought sub-standard financial assets 
and,  through  globalisation,  they  were  all  over  the  world,  as  importers  of  sub-standard 
financial assets manufactured in the United States. 
Seventh, as the property market in the United States slowed and property prices adjusted 
downward, the delinquency rates of sub-prime mortgages shot up. The ratings and the prices 
of structured products containing, or suspected to contain, sub-prime mortgages fell sharply, 
and  the  whole  market  froze,  with  no  transactions  and  therefore  no  price  discovery 
mechanism,  making  it  impossible  for  those  holding  such  financial  assets  to  mark  them  to 
market and incur reasonable write-offs. Even the market for interbank funds showed signs of 
significant lack of liquidity as participating banks were unable to evaluate the credit risk of 
counterparties. 
Eighth, understandably many players involved in this chain of events got hit – many of the 
originators have had to be closed down, different investors have had to take large losses, 
etc. But of systemic concern was the situation of the financial institutions providing the back-
up  lines  to  the  conduits  and  Structured  Investment  Vehicles  (SIV)  involved  in  the 
manufacture and distribution of the structured products containing sub-prime mortgages. Put 
simply, they found themselves having to take back substantial assets for which there were no 
market  prices.  But  their  ability  to  do  so  was  limited  because  they  were  operating  with 
relatively  low  capital  adequacy  ratios,  which  was  why  they  had  pursued  disintermediation 
through  securitisation  in  the  first  place.  This  process  of  re-intermediation  put  considerable 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2007
pressure  on  the  profitability,  asset  quality  and  capital  adequacy,  to  the  extent  of  creating 
great tension in the inter-bank market, as financial institutions hoarded liquid funds. 
Ninth, as you all know, major central banks had to step in to provide liquidity in order to ease 
tightness in the money market. They have been doing so for about three months now, which 
is not a good sign, because of the implication of a continuing lack of trust among financial 
institutions in lending to each other. In one particular jurisdiction, a problem at the wholesale 
money  market  level  triggered  a  breakdown  of  depositors’  confidence  at  the  retail  level, 
resulting  in  a  bank  run.  In  the  United  States,  the  Fed  further  responded  with  a  shift  in 
monetary  policy,  notwithstanding  continuing  concerns  over  rising  inflation,  and  cut  interest 
rates  twice,  presumably  to  pre-empt  credit  tightness  from  adversely  affecting  economic 
prospects generally and the property market in particular. 
Tenth,  meanwhile,  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  are  writing  off  large  amounts 
quarter after quarter and this is affecting the general availability of credit and prospects of the 
economy, notwithstanding lower interest rates, and increasing the probability of a recession, 
although  many  still  put  this  at  less  than  50-50.  This  seems  to  be  the  general  sentiment 
currently reflected in financial market performance in the United States. There has also been 
much greater short-term volatility, as new information is absorbed by the market, indicating 
considerable nervousness. There is risk that the situation may drag on, given that much of 
the structured products, with varying degrees of uncertainty of repayment, have yet to mature 
and the associated losses to be realised. This would not be good for the economy and for 
financial market performance, and so we see ongoing efforts to end this. There is, notably, 
the super fund or SIV initiated by major banks to buy structured products on the market at a 
discount,  thus  helping  to  re-introduce  a  pricing  mechanism  for  them,  but  the  details  of  the 
scheme are still not publicly known. 
How  the  sub-prime  crisis  will  play  out  is  still  unclear.  The  fact  that  Hong  Kong  and  many 
emerging markets have so far been spared is not a reason for letting our guard down. The 
global significance of a slow down, or a recession, in the US economy, after a long period of 
sustained growth, should not be underestimated. The talk about a de-coupling of the Asian 
economies from the US economy has not been borne out by empirical evidence. And we all 
know  how  debilitating  it  can  be  for  an  economy  when  property  prices  adjust  substantially 
downwards, forcing families to sit on negative equity mortgages. With a savings rate at near 
to  zero  the  ability  to  sit  it  out  is  limited,  thus  possibly  adding  more  downward  pressure. 
Financial markets are very good at telescoping the future and reflecting it in today’s prices; 
hence  the  current  volatility  and  the  possibility  of  sharp  adjustments  should  the  telescope 
focus  on  a  disappointing  picture.  Financial  globalisation  will  readily  transmit  this  to  our 
markets. 
Monetary and financial developments on the mainland 
Let  me  turn  to  the  SECOND  issue  with  implications  for  monetary  and  financial  stability  in 
Hong  Kong.  This  must  of  course  be  the  monetary  and  financial  developments  on  the 
Mainland. Here I also have ten observations to share with you. 
First is the increasing size of the current account surplus of the balance of payments. Not 
only has this become a pressing issue in international politics, it is presenting the Mainland 
with a most difficult task in effectively managing its monetary and financial affairs. 
Second is the appreciating exchange rate of the renminbi, under political as well as market 
pressure.  The  renminbi  has  appreciated  against  the  US  dollar  by  over  10%  since  the 
introduction  of  flexibility  in  the  exchange  rate  in  July  2005,  but  this  has  not  produced  any 
significant impact on the current account surplus. 
Third  is  the  rapid  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  as  the  current  account  surplus  and 
continuing  net  inflow  in  the  capital  account  are  absorbed  by  the  authorities.  With  an 
appreciating  domestic  currency,  this  presents  considerable  challenges  to  the  investment 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 3
management of foreign reserves. More importantly, it also presents difficult challenges to the 
management of the monetary system. 
Fourth, consequently, the reserve ratio for commercial banks has to be raised successively, 
now standing at a historical high of 13.5% of deposits. There is of course a cost involved for 
commercial banks in holding reserves with the central bank earning fairly low interest, with 
implications  for  the  profitability  of  the  banks  and  the  efficiency  of  the  banking  system  in 
financial intermediation. 
Fifth, concurrently, the central bank also has to issue vast amounts of central bank paper to 
sterilise that part of the renminbi monetary base injected into the banking system as a result 
of  the  continuing  purchase  of  foreign  reserves.  This  also  represents  a  cost  to  the  central 
bank, if the foreign reserves, after adjusting for exchange rate appreciation of the domestic 
currency, earn an investment return less than the interest rate paid on the central bank paper 
issued. 
Sixth, notwithstanding the efforts to sterilise monetary injections, inflation has been on the 
rise,  reflecting  economic  buoyancy  and  imbalances  in  individual  commodity  markets, 
presenting considerable challenges to macro adjustment and control. 
Seventh,  although  interest  rates  have  been  raised,  the  concern  about  attracting  further 
capital  inflows  constrains  the  scope  for  their  use.  Instead  there  has  been  continued 
dependence  on  the  use  of  administrative  measures  that  risks  distortions  and  lowers  the 
efficiency of the allocation of financial resources. 
Eighth, there has been greater recognition of the need for an orderly outflow of capital, both 
to relieve upward pressure on the exchange rate and to achieve a more stable, risk-adjusted 
rate  of  return  for  the  very  large  savings  of  the  community,  so  that  consumption  may  be 
encouraged  and  the  growth  of  fixed  investment  in  the  economy  contained,  thus  achieving 
more  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  But  this  recognition  has  yet  to  be 
translated  into  concrete  action,  although  there  are  concrete  proposals  being  explored, 
notably the through train for investment in Hong Kong stocks. 
Ninth,  however,  there  is  considerable  pent-up  demand  on  the  Mainland  for  capital  market 
instruments generally and outward investment in particular. This will need to be satisfied and 
it is the right time for introducing relaxations on outward investment. It will be unfortunate if 
the  much  needed  outward  capital  mobility  is  forced  through  black  channels  and  investors 
subject to the malpractices of unregulated intermediaries. 
Tenth is the sensitivity of the capital markets to changes in policy, not just those in the area 
of  macro  adjustment  and  control,  but  also  those  relating  to  capital  market  development. 
Given the nascent state of these markets on the Mainland, the possibility and the advantages 
of making greater use of the corresponding, more sophisticated markets in Hong Kong, and 
the desire in the fullness of time to achieve a complementary, co-operative and inter-active 
relationship  between  the  two  financial  systems,  there  has  been  (and  will  continue  to  be) 
frequent policy changes affecting capital market performance. 
Implicit in these observations are strong forces pulling in different directions in the monetary 
and  financial  system  on  the  Mainland,  all  with  implications  for  monetary  and  financial 
stability,  not  just  on  the  Mainland,  but  also  for  Hong  Kong,  being  so  close  to  and  so 
integrated with the Mainland. There is great emphasis on controllability, gradualism and the 
ability to take initiatives in the reform and liberalisation of the Mainland, all in the context of 
the building of a socialist, market economy. I have no doubt that the Mainland authorities will 
be able to steer the right course through this potent scenario on the monetary and financial 
fronts,  and  avoid  mishaps.  One  can  therefore  be  optimistic  about  Hong  Kong,  as  the 
international financial centre of the country, continuing to benefit from monetary and financial 
developments  on  the  Mainland,  although  we  should  not  forget  that  in  the  capitalist,  free 
market  environment  that  we  are  in,  there  is  a  possibility  of  market  volatility  or  adjustment 
being magnified. The task is for all concerned to ensure that they are in a position to cope 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2007
with magnified volatility, in other words, manage market risks that may be greater than what 
they have seen in the past. 
The linked exchange rate system 
Let me turn to the THIRD and last issue that I wish to cover this evening. This concerns our 
own exchange rate system. I should of course start by re-iterating the firm HKSARG policy of 
keeping  our  exchange  rate  to  the  US  dollar  within  the  range  of  7.75  to  7.85  through  the 
linked exchange rate system, characterised by currency board arrangements that require our 
monetary base, and any changes in it, to be 100% backed by US dollars. 
With the weakening US dollar and the strengthening renminbi; with the local inflation rate, 
excluding the temporary effects of tax relief, edging higher; with an “asset bubble” on the lips 
of  many  commentators;  with  the  exchange  rate  hitting  the  strong  side  Convertibility 
Undertaking  late  last  month,  requiring  our  passive  and  un-sterilised  foreign  exchange 
intervention, injecting quite a lot of Hong Kong dollar liquidity into the inter-bank market; and 
with current US monetary policy possibly becoming inappropriate for Hong Kong; questions 
have  understandably  been  raised  on  the  appropriateness  of  the  system.  Let  me  provide 
answers to these questions. 
First, the appropriateness of the linked exchange rate system should be judged by its ability 
to deliver monetary and financial stability in Hong Kong through economic cycles, and should 
not be judged by the short-term cyclical conditions of the economy relative to that of the US 
economy. The linked exchange rate system has served Hong Kong extremely well since its 
establishment.  Given  the  small  and  externally-oriented  nature  of  the  Hong  Kong  economy 
and its role as an international financial centre, maintaining exchange rate stability against 
the US dollar, which is the most commonly used currency for conducting international trade 
and finance, is conducive to the long-term economic development of Hong Kong. 
Second,  on  linking  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  to  the  renminbi  instead  of  the  US  dollar:  this  is 
inappropriate and technically not feasible. The US dollar is still the most appropriate anchor 
currency for the Hong Kong dollar, taking into account factors such as international usage, 
business  cycle  synchronisation  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  US  being  higher  than  that 
between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland,  the  different  stages  of  economic  development 
between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland,  and  the  fact  that  the  renminbi  is  not  freely 
convertible. 
Third, on inflation and the linked exchange rate system: it is true that the weakness of the 
US dollar and the strength of the renminbi may increase inflationary pressures in Hong Kong, 
but rapid growth in productivity in Hong Kong and diversification of sources of imports can in 
part mitigate the inflationary pressure. HKMA  research showed that a 10% appreciation in 
the  renminbi  would  increase  Hong  Kong’s  inflation  rate,  as  measured  by  the  CCPI,  by 
roughly 0.4 percentage points. Furthermore, only about 9-17% of imports retained in Hong 
Kong come from the Mainland. 
Fourth,  on  asset  bubbles  and  the  linked  exchange  rate  system:  the  monetary  policy 
objective  of  Hong  Kong  is  exchange  rate  stability,  rather  than  to  target  asset  prices  or 
inflation. Asset bubbles are not unique to economies with fixed exchange rates. Economies 
with floating exchange rates experience similar problems. In any case, it is difficult to tell ex 
ante whether there is an asset bubble. On the other hand, most research studies find that 
monetary policy is too imprecise and blunt to be used as a tool for targeting asset prices. 
Fifth, on the Hong Kong dollar being undervalued: there is no evidence. Recent empirical 
research by the HKMA and the IMF show that there is no evidence of currency misalignment 
for the Hong Kong dollar at present. Given the flexible and adaptive nature of the Hong Kong 
economy,  wages,  prices  and  other  economic  variables  would  adjust  so 
that  any 
misalignment  in  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  would  be  corrected.  Even  a  flexible 
exchange  rate  is  not  immune  to  sustained  currency  misalignment.  Exchange  rate 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 5
movements are affected not only by economic fundamentals but also by market dynamics. A 
flexible exchange rate is arguably more prone to currency misalignment, particularly for small 
and open economies which are more vulnerable to changes in capital flows. 
Sixth, on widening the exchange rate band: the simple answer is no. It would only serve to 
undermine the credibility of the linked exchange rate system and invite speculation on the 
likelihood  of  further  band-widening.  It  would  probably  not  relieve  pressures  for  currency 
appreciation, rising inflation and buoyant asset prices. 
Seventh, on the so-called reverse double play: the scope is limited. The reverse double play 
aims  at  profiting  from  a  long  position  in  Hong  Kong  stocks  by  engineering  a  capital  inflow 
large enough to trigger passive exchange market intervention on our part, which would push 
interest rates to very low levels and asset prices higher. But interest rate adjustments when 
the exchange rate hits the strong side of the band are bounded by the floor of 0%, while they 
might be a lot more dramatic at the weak side, and the sensitivity of stock prices to these 
different adjustments differs. Herd reaction, which is what most speculative plays aim at, is a 
lot  easier  to  instigate  through  the  fear  factor,  when  interest  rates  rocket  up,  risking  a 
stampede  to  exit  from  the  market,  but  a  lot  more  difficult  through  the  greed  factor,  when 
interest rates fall, and the rush to buy does not necessarily materialise. 
Conclusion 
I hope these answers are clear and the high degree of confidence in and credibility of the 
linked  exchange  rate  system  built  up  over  the  past  quarter  of  a  century  is  sustained.  This 
would obviate the need for the type of interest rate adjustments seen earlier in the month and 
dampen volatility in Hong Kong dollar interest rates around those of the US dollar. Indeed, 
monetary and financial stability is dependent to a large extent on confidence in and credibility 
of  monetary  and  financial  policies.  As  we  move  further  into  a  period  in  which  the  external 
environment, characterised by unusual monetary and financial developments in the United 
States  and  the  Mainland  of  China,  presents  increasing  risks  to  monetary  and  financial 
stability in Hong Kong, such confidence and credibility will be crucial for us to stay the course 
and not be derailed. 
6 
 BIS Review 139/2007
