José Manuel González-Páramo: The euro money and financial markets – 
where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Spanish Capital Markets Forum, Madrid, 24 October 2007. 
 I am very grateful to the organisers for inviting me to address such a distinguished audience 
on the occasion of this interesting forum on Spanish Capital Markets. In my intervention I will 
focus  on  the  developments  of  the  euro  area  money  and  financial  markets  into  which  the 
Spanish capital markets are highly integrated. 
Outbreak of the turmoil1
As you are well aware, in July and early August a series of events led to an intensification of 
the tensions in the US sub-prime mortgage market and a sharp decline in the degree of risk 
appetite  of  global  investors.  Market  volatility  increased  across  almost  all  financial  asset 
classes. Stock prices declined as investors sold equities and moved funds into safe-haven 
investment  assets,  such  as  government  bonds.  In  this  context,  several  investment  funds 
holding asset-backed securities suspended withdrawals from their clients. At the same time, 
a  number  of  European  banks  made  public  their  direct  or  indirect  exposures  to  the  US 
mortgage market, particularly to its sub-prime component. 
In the money markets the impact of the turmoil  was initially felt mainly in the longer-dated 
unsecured 
in  non-government  repurchase  agreement  (repo) 
transactions:  trading  in  these  two  segments  became  increasingly  thin.  These  frictions 
eventually spilled over to the very short-term money markets (i.e. below one-week), at first in 
the  US  dollar  market  where  banks  –  particularly,  the  European  ones  –  encountered 
difficulties in raising short-term liquidity. 
Early in the morning of Thursday 9 August, the tensions spread to the short-term euro money 
market and also to other money markets such as those related to the British pound and the 
Swiss franc. The tensions were also felt in the foreign exchange swap market, which is very 
important for banks managing liquidity in different currencies. 
inter-bank  market  and 
Interventions of the ECB 
After  it  became  clear  that  there  was  the  risk  of  an  imminent  gridlock  in  the  euro  money 
market,  the  ECB  released  a  communication  stating  its  readiness  to  contribute  to  orderly 
conditions  in  the  euro  money  market.  Subsequently,  the  ECB  conducted  a  first  fine-tuning 
operation  with  an  overnight  maturity  to  inject  liquidity.  The  operation  was  conducted  as  a 
fixed  rate  tender  at  4.00%  and  the  full  bid  amount  of  EUR  95  billion  was  allotted.  This 
operation was followed by similar fine tuning operations on the following 3 days, which were 
however conducted as variable rate tenders and with declining allotment amounts. 
These  fine-tuning  operations  together  with  the  following  abundant  weekly  refinancing 
operation (EUR 73.5 billion above the benchmark) succeeded in stabilising the very short-
                                                 
1  
I  am  very  grateful  to  Trevor  Fitzpatrick,  Edward  O’Brien,  Fatima  Pires  and  Ralph  Weidenfeller  for  their 
valuable inputs and contributions. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 1
indirectly  supporting 
term interest rates.2 The subsequent regular weekly operations in this reserve maintenance 
period aimed at gradually reabsorbing banks’ accumulated reserve surpluses by the end of 
the maintenance period on 11 September. 
In  the  following  reserve  maintenance  period  the  ECB  followed  a  broadly  similar  approach, 
allotting  significant  excess  liquidity  at  the  beginning  of  the  maintenance  period,  which  was 
then gradually re-absorbed over the following weeks. 
However,  as  the  activity  in  the  term  money  market  –  in  particular,  unsecured  lending  – 
remained  limited,  the  ECB  satisfied  some  demand  by  banks  for  diversified  funding  by 
conducting  two  supplementary  three-month  refinancing  operations  for  EUR  40  billion  and 
EUR  75  billion,  respectively.  These  operations  aimed  at 
the 
normalisation in the functioning of the euro money market. Nevertheless, liquidity in the term 
money markets continued to be limited. 
All in all, it should be emphasised that over the entire two months following the outbreak of 
tensions, the ECB did not provide more liquidity than in earlier maintenance periods, in which 
the demand by banks was mainly driven by reserve requirements. What was different was 
the  pattern  of  liquidity  provision  (with  significant  frontloading  of  the  liquidity  needs)  and  its 
maturity composition, with much larger weight for 3-month refinancing operations relative to 
1-week refinancing operations. 
On  8  October,  before  the  start  of  the  current  reserve  maintenance  period,  we  issued  a 
communication  stating  that  the  ECB  continues  to  closely  monitor  liquidity  conditions  and 
aims at further reducing the volatility of very short term rates around the MRO minimum bid 
rate.  For  this  purpose,  we  have  decided  to  reinforce  our  policy  of  allocating  more  liquidity 
than  the  benchmark  amount  in  our  weekly  operations  to  accommodate  the  demand  of 
counterparties  to  fulfil  reserve  requirements  early  within  the  maintenance  period.  In  the 
refinancing operation on 9 October, which was the first of the current period, we allotted EUR 
40 billion above the benchmark amount. In the following weekly operation on 16 October, the 
allotment exceeded the benchmark amount by EUR 18 billion, and in yesterday’s tender we 
allotted  more  than  EUR  14  billion  above  the  benchmark  amount.  Indeed,  the  difference 
between  the  allotted  and  the  benchmark  amount  is  envisaged  to  decline  gradually  in  the 
course of the maintenance period, taking into account the prevailing market conditions. And 
the  ECB  still  aims  at  balanced  liquidity  conditions  at  the  end  of  the  maintenance  period. 
Besides, the ECB intends to steer liquidity towards more balanced conditions also during the 
maintenance period, in a way which is consistent with the objective to keep very short term 
rates close to the minimum bid rate. We have also stated our commitment to keep this policy 
in place for as long as needed. 
Before  turning  to  the  current  situation  in  the  market,  let  me  stress  a  very  important  point. 
Through  the  liquidity  operations  just  discussed,  the  ECB  has  contributed  to  the  orderly 
functioning  of  the  money  market,  which  is  one  of  its  key  responsibilities.  It  is  worth 
emphasising,  however,  that  the  ECB’s  primary  mandate  calls  for  its  monetary  policy  to 
deliver price stability. The two responsibilities are clearly distinct and should not be mixed. 
This is our concept. Only when kept separate, the fulfilment of both duties can reinforce each 
other. 
Current situation 
Let me now turn to the main issues that characterise the nature and dimension of the current 
tensions in some segments of the financial markets.  
                                                 
2   The so-called benchmark amount is the amount of liquidity that is needed for the banking sector to fulfill their 
reserve requirements in a smooth fashion over the course of a maintenance period. Usually, the ECB supplies 
roughly this amount in its weekly refinancing operations. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2007
Although the ECB interventions have had a stabilising effect on the euro money market rates 
at  the  shorter  end  of  the  term  structure  and,  more  generally,  the  money  market  has 
recovered  some  of  the  lost  ground,  market  participants  continue  to  report  limited  trading 
activity, particularly in unsecured inter-bank term markets. Compared to the situation prior to 
the  emerging  of  tensions,  unsecured  deposit  rates  beyond  one  month  are  in  some  cases 
(notably,  three  months)  still  significantly  higher  and  turnover  remains  lower,  despite  some 
improvement during the past few weeks. This situation reflects two main factors. 
• 
First,  some  banks’  daily  funding  needs,  especially  in  USD,  have  significantly 
increased at various points in time in the recent past. In addition, they have become 
more  uncertain,  since  the  credit  lines  that  they  had  offered  to  various  financial 
entities  as  back-up  facilities  have  been  largely  utilised  or  appeared  likely  to  be 
utilised. This is due to the fact that these entities have faced difficulties in tapping 
their usual market funding sources, in particular the US dollar-denominated asset-
backed commercial paper market. 
Second,  a  number  of  financial  institutions  are  still  reluctant  to  lend  money  in  the 
inter-bank market, particularly on an uncollateralized basis, because of uncertainty 
about the soundness of their counterparties. This reflects a problem of confidence 
and trust among banks, even in the presence of abundant liquidity in the banking 
system.  Lack  of  confidence  among  banks  leads  to  a  sustained  reduction  in  inter-
bank activity. 
 As  regards  the  funding  markets  most  affected  by  the  turmoil,  anecdotal  evidence  and 
bilateral contacts with market participants indicate some recent improvements: 
• 
In the FX swap market, the degree of market depth and liquidity has improved with 
turnover increasing again, while spreads have narrowed, particularly for short term 
periods up to one week. However, it seems that turnover may not yet have reverted 
to pre-crisis levels for periods beyond one week. 
In the Asset Backed Euro Commercial Paper (ABECP) market, the amount of paper 
maturing  (currently  about  EUR  6.4  billion  per  day)  is  now  in  line  with  the  amount 
issued (currently EUR 6.6 billion per day). In addition, there has been a recovery in 
the original maturities of ABECP; after falling from above 50 days in early August to 
below 25 days in mid September 2007, original maturities have recently returned to 
levels close to 45 days. 
The outstanding amount in the US Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) market 
has decreased from a peak of almost USD 1.2 trillion at the end of July to a current 
level  of  around  USD  0.9  trillion,  although  the  pace  of  decline  has  stabilised.  The 
patterns in the US have been similar to those of the ABECP: shortening of roll-over 
maturities,  issuance  smaller  than  maturing  amount  and  banks  buying  their  own 
paper. The 3-month rates on highly rated US ABCPs, which rose up to 50 bps over 
LIBOR in August, have declined to pre-turmoil levels just below LIBOR. 
  Preliminary lessons to be drawn 
Recent events have revealed some weaknesses in the organisation and functioning of the 
financial system, in particular regarding the market for complex structured products and the 
liquidity in this market under stressed conditions. Let me point out three key weaknesses: 
• 
First, the ability of investors to assess the extent of concentrations among various 
types  of  collateral  –  including  sub-prime  –  within  the  structured  finance  securities 
has clearly been shown to be less than adequate. Indeed, conducting adequate due 
diligence  regarding  the  nature  of  underlying  investment  exposures  cannot  be 
replaced by decision-making based almost exclusively on ratings. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 3
  Second, market participants were not sufficiently alert to the possibility that liquidity 
could dry up in structured finance markets, even though secondary market liquidity 
in the various structured finance markets has been traditionally thin. As you know, 
there  are  several  reasons  for  this,  inter  alia:  the  specificity  of  these  instruments, 
which  are  often  tailor-made;  the  “buy-and-hold”  strategies  followed  by  a  large 
number of investors (including, pension funds, insurers, and banks); and the limited 
comparability of  mark-to-model valuations, stemming from the complexity of these 
instruments. 
Third, the Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) structures had intrinsic liquidity 
risk because they invested the proceeds of short term liabilities into longer maturity 
structured finance assets. In some cases, certain types of ABCP structures such as 
Structured  Investment  Vehicles  (SIVs)  faced  increased  pressure  resulting  from  an 
inability to roll-over. This came both from investor anxiety concerning the underlying 
collateral and the inability to value adequately the collateral as they were forced to 
sell  assets.  There  are  indications  that  the  liquidity  strains  associated  to  these 
structures are not yet over. 
Three key weaknesses of credit markets 
Whilst  it  is  too  early  to  make  a  definitive  assessment,  certain  supervisory  and  regulatory 
issues  can  already  be  identified  as  warranting  further  attention  or  action.  Initiatives  are 
already underway at the international and EU level to address these various issues, but for 
our exchange of views here today I would like to focus on three key issues: transparency, 
valuation of complex structured products, and liquidity risk management practices, including 
liquidity risk stress-testing. 
• 
investors  and 
transparency 
for  markets, 
regulators.  Adequate 
First, 
transparency is a necessary basis for an efficient functioning of financial markets. 
Recent experience has shown how perceived opaqueness or uncertainty regarding 
the underlying exposures, in particular of financial institutions, has translated into a 
loss  of  confidence  with  a  resulting  disruption  in  the  interbank  market.  There  have 
been recently many calls for enhanced market transparency both from banks (e.g. 
enhanced disclosure of banks’ liquidity lines to conduits) and non-regulated entities 
(e.g. voluntary disclosure of portfolio holdings in order to assess where the US sub-
prime  risk  lies,  and  the  development  of  guidelines  for  the  consistent  disclosure  of 
methodologies used to value portfolio holdings). In this context I would like to note 
that improvements are expected from the implementation of the Basel II framework, 
namely  of  the  Pillar  III  requirements,  in  particular  regarding  disclosure  of  risk 
positions  for  banks;  with  regard  to  the  non-regulated  entities,  a  recent  industry 
initiative  (dated  10  September)  from  the  European  Securitisation  Forum  and  the 
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) calling for additional 
disclosures in the structured product market should be mentioned and welcomed. 
Second, valuation of illiquid complex structured products. Given present market 
conditions and the uncertainty concerning the underlying quality of the assets, there 
are  currently  no  quotes  or  market  prices  for  many  structured  finance  products. 
However,  year-end  financial  statements  including  valuations  of  structured  finance 
products  will  have  to  be  prepared  soon.  The  room  for  discretion  under  existing 
accounting  rules  and  the  use  of  marking-to-model  valuations  (in  the  absence  of 
market prices), may result in very different valuations for similar assets. This lack of 
comparability and consistency in the valuation of similar assets should be addressed 
in order to restore confidence in this market. 
Third, liquidity risk management, in particular liquidity risk stress-testing and 
contingency funding plans. The complexity of structured finance products requires 
  4 
 BIS Review 122/2007
banks  to  have  in  place  commensurately  sophisticated  risk  management  systems. 
Recent events have shown that significant efforts remain to be done in this respect. 
Furthermore, carrying out liquidity risk stress-testing and having in place adequate 
contingency funding plans are particularly important given their ability to significantly 
improve the preparedness of banks to deal with liquidity events. 
Finally, there are other areas of relevance for the recent financial market developments that 
deserve  further  study,  such  as  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies.  However,  I  have  already 
exceeded the number of issues than can be conveniently addressed in ten minutes. 
Let  me  conclude  by  noting  that  the  recent  market  developments  have  not  only  revealed 
weaknesses  and  challenges  to  be  addressed,  but  also  the  strength  of  some  of  the 
institutional  arrangements  in  place.  As  a  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  I  take 
especial pride in the flexibility and effectiveness that the Eurosystem’s operational framework 
has  exhibited  in  managing  liquidity  in  the  euro money  market  under  stress  conditions.  But 
this is an issue that I leave for the next occasion in which I will have the pleasure to meet 
again this audience. 
Thanks very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 5
