Christian Noyer: Globalisation of capital markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  Paris  Europlace, 
International Financial Forum, Tokyo, 27 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and a pleasure for me to speak before such a distinguished audience and 
I am delighted to be in Tokyo today. In the last decades, global economic growth, financial 
innovation and financial globalisation have progressed hand in hand. This does not exclude, 
of course, challenging episodes of stress, such as the current one. 
Financial  globalisation  is  not  a  new  phenomenon,  but  the  scale  and  speed  of  the  current 
phase  of  globalisation  is  unprecedented;  cross-border  and  cross-market  links  are  deeper 
than ever before. Events are still unfolding, but the dynamics of the current crisis has been a 
live  experiment  of  how  globalisation  has  modified  the  reaction  of  the  financial  system  to 
shocks. The magnitude of possible losses is, in many respects, contained. Current estimates 
put  the  direct  cost  of  subprime  defaults  at  around  250  billions  USD.  It  is  significant  but 
bearable, especially starting from a point of very favourable economic conditions and high 
profitability. 
Still, what began as a sound correction of the undervaluation of risks in the subprime market 
unravels as one of the major financial crisis of the past 10 years. Some scenarios considered 
as very remote crystallised on a large scale, while widely expected break-up points held up 
well. Hedge funds, once considered as a source of systemic risk, fared better than regulated 
institutions. The  inter-bank  market,  traditionally  the  most  liquid  and  efficient  of  all  markets, 
has  experienced  serious  dislocation,  while  equity  markets  were  relatively  unscathed.  The 
spreading  of  defiant  expectations  from  the  subprime  US  market  to  other  segments,  other 
institutions and other regions has been unexpected, asymmetric and disconnected from the 
magnitude  of  the  initial  shock.  It  invites  us  to  revisit  our  reading  of  globalisation  and 
contagion in the light of current events. 
The  ongoing  financial  globalisation  is  underpinned  by  three  main  drivers,  each  of  them 
strengthening the two others. 
The  first  driver,  and  probably  the  strongest,  is  financial  innovation.  Supported  by 
technological  progress,  financial  innovation  has  fostered  the  emergence  of  new  financial 
products and services, resulting in more complete financial markets. Thanks to advances in 
financial technology, it is now possible to break up the risk of an asset into its constituent 
parts  and  to  recombine  them  as  wished,  to  fit  a  specific  investor’s  risk  profile.  The 
emergence of derivatives, combined with the appropriate mathematical tools to price them, 
has  greatly  expanded  the  range  of  tradable  risks,  opening  up  new  and  vast  horizons  for 
hedging  strategies.  Financial  institutions  are  able  to  actively  manage  their  exposures  and 
reallocate certain risks to those players that are most able to bear them. Overall, investors 
are  more  willing  to  invest  across  borders,  knowing  that  they  can  reach  an  improved  risk-
return trade-off. 
Simultaneously,  economies  are  becoming  more  open  financially,  especially  in  the 
emerging  world.  The  growth  of  international  capital  flows  is  the  consequence  both  of 
domestic  policies  and  global  factors.  Domestically,  financial  liberalisation  and  deregulation 
have  relaxed  investment  restrictions.  More  flexible  exchange  rate  policies,  liberalisation  of 
capital  accounts,  the  opening  of  domestic  stock  markets  to  foreign  investors  as  well  as 
“investor-friendly” policies help to attract foreign investors. Global factors have also played a 
role, with the abundant global liquidity environment as well as the decrease in home bias. By 
way  of  example,  non-residents  currently  hold  46%  of  French  market  capitalisation  and 
slightly more than 50% of French government bonds. 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 1
A third driver is the emergence of global financial players, such as large banks, hedge 
funds,  private  equity  funds  and  more  recently  sovereign  wealth  funds.  They  all  share 
common characteristics: 
   They  play  an  important  role  in  fostering  market  efficiency,  and  provide  liquidity  to 
capital markets; 
They use sophisticated investment strategies; 
They  implement  advanced  risk  management  practices,  and  help  to  spread  them 
across markets and countries. 
However, because of their sheer size and potential impact on market equilibria, they raise 
some  concerns  of  transparency  as  well  as  questions  about  their  role  in  fostering,  or  not, 
financial stability. 
Those issues warrant being debated. 
What  are  the  consequences  of  the  financial  globalisation  currently  underway  for 
global capital markets? They are well known, so I will just highlight two of them. 
First, globalisation increases the efficiency of financial markets. 
Thanks  to  financial  globalisation  and  technological  progress,  informational  efficiency  of 
capital markets has increased over the past few decades. Any new available information is 
accurately  processed  and  impounded  in  asset  prices,  leading  to  more  accurate  pricing  of 
assets  and  risks.  And  the  permanent  quest  for  arbitrage  opportunities  has  fostered  cross-
market and cross-border strategies also leading to more consistent pricing. 
Allocative efficiency, that is the market’s ability to allocate resources in a way that maximises 
the  welfare  attained  through  their  use,  has  also  improved:  for  a  given  investor,  there  is  a 
wider and more diversified range of investment opportunities than ever before. 
Operational  efficiency  has  so  far  gained  from  globalisation,  since  the  cost  of  financial 
operations has quickly fallen, due to productivity gains in the financial sector stemming from 
the  scale  and  scope  of  economies  and  the  intense  competition  between  markets  and 
intermediaries. 
Nevertheless, this overall trend towards efficiency occasionally bumps into puzzles that are 
not readily explained by economic theory. For instance, the longstanding question as to why 
capital does not flow, in net terms, from rich to poor countries has not yet been clarified since 
it was first addressed by Robert Lucas. It has recently been supplemented by the so-called 
“allocation  puzzle”,  highlighting  the  fact  that  capital  seems  to  flow  toward  economies  with 
relatively low investment rates. Convincing explanations for these puzzles certainly require 
taking into account market imperfections (such as credit constraints), differences in financial 
infrastructures as well as growth externalities (such as human capital). 
Another  salient  feature  of  financial  globalisation  is  the  rapid  maturing  of  emerging 
economies and markets. In 2007 and 2008, the IMF expects emerging countries to account 
for  more  than  half  of  world  economic  growth.  The  same  positive  trend  is  reflected  in  their 
financing  conditions.  Emerging  market  economies  increasingly  finance  themselves  in  the 
form of bonds in local currency at long maturities and fixed interest rates. By doing so, they 
have  escaped  the  curse  of  “original  sin”  –  the  inability  to  borrow  abroad  in  their  own 
currencies  –  that  made  the  crises  of  the  1990s  so  costly.  Their  capital  markets  have 
expanded rapidly, both in size and in the range of instruments available. Asian stock market 
capitalisation, for instance, increased five-fold between 2000 and 2005, as against only a one 
and  a  half  times  increase  for  the  major  European  and  US  stock  exchanges.  Issuance  of 
bonds  and  syndicated  loans  from  emerging  market  corporates  has  also  accelerated 
markedly, and has even exceeded sovereign issuance in some countries. Lastly, risk premia 
on  emerging  market  assets  have 
reflecting  sound  economic 
fundamentals. For this series of reasons, emerging markets have become an attractive asset 
fallen  significantly, 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2007
class for long-term international investors, as shown by their rising share in asset allocations. 
It is therefore not so surprising that they have so far been relatively immune to the current 
subprime crisis, and might even be seen as “safe havens”! 
Let me now turn to some major challenges of financial globalisation. 
First,  the  impact  on  monetary  policy.  Some  analysts  have  suggested  that,  because  of 
capital market integration, real interest rates will equalize around the world, thus reducing the 
ability  of  national  Central  Banks  to  control  inflation.  However,  this  need  not  be  the  case. 
Indeed, the classic Mundell-Fleming analysis concludes that monetary policy should be more 
effective, rather than less, in the case of international capital mobility, although it can operate 
through different channels of transmission including the exchange rate. Furthermore, in many 
emerging countries, strong capital inflows confront monetary policy with a dilemma between 
pursuing internal and external objectives, in a context of rising inflationary pressures. Taming 
capital  inflows  would  call  for  a  relaxation  of  monetary  policy,  at  the  risk  however  of 
compromising  on  the  domestic  objective  of  maintaining  low  inflation.  Sterilisation  cannot 
always be relied upon to resolve this dilemma as it is likely to be ineffective in the long term 
and fuel other imbalances such as excessive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. 
A  second  question  is  the  potential  for  global  contagion.  As  a  direct  consequence  of 
cross-border  financial  integration,  local  price  or  liquidity  shocks  are  more  likely  to  spread 
around the globe. Large-scale liquidity creation resulting from monetary (or exchange rate) 
policy in one country may fuel asset price bubbles elsewhere. One current example might be 
seen in carry trades, which have become a major driver of a number of currencies, including 
the  yen.  Therefore,  distant  events  can  have  sharp  impacts,  even  on  local  institutions  or 
investors.  New  contagion  channels  have  emerged.  With  more  risk  traded  in  and  through 
markets, the potential knock-on effects from an erosion of liquidity in some segments or for 
some  institutions  have  multiplied,  and  we  are  currently  experiencing  how  unexpected  this 
process can be. Risks have become “mobile”, if I may put it like that, so mobile that we lose 
sight of their true location. 
The third and final set of issues relates to global imbalances. The facilitation of cross-
border capital flows may have relaxed financing constraints for borrowers, making it possible 
to  finance  ever  larger  current  account  deficits.  In  one  sense,  the  contribution  of  financial 
globalisation  to  disconnecting  national  savings  and  national  investment  is  a  welcome 
development,  to  the  extent  that  it  allows  for  a  more  efficient  global  allocation  of  savings. 
However the differences in the development of financial markets around the world may also 
have  created,  or  at  least  facilitated,  global  imbalances.  The  ability  of  countries  to  produce 
sound and liquid financial assets is largely disconnected from their level of economic growth : 
rising  revenues  in  the  emerging  world  need  to  “find  a  home”  in  sound  and  liquid  financial 
markets. 
Finally,  in  any  case,  the  question  of  sustainability  –  the  resilience  of  capital  flows  to  the 
accumulation  of  imbalances  –  remains  a  pressing  one.  While  capital  flows  tend  to  move 
freely  across  borders,  exchange  rate  regimes  remain  very  diverse  in  their  degrees  of 
flexibility. This leads to asymmetric adjustments depending on the exchange rate regime, not 
only between currency areas, but also inside the same region, such as in Asia. Overall, some 
of the main floating currencies may end up bearing a higher share of the adjustment on their 
shoulders than they should. Maintaining integrated global capital markets in an environment 
where  such  differences  persist  might  not  be  sustainable  over  the  long  term.  An  orderly 
unwinding  of  global  imbalances  might  therefore  imply  greater  flexibility  from  countries  with 
large current account surpluses and fixed exchange rates. 
I will conclude on a matter of debate for international financial stability for the future. 
As I have said, financial systems have become more efficient as a result of globalisation and 
innovation. But have they become more resilient, that is, more capable of absorbing shocks? 
None of us has the answer to that question now, but it will be interesting for central banks 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 3
and regulators to monitor financial developments in the coming months, in search of clues. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2007
