Shamshad Akhtar: Islamic finance – growth, competitiveness and 
sustainability 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 14th: World 
Islamic Banking Conference, Bahrain, 9-10 December 2007. 
 1. 
Islamic  finance  has  received  overwhelming  response  from  across  the  world  as  one 
discovers  its  ideological  and  practical  richness  and  relevance.  Growth  in  Islamic  finance 
industry has however triggered a number of debates regarding the challenges this industry 
faces. These debates essentially revolve around whether Islamic finance is progressing well 
and is it there to stay? Is Islamic finance going to be a niche market or does it have global 
appeal?  What  are  key  drivers  for  enhancing  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  Islamic 
finance  industry  which  would  in  turn  help  broaden  its  appeal  and  in  turn  enhance  its 
sustainability? In my brief remarks I will touch on these debates. 
2. 
Despite transitory challenges – typical of a new and emerging industry, my view is that 
prospects  for  growth  of  Islamic  finance  are  promising  but  rests  on  building  an  effective 
system for Islamic finance.1 Growing interest has led to rising investments in Islamic finance 
and resulted in phenomenal growth in Islamic finance businesses. Interest in this discipline 
has  already  extended  beyond  Muslim  and  Islamic  countries  to  non-Muslim  population  and 
jurisdictions  and  non-Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  avoidance  of  forbidden  investments 
(“haram”  products)  and  interest  rates  and  speculative  structures  prohibited  in  Islamic 
jurisprudence and Islamic finance’s emphasis on just and equitable financial system offers 
distinct  appeal  for  Muslims  to  be  attracted  to  this  option.  Appeal  of  Shariah  compliant 
financing mechanism is also likely to be a powerful tool for enhancing access to development 
finance and empowering the poor and vulnerable groups, particularly if Islamic banks extend 
their reach in rural areas which are currently not effectively served by conventional system.  
3. 
Irrespective  of  religious  appeal  and  affiliations,  consumers  would  be  eventually 
attracted to Islamic finance if it positions itself to offer an efficient and competitive alternate 
avenue of financial intermediation which caters to all segments of population and economy 
and  services  retail  and  personal  banking  and  project  finance.  This  can  happen  only  if  key 
messages  and  principles  of  Islamic  finance  are  flexibly,  constructively  and  innovatively 
interpreted, its conceptual framework further developed, nurtured and translated effectively 
into  practical  applications,  and  work  is  launched  to  better  develop  interface  and  linkages 
between Islamic and conventional finance and unleash the synergies to advantage of global 
financial development.  
Few  key  drivers  for  enhancing  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  Islamic  Finance 
Drivers for enhancing efficiency and competitiveness 
4. 
include: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Financial engineering and innovation. 
Global financial centers and their regulators support for Islamic finance industry. 
Standard  governance  and  prudential  regulation  and  supervisory  guidance  which 
require tweaking regulations to properly identify and assign proper weights for new 
                                                 
1   “Building an effective Islamic financial system.” Dr. Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
at the Global Islamic Financial Governor’s: Financial Regulators Forum in Islamic Finance, Kuala Lumpur, 27 
March 2007. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
and different types of risks associated with the special and unique characteristic of 
Islamic finance business. 
Development  and  adoption  of  simple  and  standard  and  cost  effective  legal 
frameworks for contracts associated with the new and hybrid products. 
Flexible  and  practical  application  and  enforcement  of  Shariah  principles  and 
injunctions and its acceptability by public.  
(iv) 
(v) 
Taking up these items, first it has to be emphasized that financial engineering and 
5. 
innovation is one of the most potent tools of Islamic finance and will be the key driver 
to attracting global economic and financial player’s interest which will be critical for 
competitiveness and sustainability of Islamic finance. Increasingly Scholars, academics 
and practitioners have worked with global banks to offer wide range of wholesale, retail and 
trade financing banking solutions. For instance: 
(i) 
Vanilla Sukuks are now being compliment by range of hybrid Sukuks: Sukuk –Ijara, 
Sukuk-Musharaka, Sukuk-Moharba and so and so forth – as per IMF recent study 
there are today over twenty odd different variants of Sukuk.  
Islamic derivative market now offers Islamic equivalent of interest rate swap/option 
called profit rate swap/option and Islamic cross currency and FX swap and options. 
This  is  appreciable  development  given  that  Shariah  compliant  transaction  has  to 
fulfill  existence  of  underlying  real  assets  and  generally  it  does  not  approve  of 
uncertainty (jahala) and speculation or undue risk taking (Gharar).  
Private equity has already structural compatibility with Islamic financing, although it 
has to be deployed for Shariah eligible uses. 
Personal  banking  solutions  are  now  being  floated  saving  and  investment  account 
and  information  technology  is  used  to  offer  online,  ATMs  and  telephone  banking 
services.  
By  and  large  products  are  structured  on  murabaha  principles  where  funds  are 
allocated for particular projects or finance an asset (such as home ownership and 
automobiles) in which depositor shares in the project rather than bank profits and to 
structure ijara (leasing) with appropriate asset backing and legal structures.  
In  some  cases  there  is  move  into  bancassurance  through  establishment  of 
associated Takaful institution and appending insurance sweetener is also a wave, 
though slow to take off. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Islamic  and  conventional 
6. 
There  is  scope  for  deepening  financial  engineering  and  innovation  and  exploiting  its 
edge to promote equity based financing or structure hybrid debt: equity instruments. This will 
allow  Islamic  banks  to  offer  richer  and  multiple  options  to  customer,  while  allowing  banks 
opportunities for proper fund mobilization and asset diversification. It will allow avenues for 
proper  diversification  and  integration  of  financial  services  and  pooling  of  risks  through 
blending  of 
to  epitomize  risk  sharing  between 
stakeholders and align rewards to be consistent with the risks.  
Second  driving  factor  would  be  global  financial  centers  and  their  regulators 
7. 
support  for  Islamic  finance  industry.  Currently  wave  of  interest  in  Islamic  finance  is 
fascinating  and  has  helped  attract  global  banks  in  Asia  and  Europe  to  use  their  skills  to 
augment the application of Islamic finance principles. As expected the approach and level of 
enthusiasm  and  pro-activism  has  varied  in  Western  world.  I  would  like  to  highlight  the 
emerging approach of United Kingdom which has set on course a conducive and practical 
approach  for  development  of  Islamic  finance  which  I  would  advocate  other  developed 
financing 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
jurisdictions  can  pursue.  U.K  aims  to  strike  a  balance  whereby  FSA’s  recent  paper2 
highlighted  that  it  has  adopted  “no  obstacle  and  no  favors”  policy  for  Islamic  finance. 
Recognizing  its  secular  framework,  U.K  has  been  upfront,  practical  and  candid  requiring 
financial institutions to find mechanisms for conforming to FSA basic regulatory framework, 
while  being  open  to  be  accommodative  in  interpretation  of  its  rules  and  regulations.  To 
conform to FSA requirements, Islamic financial institutions have to ensure structures evolved 
are in compliance with FSA requirements. Meanwhile, U.K provides the necessary flexibility 
and the required relief to its regulation on case to case basis. Equally supportive has been 
U.K rationalization of multiple taxes applicable in purchase and sale of properties to facilitate 
Sukuks and Islamic mortgages.  
8. 
Third  critical  driver  of  Islamic  finance  is  the  efforts  being  launched  by  central 
banks  to  reach  understanding  on  banking  regulation  and  supervision.  Broad 
understanding has now evolved that financial institution have to conform to standard financial 
regulation and supervision requirements applicable to conventional banks. There has been 
steady progress to improvise and modify regulatory framework to recognize the safeguards 
required for risks associated with Islamic banking solution and the required capital treatment 
for  special  and  unique  characteristics  of  Islamic  finance  business.  The  differences  in  the 
assets and liability structure in Islamic finance and the complexities associated with different 
Islamic  products,  however,  tend  to  alter  the  risk  perception  associated  with  this  financial 
system.  
9. 
As  such,  work  of  IFSB  and  industry  continues  to  be  critical  to  evolve  better 
understanding of different risks and how to cushion for such risks. Ensuring harmonization 
and  consistent  adoption,  application  and  implementation  of  these  evolving  standards  for 
Islamic finance and products will be a challenge but absolutely required to avoid regulatory 
arbitrage  by  industry  and  certain  Islamic  jurisdictions.  Potential  for  such  distortions  will  be 
inevitable  as  Islamic  prudential  regulatory  and  capital  adequacy  standards  require  more 
guidance and awareness. Furthermore, in line with the spirit of Bank International Settlement 
subscribed  regulatory  standards,  IFSB  standards  are  also  for  voluntary,  rather  than 
compulsory compliance. While this would result in differences in timing of adoption of such 
standards  by  Islamic  industry,  it  is  expected  that  with  growing  awareness  market  and 
investors will be factoring in differences in compliance in their choice of institutions.  
10.  Fourth critical driver of Islamic finance would be development and adoption of 
simple and standard legal frameworks. Contracts are at the core of Islamic transactions 
which  define  the  rules  for  sale  and  purchase/trade/exchange  of  goods  and  services. 
Contracts are structured around the nature of transaction which could be either in the form of 
trade  financing;  asset  based  financing  or  different  forms  of  partnerships.  Under  Islamic 
finance preference is given to trading of physical assets as well as trading of rights and with 
the  growing  hybrid  products  the  demands  for  legal  documentation  has  multiplied  and  is 
adding  to  the  cost  of  transaction. Certainty  of  contract  is another  important  element  under 
Islamic  contract  law.  The  body  of  Islamic  Contract  Law  while  rich  and  supportive  of 
participant’s  right  in  transaction  is  onerous,  complex  and  prone  to  different  interpretations 
and rulings. Equally challenging are questions of enforceability of terms and conditions and 
lack of ability of courts to arbitrate litigation in case of dispute on contracts.  
11.  Fifth, it has to be recognized that Islamic finance is in its evolutionary stage and 
its sustainability would depend critically on regulators work with Islamic Scholars to 
reach  flexible  and  shared,  if  not  unified,  understandings  on  principle  elements  at 
international  level,  despite  differences  in  faiths  and  disciplines.  There  are  number  of 
faiths  and  disciplines  across  Muslim  jurisdictions  (for  e.g.  Syria  and  Pakistan  are 
                                                 
2   Financial  Services  Authority:  Islamic  Finance  in  the  UK:  Regulation  and  Challenges.  Micheal  Ainley,  Ali. 
Mashayekhi, Robert Hicks, Arshadur Rahman and Ali Ravalia. November 2007. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
predominantly  Hanafi  school,  Bahrain,  Dubai  and  Abu  Dhabi  pursues  Maliki  school,  Saudi 
Arabia and Qatar relies on Hanbali school). Rather than pursue harmonized views, each faith 
developing its own applications adds to the cost of transaction, introduces doubts on viability 
of  Islamic  finance  given  the  split  opinions,  and confuses  the  public  that  basically  relies  on 
Scholars  endorsement  of  products  and  business.  These  differences  along  with  different 
interpretations  of  Shariah  Scholars  at  the  Boards  or  as  advisors  within  the  banks,  if 
significant,  further  carry  the  risk  of  Sharia  arbitrage  which  carries  complications  for 
regulators.  Reaching  consensus  and  shared/harmonized  guidance  among  Scholars  of 
different beliefs and faiths and evolving more unified institutional mechanism for adoption of 
common  Shariah  standards  and  ensuring  proper  enforcement  through  effective  internal 
controls for their compliance would let the industry grow and compete on level playing field. 
Flexible and simpler interpretation of the basic tenets at the level of Scholars would enhance 
public acceptability.  
12.  Finally, keeping these macro considerations aside, Islamic banks being late starters do 
face  a  real  challenge  of  competing  with  a  well  established  conventional  industry. 
Furthermore, full-fledged Islamic banks as per their licensing requirements have to confine 
themselves  to  Islamic  businesses  and  products,  while  conventional  banks  with  Islamic 
windows  have  inherent  advantage  as  they  can  compete  more  aggressively  offering  both 
conventional and Islamic businesses. Different approaches to licensing are debated to have 
implications for competitiveness of industry whereby there is an argument put forward that in 
interest of fostering healthier competitions banks should be allowed to choose what they offer 
without  imposition  of  licensing  policy  constraints.3  To  propel  Islamic  industry  allowing 
dedicated  Islamic  banks  is  a  well  accepted  course  as  long  as  regulators  do  not  shield  or 
provide  preferential  treatment  to  these  institutions  but  creates  a  level  playing  field  in 
regulatory and supervisory oversight. 
Next stage of development  
13.  Competitiveness  of  Islamic  finance  in  future  would  depend  on  how  Government  and 
regulators  perceive  and  nurture  future  development  of  Islamic  finance  and  address  the 
issues  highlighted  above  and  develop  institutional,  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks 
and their effective enforcement. In the next stage of Islamic finance development, there is 
need for more substantive work on Islamic finance in the areas of:  
(i) 
Standardization  of  contracts  and  documentation  which  would  reduce  transaction 
costs and risks of litigation. 
Development  of  dispute  resolution  mechanism  for  Sharia  compliance  matters  as 
regulators will not be in a position to resolve these. 
Proper  implementation  of  evolving  guidance  of  regulatory  standards  for  special 
features of Islamic without comprising international standards to which both Islamic 
and conventional banks are to be subject too. 
Development of more interfaces between regulators – so far there seems to have 
been more systematic alliance between central banks to coordinate standard setting 
and  its  compliance.  There  is  however  need  for  better  coordination  between  bank 
and  non  bank  regulators  and  also  for  later  to  launch  more  initiatives  to  nurture 
nonbank Islamic sector.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
                                                 
3   The  McKinsey  Qaurterly:  Rethinking  Regulation  for  Islamic  Banking.  Nasr-Eddine  Benaissa,  Xavier  Jopart, 
and Ozgur Tanrikulu. 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2007
