Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The euro – benefits and challenges 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Conference “Poland and the EURO”, Warsaw, 26 November 2007. 
 Introduction  
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me first thank the organisers for inviting me to this conference on Poland and the euro. 
As you know, in just over one month’s time, the euro area will be expanded for the third time 
since  its  start  in  1999,  this  time  with  Cyprus  and  Malta,  taking  the  total  number  of 
participating countries to 15. As more countries complete their convergence processes and 
join  the  euro  area,  our  experience  and  knowledge  are  growing  as  regards  not  only  the 
convergence  process  but  also  how  participation  in  the  euro  area  changes  the  economic 
conditions  for  the  individual  country.  As  all  countries  need  to  have  an  open  and  sincere 
debate  about  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  euro,  a  project  which  is  at  the  core  of  European 
integration, I am pleased to share my views with you today.  
Poland  has  been  at  the  core  of  European  history  since  a  long  time.  Being  myself  from 
Vienna, I know very  well the importance of the help of King Jan III Sobieski in ending the 
siege of Vienna in 1683, for the subsequent history of my country.  
In my speech, I would like to address the issue of experiences gained so far in the euro area 
by discussing the benefits and challenges of adopting the euro. I would then like to say a few 
words  about  the  formal  convergence  process  and  the  role  of  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB)  in  the  examination  of  countries’  progress  with  convergence.  Finally,  I  would  like  to 
concentrate on a few specific future policy challenges, both for the euro area as a whole and 
for the individual countries. 
Benefits of joining the euro area  
2.  
As regards the benefits of euro area membership, these can be seen from two perspectives: 
from the perspective of the individual country and from the perspective of the euro area as a 
whole. The convergence process for euro area entry is aimed at ensuring that participation in 
the euro area is beneficial for both. Starting with the euro area, Monetary Union represents 
the completion of the Internal Market in the EU, providing full price and cost transparency to 
the Single Market for goods, services, labour and capital. The euro has brought exchange 
rate stability within the area, which supports trade and enables economies of scale, thereby 
providing the conditions for a more efficient allocation of resources. For the ordinary citizen, 
the  most  striking  advantage  is  of  course  that  they  no  longer  need  to  exchange  currencies 
when travelling in the euro area. In addition, the euro has brought monetary stability, with low 
inflation  and  a  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  to  the  low  levels  prevailing  in  the 
countries that had the highest monetary policy credibility before the euro was introduced.  
This  was  not  an  obvious  outcome.  In  fact,  given  differences  across  countries  and  the 
complexity  of  the  task at  hand,  many  commentators  doubted  whether  the  euro  area  could 
ever  achieve  the  high  degree  of  monetary  stability  and  credibility  of  some  of  its  legacy 
currencies. Moreover, despite significant economic shocks over the years, due for instance 
to  oil  price  and  financial  market  developments,  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  have 
remained  closely  anchored  to  price  stability,  as  defined  by  the  ECB.  Price  stability,  low 
inflation expectations and low long-term interest rates are key objectives for monetary policy, 
as they provide the best support for sustainable economic growth and employment.  
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
For  the  individual  countries,  however,  the  story  could  be  somewhat  different,  given  that 
favourable  developments  in  the  euro  area  could  mask  a  considerable  level  of  diversity 
among countries. In recent years, there has been much discussion about divergences across 
countries  in  the  euro  area.  However,  while  inflation  and  growth  differentials  between  euro 
area countries are not insignificant, they have not been unusually large since the launch of 
the  euro  in  comparison  with  other  large  currency  areas,  particularly  the  United  States. 
Moreover, the dispersion of inflation rates is substantially smaller that that experienced in the 
previous  decade,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  growth  rates  across  countries  has  declined 
somewhat over the past 20 years.  
However, the persistence of inflation and growth differentials across countries, in the sense 
that it is the same countries which persistently exhibit developments above or below the euro 
area  average,  may  suggest  that  the  underlying  adjustment  mechanisms  in  the  euro  area 
economies are functioning only gradually and not as fast as might be desirable. This, in turn, 
could  have  adverse  implications  for  activity  and  employment.  Accordingly,  appropriate 
reforms and economic policies are warranted. I will come back to this point later.  
The  main  benefit  of  the  euro  for  the  individual  country,  especially  for  small  and  open 
economies, relates to its potential to promote trade. By eliminating exchange rate volatility 
and  providing  complete  price  transparency,  the  euro  has  greatly  enhanced  the  forces  that 
lead to economic activity to be conducted across borders. It has been shown in a number of 
studies1 that trade integration has increased rapidly among countries that have introduced 
the  euro,  with  a  significant  increase  in  intra-euro  area  trade  and  foreign  direct  investment 
(FDI).  Indeed,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  within  the  euro  area  rose  from  about  27%  of 
GDP in 1999 to around 32% in 2006. This rise in cross-border trade may to a certain extent 
be due to the introduction of the single currency, the increased price and cost transparency it 
helped  foster  and  the  absence  of  exchange  rate  risk.  The  increasing  interdependence  of 
euro  area  countries  is  also  confirmed  by  the  considerable  growth  in  intra-euro  area  FDI 
flows, with the sum of inflows and outflows in 2006 accounting for around 5% of euro area 
GDP – at par with extra-euro area FDI flows.  Intra-euro area FDI stocks have thus grown 
considerably, doubling from 14% of euro area GDP in 1999 to around 28% in 2006.  
At  the  same  time,  the  increase  in  trade  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  recently  been  even 
greater than the increase in intra-euro area trade, with the following figures showing that the 
euro area is very open. From 1999 to 2006 extra-euro area exports and imports of goods 
rose  to  33%  of  euro  area  GDP,  from  about  24%.  The  stronger  growth  of  extra-euro  area 
trade has mainly been due to the more sustained growth in world GDP, an increase in global 
trade integration and the very sizeable increase in trade with China, emerging Asia and the 
new EU Member States that joined the Union in May 2004.  
Finally,  a  factor  which  may  be  particularly  important  for  small,  open  economies  is  that 
adopting 
financial 
disturbances.  Such  disturbances  have  often  had  a  disproportional  effect  on  smaller 
economies, raising the risks of external shocks.  
In sum, I would argue that the introduction of the euro has been a great success, showing 
that  clarity  of  vision,  based  on  sound  economic  arguments  and  determined  planning  and 
implementation,  can  yield  important  results  in  adapting  our  economies  to  the  future  global 
challenges.  
the  euro  may  provide  stronger  protection  against 
international 
                                                 
1   For a review of the literature, see R. Baldwin, “The euro’s trade effects”, ECB Working Paper No 594, March 
2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
Challenges related to adoption of the euro 
3.  
Nevertheless, there are also challenges related to participation in the euro area which should 
not be forgotten. As I touched upon earlier, a potential challenge or risk involved in adopting 
the euro relates to the question of whether the economies that share the euro are relatively 
similar in terms of business cycles and do not display significant divergences. With monetary 
policy  focusing  on  the  euro  area,  divergences  would  place  greater  demands  on  domestic 
fiscal and structural policies as they would need to play a key role in the adjustment process. 
Divergences  may  arise  from  radically  different  economic  structures  or  from  differences  in 
economic policies, although the latter should be less of a problem given that all EU countries 
are committed to price stability, sound public finances and the Lisbon Agenda for promoting 
growth and employment.  
Once the euro has been adopted, adjustments to economic problems, external shocks and 
changes in competitive positions need to be made other than via domestically set short-term 
interest  rates  and  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.  Each  country  consequently  needs  to 
assess the likelihood of being exposed to country-specific shocks to which a euro area-wide 
monetary  policy  will  not  be  able  to  react.  In  particular,  it is  important  to  avoid  home-made 
competitiveness  problems,  for  instance  through  too  high  wage  increases  in  relation  to 
productivity gains. At present, the business cycles of the euro area and most EU countries 
are  highly  correlated,  and  the  correlation  can  be  expected  to  increase  further  given  the 
growing trade integration and the pursuit of stability-oriented economic policies. 
Some differences between countries will, however, always exist and are a natural feature in 
all currency areas, reflecting regional adjustments to changes in demand and supply. As long 
as  markets  are  free  to  adjust  to  the  changing  economic  conditions,  country  differentials 
should  largely  be  of  a  transitory  nature.  This  underlines  the  importance  of  efficient  and 
flexible labour and product markets which react in a timely manner and thereby moderate the 
impact  of  divergent  developments  on  growth  and  employment.  This  is  also  why  there  is  a 
strong focus in the EU and the euro area on structural reforms, as reflected for instance in 
the  Lisbon  process,  and  on  prudent  fiscal  policies  which  are  sufficiently  flexible  to  provide 
buffers  for  bad  times.  The  pressure  to  reform  and  improve  the  working  of  the  domestic 
economy does not end with the convergence process for euro area entry.  
Let me briefly also touch upon the challenges related to the adoption of the euro. As you are 
aware,  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  specifies  a  number  of  nominal 
convergence  criteria  which  must  be  fulfilled,  including  the  need  to  deliver  both  price  and 
exchange rate stability. This may be complicated in countries which are also undergoing a 
process of real convergence, which tends to put upward pressure on either inflation or the 
exchange  rate.  This  suggests  that  the  timing  of  euro  area  entry  needs  to  be  carefully 
considered,  also  in  view  of  the  fact  that  a  key  challenge  relates  to  the  sustainability  of 
convergence.  Only  when  a  country  is  certain  to  be  able  to  maintain  simultaneously  an 
environment  of  low  inflation  and  a  stable  exchange  rate  can  it  be  confident  of  functioning 
smoothly within Monetary Union.  
These challenges relate to the country as a whole; the challenge for individual citizens is to 
adapt  to  a  whole  new  monetary  reference  system.  While  this  may  take  time  for  older 
generations, who are used to what is cheap and expensive in the terms of the old currency, it 
is striking how fast the changeover goes for the younger generations. Unfamiliarity can lead 
to situations where companies try to take advantage of the euro cash changeover by raising 
prices.  We  have  had  this  debate  in  many  countries,  and  it  remains  a  challenge  for  public 
authorities  and  consumers  to  scrutinise  price-setting  behaviour  closely  and  act  against 
obvious attempts to take advantage of the situation.  
Finally,  a  key  challenge  for  all  countries  lies  in  an  open  and  transparent  debate  with  the 
general public on the implications of euro area participation and the necessary steps to be 
taken towards this goal. Surveys show that there is a small majority of citizens in the new EU 
Member States (53%; and 52% in Poland) believe that adopting the euro will have positive 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
consequences  for  their  countries.  Fewer  people  feel  happy  about  the  prospect  of  a  future 
changeover  (48%;  and  46%  in  Poland).  Sometimes,  participation  in  Monetary  Union  is 
viewed by sceptics in terms of a loss of sovereignty. However, the room for manoeuvre for 
independent national policy-making in a highly integrated world economy is debatable in any 
case. For instance, it is clear that there are limits to the scope for national monetary policy to 
deliver both price and exchange rate stability in a world with free capital movements.  
Joining the euro area – the formal process 
4.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  formal  process  for  adopting  the  euro.  The  important  step  towards 
adoption  of  the  euro  after  a  country  has  joined  the  EU  is  to  join  the  exchange  rate 
mechanism,  ERM  II.  According  to  the  Treaty  requirements,  a  country  must  observe  the 
normal fluctuation margins in ERM II for at least two years. In particular, it should not devalue 
its central rate on its own initiative. Convergence reports by the European Commission and 
the ECB – the next regular report will be in 2008 – examine progress with convergence with 
reference to criteria relating to inflation, public finances, exchange rate and long-term interest 
rate developments, as well as legal convergence. These findings are presented to the EU 
Council, which takes the final decision on which countries fulfil the conditions for adopting the 
euro.  The  Council  also  decides  the  final  conversion  rate  to  the  euro.  It  is  then  that  the 
technical preparations for euro adoption can start.  
The entry of new countries into the euro area is determined by the conditions laid down by 
the  Treaty.  They  are  applied  in  an  equal  fashion  to  all  candidates.  While  each  country 
prepares  for  euro  area  entry  at  a  pace  in  line  with  its  own  economic  conditions,  all  EU 
Member States, apart from Denmark and the United Kingdom, are committed to strive to fulfil 
the convergence criteria as soon as possible and adopt the euro thereafter.  
Future challenges  
5.  
Let me now turn to some future challenges which I consider will be of increasing importance 
in the coming years. It is clear that a lot of progress has been made within the EU on finding 
a  successful  institutional  framework  for  macroeconomic  stability  and  sustainability.  It  is, 
however, true that a number of countries – including Poland – are still struggling, in particular 
with finding a sustainable path for public finances. These challenges are even more acute if 
we  take  into  account  the  challenge  of  an  ageing  population  which  will  very  soon  start  to 
weigh on public finances. This consequently remains the key priority in many countries.  
To  take  another  perspective,  we  can  also  see  that  the  pressures  from  globalisation  and 
technological  change  force  us  to  think  hard  about  the  long-term  competitiveness  of  our 
economies.  While  we  have  had  a  lively  debate  in  recent  years  about  the  reasons  for  the 
relatively low level of productivity growth in the euro area, the remedies are still not easy to 
formulate. For many of the new EU Member States, this question is of particular relevance, 
especially in light of the fact that gains realised from a low starting position – stemming from 
the upgrading of technology and product quality through privatisation, restructuring and FDI 
inflows  –  may  not  be  easy  to  sustain  over  time.  More  sophisticated  measures  may 
consequently  be  needed  to  bring  about  a  new  wave  of  restructuring  and  technological 
progress in order to keep up with competitor economies. In this endeavour, issues such as 
good corporate governance, efficient competition, research and development and education 
policies will be increasingly important. 
An  important  element  for  the  Internal  Market  in  the  EU  and  the  Lisbon  Agenda  is  a  well-
functioning  labour  market.  In  recent  years  we  have  witnessed  an  increase  in  cross-border 
labour migration in Europe, especially since the enlargement of the EU in 2004. Most worker 
migration has so far been of a temporary nature. This has been facilitated by advances in 
information and communication technology that have made these labour flows very flexible, 
to the point that we have difficulty registering the extent of labour flows and assessing the 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2007
economic  impact.  The  temporary  nature  of  migration  also  implies  that  a  great  amount  of 
knowledge and wealth is returned to the countries of origin, thereby supporting the catching-
up process in these countries.  
In the short run, however, labour migration also constitutes a challenge to the countries of 
origin.  A  large  proportion  of  the  workers  leaving  the  country  are  highly  educated,  which 
aggravates labour market bottlenecks and skill mismatches. In addition, labour demand has 
been rising rapidly. As we have seen, this normally results in rising wage pressures, despite 
often high remaining levels of unemployment. These developments point to a need to review 
national policies on factors affecting the labour market, such as education, early retirement 
schemes and social transfer systems, infrastructure, housing and the use of foreign workers, 
which have the potential to increase labour supply and flexibility. 
An  additional  challenge  relates  to  the  development  of  the  financial  sector,  which  has  not 
been the focus on my speech today. I will therefore only briefly point out one issue: the share 
of  foreign  currency  lending  remains  high  in  many  of  the  central  and  eastern  European 
countries. The resulting currency mismatches, particularly of households, is, in my view, an 
important concern from a financial stability perspective. Indeed, in many countries, borrowers 
appear to underestimate the risk of exchange rate changes between the domestic currency 
and the currency in which they borrow. While most of the foreign currency borrowing is in 
euro, other currencies such as the Swiss franc have increasingly been gaining share. 
Let me finally say that in many of these challenges, Poland is well placed to draw benefits 
and lessons from other countries and contribute to a deeper exchange of views based on its 
own experiences. Recent years have seen important improvements in the Polish economy, 
with real GDP growth rising to above 6% last year and possibly this year. This upswing has 
been led by robust domestic demand, rising FDI inflows and a markedly improved situation 
on the labour market with rapidly falling unemployment, although to some extent this reflects 
increased early retirement, emigration and a growing number of students.  
Important progress has been made in terms of inflation, although more recently temporary 
shocks to food prices have put upward pressure on inflation, and wages have accelerated. 
As I have discussed, further efforts are needed in view of future euro area membership, in 
terms of both successful preparations and successful participation. Moreover, steps towards 
a  more  flexible  domestic  economy  with  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  will  in 
themselves  be  conducive  to  a  rapid  catching-up  process  and  improvement  in  living 
standards.  
I am sure there will be many reasons to come back to these issues in a not too distant future 
here in Poland. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 5
