Philip H Penn: Enhancing and strengthening banking supervisory 
capabilities in Pacific countries 
Opening remarks by Mr Philip H Penn, Acting Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa, at the 
Pacific Regional Banking Supervision Seminar, Apia, Samoa, 23-25 October 2007. 
 Mr Andrew Milford, Banking Supervision Advisor from the Pacific Financial Technical 
Assistance Centre; 
Distinguished Resource Persons; 
Ms Elizabeth Roberts, Director of the Financial Stability Institute (FSI); 
Messrs Graham Johnson and Chris Gaskell from the Australian Prudential Regulatory 
Authority (APRA); 
Mr Kim Norris, Director, International Advisory Group, OSFI, Canada; 
Deputy Governors; 
Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
As the host for this year’s Regional Seminar and the Annual Meeting of the Association of 
Financial  Supervisors  of  Pacific  Countries  (AFSPC),  I  am  very  pleased  and  honored,  on 
behalf of the Governor and Staff of the Central Bank of Samoa, to extend to you all a very 
warm welcome. 
We are very happy to see and meet again some familiar faces. 
And for those of you who are here on your first visit, a special warm welcome to Samoa and 
we hope you have time to spare to enjoy the Paradise of the Pacific. 
You  have  certainly  arrived  at  the  time  when  the  streets  of  Apia  are  back  to  normal  as 
compared to a few weeks ago when we experienced unusual busy traffic due to the influx of 
tourists and overseas sports people, who came to enjoy and participate at the 10th South 
Pacific Games which we hosted last month. With due respect to our friends from the Pacific, I 
am  very  pleased  to  mention  that  these  Games  was  a  great  success  and  an  extraordinary 
achievement for our country and for all those who attended. I understand that some of you 
were very keen to hold this Seminar to coincide with the Games. But I guess the potential 
risk from a prudential supervisor’s view of losing participants during the two weeks of 
the Games may be considered critical and detrimental to achieving the objectives of 
our Seminar. 
That aside, the Central Bank of Samoa is very grateful for the opportunity to be co-hosting 
this  years’  event  with  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  in  Basel,  Switzerland;  the  Pacific 
Financial Technical Assistance Centre in Suva; and the Association of Financial Supervisors 
of Pacific Countries. This Seminar is part of a continuing series of trainings which could only 
contribute  towards  enhancing  and  strengthening  our  capability  as  supervisors  in  the 
development  of  our  economic  and  financial  systems.  This  is  indeed  a  great  opportunity  to 
learn and share issues of common interest, in particular, the potential risks and threats that 
could adversely affect the confidence in our banking and financial systems. 
As you all know, banks and non-bank financial institutions play a vital role in the economic 
development  of  any  country.  Therefore,  there  is  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  the 
stability  and  financial  soundness  of  these  institutions.  And  recognizing  such  importance, 
central banks have been entrusted with the responsibility of not only licensing but supervising 
them as well. 
The financial system is built on a fundamental (and ever-present) mismatch. Savers want 
access to their money instantly, if necessary. But borrowers are usually unable to give it to 
them anything like as quickly. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
The banks have traditionally bridged that gap. But the only way they can do so is to borrow 
short and lend long. This mismatch makes them vulnerable. That is why governments have 
imposed regulations on the banks, requiring them to hold reserves against emergency. But if 
there  is  a  complete  loss  of  confidence  among  depositors,  there  is  really  not  much  an 
individual bank can do. The central bank is usually obliged to help. 
Modern innovations in the financial system have seen banks, rather than holding on to the 
loans that they have made, parcelled them up and sold them on. The aim was to disperse 
risk; in the case of default, it was better for a lot of investors to lose a little than for a few 
banks to lose a lot. However, all the clever types of “securitization and structured products” 
have not eliminated the fundamental mismatch. Someone still has to borrow short and lend 
long. Northern Rock, the stricken British bank in recent weeks, is a case in point. 
In relation to this case, I just want to paraphrase an interesting article in the latest publication 
of The Economist headed “A generation has prospered from the wholesale transfer of 
risk through securitization. Now it is paying the price”. 
[The chief executive of Northern Rock, Mr Adam Applegarth, in unveiling his bank’s first-half 
results last July, announced that “the medium-term outlook for the company is very positive,” 
He spoke of a credit book that was “robust”. But, who would have guessed that less than two 
months later, Britain’s fifth-largest mortgage lender would be fighting for its life, its branches 
besieged by customers demanding their savings back? 
The  run  on  Northern  Rock  is  the  most  dramatic  symptom  of  the  contagion  gripping  the 
financial markets. Here was a bank that had grown rich from the innovations of recent years, 
using  abundantly  stocked  wholesale  markets  to  fund  its  lively  growth,  using  those  same 
markets to offload bits of it loan book as and when they became unattractive. 
But  the  very  innovations  on  which  Northern  Rock  thrived  have  savaged  its  business.  The 
company  does  no  lending  overseas.  Nevertheless,  its  fate  was  determined  by  the  distant 
turmoil in America’s mortgage market. When that spilled over into the securities markets, the 
money markets that Northern Rock had depended on for years, dried up in a single day at 
the start of last August. 
The brave new world that enabled banks like Northern Rock to grow so fast is founded on 
“securitization”  –  the  process  that  transform  mortgages,  credit-card  receivables  and  other 
financial  assets  into  marketable  securities  –  and  the  innovation  it  spawned  in  “structured” 
products.  This  was  a  revolution  that  brought  huge  gains.  But  across  the  financial  world, 
investors and regulators are asking themselves whether it also brought costs that are only 
now becoming clear.” 
The  way  oversight  of  the  financial  system  is  split  between  the  FSA,  the  Treasury  and  the 
Bank  of  England  is  in  doubt.  Gordon  Brown’s  reform  of  a  decade  ago  means  that  those 
responsible  for  monitoring  the  banking  system  are  separate  from  those  who  make  the 
decision to intervene.] 
In understanding the factors that impinge on this particular case about Northern Rock, one 
will learn that the roles and tasks faced by the supervisors and the regulators are enormous. 
Supervisors need to keep a step ahead of financial market developments and innovations. 
We  must  not  be  oblivious  or  ignorant  to  the  fact  that,  despite  all  the  strength  of  legal 
framework,  regulatory  and  supervisory  arrangements  we  can  have,  we  always  learn  that 
banks  still  fail,  even  those  too  big  to  fail  collapsed  at  their  own  demise  –  some  due  to 
reasons  other  than  risks.  In  other  words,  the  supervision  of  banks  cannot  provide  full  or 
complete guarantee against banking failures. 
However, supervision can assist the banks in managing their risks by taking appropriate 
measures and precautions. After all, banks are vulnerable to errors in human judgment and 
the  fragile  confidence  of  depositors.  Therefore,  regulation  and  supervision  is  not  a 
substitute  for  good  management.  That  is  the  lesson  we  have  to  learn  from  many  bank 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
failures even in countries with the best regulatory systems. Finally, it is the responsibility of 
the  management  of  the  banks  themselves  to  introduce  proper  checks  and  balances  to 
ensure that the risks are managed efficiently and effectively. 
As we know, the whole approach to bank supervision in particular and financial supervision 
in general is still in its early evolutionary stage. With the fast changes in financial markets 
and  information  technology,  the  methods  of  ensuring  the  safety  of  banks  will  also need  to 
change.  Already,  the  rules  relating  to  bank  operations  are  changing  in  many  parts  of  the 
world.  This  means  that  the  ways  banks  are  supervised  also  need  to  be  changed.  The 
responses to these rapid changes may be slow, but there is concerted and dynamic effort by 
the international supervisory authorities to ensure the safety of banks. 
Thus,  banking  supervision  is  conducted  in  the  interest  of  everyone  because  the  cost  of  a 
banking  crisis  can  be  enormous.  When  banks  fail,  we  all  fail.  And  certainly,  the  cost  of  a 
banking crisis will be unbearable especially for our relatively small economies in the Pacific 
Region. 
I note that you have a full agenda ahead of you. At the same time, I have no doubt that the 
choice of topics is to provide discussions, which should add value to your work not only in 
your  own  countries  but  also  for  the  Pacific  region.  The  case  study  that  will  provide  the 
experience of Palau regarding the failure of one of its biggest bank, will not only remind us 
of the reality and the crucial role of bank supervisors, but it should bring us together to learn 
from it and be better prepared for the possibility of such crisis occurring in our own respective 
countries. 
I also note with interest that you will be covering the Basel Revised Core Principles which, 
as I mentioned earlier, reflect the ever changing environment in which banks operate, that 
international standards continue to change as the environment of risks also changes. And as 
part of the global financial system, we all need, to some extent, to adapt to such changes. 
Although some of these changes may not directly affect us due to our narrow market base, 
others  can  impact  on  our  financial  system  indirectly.  One  of  these  changes  would  be  the 
Basel II new capital adequacy framework that has already been advanced for some years 
for adoption. 
From  experience,  the  new  Capital  Accord  will  have  significant  impact  on  our  limited 
resources and our capacity to administer and properly implement. In this connection, I am 
pleased to acknowledge the presence of resource experts, Ms Elizabeth Roberts, Director of 
the Financial Stability Institute (FSI) at the Bank for International Settlements, Basel; Messrs 
Graham  Johnson  and  Chris  Gaskell  from  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulatory  Authority 
(APRA); Mr Kim Norris, Director, International Advisory Group, OSFI, Canada; and experts 
from  the  IFC.  I  am  confident  that  their  knowledge  and  experience  would  be  immensely 
helpful to the participants in understanding and appreciating the practical implications behind 
these  changes  both  from  a  supervisor’s  perspective  as  well  as  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
supervised institutions. 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  that  we  all  face  enormous  resource  and  capacity  constraints  in 
coping with existing responsibilities, let alone undertaking these new challenges. Hence, the 
value of coming together to share our experiences and plan regional training programs for 
our member countries is very important. Through these meetings, we can learn and maintain 
strong networking relationship which should enhance our efforts in capacity building in this 
innovative and challenging area of financial supervision. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  declare  this  Regional  Seminar  for 
Financial Supervisors open and I wish you all an enjoyable and fruitful week of discussions. 
Thank you for your attention and may God Bless you all. 
Soifua. 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
