Jean-Claude Trichet: The US economy, the euro area economy, and their 
central banks 
Speech delivered by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
award  ceremony  on  the  occasion  of  the  “6.  Karl  Klasen  Journalistenpreis”,  Hamburg, 
7 December 2007. 
 Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
ich freue mich, heute Abend gemeinsam mit Ihnen diese festliche Atmosphäre genießen zu 
dürfen, und es ist mir eine Ehre, der Hauptredner der Verleihung dieses Journalistenpreises 
zu sein. Ich danke Ihnen, Herrn Kai-Jacob Klasen, herzlich für die Einladung und finde es 
bewegend, heute Abend im Rahmen dieser Veranstaltung Dr. Karl Klasen zu gedenken. 
Die  Stiftung,  die  diese  Preisverleihung  ausrichtet,  hat  sich  das  lobenswerte  Ziel  gesetzt, 
Journalisten zu Arbeiten über die deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen zu inspirieren, und 
zeichnet  diejenigen  aus,  die  sich  durch  ihre  Beiträge  um  die  Festigung  der  Bindungen 
zwischen  Deutschland  und  den  USA  verdient  gemacht  haben.  Was  die  Geldpolitik 
anbelangt,  so  stehen  die  transatlantischen  Beziehungen  nun  im  breiteren  Kontext  der 
Interaktionen  zwischen  dem  Eurosystem  und  dem  Federal  Reserve  System.  In  meiner 
Funktion als Präsident der Europäischen Zentralbank habe ich mich stets darum bemüht, die 
engen  und  freundschaftlichen  Verbindungen  zu  unseren  US  amerikanischen  Kollegen  zu 
pflegen und zu stärken. 
[Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure for me to be here today in this festive atmosphere, and an honour to be the 
main speaker at this journalist award ceremony. I am very grateful, Mr Kai-Jacob Klasen, for 
your invitation, and I am moved to pay tribute tonight to the memory of Dr Karl Klasen.  
The  foundation  hosting  this  ceremony  has  the  commendable  purpose  of  inspiring  and 
rewarding journalists’ works that strengthen German-American relationships. In the area of 
monetary  policy,  transatlantic  relations  are  now  written  in  the  broader  context  of  the 
interactions  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  and  it  has  always 
been my aim, as President of the European Central Bank, to preserve and foster close and 
friendly relationships with our American counterpart.] 
The goal of my talk today is to show that it is worth pursuing and extending this relationship. 
The euro area and the United States share some common external and internal experiences 
that justify the increasing cooperation that exists both at the policy and institutional levels. To 
convince you of this, I will first show that the United States and the euro area face a similar 
external environment and that their economic and financial connections have been reinforced 
in the context of globalisation. I will then argue that the monetary authorities of the United 
States and the euro area face common features due to a certain degree of internal diversity 
within such large economic areas. This is why sharing our thoughts and experiences always 
proves invaluable in our duty to ensure efficient monetary policy. In the last section of my 
talk, I will demonstrate how this interaction is facilitated by institutional cooperation and the 
development of personal contacts with our American colleagues.  
Trade and financial integration: a shared external environment 
The euro area and the United States are the largest economies in the world, hosting more 
than  600  million  inhabitants  and  responsible  for  around  40%  of  world  production.  The 
preponderance of these two regions and their similar size naturally calls for parallels to be 
made.  Viewed  from  outside,  these  two  regions  are  large  economic  blocs  that  have  led 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 1
globalisation and the surge in world trade, financial flows and innovative ideas that has been 
getting stronger during the last few decades.  
Trade openness 
The euro area is the largest exporter in the world. Its extra-area exports amounted to €1.9 
trillion  last  year,  while  US  exports  reached  €1.1  trillion.  Together,  these  two  economies 
account for almost a third of world trade.  
The euro area is a significantly open economy for its size. Its exports and imports of goods 
reached  33%  of  its  own  GDP  in  2006,  a  figure  to  add  to  the  rising  importance  of  trade  in 
services – around 10% of GDP. In 1998, euro area exports and imports only accounted for 
24% of GDP, and trade in services for 8%. Trade openness of the euro area has therefore 
been reinforced since the advent of the euro. The United States is slightly less open, with 
trade in goods representing 22% of GDP and trade in services 6% of GDP. However, among 
euro area trade partners, the United States plays a central role. Indeed, around 15% of euro 
exports  in  goods  goes  to  the  United  States.  Looking  at  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic, 
American exports represent around 10% of our imports of goods. On balance, over the last 
few years, we have recorded a large trade surplus with the United States. Our goods exports 
exceeded our imports from the United States by more than USD 80 billion. In the services 
sector, where trade has been growing and continues to grow, our connection with the United 
States is even more important. 22% of our services exports goes to the United States and a 
quarter of our imports come from the United States. In particular, the export performance of 
our travel and transportation services is always outstanding. 
Nevertheless, most euro area trade occurs with our European neighbours, and with Japan 
and China. This could suggest that the linkages between the United States and the euro area 
are  of  a  secondary  importance.  However,  this  would  underestimate  the  significance  of  the 
US  economy  because  there  are  also  indirect  transmission  channels.  Indeed,  the  United 
States  plays  a  broader  role  in  the  world  economy,  and  there  can  be  second-round  effects 
that are not captured by the crude figures I have just presented.  
These  second-round  effects  include  trade  linkages,  but  also  financial  and  confidence 
linkages.  After  the  financial  turmoil  experienced  this  summer,  it  is  becoming  increasingly 
important to understand them. 
The importance of financial openness 
The United States, where the recent financial troubles originated, and the euro area are very 
open to financial flows. US external assets and liabilities exceeded USD 13 trillion in 2005, 
and the figure for the euro area is very similar. In percentage of GDP, US external assets 
represented 90 % of US GDP and US external liabilities amounted to 110 % of GDP in 2005. 
As regards the euro area in 2005 as well, external assets represented 124 % of euro area 
GDP and external liabilities reached 137 % of euro area GDP ; therefore, in relative terms, 
the euro area is financially more open that the United States.  
European investors are also central players in American markets. As an example, the euro 
area stock of direct investment in the United States reached more than €600 billion at the 
end of 2006. Some industries are particularly present in the United States: the trade and the 
financial  sector,  of  course,  but  also  the  chemical  industries  of  France,  Germany  and  the 
Netherlands  have  large  investments  at  stake  in  the  United  States.  The  situation  is  fairly 
similar  in  the  other  direction,  with  around  €630  billion  from  US  firms  being  invested  in  the 
euro area, principally in the services industries of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. 
The current levels of FDI flows show that these bilateral links will continue to strengthen in 
the  future.  Portfolio  investments  from  the  euro  area  to  the  United  States  are  also  of  an 
impressive  magnitude.  The  stock  of  US  portfolio  assets  held  by  the  euro  area  reached 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2007
almost €1.5 trillion last year, this being about a third of European holdings worldwide. The 
euro and the US dollar are also the currencies of denomination of the majority of portfolio 
assets  traded.  More  than  three-quarters  of  portfolio  assets  worldwide  are  denominated  in 
euro and in dollars, according to the available data.1
All  in  all,  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  are  large  trade  and  financial  partners. 
Arguably,  the  United  States  seems  to  have  a  greater  impact  on  world  business  cycles, 
probably mainly because of the growing importance of financial channels in the transmission 
of macroeconomic shocks.  
For both the United States and the euro area, trade and financial channels have, of course, 
direct consequences for monetary policy. For instance, the increase in imports from low-cost 
countries  has  ensured  that  import  price  inflation  has  remained  contained.  Import  prices 
declined  in  the  period  2001-2003  in  the  euro  area  and  remained  stable  throughout  the 
following years. However, commodity prices experienced higher levels of inflation as a result 
of  the  strong  growth  of  emerging  economies  such  as  India  and  China.  Globalisation  can 
therefore have mixed effects on inflation. Finally, it has also been argued that both the United 
States  and  the  euro  area  witnessed  a  loosening  of  the  link  between  inflation  and  activity 
because of increased openness. This has important implications for monetary policy. 
Diversity within large economic blocs – a common challenge for monetary policy 
Although we have seen that the environment  outside the euro area and the United States 
has  gained  importance,  the  internal  economic  situation  remains  a  major  focus  of  attention 
within central banks. Almost nine years after the euro changeover, euro area macroeconomic 
developments continue to mask some diversity across the euro area countries. Nonetheless, 
this diversity in terms of inflation and output growth is currently of approximately the same 
scale as in the United States.  
More  specifically,  euro  area  inflation  differentials  have  exhibited  a  strong  decline  in  recent 
decades. Starting from an unweighted standard deviation of around 6 percentage points at 
the beginning of the 1990s, inflation dispersion has fallen to around only half a percentage 
point so far in 2007. More specifically, this year there has been an overall decline in inflation 
rates  among  traditional  high-inflation  countries  compared  with  last  year.  However,  since 
August, inflation rates in all countries have risen, probably as a result of higher oil and food 
prices.  This  implies  that  dispersion  in  the  euro  area  is  currently  somewhat  below  inflation 
dispersion among the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas, where it has fluctuated around 1 
percentage point over the last two decades.  
The  dispersion  in  real  GDP  growth  rates,  measured  in  terms  of  the  unweighted  standard 
deviation, has been moving around a level of 2 percentage points over the past few decades, 
with no apparent upward or downward trend. This is similar to the dispersion witnessed in 
output growth across regions within the United States. 
The persistence of macroeconomic developments in the euro area 
A  key  feature  of  the  observed  economic  diversity  is  the  persistence  of  macroeconomic 
developments  across  euro  area  countries.  For  example,  the  difference  in  the  cumulated 
growth of real GDP between the two euro area countries with the largest and the smallest 
output increases, respectively, was more than 50 percentage points in the period 1998-2006. 
The situation was similar across US states. Furthermore, the equivalent accumulated spread 
between the two euro area countries with the lowest and highest inflation rates was almost 
20  percentage  points  and  in  unit  labour  costs  for  the  total  economy  between  20  and  25 
                                                 
1   CPIS data, IMF, 2005. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 3
percentage  points  over  the  same  period.  In  the  United  States,  the  spread  in  CPI  inflation 
between the two Metropolitan Areas with the lowest and highest inflation rates was slightly 
lower, at around 18% for the same period. 
In the euro area, in addition to the decline in dispersion of inflation, activity and labour cost 
developments,  another  key  feature  is  that  business  cycles  are  converging  and  output  gap 
fluctuations are becoming more similar across countries. This feature is not apparent in the 
United  States,  where  the  dispersion  of  cycles  and  of  trend  GDP  growth,  seem  to  explain 
roughly  equal  parts  of  growth  dispersion  between  states.  For  instance,  last  year,  the 
acceleration  in  activity  and  the  rebound  in  the  euro  area’s  real  GDP  growth  was  a  widely 
shared  phenomenon  across  the  various  euro  area  member  countries.  Hence,  registered 
growth  dispersion  across  the  euro  area  countries  seems  to  be  mainly  explained  by 
differences in trend output growth, rather than cyclical developments, a feature I would like to 
reflect more on. 
Differences in trend output growth in the euro area 
The differences in trend output growth in the euro area might reveal structural factors that are 
a normal feature in a monetary union. Differences in trend output growth may, for instance, 
reflect diverse initial conditions and catching-up processes in some countries. For example, 
in recent years, per capita income in Ireland has risen from a level well below that of the euro 
area in the early 1990s to a level well above. In the early 1990s the GDP per capita of Ireland 
represented 75 % of the average of what were to become the first 12 euro area countries. 
Last year, the level in Ireland was about 30% above the euro area level. Moreover, a country 
may experience an equilibrating adjustment process following a shock. Diversity stemming 
from these factors is also economically justified, needed and observed within other currency 
areas. In an environment of high adjustment capacity, such divergences can be interpreted 
as a desirable equilibrating mechanism, contributing to sustainable convergence among euro 
area countries. 
However,  in  some  cases,  persistent  macroeconomic  differentials  may  reflect  inappropriate 
national  policies,  structural  inefficiencies  and  rigidities  or  a  malfunctioning  adjustment 
mechanism in individual euro area countries. Differentials resulting from such factors may be 
detrimental  to  the  dynamics  of  economic  activity  and  employment.  These  are  sources  of 
macroeconomic  differentials  that  policy-makers  should  be  concerned  about  and  where 
measures should be taken at the national level in order to increase economic flexibility. 
The importance of the functioning of product, labour and financial markets 
Starting with monetary policy, the single monetary policy with a uniform policy interest rate 
for the euro area countries cannot, as you know, directly influence diversity in output growth 
or  inflation  across  the  euro  area  countries.  This  emphasises  the  importance  of  only  those 
countries  that  have  reached  sustainable  convergence  –  as  prescribed  in  the  Maastricht 
criteria – participating in the euro area.  
Well-designed structural policies – undertaken at the national level – should be implemented 
to  enhance  flexibility  in  product  and  labour  markets  and  thereby  increase  the  adjustment 
capacity of economies. Such reforms should aim to enhance productivity growth and labour 
utilisation  while  maintaining  stable  macroeconomnic  conditions.  In  this  context,  the  Lisbon 
strategy is a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw our attention to the urgency of 
such structural reforms. The United States, where cross-state labour is higher, could also be 
considered to be a role model for Europe. 
Speaking to an audience of journalists and business executives, I am well aware of the hard 
task you are confronted with – that of conveying the message about the beneficial effects of 
reforms  in  growth  and  job  creation.  In  this  context,  it  is  essential  to  understand  and 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2007
communicate  that  the  medium  to  long-term  benefits  of  structural  reforms  will  significantly 
reward  the  initial  investment.  I  can  only  encourage  all  responsible  parties  in  these 
communication efforts. 
More specifically, on the labour market, economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the 
institutional barriers to flexible wage and price-setting mechanisms. Let me stress that social 
partners  share  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  wage  determination  appropriately  takes  into 
account productivity and labour market conditions at the industrial, sectoral and regional level 
and  does  not  jeopardise  competitiveness  or  employment.  And  one  should  also  take  into 
account the fact that wage setting in the public sector often serves as a role model for the 
private  sector.  In  addition,  early  retirement  policies  have  a  significant  negative  impact  on 
labour supply and, hence, on the participation and employment rate. In the context of wage 
setting,  sufficient  wage  differentiation  is  needed  to  improve  employment  opportunities  for 
less-skilled workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment.  
Reforms  are  also  needed  in  product  markets.  Let  me  stress  the  importance  of  fully 
completing  the  Single  Market,  particularly  in  services  and  network  industries.  A  deeper 
integration  of  markets  would  stimulate  price  flexibility  by  fostering  competition  and  open 
product markets. This requires that existing barriers to labour and capital mobility within the 
euro  area  be  removed.  Greater  cross-border  competition  and  the  integration  of  markets 
across  the  euro  area  countries  would  contribute  to  lower  prices,  an  area  in  which  Europe 
may  again  find  an  interesting  benchmark  in  the  United  States.  These  reforms  could  also 
enhance adjustment processes in individual countries in the event of asymmetric shocks or 
differing cyclical developments.  
National  authorities  can  make  a  substantial  contribution,  not  only  by  implementing  sound 
structural  policies,  but  also  by  ensuring  a  proper  functioning  of  adjustment  mechanisms 
within the euro area and by implementing well-designed fiscal policies. Here, I would like to 
repeat that the best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper functioning of the euro 
area  is  to  be  sustainable  and  medium-term  oriented,  fully  in  line  with  the  orientations 
provided by the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover, fiscal policy can and should also focus 
on  increasing  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  the  public  sector  itself  through  “high  quality” 
expenditure  and  tax  policies.  Large  and  inefficient  public  sectors  can  put  the  brakes  on 
economic activity by imposing a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources 
into unproductive uses. There, speaking in Germany, I have to mention that Germany itself 
has been exemplary in containing overall public spending as a proportion of GDP over the 
last  years  despite  many  challenges  and  a  difficult  environment.  In  2007  the  Commission 
estimates that public spendings will represent 43.8 % of GDP, which is 4.3 percentage points 
less than in 1999. 
Cooperation between the two major monetary authorities 
I hope I have by now convinced you that the monetary authorities in the United States and 
the euro area face challenges that are similar. Internally, diversity in these large areas is of 
the  same  magnitude,  although  possibly  not  of  the  same  nature.  Externally,  both  regions 
count  on  a  large  external  sector,  with  significant  bilateral  linkages.  Similar  experiences 
naturally  call  for  close  working  relations.  This  interaction  has  become  particularly  intense 
since  the  advent  of  the  euro  and  the  setting  up  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  of  the 
Eurosystem,  but  at  the  same  time  builds  on  a  long-standing  history  of  central  bank 
multilateral cooperation  in  various  international  institutions and  fora,  including  the Bank  for 
International  Settlements  since  the  1930s,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  since  the  mid-
1940s,  the  G10  since  the  1960s,  the  G7  since  the  mid-1970s  and,  more  recently,  the 
Financial Stability Forum and the Group of Twenty. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 5
Contacts with the Federal Reserve 
These international organisations provide an excellent opportunity for the Federal Reserve 
Chairman and myself, for the members of the Boards as well as for the staff of both the Fed 
and  the  ECB/Eurosystem,  to  meet  very  regularly.  To  give  you  some  idea  of  the  level  of 
contact we have, I can say that Ben and I meet, through the G7, the G10, the G20, the IMF 
and  BIS  meetings,  probably  a  little  more  than  once  a  month  on  average.  In  addition,  Mr 
Bernanke and I jointly participate in a number of international conferences. 
Indeed,  through  our  regular  meetings,  Ben  and  I  have  built  up  a  very  close  working 
relationship, a climate of mutual trust, and a platform for direct and quick contact in special 
circumstances that would require urgent communication.  
Why is this important? The purpose of our contact is not the coordination of our monetary 
policies.  This  would  be  incompatible  with  the  orientation  of  our  policies  towards  our 
respective domestic objectives. Rather, the benefit of our close contact lies in the in-depth 
exchange  of  information  and  views  on  recent  economic  developments,  on  the  monetary, 
financial  and  economic  outlook  in  our  respective  economies,  and  on  the  policy  challenges 
ahead.  This  includes,  as  I  discussed  before,  trade  and  financial  linkages  between  our  two 
economies,  directly  or  via  other  economies.  Sharing  first-hand  knowledge  on  the  world 
outlook  and  on  how  we  see  our  respective  domestic  economies  influencing  and  being 
influenced by the global outlook is extremely important in today’s globalised economy. 
On very rare occasions in the past, our close working relationship has also permitted to work 
out swift action. A prime example of this is the decision the ECB took in the very afternoon of 
the day of the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001.  
A  second  example  is  the  decisions  we  took  to  help  stabilising  money  market  conditions 
during the financial market turmoil of last summer. Here again, close contact with the Fed 
proved extremely useful in sharing information on the financial conditions and central bank 
actions in our respective economies. 
The close contact I have with the Chairman is, as you see, only the tip of the “iceberg”. Our 
two  institutions  collaborate  closely  at  all  possible  levels,  involving  Board  members, 
management  and  staff.  Across  various  domains  of  central  banking,  we  have  set  up  joint 
platforms for the regular exchange of information. In the field of economic research, we have 
set  up  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy  to  discuss  theoretical  and 
empirical aspects of monetary policy. So far, four conferences have been organised, and a 
fifth  one  is  scheduled  for  June  2008.  In  the  area  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  and 
infrastructure, we have organised a number of joint conferences, for instance in April 2006 on 
central counterparty clearing, as well as regular meetings with the Federal Reserve Board. 
Even  in  an  area  such  as  education,  we  have  undertaken  joint  work,  for  example  at  the 
conference on the Role of Central Banks in Economic and Personal Finance Education in 
Poland in 2006, organised by Narodowy Bank Polski, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
and the ECB. 
Our  ties  are  also  facilitated  by  geographic  proximity.  You  may  be  surprised  to  hear  me 
mention geographic proximity, given that the centres of the Eurosystem and Federal Reserve 
System  are  in  Frankfurt  and  Washington  respectively.  However,  the  ECB  maintains  a 
permanent  representative  office  at  the  IMF,  only  a  few  streets  away  from  the  Federal 
Reserve Board in Washington. Though liaison with the Federal Reserve is not its main raison 
d'être, this office is another channel for closer contact and interaction. 
Staff members of the two central banks also participate regularly in conferences organised 
by the other institution. For instance, so far in 2007, over ten staff members of the ECB, the 
Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  Federal  Reserve  District  Banks  have  presented  their 
research  work  in  seminars  and  conferences  organised  by  one  of  these  institutions.  Staff 
members  also  regularly  visit  the  other  central  bank,  spending  several  days  discussing 
research work or technical issues. On some occasions, these stays even run over several 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2007
months. Since 2003, six ECB staff members have spent a total of 40 months at the Federal 
Reserve  Board  and  District  Banks  as  part  of  the  ECB’s  External  Work  Experience 
programme.  And  I  do  not  mention  here  the  many  many  relationships  that  are  established 
between the national central banks of the Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve System.  
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude. 
The euro area and the United States are large economic blocs which are, at the same time, 
largely open to world markets. The last decades, in particular, have witnessed a tightening of 
the trade and financial linkages and the bilateral relationships between the United States and 
the euro area have been reinforced. As a result, central banks worldwide, and in particular 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Eurosystem,  always  keep  an  eye  on  partners’  economic, 
monetary  and  financial  developments.  The  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  have 
many  opportunities  to  share  their  experience  and  technical  expertise,  whether  through 
discussions  within  international  meetings  or  in  informal  ways  through  conferences,  staff 
visits, personal contacts of all nature, including confident personal relationships at the level of 
Chairmen. I would also like to point to one example of cooperation that might look unusual. 
Last year, we had one case of cooperation in the domain of culture and arts, as the Federal 
Reserve exhibited a remarkable set of the art works of its collection at the premises of the 
ECB  in  Frankfurt.  This  art  exhibition  was  another  symbolic  illustration  of  our  close  cross-
Atlantic  ties,  in  which  tonight’s  journalist  prize  ceremony  also  plays  a  part.  I  have  always 
been convinced that a very strong relationship between both sides of the Atlantic is essential 
for  the  stability  and  continued  prosperity  of  our  respective  continents  but  also  for  the 
continuing stability and prosperity of the global economy itself. This is today particularly true 
in a period of immense opportunities and of significant challenges. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Bayoumi T. and A. Swiston (2007), Foreign Entanglements: Estimating the Source and Size 
of Spillovers Across Industrial Countries, IMF Working Paper 07/182. 
Calza A. and S. Dées (2007), The Euro Area in the Global Economy: Its Sensitivity to the 
International Environment and Its Influence on Global Economic Developments, in Di Mauro 
and  Anderton  (eds.),  The  External  Dimension  of  the  Euro  Area:  Assessing  the  Linkages, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Di  Mauro  F.,  L.V.  Smith,  S.  Dées  and  M.  H.  Pesaran  (2007),  Exploring  the  international 
linkages of the euro area: a global VAR analysis, Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 22(1), 
pages 1-38. 
BIS Review 146/2007 
 7
