Svein Gjedrem: Interest rate developments  
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
annual conference hosted by the Norwegian Federation of State Employees’ Unions, Oslo, 
28 November 2007. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
31 October and in Monetary Policy Report 3/07. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. First of all, I would like to thank you for inviting me to this conference. As the 
title suggests, my speech today will focus on the interest rate and monetary policy.  
What is monetary policy’s role? 
Over  the  past  100  years,  there  have  been  four  periods  of  very  high  inflation  in  Norway: 
during the two World Wars, during the Korean War and in a 15-year period from the first half 
of the 1970s to the second half of the 1980s. The last of these three periods was different 
from the preceding periods. In the 1970s and 1980s, inflation accelerated gradually. Inflation 
did not reach the same level as it did during the two world wars, but it took longer to fall.  
Substantial  economic  losses  and  financial  instability  followed  in  the  wake  of  high  inflation. 
Inflation was very costly.  
History shows that there is no long-term trade-off between lower unemployment or stronger 
economic  growth  and  higher  inflation.  If  we  look  at  the  period  from  the  1970s  to  today, 
economic growth has been higher since the 1990s when inflation was low than it was in the 
1970s and 1980s when inflation was high.  
Over time, interest rate setting only has an impact on inflation. Output is determined by real 
factors  such  as  the  supply  of  labour,  capital  and  technology  and  by  productivity 
developments.  
Nevertheless,  monetary  policy  can  have  an  impact  on  the  real  economy  in  the  short  and 
medium term. Actual output will normally deviate from trend output, which is determined by 
developments in real factors. If output is higher than implied by these factors, price and cost 
inflation  will  pick  up.  Stabilising  output  developments  means  seeking  to  influence  actual 
output so that the economy grows at a pace that is consistent with price and cost stability. 
In  line  with  this,  the  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  low  and  stable  inflation,  with 
annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  approximately  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  In  its  conduct  of 
monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is 
given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment.  
A plan for petroleum revenue spending over the central government budget was drawn up in 
2001.  Government  revenues  from  the  sale  of  oil  and  gas  are  invested  in  the  Government 
Pension Fund – Global (the petroleum fund). The plan is to spend the expected real rate of 
return  on  the  Fund  each  year,  i.e.  4  per  cent  of  the  Fund’s  value  as  an  annual  average 
through the business cycle. 
This  establishes  a  clear  division  of  labour  among  the  different  components  of  economic 
policy. 
• 
Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can also contribute 
to  smoothing  swings  in  output  and  employment.  The  inflation  target  provides 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 1
  economic  agents  with  a  stable  basis  for  their  decisions  concerning  saving, 
investment, budgets and wages.  
The  central  government  budget  –  growth  in  public  expenditure  –  influences  the 
krone exchange rate and the size of the internationally exposed business sector in 
the medium term. Government expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the 
long term.  
How  well  and  how  efficiently  we  utilise  our  labour  resources  and  other  economic 
resources  is  largely  determined  by  wage  formation  and  economic  structures  and 
incentives. 
When  monetary  policy  anchors  inflation  expectations,  this  provides  a  sound  basis  for  the 
interplay between monetary policy and other components of the economy.  
Inflation targeting provides a fixed framework for monetary policy and gives a clear indication 
of  how  the  central  bank  is  to  respond  in  different  situations.  The  social  partners  can 
determine  wage  growth  in  the  knowledge  of  the  monetary  policy  response.  This  system 
works well whether wages are set at the central, local or individual level. 
In the initial period after the introduction of an inflation target in 2001, it appeared that the 
social  partners  had  not  yet  internalised  the  response  pattern  ensuing  from  the  monetary 
policy mandate. We are now well into a cyclical phase with very high capacity utilisation and 
low  unemployment.  In  this  situation,  there  may  be  a  risk  that  wage  growth  will  again 
accelerate. On the other hand, the experience gained by the social partners that large pay 
rises  push  up  interest  rates  may  have  the  effect  of  curbing  pay  increases.  In  local  wage 
negotiations at enterprise level, competition, the supply of foreign labour and the possibility of 
outsourcing or relocating activities abroad may dampen the impact.  
The inflation target of 2.5 per cent provides a framework for the social partners. Over time, 
nominal wage growth above 2.5 per cent will mean higher real wages and higher purchasing 
power. Real wage growth that exceeds productivity growth can lead to higher inflation and 
higher interest rates.  
In  government-financed  enterprises  –  often  labour-intensive  –  budgets  are  adjusted  to  the 
wage  growth  expected  by  the  Government.  This  is  usually  in  line  with  assumptions  about 
cost  inflation  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  and  with  the  inflation  target.  If  wages  rise  more 
sharply,  efficiency  must  be  increased  in  order  to  minimise  the  adverse  impact  on  service 
production and customers. 
Norges Bank's most important instrument is the interest rate on banks' deposits with Norges 
Bank  (the  sight  deposit  rate),  also  referred  to  as  the  key  policy  rate.  The  key  policy  rate 
influences  interest  rates  on  interbank  loans.  Banks’  deposit  and  lending  rates  and  bond 
yields depend on the current key policy rate and expectations as to future changes in this 
rate. Lending rates in state banks are also linked to the interest rate on interbank loans and 
bond yields. 
The  aim  of  preventing  inflation  expectations  from  becoming  entrenched  below  the 
operational target of 2.5 per cent was one of the main reasons the interest rate was lowered 
to  a  very  low  level  in  2003  and  2004,  when  inflation  receded  and  approached  zero.  Low 
interest rates have stimulated demand and output and gradually led to the prospect of higher 
inflation, which we are addressing by increasing the interest rate. 
The  labour  market  is  an  important  factor  in  how  the  interest  rate  functions.  A  rise  in  the 
interest  rate  curbs  aggregate  demand  for  goods,  services  and  labour,  and  eases  the 
pressure on wages and prices. These effects are amplified by the impact of the interest rate 
on the krone exchange rate. Higher interest rates contribute in isolation to krone appreciation 
and  to  lower  profitability  in  the  internationally  exposed  sector.  This  can  result  in  lower 
employment and wage growth in this sector. Expectations with regard to price developments 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2007
also influence wage demands and have an effect when companies adjust their prices. The 
inflation target can provide an anchor for these expectations. 
Even though demand for labour is strong, there is a risk that outflows from the labour market 
to various social security schemes will remain high. Sickness absence is high, and the share 
of  the  working-age  population  on  rehabilitation  schemes  or  receiving  disability  pensions  is 
rising.  Many  wage-earners  choose  to  take  early  retirement  under  the  AFP  scheme 
(contractual  early  retirement)  when  they  reach  62  years  of  age,  and  –  because  this  age 
group  is  expanding  sharply  –  this  number  will  probably  increase  in  the  next  few  years.  In 
Norway,  close  to  600  000  persons  of  working  age  receive  social  security  benefits  or 
pensions.  This  is  equivalent  to  25  per  cent  of  the  labour  force.  This  is  the  Norwegian 
economy’s  Achilles’  heel.  A  particularly  disturbing  aspect  is  that  disability  is  increasing 
among young people.1  
In  economic  terms,  Norway’s  substantial  petroleum  wealth  gives  it  a  unique  position 
compared with many other countries. Nonetheless, labour is still by far the most important 
resource  we  have.  A  well  functioning  labour  market  is  therefore  important  for  our  welfare. 
Although it is difficult to quantify labour’s contribution in exact terms, even a small increase in 
the “return” on labour could generate considerable gains.  
Inflation in Norway decelerated markedly from the end of the 1980s to the mid-1990s and 
has  since  been  low  and  stable,  and  fairly  close  to  2.5  per  cent,  with  considerably  lower 
variability than earlier. Over the past 5-10 years, inflation has averaged around 2 per cent, 
i.e. somewhat lower than the inflation target. 
The current economic situation 
The Norwegian economy is in a period of strong expansion after a marked upturn began in 
summer 2003. The upturn followed a period of slow growth from 1998 and a mild recession 
in 2002 and into 2003. So far in the cyclical upturn, the mainland economy has grown by an 
average of just over 4 per cent annually. This year, growth appears to be over 5 per cent. 
Growth is very strong for such an advanced stage of the economic cycle. This is clear from a 
comparison with the upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. 
There has been a sharp increase in the utilisation of production resources since 2003. The 
level of capacity utilisation is particularly high in the building and construction industry. Order 
backlogs in this industry and in some manufacturing sectors are full, and many companies 
say they cannot take on any new assignments. There are shortages of many inputs, not just 
labour.  Contacts  in  our  regional  network  frequently  report  purely  physical  production 
constraints. There is a shortage of rigs and equipment in the petroleum sector, and periodic 
shortages  of  planks,  concrete,  insulation  and  scaffolding  in  the  building  and  construction 
industry. High capacity utilisation is placing limits on growth. 
Pressures  in  the  building  industry  are  reflected  in  building  costs,  particularly  the  cost  of 
materials, which has risen sharply. Building a detached home (in wood) today results in ten 
per cent less house per krone than it did just one year ago. But costs are increasing for all 
types of building and construction. Each million allocated over central and local government 
budgets now buys considerably fewer square metres of building and fewer metres of road. 
Strong economic growth has so far  only to a limited extent fed through to a higher rise in 
prices for consumer goods and services. Lower electricity prices have contributed to a fall in 
total CPI inflation in 2007. Consumer prices adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy 
products were stable at between 1 and 1½ per cent for a long period. Underlying inflation has 
                                                 
1   See Elisabeth Fevang and Knut Røed (2006): “Veien til uføretrygd i Norge (The route to disability pensions in 
Norway)”, Report no. 10 2006, Ragnar Frisch Centre for Economic Research. Norwegian only. 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 3
edged up gradually since late summer 2006, and the most recent figures indicate that it now 
stands at approximately 1½ per cent.  
Developments in recent years have paved the way for strong growth in employment, even 
now that the cyclical upturn is in a mature phase. The labour market is tight. Unemployment 
has not been as low since the latter half of the 1980s, and employment has risen faster this 
year than in living memory. It is estimated that the number employed will increase by 3.5 per 
cent  this  year,  which  would  be  the  strongest  rise  recorded  in  the  post-war  period.  The 
number of vacancies per unemployed has never been higher. There is a shortage of qualified 
labour in many industries. 
Although  unemployment  is  now  very  low,  employees’  share  of  value  added  has  been 
reduced. This conflicts with previous experience. Historically, unemployment has been high 
when the wage share was low.  
What are the factors that can explain the current situation of both low unemployment and a 
low wage share?  
Developments have been influenced by a number of positive supply-side conditions.  
First, due to high export prices and low import prices, we can now import considerably more 
for a given quantity of export goods. This means that Norway’s terms of trade have improved 
considerably.  
Second,  an  ample  supply  of  foreign  labour  has  been  an  important  factor  behind  output 
growth.  There  was  a  particularly  sharp  increase  in  the  supply  of  foreign  labour  after  EU 
enlargement  in  2004,  and  inward  labour  migration  and  population  growth  have  risen  to 
record-high levels. At the same time, this has enabled Norwegian companies to be bolder in 
accepting new assignments and making investments, in the knowledge that they can procure 
labour not only from the Nordic countries, but throughout Europe. Norwegian firms also have 
greater scope for relocating production to other countries if labour costs become too high. 
This  has  resulted  in  intensified  competition  in  the  labour  market  and  has  probably  had  a 
dampening effect on wage demands.  
Third,  productivity  growth  has  been  unusually  strong,  for  both  companies  competing  on 
international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the  domestic  market.  In 
comparison  with  other  countries,  this  is  particularly  the  case  for  banks  and  other  service 
sectors, reducing their production costs. The business sector has been quick to adapt and 
change, and to make use of new technology that is available in an international market. This 
is probably due to the 1980s and 1990s’ modernisation of the way the economy functions, 
which resulted in more efficient markets. In addition, growth in labour productivity reflected a 
marked  fall  in  sickness  absence  in  2004.  The  latest  figures  nonetheless  indicate  that 
productivity growth is falling back.  
Although  we  do  not  have  satisfactory  current  statistics  for  central  government  and  local 
government  productivity,  government  agencies  have  probably  also  become  more  efficient. 
New technology and new organisational structures have certainly provided opportunities to 
increase efficiency.  
Wage-earners  and  enterprises  have  both  fared  well.  Low  import  prices  have  resulted  in  a 
slow rise in consumer prices and a solid increase in wage-earners’ real wages. High export 
prices  have  contributed  to  holding  down  the  rise  in  real  wages.  Combined  with  high 
productivity  growth,  this  has  resulted  in  high  corporate  earnings  and  solid  growth  in 
employment.  
It remains to be seen whether the combination of low unemployment and a low wage share 
is sustainable. This partly depends on whether positive supply-side conditions persist. There 
is probably symmetry here.  
First,  should  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  deteriorate,  productivity  growth  slacken  and  foreign 
workers  return  to  their  home  country,  the  wage  share  will  increase,  profits  fall  and 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2007
unemployment  will  rise.  Second,  if  enterprises,  in  their  search  for  the  best  qualified 
candidates,  go  so  far  as  to  bid  up  wages,  profits  may  fall  and  unemployment  edge  up. 
Developments  ahead  will  also  depend  on  how  wage-earners  react.  If  the  wage  share  has 
fallen solely because of a lag in wage formation, both wage shares and unemployment may 
increase. 
High income growth and a sharp rise in the number of households laid the basis for a sharp, 
long-term  rise  in  house  prices.  It  now  appears  that  the  housing  market  is  cooling  after  an 
almost  three-fold  rise  in  prices  in  real  terms  in  the  course  of  the  past  14  years.  In  some 
regions, house prices are now approximately unchanged or lower than they were a year ago. 
House price inflation has been accompanied by strong growth in household debt. Household 
debt in Norway is now about twice the level of disposable income, making the debt-income 
ratio  higher  than  ever  before.  At  the  same  time,  saving  is  declining.  This  means  that  in 
addition to fully financing their housing investments through mortgages, households are also 
raising loans to finance current consumption.  
Higher interest rates and falling house prices may lead to slower consumption growth and a 
gradual increase in saving. 
Growth outlook and the orientation of fiscal and monetary policy 
I would like to conclude by commenting on the outlook for growth. 
Global  economic  developments  are  important  for  economic  developments  in  Norway,  and 
changes in the growth prospects for the world economy may influence our forecasts.  
Growth  in  the  US  economy  has  slackened.  The  US  housing  market  has  weakened  and 
employment  is  rising  at  a  slower  pace  than  earlier  this  year.  There  are  also  signs  of 
somewhat  slower  growth  in  western  Europe.  Economic  growth  in  emerging  economies 
remains  strong,  particularly  in  China.  Developments  in  these  countries  are  of  growing 
importance for the world economy and for our own economy. China, India and Russia have 
accounted for close to half of overall global growth over the past year.  
In spite of weaker prospects for the US and western Europe, oil prices have increased since 
the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  prices  for  other  commodities  remain  high,  partly 
owing to continued strong growth in demand from Asia.  
Uncertainty surrounding developments in the world economy has heightened as a result of 
the turbulence in financial markets this autumn. The turbulence was triggered by problems in 
some segments of the  US housing market.  Many borrowers were granted mortgages they 
cannot service now that the interest rate has risen. There were losses, particularly on loans 
in  the  bond  market  and  in  complex  loan  products  owned  by  separate  companies  that  had 
relied  on  very  short-term  financing.  These  companies  are  linked  to  the  large  international 
banks, and the banks have had to transfer loans onto their own balance sheets. Combined 
with higher losses, this limits banks’ capacity to extend new loans to the housing market and 
other sectors, and will thereby have a dampening impact on economic growth. To prevent 
interbank lending rates from rising too much, a number of central banks have increased their 
short-term lending to banks.  
In addition, the Federal Reserve has lowered its key rate by 0.75 percentage point in recent 
months. A further cut in the key rate in the US is now expected, and the interest rate is also 
expected to fall in the UK. In the euro area, market participants expect a more stable key rate 
ahead.  But  developments  are  not  the  same  everywhere.  The  central  banks  in  Sweden, 
Switzerland, Canada, New Zealand and China have raised their key rates. In Sweden, which 
has a lower interest rate level than our main trading partners, further interest rate hikes are 
expected.  
BIS Review 139/2007 
 5
The interest rate differential between Norway and other countries can have an impact on the 
krone  exchange  rate.  In  the  short  term,  however,  the  factors  that  influence  the  krone 
exchange rate vary. High oil prices and krone appreciation appear at times to be related, but 
there have also been periods when the krone has appreciated while oil prices declined. The 
krone  appreciated  when  the  interest  rate  differential  against  other  countries  was  high  in 
2002, but as interest rates in Norway moved down to the level among our trading partners, 
the value of the krone fell back. In the past, we have observed that market turbulence has 
occurred  in  tandem  with  a  weaker  krone.  This  autumn  the  krone  appreciated  during  the 
period of market turbulence, but has weakened somewhat in the past two weeks, reflecting 
shifting themes in foreign exchange markets. However, it appears the krone will be a good 3 
per cent stronger on average in the second half of this year compared with the first half, and 
about  1.5  per  cent  stronger  this  year  than  last  year.  Exchange  rate  developments  have  a 
dampening impact on inflation. 
Given our inflation-targeting regime, we will be mindful of the effects of higher interest rates 
on the krone exchange rate when inflation is low. 
High oil prices have resulted in substantial growth in the petroleum fund’s capital, and there 
are prospects of further growth ahead.  
The Government uses the central government budget to influence economic developments. 
Government petroleum revenues are transferred in full to the Government Pension Fund – 
Global  and  invested  in  securities  abroad.  However,  as  part  of  the  budget  resolution,  the 
Storting decides on an annual transfer from the Fund to cover the deficit in the government 
budget when petroleum revenues and capital income earned by the Fund are excluded. This 
annual transfer – direct petroleum revenue spending – has been sharply reduced in recent 
years,  but  is  expected  to  increase  somewhat  next  year.  Developments  reflect  a  marked 
increase in the government’s general tax revenues as a result of the current period of strong 
expansion. This in turn reflects the automatic contribution made by the central government 
budget  to  curbing  cyclical  fluctuations  because  more  money  accrues  to  the  state  in  good 
times than in bad. 
If the economy had not been in a period of strong expansion, and the economic situation had 
been  more  normal,  a  considerably  larger  transfer  from  the  Pension  Fund  to  the  Treasury 
would have been necessary in order to balance the budget. This cyclically adjusted transfer 
is estimated at a good NOK 71 billion this year, and just under NOK 77 billion in 2008, and 
has increased gradually over time. It is this estimate that forms the basis of the plan drawn 
up by the Government and the Storting, referred to as the fiscal rule. The rule states that the 
government  is  to  spend,  as  an  annual  average  through  the  business  cycle,  the  expected 
return  on  the  petroleum  fund,  i.e.  4  per  cent.  Because  of  the  high  level  of  activity,  the 
Government has proposed using somewhat less money from the petroleum fund than 4 per 
cent of the Fund’s value at the beginning of the year.  
The  proposed  tax  programme  for  next  year  will  have  a  fairly  neutral  impact  on  economic 
activity.  Proposed  direct  and  indirect  tax  rates  will  generate  approximately  the  same 
government revenues as last year’s tax rates had they been continued. As a whole, however, 
the central government budget will have the effect of stimulating activity. This is reflected in 
fairly strong growth in the level of expenditure, which is stronger than the rate of growth in 
mainland GDP that can normally be expected.  
In  the  November  2005  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  published  its  own  forecast  for  the 
interest rate for the first time. The forecast satisfies two main criteria: First, the interest rate is 
set with a view to stabilising inflation close to the target in the medium term. The horizon will 
depend  on  the  shocks  to  which  the  economy  is  exposed  and  their  effects  on  the  path  for 
inflation  and  the  real  economy  ahead.  Second,  the  interest  rate  path  shall  provide  a 
reasonable balance between the path for inflation and the path for capacity utilisation. In the 
assessment,  potential  effects  of  property  prices  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  on  the 
prospects for output, employment and inflation are also taken into account.  
6 
 BIS Review 139/2007
Even if Norges Bank presents an interest rate forecast, this does not mean that the interest 
rate  will  follow  this  precise  path.  The  wage  settlements  may  be  different  from  what  we 
envisaged,  and  there  may  be  changes  in  the  global  economy,  exchange  rates,  and 
petroleum  and  commodity  prices  that  have  an  impact  on  the  economy  and  the  inflation 
outlook. This may result in a different interest rate path.  
In the press release following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 31 October, 
it  was  stated  that  underlying  inflation  has  picked  up  but  is  lower  than  the  inflation  target. 
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  remains  strong  and  is  stronger  than  projected  earlier. 
Capacity  utilisation  is  high.  Wage  growth  is  on  the  rise  and  there  are  prospects  of  higher 
inflation. At the same time, the krone had appreciated markedly and there are prospects that 
somewhat weaker growth in the world economy will contribute to curbing inflation and growth 
in output and employment in Norway. Reference was also made to the analyses in Monetary 
Policy Report 3/07, which indicate that the key policy rate should be raised further, but to a 
lesser extent than envisaged in June. 
In  addition,  the  Executive  Board  pointed  out  that  the  projections  are  uncertain.  New 
information  may  reveal  aspects  of  economic  developments  indicating  that  the  Norwegian 
economy  is  moving  on  a  different  path  than  projected.  On  the  one  hand,  high  capacity 
utilisation and higher cost inflation may lead to higher-than-projected inflation. On the other 
hand,  the  risk  of  slower  growth  in  the  world  economy  has  increased.  If  global  economic 
developments are weaker or if the krone appreciates more than we have assumed, inflation 
may be lower than projected at present. 
It was the view of the Executive Board that the key policy rate should be in the interval 4¾-
5¾ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Report on 13 March 2008, unless the 
Norwegian economy is exposed to unexpectedly severe shocks.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
  7
BIS Review 139/2007 
     8 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 17
    18 
 BIS Review 139/2007
    BIS Review 139/2007 
 19
    20 
 BIS Review 139/2007
   BIS Review 139/2007 
 21
