Caleb  M  Fundanga:  The  Bank  of  Zambia  –  placing  a  high  premium  on 
education 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the signing ceremony 
of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the  University  of 
Zambia, Lusaka, 23 November 2007. 
 The Vice Chancellor 
The Deputy Vice Chancellor 
The Registrar 
The Deans of various schools 
Heads of Departments present 
Faculty Members 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  feel  greatly  honoured  to  once  again  participate  in  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  (MoU)  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  (BOZ)  and  the  University  of  Zambia 
(UNZA).  The  Bank  of  Zambia  and  UNZA  have  a  long  standing  relationship  which  is 
intertwined in more ways than one. I am sure that the majority of employees in the Bank that 
possess a first degree have this University to thank for that achievement. It therefore gives 
me pleasure to stand here and undertake this function of signing the MOU between our two 
institutions. 
Vice  Chancellor,  the  Bank  places  a  very  high  premium  on  education.  It  is  for  this  very 
reason that it has this day decided to renew its financial support to the University of Zambia’s 
Department of Economics. Under the new agreement, the Bank has increased the level of 
support  to UNZA  to  include  setting  aside  a  special  fund specifically  for  research  purposes 
and procurement of personal computers (PCs) and software for the same purpose. We in the 
Bank  consider  research  as  very  important  because  it  forms  the  basis  upon  which  we 
formulate  our  policies  and  execute  our  operations.  To  underscore  this  point,  the  Bank  of 
Zambia launched the BOZ Reader series a few years ago as a means of having articles of 
economic  interest  being  published  for  the  benefit  of  the  Zambian  public.  The  three 
publications  of  the  BOZ  Reader  that  have  been  published  so  far  have  largely  contained 
articles prepared by BOZ members of staff. However, our intention has always been to have 
a wider network of contributors. 
With the signing of this agreement, we hope to see more economics related research being 
undertaken by faculty members in the Department of Economics on behalf of the Bank. We 
further urge the University of Zambia to be a key and keen contributor to the publications. 
The  University  of  Zambia  Economics  Department  should  coordinate  with  our  Economics 
Department on this matter. 
In addition to the research fund, the monthly salary supplementation for faculty members in 
the  Economics  Department  has  been  adjusted  up  by  64%.  Meanwhile,  the  Bank  has 
continued to recognize academic excellence among economics students at UNZA. For this 
reason, the bank has been providing fully funded scholarships to five outstanding economics 
students  at  third  and  fourth  year  levels.  This  support  is  also  expected  to  shift  to  post-
graduate  economics  programmes  as  soon  as  the  modalities  are  agreed  between  the  two 
institutions. 
Vice Chancellor, we are aware that the supplementary funds provided by BOZ cannot meet 
all your requisite needs with regard to enhancing your research capacity. I therefore urge you 
to forge other linkages that promote research. I have in mind the African Economic Research 
Consortium (AERC) whose principle objective is to strengthen local capacity for conducting 
BIS Review 140/2007 
 1
independent,  rigorous  inquiry  into  problems  pertinent  to  the  management  of  economies  in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa.  AERC  was  established  in  1988  as  a  public  not-for-profit  organization 
devoted to advanced policy research and training in economics. However, it is rare to find 
Zambians utilizing the facilities which are offered by this organization. Our hope is that with 
this information, we will see more papers by UNZA academicians on the AERC website in 
the near future. 
In order to encourage research on local issues by our own researchers, I am contributing an 
book  to  the  UNZA  library  by  Professor  Paul  Collier,  the  Director  for  the  Study  of  African 
Economies at Oxford University. The book, “The Bottom Billion” provides an example of the 
sort of issues which we expect our own authors to be able to elucidate on more clearly from 
their own experiences. In the book, Collier analyses the causes of failure by fifty failed states, 
pointing  to  a  set  of  traps  that  snare  these  countries.  These  traps  include  civil  war,  a 
dependence  on  extraction  and  export  of  natural  resources,  being  land-locked,  and  bad 
governance.  Surely  our  experience  with  some  of  these  “traps”  should  make  us  better 
experienced to explain the issues. This is what we expect of UNZA. 
Vice Chancellor, on our part, we will continue to assist UNZA as guided by the MOU. We 
are very confident that the support that UNZA is receiving from partners such as BOZ will go 
a long way in furthering academic excellence and uplifting the levels of morale among faculty 
members. 
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2007
