Krzysztof Rybiński: Monetary policy challenges resulting from the rapid 
credit growth in the CEE 
Panel discussion by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, 
at the National Bank of Poland International Conference of Central Bankers and Economic 
Educators  “Monetary  Policy  Challenges  Resulting  from  the  Rapid  Credit  Growth  in 
Converging Economies”, Warsaw, 23 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In recent years we have witnessed a rapid growth of credit in CEE countries. Today, I would 
like  to  focus  on  globalisation  as  one  of  the  main  causes  of  such  development.  First,  I  will 
explain  how  globalisation  contributed  to  recent  credit  growth  in  the  CEE  and  then  I  will 
discuss  what  could  be  the  possible  consequences  for  the  monetary  policy  of  vanishing 
globalization “tail wind” in the nearest future.  
To start with, let us define the term globalisation, as its meaning is so broad, that when it is 
referred to in a discussion, various people understand various things. One of the definitions 
of globalisation is provided by the International Monetary Fund1, where it is construed as “the 
growing interdependence (integration) of national economies, in particular as a result of the 
growing international trade and financial flows”. Moreover, an element of globalisation that is 
worth  mentioning  is  the  fast  flow  of  information  and  knowledge,  which  is  the  driving  force 
behind  globalisation  processes.  One  should  keep  in  mind  that  globalisation  is  not  a 
completely  new  phenomenon.  In  view  of  the  existence  of  political  barriers  to  international 
trade, the flow of capital and goods was equally as possible one hundred years ago as it is 
today.  It  goes  without  saying,  however,  that  as  a  result  of  the  rapid  development  of 
technology,  especially  in  the  ICT  area,  which  drastically  lowered  the  cost  of  the  said 
exchange,  the  international  integration  of  trade,  investment,  financial  and  other  services  is 
now more advanced than it has ever been before. 
In recent years globalization “tail wind”, mainly through increasing competition, productivity 
and  growing  imports  from  low-cost  countries,  helped  to  reduce  inflation  in  CEE  countries. 
HICP inflation in the region2 fell from average 7.7 percent in the years 1997-2000 to 3.8 in 
2001-2006. It led to a prolonged period of very low nominal and real interest rates. Nominal 
interest  rates  (average  for  CEE  countries  with  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes)  have  fallen 
from 8.8 percent during 2002-2005 to 5.4 during 2006-2007. Real rates decreased from 3.0 
to 1.7 in the same period. This in turn helped to accelerate credit growth and fuelled asset 
bubbles.  The  amount  of  loans  granted  to  households  increased  3.5  times  since  2004  and 
almost  10  times  since  2000.  Low  deposit  rates  and  economic  upturn  in  CEE  after  EU 
accession encouraged both financial institutions and individuals to move toward more risky 
forms of investment. As a result, real estate prices soared after 2004 and equities listed on 
stock exchanges reached historical highs. Since 2003 major stock exchange indexes in CEE 
increased on average by almost 300 percent. While part of this asset price and credit growth 
may be explained by structural factors often referred to as “convergence”, the observed rates 
of growth are clearly unsustainable and they contribute to economic imbalances. 
With the benefit of the hindsight one could argue that monetary policy in the last few years 
did  not  properly  take  into  account  the  possibility  that  prolonged  period  of  historically  low 
interest  rates  may  contribute  to  asset  bubbles  and  hence  contribute  to  greater  inflation 
                                                 
1   See IMF (2000) 
2   Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia, Slovakia. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
volatility  in  the  future.  As  argued  by  Rogoff  (2006)  when  faced  with  a  tail  wind  monetary 
authorities  in  both  developed  and  developing  world  should  have  temporarily  lowered  the 
inflation target rather that reduce interest rates too much for too long. But there is another 
issue. It seems that globalisation tail wind is reversing these days and that in the coming few 
years central banks can face “globalisation headwind” amid rising food and energy prices. 
1. 
Agflation is the rise of inflation due to increase of food prices. In recent months we 
have witnessed a significant increase of food prices, grain and oilseeds being the 
leaders. Prices of food products on international markets has risen by almost 40 per 
cent  within  last  two  years  and  prices  of  grain  and  oil  seeds  has  almost  doubled 
within  this  period.  Many  forecasters  suggest  that  this  trend  will  not  end  in  the 
nearest  future.  There  are  several  explanations  of  such  situation.  Firstly,  rising  oil 
prices increase demand for alternative sources of energy, biofuels being high on the 
agenda in many regions. In effect industrial demand for food commodities will further 
rise. By the way, it is worth to mention what may be the ecological consequences of 
growing  biofuels  production.  Spiegel  online  on  26th  September  2007  described  a 
research led by the Nobel-price winning chemist Paul Crutzen which had found that 
biofuels  emit  even  70  percent  more  greenhouse  gases  than  fossil  fuels.  In  effect, 
global warming may accelerate and lead to further increase in frequency of disasters 
such as floods, droughts, and unexpected weather changes that may have negative 
effects on crops. Secondly, food prices will be lifted up by an increasing demand for 
agriculture products in the emerging markets, especially in Asia, as the catching-up 
process  progresses.  It  is  worth  keeping  in  mind  that  the  share  of  food  in  the  CPI 
basket is some 10 pp. higher in CEE countries than in the eurozone, so agflation, if 
it materializes, will lead to inflation divergence. 
Other  commodities  prices.  Demand  for  commodities,  just  as  for  agricultural 
products,  has  substantially  risen  in  recent  years.  The  “problem”  lies  again  in  the 
emerging markets. Fast growing economies create still growing demand for all sorts 
of commodities, especially metals and fuels (for example: oil consumption in China 
has  doubled  within  last  10  years).  As  the  result,  prices  of  metals  and  energy 
commodities have doubled since the end of 2004. Although prices of these products 
do not affect consumer inflation directly, in the medium term will contribute to further 
increase of inflation volatility.  
2. 
The  tail  wind  of  globalization  will  probably  return  in  the  medium  run,  but  structural 
adjustments, which may take several years, must be completed first. Rising white collar and 
industrial wages in emerging markets will attract more and more people to the labour market 
and will consequently lead to adjustments in education systems in those countries. Labour 
force “great doubling”3, together with significant increase of the quality of human capital due 
to  better  education  system  will  contribute  to  further  increase  of  offshoring  directed  to  still 
cheaper  emerging  markets.  Offshoring,  as  a  strategy  of  increasing  competitiveness,  is 
becoming more and more common and includes not only the manufacturing of products but 
also  –  increasingly  –  services.  Numerous  analyses  show  that  the  process  of  offshoring  is 
bound  to  grow  and  increasingly  affect  services4.  For  example,  McKinsey  Global  Institute 
estimated that in 2008 ca. 160 million jobs in services, i.e. 11% of the global employment in 
services  estimated  at  1.46  billion,  may  theoretically  be  performed  at  a  distance  from  the 
customer. 
It is hard to forecast, however, what the global consequences of such situation will be. On 
the one hand, offshoring lowers operational costs of enterprises and thus optimal mark-up 
pricing allows to reduce prices. On the other hand, rising labour demand will lead to higher 
                                                 
3   See Freeman (2005) 
4   Rybinski (2007) 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
2. 
3. 
wages  and  depending  on  productivity  growth  may  also  lead  to  higher  unit  labour  costs. 
Higher wages also imply higher consumption and a further rise of demand for commodities in 
emerging markets.  
As  the  tail wind  of  globalization  is  reversing  these  days, the  most  difficult challenge  which 
CEE  countries  will  have  to  face  with  is  to keep  fast  real growth  and,  at  the  same time,  to 
manage nominal convergence – indispensable condition of EMU graduation. There are some 
issues which will make this task even more complicated: 
1. 
Migration.  One  of  the  major  obstacles  is  the  massive  emigration  of  workforce 
observed  in  the  New  Member  States  after  joining  the  European  Union.  In  Poland 
and the Baltic states some 4 to even more than 7 percent of a labour force attracted 
by higher wages, job availability and better living conditions migrated so far to the 
EU-15. This has led to severe tensions in many industries pushing wages and unit 
labour  costs  up.  High  corporate  profits  have  provided  a  cushion  yet,  but,  if  this 
situation  continues,  many  companies  will  be  forced  to  raise  prices  to  remain 
profitable.  
Rising unit labour costs.  Growing  tension  on  the  labour  market  is  present  in  all 
CEE  countries,  but  Baltic  and  Balkan  States  seem  to  be  the  most  threatened  by 
rising  labour  costs.  Annual  average  dynamics  of  unit  labour  costs  in  the  second 
quarter  of  2007  in  CEE  accounted  to  8  per  cent  and  in  the  group  of  Baltic  and 
Balkan states the figure was over two times higher. This shows that sooner or later 
(rather sooner) enterprises will stop cutting their profit margins and will be forced to 
pass growing operational costs on consumers.  
Productivity growth. We live in a global knowledge economy, which is driven by 
innovation – technological, business-process or customer related. The crucial factor 
to  succeed  in  the  global  knowledge  economy  is  the  country’s  ability  to  develop 
intellectual  capital.  Only  those  who  understand  the  importance  of  innovations  for 
growth  will  thrive  and  prosper  in  the  coming  decades.  Unfortunately,  CEE  region 
lags badly behind the leaders in terms of its current and future ability to generate 
innovation. One of indicators measuring current ability to innovate is the number of 
researchers.  In  the  mid-1990s  CEE-4  (the  Czech  Republic,  Hungary,  Poland  and 
Slovakia) and NIEs regions had similar number of researchers per million people, 
while two years ago NIEs had almost twice as many persons employed in R&D per 
million  people  in  comparison  with  CEE-4.  Future  knowledge  potential  of  particular 
country  or  region  can  be  measured  by  tertiary  enrolment  ratio.  Tertiary  enrolment 
ratio in the CEE-4 countries improved to 50 percent in 2004, but still remains well 
below 62 percent in the EU-15 and 82 percent in the United States. Because of a 
relatively small population and a number of structural deficiencies it is very unlikely, 
that  increase  in  the  number  of  students  in  CEE-4  that  have  occurred  in  recent 
decade will translate into higher innovation potential in the coming years, unless a 
dramatic  change  in  policies  in  CEE-4  is  made.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  a 
dramatically low number of patents registered in the CEE countries and extremely 
low  number  of  scientific  publications.  As  the  ability  to  generate  great  ideas  in  the 
CEE  region  is  limited,  it  seems  that  in  the  transition  period  the  most  important 
modernization channel in the region was through foreign direct investments. Indeed 
CEE became a very large recipient of FDI, with FDI stock to GDP ratio topping 40 
percent in CEE-4 region. Only NIEs economies managed to attract higher FDI stock 
in  relation  to  GDP  and  enjoy  higher  FDI  annual  inflows.  However,  in  the  global 
knowledge  economy  it  is  important  to  attract  foreign  direct  investments  to  sectors 
that can become globally competitive, in particular to these sectors that export high-
technology,  i.e.  high  value  added  goods  or  services.  While  CEE-4  significantly 
improved the structure of exports, the high-tech goods account for only 12 percent 
of manufactured exports, which is the world worst result, lagging even behind Latin 
American  countries.  NIEs  are  world  leaders  and  China  is  about  to  take  over  the 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
second post from the United States. Above data suggests that in the long run low 
ability  to  generate  innovation  combined  with  low  value  added  FDI  may  harm  the 
CEE ability to improve productivity. 
Summing  up,  with  the  inflation  headwind  expected  in  the  coming  few  years  CEE  central 
banks will face a possibly steep sacrifice ratio when controlling inflation. Keeping inflation at 
the target consistent with EMU accession may require sizeable reduction of the output gap, 
which in turn may make fiscal targets difficult to achieve. 
Tail  wind  of  globalization  appears  to  be  fading  in  the  coming  few  years  and  if  agflation  or 
surge in other commodity prices materializes, joining EMU may become “mission impossible” 
for many CEE countries in the next few years. The window of opportunity created by global 
inflation “tail wind” might have closed in 2007. 
References 
Freeman  R.  (2005)  “The  Great  Doubling:  America  in  the  New  Global  Economy”,  Usery 
Lecture, April 8, 2005. Georgia State University; What Really Ails Europe (and America): The 
Doubling of the Global Workforce, The Globalist, June 3, 2005 
IMF  (2000)  “Globalization:  Threat  or  Opportunity?”  IMF  Staff,  April  12,  2000  (Corrected 
January 2002) 
McKinsey Global Institute (2005) “The Emerging Global Labour Market”, June 2005. 
Rogoff K.S. (2006) “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City 
Rybinski K. (2007) “Three faces of globalisation. Offshoring – global imbalances – monetary 
policy”, Difin, Warsaw 2007 (in Polish) 
Spiegel online (2007), “Rethinking Renewables: Biofuels Emit More Greenhouse Gases than 
Fossil Fuels”, http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/0,1518,508089,00.html 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2007
