Paul Jenkins: North America in today's global economic setting 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Jenkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Canadian Association of New York, New York, 6 November 2007.  
 Good afternoon. I'm very happy to be here today and to have the opportunity to address the 
Canadian Association of New York. The goals of the organization, as set out in your mission 
statement, are laudable ones. And I hope today to make a contribution towards your efforts 
"to disseminate information and knowledge relating to Canadian business".  
In recent months, much has been said, and written, about developments in financial markets. 
The turbulence in global credit markets, which had its roots in developments in the market for 
subprime mortgages here in the United States, has been a focal point of attention for market 
participants and policy-makers around the world. At the Bank of Canada, we have worked 
hard  to  understand  the  causes  of  this  financial  market  turbulence  and  assess  the 
implications.  
But while attention has been focused on financial markets, it's important not to lose sight of 
other developments and trends with implications for the real economy. So today, I want to 
switch the focus back on to the real side of the Canadian and U.S. economies. What I plan to 
do is discuss the implications of global economic trends for the evolution of the ties between 
our two economies. First, I want to look at how the economic links within North America have 
been evolving. Second, I'll talk about how trends in the global economy have been affecting 
those  links. Then,  I'll  look  at  some  of  the  policy  implications  of  these  evolving  trends,  and 
close with a few words about the state of the Canadian economy. 
Economic links within North America 
Let  me  begin  by  going  back  almost  exactly  20  years  to  the  signing  of  the  original  U.S.-
Canada  Free  Trade  Agreement  (FTA)  in  October  1987.  Since  this  watershed  event, 
businesses on both sides of the border have cemented the already-close economic ties that 
existed  between  our  two  countries.  This  agreement  recognized  the  growing  importance  of 
trade  for  both  economies.  Of  course,  Canada  does  rely  more  on  trade  than  the  United 
States. But since the implementation of the FTA in January 1989, trade flows measured in 
constant dollars have more than tripled for both countries, and trade as a share of GDP has 
risen sharply. Indeed, more broadly, the volume of world trade has risen at an annual rate of 
8.4 per cent since 1990, compared with an average annual rate of growth for world GDP of 
3.75 per cent over the same period. It is safe to say that this tremendous growth in world 
trade has been far greater than anyone had expected. 
Given  the  close  trade  ties  between  our  two  economies,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  has 
traditionally been a rather strong correlation between economic growth rates in Canada and 
the United States.1 Our economies have tended to move fairly closely together throughout 
economic cycles. So it's not hard to see how, for example, developments in the auto sector in 
the United States are felt almost immediately in Canada, or how swings in housing starts in 
the  United  States  affect  Canada's  forest  products  industry.  In  the  Bank's  latest  Monetary 
Policy  Report,  we  noted  that  our  base-case  economic  projection  for  the  United  States 
incorporates a 15 per cent decline in residential investment this year, and a further 11 per 
cent  drop  next  year.  All  else  being  equal,  our  analysis  suggests  that  this  would  lead  to  a 
                                                 
1   The IMF estimates that a 1-percentage-point decline in U.S. GDP growth is associated with a decline of 0.5 
percentage points in Canadian GDP. See the IMF's April 2007 World Economic Outlook, page 137. 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 1
reduction  in  the  growth  of  Canada's  GDP  of  0.4  percentage  points  this  year  and  0.3 
percentage points in 2008. 
Following  the  implementation  of  the  Free  Trade  Agreement,  Canada  began  to  send  an 
increasing share of its exports to the United States. From 1990 to 2000, the percentage of 
Canadian goods exported to the United States rose from just under 75 per cent to just under 
87  per  cent.  Of  course,  the  original  FTA  turned  into  the  North  American  Free  Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA) with the addition of Mexico in 1994. And under NAFTA, Mexico has also 
increased the concentration of its exports that go to the United States, reaching a peak of 
about 89 per cent in the year 2000.  
But below the surface, the story is much more interesting and complex. While the share of 
Canadian and Mexican exports to the United States remains higher today than before free 
trade, the share of imports received by both countries from the United States is not higher.2 
Further, the year 2000 looks to have been a turning point. With the accession of China to the 
World  Trade  Organization  in  2001,  that  country  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  India  started  to 
become increasingly important global players. So the share of both Canadian and Mexican 
exports to the United States began to decline at about that time, while both countries began 
to import more from outside North America.  
I don't want to overstate the situation. The United States remains Canada's most important 
import  source  and  export  destination  by  far.  But  despite  these  close  ties,  it  is  clear  that 
developments in the global economy have affected the economic links between Canada and 
the United States. To understand how these links are changing, it's important to understand 
the  differences  in  how  the  structures  of  the  U.S.  and  Canadian  economies  have  been 
responding to recent global developments.  
Global cyclical and structural developments 
Over the past decade, we have seen a number of economic shocks that have affected the 
U.S. and Canadian economies differently. Why has this happened? Part of the reason has to 
do with the rise to prominence of economies such as China and India. Because of their size 
and their growing share of world output, it is their influence, rather than the U.S. economy, 
that is increasingly shaping the global business cycle and determining the prices of traded 
goods, including commodity prices. 
The  other,  related,  reason  why  our  two  economies  have  been  affected  differently  is,  of 
course, the fact that commodity-price shocks result in opposite movements in the terms of 
trade for Canada and the United States. This means that when Canada's terms of trade have 
improved – that is, when Canadians receive higher prices for exports and pay lower prices 
for imports – the terms of trade for the U.S. economy have tended to deteriorate. And the 
situation has been the reverse when Canada's terms of trade have deteriorated.  
What  this  negative  correlation  in  the  terms  of  trade  tells  us  is  that  even  though  the  two 
economies are integrated, they have very different structures that, quite naturally, respond in 
different ways to certain shocks. Consider both the Asian crisis of 1997-98 and the events of 
the past five years or so, as China and India have risen to economic prominence. Both of 
these events have had significant implications for the economies of North America. 
In the case of the Asian crisis, we saw a marked slowdown in global economic growth, which 
resulted  in  a  sharp  decline  in  the  prices  for  many  of  Canada's  primary  commodities.  With 
                                                 
2   Canada's share of exports to the United States rose from 72.8 per cent in 1988 to a peak of 87.1 per cent in 
2002, compared with 79 per cent in the first half of 2007. Canada's share of imports from the United States 
rose from 65.6 per cent in 1988 to a peak of 68.2 per cent in 1998, compared with 54.5 per cent in the first half 
of 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2007
these  swings  in  relative  prices,  Canada  saw  its  terms  of  trade  deteriorate,  while  the  U.S. 
terms of trade improved. In these circumstances, we saw a decline in the exchange rate for 
the  Canadian  dollar  against  the  U.S.  dollar.  These  movements  sent  price  signals  that 
triggered important shifts across sectors and regions of the Canadian economy. With lower 
commodity  prices,  resources  flowed  out  of  commodity-producing  sectors  and  into  sectors 
such as manufacturing. 
But  over  the  past  five  years,  we  have  seen  essentially  the  reverse  take  place.  There  has 
been  very  vigorous  global  growth,  accompanied  by  high  prices  for  the  commodities  that 
Canada  produces.  As  a  result,  Canada's  terms  of  trade  have  seen  a  sharp  improvement, 
while  the  U.S.  terms  of  trade  have  deteriorated.  And  the  Canadian  dollar  has  appreciated 
against  the  U.S.  dollar.  Not  surprisingly,  resources  have  shifted  back  to  the  production  of 
commodities where prices have risen, and away from sectors such as manufacturing. 
Economic data clearly illustrate the structural changes that have been brought about by the 
integration  of  China  and  India  into  the  global  economy  and  by  the  increasing  competition 
coming from emerging economies more generally. Consider Canada's manufacturing sector. 
This  sector  expanded  in  terms  of  both  its  share  of  employment  and  its  share  of  GDP, 
following the implementation of the original Free Trade Agreement. And, as I just noted, the 
sector expanded strongly in the wake of the Asian crisis. But since 2000, in the face of high 
commodity prices, a strong dollar, and rising competition from Asia, Canada's manufacturing 
sector has declined in terms of its shares of employment and output.3  
Policy implications 
So  what  are  the  implications  of  these  developments  for  policy-makers?  In  answering  that 
question,  I  want  to  make  a  general  observation,  and  that  is  the  importance  of  allowing 
market-based adjustment mechanisms to work in an economy. Markets send price signals 
that indicate the best way for resources to be allocated to the highest value-added activities. 
This  implies  that  policy-makers  should  not  try  to  impede  or  frustrate  these  market  signals. 
And  it  implies  that  our  economies  will  be  best  served  by  policies  that  promote  flexibility  – 
policies  that  allow  economies  to  respond  to  price  signals  and  to  adapt  to  changing 
circumstances. Let me make three points about how policy-makers can encourage flexibility. 
The first thing to note is the importance of continuing to promote free trade, and resisting the 
siren song of protectionism. We must never forget that trade – whether in goods or services 
–  is  a  positive-sum  game.  That  is  to  say,  in  the  end,  all  countries  can  be  winners.  But  if 
countries  yield  to  protectionist  pressures,  everyone  in  the  international  community  will  be 
worse off in the end. Moreover, protectionist actions that focus on bilateral imbalances will 
not reduce the size of a country's overall current account deficit. If the underlying cause of 
that  deficit  is  not  addressed,  protectionism  will  only  result  in  trade  flows  being  diverted  to 
other countries. 
But to support an open and robust global trading system, we also need to actively support a 
market-based  international  financial  system.  Policies  that  thwart  market-based  economic 
adjustments can threaten global growth and stability. That is why we at the Bank of Canada 
have been quite active in saying that surveillance at the International Monetary Fund should 
be  focused  on  countries  that  are  following  policies  that  do  not  allow  market-based 
adjustments to take place. 
The  second  point  I  want  to  make  is  the  importance  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies.  I'll 
confine  my  remarks  here  to  monetary  policy.  Although  there  are  differences  in  approach, 
                                                 
3   From 1995 to 2000, the share of manufacturing employment rose from 14.3 per cent to 15.2 per cent, while 
the share of manufacturing output rose from 17.2 per cent to 18.8 per cent. But by 2006, those shares had 
declined to 12.9 per cent and 15.8 per cent, respectively. 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 3
both  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  have  inflation  control  as  a 
fundamental goal, with that goal supported by a floating exchange rate. For an economy as 
open  as  Canada's,  having  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is  a  critical  element  in  allowing  it  to 
pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  that  is  appropriate  to  its  specific  domestic 
circumstances.  And  by  focusing  on  inflation  control,  both  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the 
Federal Reserve are allowing changes in relative prices to send those clear signals that help 
the economy adjust to different circumstances. 
Of course, it is not easy for businesses competing in the global economy to adapt to sharp 
movements  in  exchange  rates.  But  movements  in  exchange  rates  encourage  the  kinds  of 
adjustments that are necessary in response to economic shocks. In the absence of a floating 
exchange  rate  and  with  limited  labour  market  mobility  between  Canada  and  the  United 
States,  the  adjustment  that  would  otherwise  take  place  would  be  significantly  more  costly 
and more difficult.  
The third point I want to make is the need to have structural or microeconomic policies in 
place that encourage flexibility and adaptability. In Canada, we have made good progress in 
improving  the  flexibility  of  our  economy.  This  is  evident  in  the  way  that  the  economy  has 
been able to adjust to the various shocks that have come its way in recent years. Indeed, 
although these shocks have had different effects across sectors and regions of the country, 
growth  in  overall  output  and  employment  has  remained  solid,  while  inflation  has  remained 
low and stable, as resources have shifted to those sectors whose products have been in high 
demand. 
But this does not imply that we should not be looking to improve Canada's structural policies. 
There  are  some  priority  areas  in  this  regard.  Considerably  more  needs  to  be  done  to 
enhance the flexibility and functioning of our internal markets from coast to coast. Business 
regulations and  standards,  including  those  for  the  financial  sector,  need  to  be  harmonized 
across  Canada.  And,  to  make  our  labour  markets  more  flexible,  trades  and  professional 
designations  should  be  recognized  and  fully  transferable  across  the  country.  The  Trade, 
Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement reached between British Columbia and Alberta is 
an important step in that direction. But more progress of this sort is needed in Canada. 
Policies that support flexibility can obviously help economies adjust to economic shocks. But 
there is also a longer-term payoff that can come from encouraging flexibility. When policies 
provide  the  right  environment  for  entrepreneurship  to  flourish,  economies  can  adapt  to 
longer-term global economic forces and continuously exploit their comparative advantages.  
Consider some of the iconic firms here in the United States, and how a company such as 
IBM  has  evolved.  IBM  was  once  primarily  a  manufacturer  of  "business  machines,"  as  its 
name implies. But as other countries and economies developed and became better placed to 
manufacture goods, IBM redefined itself and used its comparative advantage to become a 
"business  solutions"  firm,  offering  software,  consulting,  and  even  financing  services  in 
addition to computers. 
Recent economic and financial developments 
Let  me  now  turn  to  recent  developments.  A  little  more  than  two  weeks  ago,  the  Bank 
published  its  Monetary  Policy  Report.  In  that  document,  we  noted  that  growth  in  the 
Canadian  economy  has  been  stronger  than  projected,  supported  by  the  robust  global 
economic  expansion  and  strong  commodity  prices.  Canada's  economy  is  now  operating 
further above its production potential than had been previously expected.  
We also noted three major and related developments since the summer that have affected 
the outlook for the Canadian economy. First, the Canadian dollar has appreciated sharply. In 
the Report, we noted that while the dollar has been supported by firm commodity prices, and 
strong domestic demand, the magnitude of the recent appreciation appears to be stronger 
than historical experience would have suggested. The second major development affecting 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2007
the Canadian outlook is the weakening of prospects for the U.S. economy, and the third is a 
tightening  of  credit  conditions.  Despite  these  tighter  credit  conditions,  the  momentum  of 
domestic  demand  in  Canada  is  expected  to  remain  strong.  But  the  combined  effect  of  a 
weaker  U.S.  outlook  and  a  higher  assumed  level  for  the  Canadian  dollar  implies  that  net 
exports will exert a significant drag on the Canadian economy. Given these developments, 
the Bank revised its projection for growth. We now project Canada's gross domestic product 
to grow by 2.6 per cent in 2007, 2.3 per cent in 2008, and 2.5 per cent in 2009. 
With the economy moving back towards balance, and with the direct effect of the stronger 
Canadian dollar on consumer prices, core inflation is projected to gradually decline to 2 per 
cent in the second half of 2008. Total CPI inflation is expected to peak at about 3 per cent 
later this year and then move back down to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2008.4  
But there are a number of upside and downside risks to the Bank's inflation projection. The 
main upside risk is that excess demand in the Canadian economy could persist longer than 
projected. The main downside risk is that output and inflation could be lower if the average 
level of the Canadian dollar were to be persistently higher than the 98 cents U.S. level that 
we assumed in the Report, for reasons not associated with demand for Canadian products. 
Given recent information, both the upside and downside risks appear to be greater than they 
were when we completed the Report. 
In the Report, we said that after considering all factors, we judge that the risks to the Bank's 
inflation projection are roughly balanced, with perhaps a slight tilt to the downside. And we 
also said that we judge, at this time, that the current level of the target for the overnight rate 
is consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The Canadian and U.S. economies remain highly integrated, and there is 
every  indication  that  our  economic  ties  will  remain  strong.  But  developments  in  the  global 
economy and the growing prominence of emerging economies have important implications 
for policy-makers on both sides of the border. 
Indeed, while our economies are highly integrated, they have different structures, and they 
respond differently to shocks that are increasingly global in either nature or origin. So, it is 
important  that  policy-makers  heighten  their  focus  on  the  need  to  promote  and  enhance 
flexibility.  Our  economies  must  be  able  to  adjust  to  changing  circumstances.  If  we  are 
successful in this effort, not only will both the Canadian and U.S. economies be able to deal 
with economic shocks, but we will also be able to sustain strong economic performance in 
North America. And that is the best outcome for Canadians and Americans alike. 
                                                 
4   The projection for total CPI excludes the impact of the recently announced one-percentage-point cut in the 
federal GST, which would be effective 1 January 2008. 
BIS Review 127/2007 
 5
