Y V Reddy: Financial sector policies for growth and employment 
Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual International 
Seminar 2007, Bali, 8 November 2007. 
 Respected Soedradjad Djiwandono, Governor Abdullah, fellow Governors and distinguished 
participants, 
I am thankful to Governor Burhanuddin Abdullah for inviting me to participate in the Annual 
International Seminar 2007. We deeply appreciate the excellent arrangements, warmth and 
hospitality of Bank Indonesia. In particular, special thanks are due to Deputy Governor, Ms. 
Miranda  Goeltom.  I  also  sincerely  appreciate  the  thoughtful  selection  of  the  topics  for 
discussion during this Seminar, which are of significant contemporary relevance to all of us. 
The  role  of  financial  sector  policies  in  growth  and  employment  would  naturally  have 
significant  relationship  with  the  institutional  arrangements  for  overall  public  policy  of  the 
country  concerned.  The  framework  and  conduct  of  policy  would  also  be  specific  to  the 
country or society concerned and would vary, over time, in response to changing economic 
developments,  in  general,  and  financial  sector  developments,  in  particular.  My  comments 
today would, therefore, be confined to the Indian experience and capture the changing role of 
financial sector policies of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in the context of ongoing economic 
reforms.  
Monetary policy 
In  India,  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  have  been  clearly  enunciated  as  price  stability 
along with provision of adequate credit for productive purposes. Thus, growth as one of the 
two objectives is part of our mandate, but the relative emphasis in policy operations would 
depend upon the circumstances and is articulated from time to time. It is often said that the 
best anti poverty programme in India is maintenance of price stability since a large part of the 
work  force  is  in  the  unorganised  sector,  with  little  or  no  hedge  against  inflation.  In  recent 
years, the strong growth environment coupled with increases in prices of oil and food items 
have required added emphasis on price stability, especially inflation expectations.  
As articulated in the recent monetary policy statements of the RBI, the poor tend to reap the 
benefits of high growth with a time lag while rises in prices affect them instantly. In the short 
term, the impacts of high growth and price rises are asymmetrical between the non-poor and 
the poor, warranting a greater emphasis on price stability at this juncture of high growth for 
maintaining social accord as well as securing popular mandate for the reform process itself. 
In his welcome address, Governor Abdullah mentioned about the issue of inequalities in the 
context  of  globalisation  and  importance  of  central  banks'  commitment  to  stability  and 
conducive environment for business.  
Similarly, in regard to financial stability also, we note that most of the active participants in 
financial  markets  are  non-poor.  To  the  extent  there  are  externalities  in  terms  of  financial 
sector – both positive and, on occasions, negative – the weight for stability in our policies has 
been higher in view of limited capacity of the poor to bear risks that may occur in the real 
sector  by  virtue  of  developments  in  the  financial  sector.  The  lack  of  social  security 
mechanisms  and  public  safety  nets  in  India  are  also  relevant.  The  design  and  pace  of 
liberalisation of financial sector in India thus takes into account the due weight for stability. 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 1
Regulation and development of financial markets, institutions, technology etc. 
To enhance efficiency and stability of the financial system and thus contribute to growth and 
employment, several steps have been undertaken for widening, deepening and integrating 
financial  markets  although  it  is  “work  in  progress”.  Simultaneously,  new  processes  and 
institutional arrangements have been put in place in regard to the banking sector, deposit-
taking non-banking financial companies and systemically important non-deposit-taking non-
banking  financial  companies.  By  and  large,  these  initiatives,  in  particular  supervisory 
systems,  are  in  alignment  with  the  global  best  practices,  but  there  are  dynamic  trade  offs 
between  public  ownership  of  financial  institutions,  regulation,  financial  innovation,  etc. 
Similarly, several steps have been taken to enhance use of technology and market micro-
structures  in  the  financial  sector.  The  financial  sector  policies  are  continuously  evolving, 
essentially in a proactive manner. Medium term frameworks or vision documents have been 
formulated  in  each  of  these  areas  since  2004  and  are  being  implemented  through  a 
continuous process of consultations with market participants and industry associations (some 
of  which  were  established  with  encouragement  from  RBI).  The  thinking  as  well  as  the 
progress in actions in this regard are articulated through RBI’s Annual Policies and Mid Term 
Reviews.  
Cost of credit 
In  the  past,  as  part  of  the  pervasive  regime  of  administered  interest  rates,  banking  and 
financial institutions were providing loans on concessional terms to certain sectors and also 
certain  categories  of  borrowers,  leading  to  significant  cross-subsidisation.  The  credit 
allocation  by  banks  was  also  directed  to  many  such  sectors/borrowers  through  various 
prescriptions. The RBI had also been contributing regularly to Long-Term Operations (LTO) 
Funds to refinance industrial or agricultural development, generally on concessional terms. 
Combined  with  automatic  monetisation  of  budget  deficits  of  the  Central  Government,  such 
contributions  also  caused  significant  increases  in  primary  or  reserve  money.  This  practice 
has been gradually phased-out in the recent years as part of economic reform, on the ground 
that, in a liberalised environment, refinance institutions should expand the avenues of raising 
resources from the market. However, if any of their activities result in cross-subsidisation, we 
believe  that  the  Government  of  India  should  rightfully  bear  the  primary  responsibility  of 
providing the support. Hence, RBI support, if any, for such worthy causes should be through 
the Government of India by way of transfer of profits. Thus, while discontinuing contributions 
to the LTO Funds, net transfer of profits of the RBI as dividend has increased from about 
Rs.200 crore (Rs.2 billion) in 1992 to Rs.11,400 crore (Rs.114 billion) in 2007. 
Financial sector  reform  has  several  dimensions  and  of  particular  relevance  to  the  issue  of 
output  and  employment  is  the  cost  of  credit  and  its  availability.  Interest  rates  have  been 
deregulated to a significant degree not only to aid movement of monetary policy to the use of 
more  effective  indirect  instruments,  but  also  because  administered  interest  rate  regime 
proved to be inefficient and costly, without necessarily ensuring flow of credit to the needy. 
The  RBI’s  recommended  approach,  however,  does  not  preclude  subsidisation  by  the 
Government but, it disfavours excessive use of banking system to cross subsidise, especially 
if  it  were  to  favour  non-poor.  RBI  favours  a  financial  system  that  provides  incentives  to 
encourage  flow  of  credit  at  justifiable  terms  and  conditions  and  for  purposes  that  ensure 
servicing of interest and principal, i.e., bankability of schemes. 
There  has  been  broad  agreement  between  the  Government  and  the  RBI  on  the  above 
approach, and accordingly, subsidies on interest rates through the banking system to small 
farmers  and  small  exporters  are  currently  provided  for  a  limited  period.  There  are  several 
Government-sponsored  programmes  intended  for  the  vulnerable  sections  and  these  are 
small-sized  loans  for  which  Government  provides  subsidy,  particularly  for  employment 
generation.  Thus,  the  financial  sector,  in  particular  the  banking  system,  is  utilised  as  a 
conduit  by  the  Government’s  fiscal  policy,  to  subsidise  select  activities  or  vulnerable 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2007
sections, and RBI plays a supporting role in enabling such measures while emphasising the 
longer  term  goals  of  a  conducive  credit  culture.  The  overall  objective  remains  growth  with 
stability,  but  with  elements  of  selective  fiscal  support  for  ensuring  inclusive  and  equitable 
growth.  Currently,  the  aggregate  annual  fiscal  burden  of  subsidisation  on  account  of  the 
above measures, through the financial sector, is estimated to be about a quarter per cent of 
GDP.  
Availability and allocation of credit 
The pre-reform period was characterised by high pre-emptions, aggregating to well over fifty 
per  cent  of  bank  deposits,  through  the  prescription  of  cash  reserve  ratios  and  statutory 
liquidity ratios for banks. As part of the reform process, these rates have been progressively 
brought down and are currently close to thirty per cent – partly reflecting the current policy of 
liquidity  management.  Accordingly,  the  proportion  of  resources  available  for  credit  to  non-
governmental purposes from the banking system have thus increased substantially since the 
commencement  of  the  reform  process.  Further,  with  planned  improvement  in  revenue 
accounts of Centre and States and more normal liquidity conditions in money markets, there 
should  be  significant  further  enhancement  in  the  proportion  of  bank  funds  that  are  made 
available for financing growth and employment in private sector.  
Selective  credit  controls,  as  a  means  of  encouraging  or  discouraging  credit  flow  to  select 
sectors,  was  pervasive  during  the  pre-reform  period.  These  have  since  been  dismantled. 
However,  recently,  it  became  necessary  to  enhance  the  risk  weights  and  provisioning 
requirements for bank’s exposure to capital market, real estate, housing and consumer loans 
in  order  to  enhance  the  sensitivity  of  banks  to  the  potential  risks  arising  out  of  rapidly 
escalating asset prices. The measures, which are temporary, appear to be having desirable 
impact on credit allocation to these sensitive sectors. 
The  most  important  instrument  for  influencing  allocation  of  credit  in  the  banking  system, 
keeping  in  view  the  compulsion  of  growth  and  employment,  has  been  the  stipulation 
regarding bank’s lending to priority sector. The stipulation is that forty per cent of advances in 
the case of domestic banks (and thirty two per cent, inclusive of export advances, in the case 
of foreign banks) be lent to specified priority sectors such as agriculture, small industries etc. 
As  a  result  of  financial  sector  reforms,  there  has  been  expansion  in  lendable  resources. 
However,  during  the  reform  process,  the  list  of  eligible  sectors  for  treatment  as  “priority 
sector” was expanded to include investments in specified bonds and also activities such as 
venture capital. Several dilutions and distortions in computation of the stipulation occurred in 
the process. As a result, there had been a growing perception of inadequate flow of credit to 
the  traditionally  preferred  sub-sectors  of  priority  sector,  namely  agriculture  and  small 
industries. In order to address these concerns, a consultative and comprehensive exercise of 
review  was  undertaken  and  new  guidelines  on  priority  sector  were  issued  in  April  2007. 
Consequently, priority sector is now restricted to advances to highly employment intensive 
sectors  such  as  agriculture,  small  industry,  educational  loans  for  students  and  low  cost 
housing.  The  shortfalls  in  lending  to  the  priority  sectors  will  have  to  be,  as  in  the  past, 
deposited  with  refinance  institutions  dealing  with  agriculture  and  small  industries.  Thus, 
sectoral focus in credit flow, with emphasis on employment, is ensured through stipulations 
relating  to  priority  sector  without  necessarily  undermining  commercial  considerations  in 
banking activities.  
Sub-targets  under  priority  sector,  along  with  other  guidelines  including  those  relating  to 
Government sponsored programmes, are used to encourage flow of credit to the identified 
vulnerable  sections  of  population  such  as  scheduled  castes,  religious  minorities  and 
scheduled tribes.  
The accelerated growth in the Indian economy has benefited several States, but there are a 
few where credit deposit ratios of the banking system are observed to be low. It has become 
necessary to identify unique problems for each State for expanding banking facilities to such 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 3
lagging States and formulate area specific action plans for accelerated financial deepening. 
These plans are drawn up with full participation of State Governments, banks and other local 
developmental  agencies.  Such  plans  have  already  been  drawn  up  for  Uttaranchal,  North 
Eastern States, Himachal, Jharkhand, Andaman & Nicobar and Bihar. There is enthusiasm 
among banks in view of expanding business opportunities and significant support from State 
Governments which see a synergy. RBI plays a catalyst, as well as a coordinating role, in 
these initiatives of growing co-operation between the States and the banking system. In fact, 
the  RBI  has  played  active  role  in  States’  debt  management,  treasury  management, 
management  of  Consolidated  Sinking  Fund,  transparency  in  budget,  computerisation  of 
Government accounts and enactment of legislation on fiscal responsibility. The relationship 
between  the  RBI  and  the  States  is  based  on  mutual  trust  and  is  in  recognition  of  the 
credibility of the RBI.  
An important component of these state-specific action plans, in some cases, have been the 
scope  for  expanded  role  of  non-governmental  organisations  and  other  microfinance 
agencies. Banks, under the overall guidance of NABARD, play an active role in promoting 
micro-finance,  especially  in  view  of  the  recently  approved  innovative  approaches,  such  as 
business correspondence models. 
An area of concern has been the concentration of bank branches in metropolitan areas to the 
detriment  of  semi  urban  and  rural  areas.  To  mitigate  this  problem,  since  2006,  opening  of 
new branches for any bank is approved by RBI only on condition that at least half of such 
new branches are opened in under-banked areas as notified by RBI. Many banks now find 
that the branches in semi-urban and rural areas are also commercially viable.  
It is useful to note that the policy preferences of RBI in the banking sector, which are aimed 
to address issues of targeted allocation of credit and penetration of banking services have 
not  adversely  affected  the  improvements  in  accounting  practices,  reduction  in  non-
performing assets and improvements in profitability as well as capital adequacy. It is useful to 
note that the valuation of bank stocks, of both public and private sector, are improving while 
foreign  banks  gather  a  fast  increasing  proportion  of  their  global  profits  from  Indian 
operations.  
Beyond credit: financial inclusion  
In the reform process that commenced in 1992, the reform of financial sector was early in the 
cycle. The first stage of the process concentrated on elimination of financial repression which 
was followed by greater marketisation of financial sector and changes in regulatory regime, 
consistent  with  global  standards.  The  process  strengthened  financial  sector,  improved 
efficiency,  imparted  stability  and  facilitated  impressive  growth,  withstanding  several  global 
and  domestic  shocks.  The  next  phase  clearly  was  to  ensure  what  may  be  termed  as 
democratisation  of  financial  sector.  The  process  which  was  commenced  two  years  ago 
aimed  at  ensuring  hundred  per  cent  financial  inclusion.  The  process  of  financial  inclusion 
consists of seeking each household and offering their inclusion in the banking system. The 
main features of the approach involve “connecting” people with the banking system and not 
just  credit  dispensation;  and  using  multiple  channels  such  as  civil  service  organisations, 
NGOs, post offices, farmers’ clubs, panchayats, MFIs (other than NBFCs), etc. as Business 
Facilitators  /  Correspondents  to  expand  the  outreach  of  banks.  Further,  a  decentralised 
approach  is  adopted  which  is  state  /  region  specific,  and  has  close  involvement  and 
cooperation between the respective State Governments and banks.  
Information technology is critical to minimising transaction costs. The Government’s on-going 
massive  programme  of  rural  employment  and  pension  payments  etc.  can  be  implemented 
with minimal transaction costs by recourse to financial inclusion through I.T. Several districts 
have already been covered under total financial inclusion and a process of evaluation and 
feedback is underway. RBI is encouraging and aiding the process.  
4 
 BIS Review 131/2007
The  importance  of  financial  inclusion  for  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  was 
expressed  eloquently  by  Governor  Tito  Mboweni  in  the  13th  C.D.  Deshmukh  Memorial 
Lecture on 2nd November 2007 in the following words : 
"Then,  there  is  the  added  concern  that  the  unequal  distribution  of  wealth  brings  with  it  a 
tension between the haves and the have-nots. Under these circumstances, the broadening of 
access to financial services becomes an important policy objective. It is well recognised that 
the financial inclusion of the lower echelons of society into the financial sector is a powerful 
contributory factor to poverty alleviation through, for example, the provision of microfinance. 
As the demand for consumer finance increased, a greater range of financial instruments are 
needed and the financial sector will need to adapt." 
A beginning has been made to enhance financial literacy and impart financial education to 
enable vast numbers of new entrants into employment and higher incomes to better manage 
their finances in a rapidly marketising financial sector. Informed choices are preferred in the 
interests of the individual customers as also the financial system as a whole. In view of the 
surge in retail loans, especially consumer durables, and attendant debt-servicing problems 
for many, a beginning has been made in the establishment of credit counselling centres as a 
non-profit activity, by some banks. 
Institutional reforms 
There was no banking crisis or currency crisis since reforms commenced in 1992. However, 
it  was  observed  that  some  scheduled  commercial  banks  had  inadequate  capital;  several 
urban cooperative banks were bankrupted and rural cooperative credit system deteriorated 
significantly.  Corrective  steps  have  been  taken  in  recent  years.  The  institutional  reform  of 
scheduled  commercial  banks  reinforced  governance  standards  and  witnessed 
the 
disappearance  of  all  who  could  not  meet  the  capital  adequacy  standards.  But,  the  credit 
needs of vast section of population, especially of unorganised sector, traders, rural areas are 
best  met  by  revival,  restructuring  and  revamping  of  what  may  be  termed  as  community 
based banks. Rural areas, particularly in backward regions, are sought to be better served by 
restructuring  an  institutional  mechanism,  namely  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs).  A  special 
programme for the revival of rural cooperatives has been launched with close involvement of 
RBI, NABARD, Government of India and State Governments with a possible fiscal support to 
the tune of about 0.50 per cent of GDP. These reforms are considered essential to cater to 
the gaps in services by scheduled commercial banks, not only in banking but in other related 
services including forex for current account, insurance products, etc.  
Innovative  mechanisms  through  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  RBI  and  the 
State  Governments  to  overcome  issues  of  dual  control  and  ensure  better  co-ordination, 
which  were  found  to  be  successful  when  adopted  for  re-vamping  the  urban  co-operative 
banks, have also been adopted in the ongoing programme of revival of the rural cooperative 
system. 
Beyond deregulation and competition 
As the reform progressed, it was assumed that deregulation and competition would enhance 
efficiency and ensure better than before quality of service at reasonable but competitive cost 
to  the  customers.  However,  while  many  improvements  have  taken  place,  entirely  as 
expected, several adverse features in regard to retail customers were noticed particularly in 
respect  of  a  few  banks.  Apart  from  issues  of  appropriate  pricing,  instances  of  unequal 
contracts,  unfair  trade  practices,  non-transparent  fees,  intrusion  into  privacy,  excessive 
penalties, delays in cheque-clearing, arbitrary revision of interest rates or equated monthly 
instalments, usurious interest charges in some cases and excesses by loan recovery agents 
have  been  noticed  warranting  several  institutional,  policy  and  procedural  interventions  by 
RBI. A delicate balance between competing considerations is needed but to the extent banks 
BIS Review 131/2007 
 5
have special privileges, the regulator who has granted such privileges has a responsibility to 
ensure  financial  deepening  and  widening  in  an  efficient,  fair  and  equitable  manner.  RBI 
considers delicate balances of these considerations to be critical for both growth of financial 
sector and a meaningful contribution of financial sector to growth and employment. 
to  State  Governments 
Latest initiatives 
The RBI’s Mid-Term Review of Annual Policy Statement, October 30, 2007, refers to some 
new initiatives that are worth noting. First, an internal working group has been constituted to 
consider recommendations made by a Committee on Agricultural Indebtedness (Chairman : 
Dr.  R.  Radhakrishna).  Second,  recommendations  of  a  Technical  Group  (Chairman  :  S.C. 
Gupta)  on  improving  the  legal  and  enforcement  framework  relating  to  money  lenders  was 
forwarded 
the  National 
Commission  for  Enterprises  in  the unorganised sector (Chairman : Dr.  Arjun K. Sengupta) 
submitted  a  comprehensive  report  to  the  Central  Government.  A  working  group  is  being 
constituted  to  study  those  recommendations  which  relate  to  the  Indian  financial  system. 
Fourth, it is proposed to review the working of lead bank scheme and related arrangements 
of  coordination  between  RBI,  banks,  NABARD,  State  Government  at  the  state  and  district 
levels.  The  review  of  these  institutional  arrangements  for  development  oriented  banking 
would help design a new framework reflecting not only the new orientation such as financial 
inclusion,  financial  literacy  and  credit  counselling,  but  also  increasing  demands  of  rapidly 
growing economy led by domestic investment, domestic consumption and export demand. 
for  appropriate  consideration.  Third, 
Concluding remarks 
To conclude, our experience shows that financial sector policies and instruments need to be 
constantly  rebalanced  to  respond  not  only  to  financial  markets,  prices  and  overall  stability 
considerations but also to developments in real sector, in particular trends in growth across 
sectors, regions and sections of population. Such a comprehensive but dynamic approach to 
development of the financial sector enhances contribution of financial policies to growth and 
employment while maintaining stability. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 131/2007
