Erkki Liikanen: A European social model – an asset or a liability? 
Remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the World Political Forum 
(founded by Mr Mikhail Gorbachev), Budapest, 27 November 2007. 
 Introduction  
1.  
To  begin  with,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  the  Single  European  Social  Model.  Owing  to 
historical reasons and differences in local circumstances, social models differ considerably 
across Europe.  
Nevertheless,  there  are  broadly-shared,  characteristically  European  values,  such  as 
solidarity  and  social  cohesion.  There  is  also  the  recognition  that  market  forces  can 
sometimes  result  in  outcomes  that  are  not  in  keeping  with  these  values.  Consequently,  a 
vast  majority  of  Europeans  share  the  conviction  that  the  state  should  promote  equality  of 
opportunity and come to the assistance of those most in need.  
Some argue that, while laudable, these European values are no longer compatible with the 
harsh  realities  of  the  modern  world  –  a  world  that  is  characterized  by  ever  intensifying 
competition brought on by globalization. Indeed, we can find examples in Europe that show 
how some features of a traditional welfare state have acted as a drag on economic growth.  
So, is the distinctly European combination of social values and economic policies a thing of 
the past, a promise that can no longer be fulfilled? Or is it possible to reconcile it with the 
forces of globalization without stifling economic dynamism? In short: can a European social 
model continue to be an asset or has it become a liability?  
These are questions I will try to address in the remainder of my remarks.  
Characteristics of the Nordic model  
2.  
In  recent  years,  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  different  European  social  models  have 
received increasing attention as all European countries have sought to find ways to cope with 
the challenges brought on by globalization.  
Much of the attention has focused on a perceived tradeoff between equality and efficiency. 
As exceptions to the rule that these should be conflicting goals, the Nordic countries have 
often  been  mentioned.  The  Nordic  model  has  attracted  considerable  interest  because  it 
seems  to  have  been  able  to  combine  –  also  in  the  past  decade  –  a  high  level  of  social 
protection and egalitarian income distribution with high economic dynamism.1
So,  does  the  Nordic  model  really  offer  a  way  to  reconcile  the  European  ideals  with  the 
demands of the global economy? To answer this question, we need to look more closely at 
the Nordic experience.  
Actually, the Nordic economies are quite different from each other – both in terms of their 
resource  endowment,  as  well  as  their  industrial  structure.  Moreover,  the  Nordic  countries' 
labour market and welfare policies are not uniform.  
                                                 
1   See, for example, Sapir, André (2005); "Globalization and the Reform of European Social Models", Bruegel 
Policy Brief, Issue 2005/1. Sapir divided the EU-15 countries into four groups based on their efficiency and 
equity: the Mediterranean model (low equity and low efficiency); the Continental model (high equity and low 
efficiency); the Anglo-Saxon  model (low  equity and  high  efficiency);  and the Nordic  model (high equity  and 
high efficiency). In reality, the groupings are far from being homogenous. Sapir included in his Nordic model 
Denmark, Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands. The two non-EU Nordic countries, i.e., Norway and Iceland, 
also fit the description of the Nordic model. 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 1
At  the  same  time,  the  countries  share  some  characteristic  features  that  constitute  the 
essence  of  the  Nordic  Model.  These  include:  a  large  government  sector,  high  tax  rates, 
generous social protection and highly compressed wage structures.  
The standard economics text books teach us that such features generally distort incentives 
for efficient resource allocation.  
This notwithstanding, during the past decade the Nordic (EU) countries have achieved higher 
growth rates than the advanced European countries on average. Moreover, the Nordics have 
been able to achieve high employment combined with macroeconomic stability.  
Does this mean that the economics textbooks are wrong and that incentives and markets do 
not really matter that much? The answer is a resounding no.  
In fact, the strong macroeconomic performance in the Nordic countries owes a lot to policies 
that are well in line with recommendations of mainstream economics.2
• 
Openness  to  competition.  Substantial  product  market  deregulation  has  helped 
underpin  economic  growth  in  the  Nordic  countries.  This  deregulation  took  place 
earlier  than  in  most  other  European  countries  and  the  level  of  product  market 
regulation in the Nordics is low by European standards. There have been reforms to 
enhance  competition  also  by  addressing  rigidities  of  the  labour  markets,  although 
such reforms have been more gradual and subtle.  
Sound macroeconomic policies. Public finances in the Nordics are in better shape 
than in most other European countries. Disciplined fiscal policy has contributed to an 
environment in which consumers and businesses can plan for a longer term. Sound 
monetary  policies  have  also  been  instrumental  in  supporting  growth,  even  though 
their  role  in  explaining  the  relative  performance  of  the  Nordics  is  limited  since 
stability-oriented monetary policies have become increasingly widespread.  
Strong  and  transparent  institutional  framework.  An  institutional  environment  in 
which contracts can be enforced and property rights can be established promotes 
economic  growth.  Increasingly,  all  European  countries  share  such  an  institutional 
environment. However, what sets apart the Nordic countries is the transparency and 
integrity  of  their  public  sector,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  these  countries 
consistently  score  well  in  surveys  that  measure  the  degree  of  public  sector 
corruption.3  
  Part  of  the  strong  economic  performance  in  the  Nordic  countries  can also  be  attributed  to 
luck – both bad and good.  
• 
As  for  the  bad  luck,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  sharp  economic  downturns 
experienced by the Nordics in the early 1990s were a blessing in disguise. This is 
because  they  gave  impetus  to  structural  reforms  and  disciplined  macroeconomic 
policies that ushered in a strong recovery from the recessions.  
As for the good luck, e.g. Finland and Sweden have been lucky to have been in the 
vanguard of the mobile phone technology during its explosive growth phase.  
                                                  
2   For a more comprehensive assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the "Scandinavian Model", see 
e.g. Chapter 4 in the EEAG Report on the European Economy 2007, prepared by the European Economic 
Advisory Group at CESifo. 
3   For instance, Denmark and Finland shared the top ranking, and all the Nordic model countries were in the top 
ten,  in  Transparency  International's  2007  Corruption  Perception  Index  that  looks  at  perceptions  of  public 
sector 
See: 
http://www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2007. 
corruption 
territories. 
countries 
and 
180 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2007
3.  
Digging deeper – the importance of education and openness to change and 
new ideas  
So,  good  policies,  sound  institutions  and  some  luck  go  far  in  explaining  the  strong 
performance  of  the  Nordic  countries.  However,  by  digging  a  bit  deeper,  we  can  see  also 
other common features that have played a crucially important role. These include: emphasis 
on education and openness to change and new ideas.  
The  Nordic  countries  share  a  long-tradition  of  emphasising  the  importance  of  education. 
Nowadays, the share of the working age population with upper-secondary education, as well 
as  tertiary  education,  is  considerably  higher  in  the  Nordic  countries  than  in  the  other  EU 
countries on average. Moreover, the participation rates for non-formal job-related continuing 
education and training are exceptionally high in the Nordic countries.4  
The Nordic economies have benefited from a well-educated labour force. The skilled labour 
force  has  contributed  to  a  rapid  diffusion  of  information  and  communication  technologies, 
thus  contributing 
favourable  productivity  developments.  Moreover,  human  capital 
accumulation,  together  with  high  spending  on  Research  and  Development,  has  fostered 
innovation.  
Another characteristic strength of the Nordic countries has been their general willingness and 
ability  to  adapt  to  changing  circumstances.  Undoubtedly,  this  partly  reflects  their  relatively 
small  size,  but  it  seems  that  education  has  in  several  ways  smoothed  the  process  of 
adjustment.  
• 
to 
First, a well-educated electorate has underpinned political systems which have been 
able  to  produce  pragmatic  policies  that  have  helped  in  adapting  to  a  rapidly 
changing world. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit’s democracy index, the 
Nordic  countries  (plus  the  Netherlands,  which  is  often  considered  a  Nordic  model 
country) are the most democratic countries in the world.5  
Second,  education  has  enabled  these  countries  to  tap  into  the  full  pool  of  human 
potential and has contributed to the absence of rigid social classes. Reflecting this, 
the  Nordic  countries  are  among 
term  of 
intergenerational  income  mobility.6  The  Finnish  experience  with  comprehensive 
school  reform  suggests  that  ensuring  a  sound  basic  education  for  the  entire 
population promotes social mobility by creating an equality of opportunity.7 A society 
with  a  well-educated  labour  force  will  also  be  able  to  adjust  to  a  changing 
environment.  
the  most  mobile  societies 
in 
 Finally,  in  this  “information  age”,  we  need  to  recognize  the  crucial  role  of  information. 
Information  technology,  e.g.,  as  measured  by  the  degree  of  "wiredness"  and  density  of 
mobile  phones,  helps  in  global  competition.  However,  even  more  important  is  the  free 
competition of ideas and ideologies. Here relevant metrics include the freedom of the press 
                                                 
4   See e.g., OECD (2007), Education at a Glance, Paris. 
5   See 
The  world 
The  Economist 
2007, 
in 
http://www.economist.com/media/pdf/DEMOCRACY_INDEX_2007_v3.pdf. 
Intelligence  Unit’s 
index 
of 
democracy. 
6   See  e.g.,  Generational  Income  Mobility  in  North  America  and  Europe,  edited  by  Miles  Corak,  Cambridge 
University Press, November 2004. 
7   Pekkarinen, T., Uusitalo, R. and Pekkala, S. (2006), "Education Policy and Intergenerational Income Mobility: 
Evidence from the Finnish Comprehensive School Reform, The Institute for Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion 
Paper No. 2204. 
BIS Review 139/2007 
 3
or newspaper circulation per capita – both measures that place the Nordic model countries 
near the top in global rankings.8  
I would like to say a few more words about free competition of ideas and ideologies. It seems 
that  this  aspect  of  society  is  nowadays  often  ignored  when  discussing  determinants  of 
economic growth. Perhaps the recent spectacular rise of some emerging market economies 
that are, at best, flawed democracies, has led some observers to downplay the importance of 
freedom in ensuring the long-term prosperity of societies.  
The  causality  between  democracy  and  prosperity  may  run  both  ways.  However,  a  well-
functioning democracy becomes even more vital to economic growth as a country becomes 
more  prosperous.  This  is  because  the  richer  countries  need  to  rely  primarily  on  "smart 
growth",  that  is,  increasing  total  factor  productivity  through  innovation  and  technological 
change, while the poorer ones can grow robustly for long periods merely by imitating more 
advanced countries and adding more inputs of labor and capital.9  
So,  going  back  to  the  Nordic  model:  what  are  the  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  Nordic 
experience? Clearly, we see the importance of sound macroeconomic policies and structural 
reforms  that  promote  competition.  An  even  more  fundamental  lesson  is  the  central  role  of 
high-quality  public  institutions,  in  particular  the  schooling  system,  in  supporting  both 
economic growth and a democracy that is open to new ideas and change.  
Challenges for Europe  
4.  
How  should  these  lessons  be  applied  to  some  of  the  most  pressing  challenges  that  are 
common to all European countries? I will look at two challenges that are of vital importance: 
globalization  and  population  ageing.  The  responses  to  these  challenges  will  have  an 
important bearing on the future of European social models.  
Globalization & rapid technological change  
The end of the cold war ushered in the current rapid phase of globalization. More than any 
other individual, our host and the founder of the World Political Forum, Mikhail Gorbachev, 
deserves credit for ending the Cold War.  
Globalization  has  underpinned  an  exceptionally  long,  strong  and  broad-based  economic 
expansion.  The  strong  growth  in  emerging  market  and  developing  countries  is  finally 
reducing  the  number  of  people  living  in  extreme  poverty,  and  the  gap  between  average 
incomes  of  developing  and  developed  countries  is  narrowing.  These  are  most  welcome 
developments.  
Also Europe has benefited greatly from robust global growth. At the same time, the forces of 
globalization pose difficult challenges for the European social models.  
Globalization  and  more  rapid  changes  in  technology  are  separate  but  closely  related 
phenomena.  Globalization  reduces  barriers  and  implies  restructuring  and  relocation  of 
economic activities to take advantage of new technologies and comparative advantages.  
                                                 
8   For data on press freedom, see: Reporters without Borders, Annual Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2007. 
http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=24025,  and  for  data  on  newspaper  circulation  per  capita,  see: 
NationMaster.com 
Statistics) 
http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/med_new_cir_percap-media-newspaper-circulation-per-capita. 
UNESCO 
(original 
Institute 
source 
for 
9   For  an  interesting  discussion  of  determinants  of  growth  in  countries  at  different  levels  of  development,  see 
Baumol, W.J., Litan, R.E. and Schramm, C.J. (2007) "Good Capitalism, Bad Capitalism, and the Economics of 
Growth and Prosperity", Yale University Press, or Eichengreen, Barry and Leblang, David (2006) "Democracy 
and globalization", NBER Working Paper 12450. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2007
This implies accelerated change and a less predictable operating environment. In such an 
environment,  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  are  particularly  essential  as  they 
reduce the overall uncertainty faced by consumers and companies alike and thus allow them 
to see signs of change and make well-informed plans for a longer term.  
Globalization  and  technological  innovation  threaten  the  status  quo  and  raise  calls  for 
protectionism.  Such  calls  must  be  resisted.  Shielding  companies 
from  competition 
undermines  their  long-term  viability.  Thus  the  long-term  success  of  European  companies 
calls  for  more,  not  less,  competition.  Also,  protectionism  will  not  stop  technological 
innovation. History teaches us that a luddite refusal to accept technological advances is not a 
viable option.  
Having  said  this,  we  must  recognize  and  tackle  the  difficult  problems  associated  with 
globalization.  Two  problems  stand  out.  First,  globalization  brings  with  it  painful  economic 
dislocation, and many people lose their jobs. Second, technological advances tend to lead to 
higher dispersion of income.  
Governments  can  and  should  play  an  active  role  in  easing  the  pain  of  dislocation.  Social 
safety  nets  are  needed  to  cushion  economic  dislocation  in  a  rapidly  changing  world. 
However, they must not support unviable structures and practices. Instead, the safety nets 
should be designed in a way that encourages people to adapt and seek new challenges.  
Also, a higher dispersion of income should not be allowed to become so entrenched that it 
erodes  the  equality  of  opportunity.  Here,  tax  policies  need  to  play  a  role  in  levelling  the 
playing field. However, above all, the equality of opportunity must be ensured through access 
to education.  
Let me say a few more words about education.  
Europe  has  a  rich  and  long  tradition  in  science  and  innovation.  Indeed,  Europe  is  the 
birthplace of scientific inquiry. And, it is fitting that some of the most influential scientists of 
the 20th century, John von Neumann and Leó Szilárd, men whose contributions ushered in 
the computer and nuclear age, hailed originally from our host city Budapest.  
This tradition provides a solid foundation to build on. High-profile joint undertakings such as 
CERN  can  play  an  important  role  in  pooling  European  resources  to  advance  basic  or 
fundamental  research.  Such  endeavours  can  also  spawn  unexpected  by-products.  For 
instance, the World Wide Web came to being at CERN.  
However,  even  more  important  than  large  European  projects,  is  that  we  put  in  place 
conditions that allow and encourage private companies and public sectors to embrace new 
technologies. This means that we need to equip all European citizens with the skills that they 
need to cope with the rapidly changing world.  
Population ageing requires increasing public sector efficiency  
In  general,  large  public  sector  employment  tends  to  crowd  out  employment  in  the  private 
sector, thus distorting the allocation of labour input in the economy.  
Similarly, a large public sector can be a drag for productivity growth. Even though it is difficult 
to measure productivity in the public sector, in aggregate terms it appears to be lower than in 
the rest of the economy and in particular in the open sector, and grows more slowly.  
The question of how to minimise these negative aspects of a large public sector, becomes all 
the  more  pressing  with  an  ageing  population.  In  Finland  we  face  the  most  rapidly  ageing 
population,  so  these  are  no  longer  hypothetical  questions  but  a  reality  that  policymakers 
must deal with today.  
The demand for welfare and health services increases as the population grows older, and at 
the same time, the room for financing extra expenditure by higher taxation is limited because 
of an already high level of taxation and increasing tax competition.  
BIS Review 139/2007 
 5
How can we ensure that the public sector in general and welfare services in particular can 
adapt?  
One way, the applicability of which varies from case to case, is to expose part of the public 
services  to  private  competition.  Another  way  is  to  focus  on  measuring  performance  of  the 
public sector and put in place appropriate incentives to respond to change.  
The  public  sector  needs  also  to  be  more  responsive  to  its  "customers"  needs.  Too  often 
bureaucracies forget that they ultimately exist for the benefit of their customers.  
The customer-oriented approach is not only essential for ensuring efficient delivery of public 
services.  But,  perhaps  more  importantly,  the  public  sector  also  needs  to  be  responsive  to 
customers' needs in order ensure its legitimacy and support of the electorate.  
Public  services  need  to  provide  a  good  match  with  the  preferences  of  a  median  voter. 
Without  such  a  match,  the  funding  base  of  the  public  sector  (taxes)  will  inevitably  start  to 
erode. This could lead to a vicious circle that would be difficult to reverse.  
Conclusions  
5.  
So, what is the answer to the question that I posed at the beginning, i.e., is the European 
Social  model  an  asset  or  a  liability?  As  is  often  the  case  in  real  life,  the  answer  is:  "it 
depends".  
Namely,  in  a  rapidly  changing  environment  any  static  model  is  likely  to  become  a  liability. 
Indeed, economic systems are so complicated that no single policy prescription can ensure 
rapid  and  sustainable  growth  over  the  long  run.  Therefore,  it  would  be  helpful  to  shift  the 
focus from copying particular "models" to analysing what structures are needed to support 
successful and adaptable approaches.  
I  have  attempted  to  do  so  by  examining  the  experience  of  the  Nordic  countries.  This 
experience suggests that it is possible to combine economic dynamism with a system that is 
consistent  with  the  core  European  values.  The  key  lesson  to  be  drawn  from  the  apparent 
success of the Nordics is the importance to ensure that both the private sector and public 
policies are capable of adapting to changing circumstances. 
To sustain a social system that is in keeping with the core European values, we need the 
following, mutually reinforcing three pillars:  
• 
• 
• 
There is no silver bullet. However, as I have argued, an active and open civil society plays a 
crucial role in keeping all these three pillars strong.  
Going forward, European values of solidarity and social cohesion will be tested by centrifugal 
forces  arising  from  globalization,  rapid  technological  advances  and  population  ageing. 
Nevertheless, they should continue to guide policy choices also in the future.  
Ensuring that these values are truly reflected in European social models will require many 
painful decisions, and we must be mindful of the dangers of populism. This calls for a frank 
and  honest  political  discourse  that  recognizes  the  benefits  and  downsides  of  globalization 
and other forces that shape the future. This, combined with a well-educated electorate, press 
freedom, and a culture of transparency provide a powerful antidote against populist policies.  
I see some similarities between the current rapid phase of globalization and the European 
integration  process  triggered  by  the  Treaty  of  Rome  50  years  ago.  Both  imply  changes  in 
many  old  structures,  both  bring  benefits.  There  are  also  differences:  in  the  integration 
process, the benefits accrued automatically to EU countries, but globalization does not imply 
a competitive private sector exposed to free competition;  
sound and transparent institutions; and  
an efficient and responsive public sector.  
6 
 BIS Review 139/2007
such  automaticity.  The  benefits  of  globalization  are  spread  wider  among  the  global 
community and European countries are not guaranteed winners.  
To survive and thrive in the global competition, Europe needs to regain its self-confidence 
and be an open society. Europe must not be focused on preserving structures; it needs to 
embrace change in order to preserve its core values.  
BIS Review 139/2007 
 7
