Toshihiko Fukui: Developments in economic activity and prices and the 
Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Nagoya, 3 December 2007.  
 Introduction 
Today, I would like to explain the Bank of Japan's view regarding developments in economic 
activity and prices and the basic thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy. In addition, I 
would like to touch upon the issues currently facing Japan's financial system.  
The current situation and the outlook for economic activity and prices 
I.  
I would first like to talk about the current situation and the outlook for economic activity and 
prices.  
Japan's  economy  as  a  whole  has  continued  to  expand  moderately,  although  the  pace  of 
improvement  in  the  household  sector  has  remained  slow  relative  to  the  strength  in  the 
corporate sector. At the end of October, we released the Outlook for Economic Activity and 
Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), and presented the projection through fiscal 2008. The 
gist  of  the  Outlook  Report  is  that  although  there  are  uncertainties  regarding  overseas 
economies and global financial markets, Japan's economy is likely to continue its sustained 
expansion under price stability. In terms of the rate of real GDP growth, we projected that this 
is likely to register around 2 percent on average, somewhat higher than the potential growth 
rate. I would now like to elaborate on the mechanisms that form the basis for the outlook as 
well as some associated risk factors.  
Within the corporate sector, exports have remained on the increase, reflecting the widening 
base of continuing world economic growth. Business fixed investment is likely to keep rising 
steadily,  supported  by  high  corporate  profits.  The  rate  of  growth  is,  however,  likely  to  be 
lower than it was up until fiscal 2006, since capital investment has continued to increase at a 
rapid pace for the last several years.  
The positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector has been feeding through into 
the  household  sector  slowly  but  steadily.  With  the  number  of  employees  rising,  employee 
income has been increasing moderately, and growth in household income has continued to 
be  further  supported  via  various  other  channels,  for  example,  increased  dividends. 
Meanwhile,  wages  have  been  somewhat  weak  recently,  reflecting  labor  cost  restraint  by 
firms in the face of greater exposure to global competition and capital market discipline, and 
increased  materials  prices.  The  change  in  the  composition  of  the  workforce  due  to  the 
retirement of the high-salaried baby-boomer generation and increases in part-time workers 
has also contributed to the weakness in wages. However, given the further tightening of labor 
market conditions and firms' growing sense of labor shortage, upward pressure on wages is 
expected  to  increase  gradually.  Against  this  background,  private  consumption  is  likely  to 
follow a moderate upward trend.  
In assessing wages and other flows of income from the corporate to the household sector, 
business conditions at small firms are especially relevant because small firms account for a 
large share of Japan's total employment. Since its inception, the current economic expansion 
has coincided with continued progress in globalization, and thus there has been disparity in 
business  conditions  depending  on  the  extent  of  involvement  with  economies  abroad. 
Recently  released  surveys  indicate  that  business  sentiment  at  small  firms  is  weakening. 
Factors behind this include the deterioration in small firms' terms of trade, resulting from the 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 1
surge in materials prices, and the fact that production remained virtually flat in the first half of 
2007.  Although  production  has  been  increasing  since  the  summer,  future  developments  in 
business conditions at small firms continue to warrant attention.  
Regarding  prices,  while  the  domestic  corporate  goods  price  index  (CGPI)  has  been  rising 
mainly due to higher international commodity prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI,  excluding  fresh  food)  has  remained  at  around  0  percent.  This 
seems to reflect the fact that fierce competition due partly to progress in deregulation has not 
allowed firms at the retail level to pass increased materials prices on to consumers to the 
extent that has been possible at the wholesale level. Looking ahead, however, as economic 
growth is expected to continue at a rate somewhat higher than the potential growth rate, the 
level of utilization of resources, namely in labor and production capacity, should rise further, 
and unit labor costs (labor costs per unit of output) are likely to stop falling. Given this, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is likely to be around 0 percent 
in the short run, but is expected gradually to rise in the longer run. 
Positive and negative deviations 
II.  
As  I  have  outlined,  the  scenario  we  consider  the  most  likely  is  that  Japan's  economy  will 
continue its sustained expansion with a virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and 
spending in place. However, it should be noted that such projections are always subject to 
upside and downside risks, which warrant close attention.  
The first risk concerns developments in overseas economies. In the United States, housing 
investment  has  been  decreasing,  and,  with  inventory  levels  high,  the  correction  in  the 
housing  market  is  expected  to  continue  for  a  while.  Banks  are  becoming  increasingly 
cautious  in  extending  loans  in  view  of  disruptions  in  financial  markets  due  to  subprime 
mortgage  problems.  Nevertheless,  to  date,  other  parts  of  the  economy  seem  not  to  have 
been  harmed  significantly,  and  private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  are 
continuing  their  moderate  upward  trend,  although  the  pace  of  increase  is  decelerating. 
Employment has also continued increasing. Given these developments, it seems likely that 
the U.S. economy will register relatively low growth rates in the short run but will eventually 
realize a soft landing and move toward sustainable growth. However, if the correction in the 
housing market intensifies or the negative effects of disruptions in financial markets become 
unexpectedly widespread, private consumption and business fixed investment may fall below 
expectations through negative wealth effects, credit tightening, and deterioration in business 
and  consumer  sentiment,  thereby  leading  to  further  deceleration  in  U.S.  economic  growth. 
Meanwhile,  the  European  economy  has  continued  to  expand,  but  the  possible  adverse 
effects  on  financial  conditions  of  global  financial  market  disruptions  may  pose  a  downside 
risk. If downside risks related to the U.S. and European economies were to materialize and 
have significant adverse effects, growth in other parts of the world may be hampered and this 
could cause global economic growth to be weaker than expected.  
At  the  same  time,  attention  should  also  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  inflation,  since  the  world 
economy,  taken  as  a  whole,  has  been  expanding  at  a  rapid  pace.  In  the  United  States, 
underlying  inflationary  pressures  do  not  seem  to  have  subsided,  reflecting  continued  high 
levels of resource utilization as well as developments in crude oil prices. In China, with signs 
of  overheating,  especially  in  fixed  asset  investment,  economic  growth  and  inflation  may 
exceed expectations. Meanwhile, given the currently elevated prices of crude oil and grains 
such  as  wheat  and  soybeans,  possible  shifts  in  international  commodity  prices  may  also 
influence the outlook for the global economy and the price situation.  
In global financial markets, disruptions due to subprime mortgage problems have continued 
to be observed. In the United States and Europe, the functioning of markets for securitized 
products  has  deteriorated  significantly,  while  money  markets  are  still  in  the  process  of 
recuperating. Stock prices and foreign exchange rates have been unstable across the world. 
The  recent  volatility  in  global  financial  markets  seems  to  reflect  a  reversal  of  the  previous 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2007
laxity in risk evaluation that had developed during the long period of benign economic and 
financial conditions. This adjustment is therefore expected to require some time to work itself 
out, and during the process financial institutions will have to bear a certain amount of losses. 
Still,  there  is  a  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  how  the  global  economy  will  be  influenced  by 
future developments in global financial markets and conditions at financial institutions.  
If  such  disturbances  to  overseas  economies  and  global  financial  markets  should  indeed 
materialize, Japan's economy may be adversely influenced through, for example, changes in 
exports  and  imports,  corporate  profits,  and  financial  market  conditions.  Attention  should 
continue to be paid to this potential risk.  
The  second  risk  concerns  possible  larger  swings  in  financial  and  economic  activity  under 
continuing  accommodative  financial  conditions.  In  terms  of  their  impact  on  Japanese 
financial conditions, the adverse effects of subprime mortgage problems and the consequent 
volatility in global financial markets have so far been limited: the lending attitude of financial 
institutions has been positive; and the issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds has 
continued  to  be  favorable.  Meanwhile,  with  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions 
continuing, there is a risk of a misallocation of resources in the long run as agents become 
over-extended  in  financial  markets  or  pour  funds  and  other  resources  into  inefficient 
economic  activities.  Such  behavior  may  push  up  economic  growth  and  asset  prices  in  the 
short run, but lead to later downward adjustments and hamper the sustainability of economic 
growth. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III.  
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based on the above-mentioned assessment of economic activity and prices.  
As I have just said, Japanese financial conditions have been extremely accommodative, and 
if Japan's economy is to follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability, the level of 
interest  rates  is  to  be  raised.  We  have  no  predetermined  view  regarding  the  timing  or  the 
pace of increase in interest rates, and will determine these in light of our assessment of the 
future path of the economy and prices and its likelihood, as well as a careful consideration of 
both  upside  and  downside  risks.  Our  outlook  suggests  that  Japan's  economy  will  realize 
sustainable growth under price stability. But still, we need to examine the likelihood of this 
scenario. We are also aware of the importance of examining risk factors that may influence 
the outlook, and in this respect we should not focus merely on immediate downside risks, but 
should be attentive to both upside and downside risks. It is vital for monetary policy to adopt 
a  wide-ranging  perspective  that  takes  due  account  of  the  various  factors  influencing 
economic activity and prices. This is something we bear in mind in our efforts to ensure the 
appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
Issues facing Japan's financial system 
IV. 
As the last topic of my speech today, I would like to touch upon the recent volatility in global 
financial markets and its implications for Japan's financial system.  
As subprime mortgage problems have intensified and become more widespread in financial 
markets abroad, the impact on Japanese financial institutions has been gradually increasing 
and  is  greater  than  originally  expected.  For  instance,  the  decline  in  the  market  value  of 
investment products has resulted in losses at some Japanese financial institutions, and some 
financial  institutions  have  posted  losses  from  revaluation  on  unsold  products  arranged  as 
part of their overseas securitization business. However, since Japanese financial institutions' 
exposure to credit markets is relatively small, it seems that so far each financial institution or 
financial group is able to absorb losses incurred sufficiently within its earnings for the period 
or its buffer capital. We will keep our eyes on developments in U.S. and European financial 
BIS Review 142/2007 
 3
markets, but it currently seems unlikely that this particular problem will pose any significant 
threat to the stability of Japan's financial system.  
Based on the assessment I have just made, let me now turn to current issues relating to risk 
management by market participants.  
First, market participants, including financial institutions, need to assess the risks pertaining 
to financial products more precisely.  
It cannot be denied that the current disruptions in financial markets are due partly to lax risk 
assessment  by  market  participants  caught  out  by  the  rapid  expansion  of  markets  for 
securitized  products  as  well  as  the  increased  market  penetration  of  complex  financial 
products  whose  riskiness  is  difficult  to  assess.  Innovative  new  financial  products,  in 
particular, have only a limited amount of accumulated historical data, for example on price 
fluctuations, and they also have complex risk profiles and relatively low market liquidity. For 
this  reason,  market  participants  should  seek  to  quantify  risks  as  accurately  as  possible, 
subject to very strict stress testing, and should then conduct appropriate risk management 
accordingly.  
Second,  market  participants  should  further  involve  themselves  in  enhancing  market 
transparency.  
As  seen  in  recent  events,  once  a  significant  shock  has  occurred,  the  market  as  a  whole 
tends  to  suffer  anxiety  and  it  can  take  some  time  for  the  proper  functioning  of  financial 
markets  to  be  restored.  Furthermore,  market  reaction  seems  to  become  larger  where 
financial  products  traded  incorporate  more  advanced  financial  technologies.  From  the 
viewpoint of minimizing market over-reactions and facilitating the prompt recovery of market 
functioning,  initiatives  by  market  participants  to  further  enhance  information  disclosure  are 
highly desirable. Greater market transparency could be achieved, for instance, through the 
disclosure  by  financial  institutions  of  the  outstanding  amounts  of  their  investments  and 
information concerning their profits and losses, as well as the provision by rating agencies of 
detailed information relevant to credit ratings.  
I would like to emphasize that we do not view the recent development of financial markets, 
especially for securitized products, in a negative light. Risk diversification using new financial 
products has broadened the range of participants in financial markets, and has contributed 
significantly to the growth of the world economy. The problem has been that the techniques 
to  assess  and  manage  the  associated  risks  have  not  kept  up  with  the  pace  of  product 
innovation.  What  we  need  is  to  improve  those  techniques.  At  the  Bank  of  Japan,  we  will 
continue  to  closely  monitor  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  to  assess  their 
implications for the Japanese financial system. At the same time, we will study and analyze 
in  greater  depth  the  various  risk  management  issues  I  have  discussed  today,  and  so 
contribute to the enhancement of risk management by Japanese financial institutions. 
Closing remarks 
Amid  intensifying  global  competition,  Chubu,  which  has  an  industrial  sector  that  is  highly 
competitive at the international level, has been pulling the Japanese economy forward. I feel 
confident that the Chubu region will make use of the advanced technological expertise it has 
built up to take advantage of new business opportunities, and to enjoy further breakthroughs. 
I believe this will in turn lead to the sustained and dynamic growth of Japan's economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 142/2007
