Krzysztof Rybiński: Rapid credit growth in converging economies – the 
challenges ahead 
Closing remarks by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, 
at the National Bank of Poland International Conference of Central Bankers and Economic 
Educators  “Monetary  Policy  Challenges  Resulting  from  the  Rapid  Credit  Growth  in 
Converging Economies”, Warsaw, 23 November 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We have now come to the end of the conference on “Monetary Policy Challenges Resulting 
from  the  Rapid  Credit  Growth  in  Converging  Economies”,  and  it  is  my  honour  to  provide 
some concluding remarks. Over the last two days, we have been discussing opportunities, 
challenges and problems related to the rapid credit expansion in Central and East European 
(hereafter:  CEE)  economies  that  find  themselves  in  a  convergence  process  towards  more 
advanced EU member states. In the following, let me briefly summarize the main conclusions 
that emerge from all the presentations and discussions. 
Before I proceed, I would like to thank you all for attending this conference, especially the 
speakers and discussants for their valuable contributions. Most of all, I would like to thank 
central  bank  governors  from  our  region:  Ms  Júlia  Király,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Magyar 
Nemzeti  Bank,  Mr  Andres  Sutt,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia,  Mr  Sławomir 
Skrzypek, President of the National Bank of Poland, and Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the 
Czech  National  Bank,  for  enriching  this  conference  with  their  presence  and  their  views. 
Without any doubt, the distinguished economists and practitioners who have actively taken 
part in this conference have been its most valuable asset. 
 Turning to the rapid credit growth that has been observed in CEE economies over the past 
years,  the  first  question  that  comes  to  an  economist’s  mind  is  the  following:  do  these 
developments pose a threat to the macroeconomic stability of the countries of interest? In 
order to answer that question, one has to ask another: what forces have been the decisive 
factors behind the rapid credit expansion? Several papers presented at this conference have 
sought to provide answers to these questions. 
One approach, followed by the papers1 presented in the first session, has been to estimate 
the equilibrium rate of credit growth and check whether the actual growth has been below or 
above that equilibrium path. The decomposition of credit growth into a convergence and a 
boom component has shown that for most of the CEE economies, the former component has 
been  dominant,  i.e.  the  rapid  credit  expansion  can  to  a  large  extent  be  attributed  to  a 
continuous  improvement  in  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  the  initial  low  credit 
volume  in  these  countries.  However,  there  are  notable  differences  across  the  region:  the 
Baltic states (especially Latvia and Estonia) and South-East European countries (especially 
Croatia and Bulgaria) seem to have approached or even reached the equilibrium by 2004 or 
2005,  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  Visegrad  countries  (especially  the  Czech  Republic  and 
Poland)  the  credit-to-GDP  ratio  seemed  to  remain  below  its  estimated  equilibrium  level  at 
that  time.  Of  course,  it  might  well  be  that  some  of  the  CEE  economies  have  overshot  the 
                                                 
1   Kiss, G., Nagy, M., Vonnák, B.: Credit Growth in Central and Eastern Europe: Trend, Cycle or Boom?, MNB 
Working Paper No. 2006/10, November 2006 and Egert, B., Backé, P., Zumer, T.: Credit Growth in Central 
and Eastern Europe: New (Over)Shooting Stars?, ECB Working Paper No. 687, October 2006. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
equilibrium  only  recently,  but  one  has  to  wait  for  a  while  until  the  relevant  data  become 
available before this overshooting can be captured in empirical analyses. 
The general upshot of these papers is that the rapid credit expansion in CEE economies has 
mainly  been  fuelled  by  demand  factors:  the  buoyant  economic  growth  and  the  ensuing 
increases in disposable incomes, rising expectations with regard to future income prospects 
related to EU accession, remarkable decreases in interest rates, and falling or low and stable 
inflation rates. A similar message emerges from two papers presented in Session 3, which 
have scrutinized the factors that contributed to the very rapid credit expansion in the specific 
cases of Romania2 and Lithuania3, and from the World Bank report4 presented in Session 6, 
which  provides  a  detailed  overview  of  the  recent  credit  developments  in  all  ten  new  EU 
member states from Central and Eastern Europe. While stressing the demand factors that 
have fuelled the expansion of credit to the private sector, these papers also point out that the 
supply  side  has  played  a  role  too:  the  boost  in  credit  volume  was  made  possible  by  the 
privatisation of banks, deregulation of financial systems, and the deepening of the financial 
markets in the region. 
Both  the  above-mentioned  World  Bank  report  and  the  paper5  prepared  by  International 
Monetary Fund staff, also presented in Session 6, were aimed at identifying vulnerabilities 
and risks that might threaten the financial stability of CEE countries. The former concludes 
that these countries vary rather widely with regard to the sustainability of the credit growth. 
While the largest new EU member states seem to be still on the safe side, the Baltic states 
and, to a lesser extent, the emerging economies of South-Eastern Europe probably witness a 
credit boom that leads to significant macroeconomic imbalances and might ultimately end in 
a crisis. These conclusions reinforce the findings of the papers presented in Session 1, which 
I have discussed before, that the Baltic states and the South-East European economies have 
probably already reached or even overshot the equilibrium level of credit to GDP. 
The  paper  prepared  by  IMF  economists,  in  turn,  addresses  the  issue  of  sustainability  by 
focusing on capital flows. Within a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, it analyses 
the short- and mid-term risks arising from the opening up to capital flows and alleviating of 
credit  constraints  for  the  case  of  a  small  converging  economy.  Both  papers  prepared  by 
economists  from  international  financial  institutions  and  presented  in  Session  6  offer 
recommendations for policymakers in such economies, which can reduce vulnerabilities and 
risks  in  the  face  of  rapid  credit  growth.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  crucial  that 
macroeconomic  policies  do  not  add  to  the  existing  demand  pressures  –  tightening  fiscal 
policies is often a must-do – and that steps are taken to strengthen the health of the financial 
system.  This  can  be  achieved  by  tightening  regulatory  measures,  raising  prudential 
standards and enhancing supervisory coordination and cooperation, as well as by supporting 
a  better  understanding  of  financial  risks  by  the  general  public,  e.g.  by  means  of  public 
awareness campaigns. 
Similar policy recommendations follow from another paper6 prepared by IMF staff, which was 
presented  in  Session  2  and  sought  to  identify  the  features  that  distinguish  “good”  credit 
                                                 
2   Neagu, F., Mărgărit, A., Copaciu, M., Racaru, I. Mircea, R., Andrassy, A.: Non-Government Credit in Romania: 
Perspectives and Implications, National Bank of Romania, Occasional Paper No. 4, June 2006. 
3  Ramanauskas,  T:  Interest  Rates,  Credit  and  Macroeconomy  –  a  Small  Structural  Model  for  the  Lithuanian 
Case, mimeo, November 2006. 
4   World Bank EU8+2 Regular Economic Report, Special Topic: Credit Expansion in Emerging Europe: A Cause 
for Concern?, January 2007. 
5   Bems,  R.,  Schellekens,  P.:  Finance  and  Convergence:  What's  Ahead  for  Emerging  Europe?,  IMF  Working 
Paper No. 07/244, November 2007. 
6   Barajas,  A.,  Dell’Ariccia,  G.,  Levchenko,  A.:  Credit  Booms:  the  Good,  the  Bad,  and  the  Ugly,  mimeo, 
November 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
booms  from  “bad”  ones,  i.e.  such  that  probably  eventually  lead  to  a  banking  crisis.  The 
analysis  has  shown,  inter  alia,  that  better  banking  supervision  lowers  the  probability  of  a 
crisis. It has also established that booms that coincide with current account imbalances seem 
less  dangerous  (a  finding  that  may  seem  counter-intuitive  at  a  first  glance),  that  trade 
openness is another factor that makes a crisis less probable, and that the more prolonged 
booms as well as those accompanied by high inflation or slow economic growth are the “bad” 
ones. 
Another important topic raised during the conference was housing. This is hardly surprising 
given that housing loans constitute the larger part of credit extended to households. Now that 
the  world  economy  is  trying  to  shrug  off  the  consequences  of  the  liquidity  crisis  of  late 
summer and falling house prices in America, the question as to how sound housing finance 
in converging CEE economies really is has become substantial. A reassuring answer to that 
question  comes  out  of  the  analysis  in  a  paper7  presented  in  Session  4,  which  focuses  on 
house prices in the CEE economies. The analysis has shown that the very rapid house price 
increases  in  our  region  have  generally  been  based  on  fundamental  factors:  a  boost  in 
housing  demand  due  to  rising  per  capita  GDP,  falling  real  interest  rates  and  demographic 
factors, coupled with the rapid development of housing markets and housing finance, virtually 
non-existent in the era of central planning. All in all, the house price inflation in the region 
seems to reflect a process of relatively fast convergence to a new equilibrium. 
Again, however, the question remains open whether that new equilibrium has already been 
reached  or  perhaps  even  overshot  in  some  economies,  and  whether  the  rapid  growth  in 
mortgage loans that is a natural consequence of the housing boom can be safely described 
as sustainable. Experience has taught us that rapid credit growth cannot be ignored even if it 
reflects nothing more than a convergence process, as it usually means that loans have been 
extended to households with ever lower margins. Another paper8 presented in Session 4 has 
focused on the changes in the margin of households who repay loans (the margin is defined 
as  the  difference  between  disposable  income  and  basic  living  costs  as  well  as  debt 
repayment  costs)  for  the  case  of  Poland.  Although  the  average  margin  has  not  declined 
despite the rapid credit growth in recent years, stress tests have shown that households that 
repay debt are rather vulnerable to adverse financial and real shocks. Specifically, economic 
slowdown, monetary policy tightening or financial market turbulence would each bring about 
a  reduction  in  the  households’  average  margin  and  cause  a  non-negligible  percentage  of 
households  to  fall  into  a  negative  margin.  This  would  probably  lead  to  a  deterioration  of 
banks’ asset portfolio – a result that cannot be ignored by monetary policymakers and bank 
supervision authorities. 
Another result that is of high relevance to monetary policy is the substitution effect between 
domestic  and  foreign  currency  denominated  loans,  which  has  been  the  focus  of  a  paper9 
presented  in  Session  2.  The  high  percentage  of  foreign  currency  indebtedness,  mostly 
mortgage  debt,  that  can  be  observed  in  many  CEE  economies  shows  that  domestic  and 
foreign  currency  loans  are  treated  as  close  substitutes  in  these  countries.  As  households 
generally do not hedge against foreign exchange risk, their debt servicing burden rises when 
the home currency depreciates. Admittedly, depreciation of CEE currencies has hardly been 
an issue in the recent past; the currencies in the region have either stable exchange rates 
(when these are pegged) or tend to appreciate (when the exchange rate regime allows it). 
However,  concerns  remain  that  under  such  conditions,  domestic  monetary  policy  cannot 
                                                 
7   Égert, B., Mihaljek, D.: Determinants of House Prices in Central and Eastern Europe, BIS Working Paper No. 
236, September 2007. 
8   Zajączkowski, S., Żochowski, D.: Housing Loans Growth, Foreign Currency Risk and Supervisory Response: 
the Polish Case, mimeo, November 2007. 
9   Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.,  Chmielewski,  T.,  Niedźwiedziska,  J.:  Substitution  between  Domestic  and  Foreign 
Currency Loans in Central Europe, mimeo, November 2007. 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
effectively control the growth of credit due to the substitution effect: monetary tightening at 
home  does  not  lead  to  a  slowdown  of  total  credit  growth,  but  rather  to  increased  foreign 
currency indebtedness. The analysis in the paper has identified the existence of this effect in 
the case of three largest CEE economies. 
Generally, most papers presented and discussed over the last two days have stressed the 
necessity of prudential supervision of the banking system in the face of a credit boom. Even 
though financial deepening and capital inflows bring about long-term benefits that can hardly 
be overstated, in the short to medium run they can lead to imbalances and distortions that 
pose a threat to the macroeconomic stability of a country. We have recently seen how badly 
lax lending and improper credit risk management can end in developed countries. In the case 
of converging economies, which are generally more financially vulnerable than fully-fledged 
market economies, it is all the more important to closely monitor risks to the financial system, 
enhance cooperation between financial institutions and supervisory authorities, and impose 
prudential constraints on lending. 
 The  ideas  that  I  have  summarized  so  far  were  expressed  in  the  papers  prepared  and 
presented  by  economists  from  academia,  central  banks,  and  international  financial 
institutions.  We  have  also  heard  important  voices  of  top  commercial  bank  executives  and 
central  bank  governors  during  the  panel  that  has  just  ended.  Household  credit,  and 
mortgages  in  particular,  will  remain  an  important  source  of  revenues  and  profits  for 
commercial  banks.  At  the  same  time  central  bankers  and  banking  sector  supervisors  will 
likely watch credit developments very closely to make sure that best lending practices are in 
place.  
In  closing,  I  would  again  like  to  thank  you  all  for  attending  the  conference.  I  would  like  to 
thank the organizing committee and the NBP staff for their excellent work. I hope to meet you 
again at another conference organized by the National Bank of Poland. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2007
