Savenaca Narube: Contemporary leadership and human resources 
management  
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
inaugural Convention of the Fiji Human Resources Institute, Suva, 21 September 2007. 
 Salutation 
The President of the Fiji Human Resources Institute; 
Executive Members; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning. I am honoured to be invited as a speaker at this inaugural Convention of the 
Fiji Human Resources Institute. I extend my sincere apology to the President, the Executive 
Members of the Institute and the participants for not being able to speak to you in person this 
morning. I was really looking forward to the opportunity. However an unforeseen commitment 
has required that I travel abroad. 
I commend and congratulate the members of the Institute for taking this timely and important 
initiative to firstly, establish the Institute and secondly, to mount this Convention. The theme 
is extremely relevant – Our People, Our Future, Our Destiny. I wish you well in your pursuit 
to develop Fiji’s human resources. I wish this Convention all success. I also hope that this 
will become an annual event. 
I  speak  to  you  on  the  topic  of  “Contemporary  Leadership  and  Human  Resource 
Management”. As you will appreciate, the topic is very broad and far-reaching. Leadership 
itself  is  a  comprehensive  issue  and  one  can  talk  on  it  for  the  entire  conference.  Human 
Resource Management is also a very wide topic in itself. I accepted the invitation to speak on 
this  topic  because  I  fully  support  this  Convention.  However,  it  was  not  an  easy  choice 
because the topic, wide as it may, is also somewhat outside my direct area of expertise. I 
would not pretend for a minute that I know the answers to many of the complex issues of 
leadership and HR Management. I would therefore confine my comments this morning to my 
personal experiences and observations on corporate leadership and how HR Management 
fits into it. Moreover, I would anchor these two issues in the context of change that we are 
experiencing locally and globally. 
Change 
Let  me  talk first  about  change.  Change  is  everywhere  these  days.  Corporations  are  being 
restructured.  Processes  are  being  re-engineered.  Management  is  being  reformed.  Entire 
economic sectors and industries are being deregulated. No country can stand in the way of 
trade liberalisation. Preferential trade arrangements are being torn down. There is an active 
move towards regional integration. In my view, Fiji cannot resist the pressure to integrate into 
the global economy.  
Globalisation is of course the major driver of these changes that are happening or still need 
to  happen  locally.  Competition  in  this  rather  hostile  environment  is  the  key.  If  you  cannot 
compete, you perish. Survival is paramount. 
Leadership and HR Management are therefore evolving in response to these changes. How 
do  you  lead  a  firm  to  financial  and  economic  success  under  these  conditions?  To  me  the 
answer is simple – your human capital holds the key. It is also the answer to globalisation 
and  competitiveness.  Even  with  the  state-of-the-art  machines  and  the  best  processes, 
without  a  performing  HR,  the  firm  will  struggle.  But  sadly,  as  we  all  know,  improving  the 
performance  of  our  people  is  perhaps  the  hardest  thing  to  do  in  the  universe.  A  host  of 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 1
factors need to converge to get the people loving what they do and doing the best that they 
can. Leadership and HR Management are at the heart of this pursuit for better performance. 
Leadership 
Leadership  has  generated  a  lot  of  discussions  and  research  over  time.  I  see  numerous 
books on leadership advocating different types of models. One of the books on leadership 
that I read recently puts it rather interestingly that “The secret to leading people and living 
and working with them is found in the space between their ears”. The book went on to 
explain  that  leadership  is  all  about  training  people  to  think.  There  is  a  lot  of  truth  in  what 
Buddha  once  said  that  “What  we  think  we  become”.  Other  leadership  models  advocate 
leadership  by  principles,  servant  leadership  and  others.  But  there  are  some  traits  of 
leadership that are common to all these models and we come across many of these in our 
careers. I will come back to these common areas later. 
Leadership  has  evolved  over  the  years.  Many,  many  years  ago  physical  labour  was 
predominant  and  the  leadership  model  was  more  like  “just  do  what  I  say”.  There  was  a 
comment back then that when you come to work leave your brain at home! Management was 
supreme. You just do what you are told – no questions asked. 
Things  have  of  course  significantly  moved  on  from  that  master-servant  model.  The 
computers  have  taken  over  the  mundane  routine  work.  Internet  is  here.  In  this  modern 
climate, the coercive leadership model in my view no longer works. Why? I think that one of 
the  major  reasons  is  that  workers  are  now  better  educated  and  better  informed  than  they 
were  then.  They  are  also  more  independent.  They  know  that  they  can  take  alternative 
options. The global job market has opened up. The modern leadership style needs to attend 
to these factors. Leaders not only need to be knowledgeable, they now need to lead a very 
knowledgeable team. 
Talking about leadership also brings up debates on issues such as: Are leaders made, or are 
they born? My view is that they can be both. While a leader can be born, they can sharpen 
those  talents  through  proper  training  and  experience.  Leadership  is  also  situational.  For 
example, good war time leaders do not necessarily transcend to good peace time leaders. 
Attributes of leadership 
Let me now return to the attributes of leadership which no doubt many of us know. 
In my experience, passion has a lot to do with good leadership. Passion is sometimes not 
well understood. To me, before becoming passionate one must do two things: 
1. 
First, you must know your destination. You cannot be passionate about processes. 
Computers do that these days. Rather, you must be passionate in getting to where 
you  want  the  organisation  to  be.  It’s  the  Vision.  It’s  the  future.  I  came  across  a 
recent  quote  from  a  Mr  Ted  Levitt  which  puts  this  very  well  that  “The  future 
belongs to people who see possibilities before they become obvious”. 
The second thing one must do is to know when you have arrived at that destination. 
It is very difficult to be passionate about getting somewhere when you do not even 
know  when  you  have  arrived.  Measurement  and  information  are  therefore  critical. 
Someone once said that you cannot achieve what you cannot measure. 
2. 
With these two prerequisites you can then get excited about your Vision and be passionate 
with  it.  You  must  become  personally  convinced  and  confident  that  you  will  get  there. 
Moreover, you must display your commitment and confidence, not only most of the time, but 
at all times – particularly when things are not looking bright. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2007
Leaders must not lose sight of the bigger picture. Do not allow the details to bog the vision 
down. One thing that staff in the Reserve Bank will tell you, is that I take every opportunity to 
preach  our  Vision  and  remind  them  of  the  bigger  picture.  I  do  this  when  I  meet  our  new 
recruits. I do the same thing at every address I give to Team RBF. Mind you, details do have 
a place and a time to deal with them. But I find that it is more rewarding if you challenge your 
team to work these details out themselves. 
I find that leaders must continuously stretch the boundaries of the corporate space and get 
your  team  out  of  their  comfort  zone.  When  you  challenge  the  status  quo  you  get  very 
interesting answers. The most common one I have come across is that this is what we have 
been doing for years. Only when they are out of their comfort zone would they be inspired. 
Inspiration is the pinnacle of personal victory. I fully subscribe to a quote by a Richard Florida 
that says: “People do not need to be managed, they need to be unleashed”. 
Related to this stretch targets is the situational leaders that I mentioned earlier. Sometimes it 
is  relatively  easier  to  lead  when  things  are  rosy.  But  leaders  are  challenged  most  when 
things are tough. The saying that “When the going get tough, the leaders get going” is 
very appropriate. When the situation is tough, tough decisions needs to be made and there is 
a  high  premium  on  being  level-headed,  keeping  emotions  under  control  and  being  an 
optimist. For instance in this current crisis, I have been stressing to Team RBF that we need 
to stay sharply focused on our Vision and to be absolutely professional on how we approach 
our work. 
Times  are  obviously  tough  in  Fiji  now.  Our  biggest  economic  challenge  is  to  maintain 
external financial stability at a time when the economy is declining. Without financial stability, 
the country will be in a much precarious position. I always stress to my colleagues that we 
have an important national mandate to keep at the Reserve Bank. Therefore, the Bank had 
to take decisive and proactive steps to protect our financial position. Over the last four years, 
the Bank had raised interest rates, reduced liquidity and tightened exchange controls. One 
thing we can be sure about is that raising interest rates and tightening exchange controls are 
never going to be popular. But unfortunately they are necessary. Long term stability is always 
superior to unsustainable short term gains. We try as much as we can to tell the public why 
we do the things we do and I am pleased to say that our policies appear to be taking effect. 
Foreign reserves are holding up well. 
Another  book  on  leadership  emphasises  that  good  leaders  are  those  that  teach  others  to 
lead themselves. At the end of it all, the team itself says that they did it themselves. I am a 
firm believer of this principle. Danny Cox in his Employees Handbook on Leadership quotes 
“The ultimate reward for a leader of people is to be able to say, “I saw someone grow 
today, and I helped.”  I  believe  that  the  ultimate  challenge  for  us  leaders  is  to  be  able  to 
effectively grow our people and being able to say, I helped someone grow today. When a 
leader has trained two or three people who are able to take over his or her job, in my view, 
he or she is an excellent and successful leader. 
Inspiration and purpose are clearly the foundation upon which employees look for in a leader. 
They look for a leader that brings inspiration and meaning to their work. We spend more time 
at work than with the family. Do our workers enjoy coming to work everyday? The answer of 
course will not be all yes. But if you can get the majority to be saying that they love to go to 
work each day, I think you are doing better than most. I am always stressing to my team that 
relationship  is  the  most  important  issue  at  the  work  place.  Leadership  is  all  about 
relationship. Values play a critical role. At the top of my list of Values is Respect for each 
other  irrespective  of  levels  of  seniority.  In  the  Bank,  we  have  adopted  five  values  and 
professionalism and respect are two of them. 
A leader is also solution focused. A common challenge that I usually pose to my colleagues 
is  that  they  should  not  only  come  to  me  with  problems  but  also  solutions.  I  do  not  hold  a 
monopoly on solutions. That always gets them thinking. An interesting side effect is that the 
problems started declining. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 3
Human Resources Management 
Let me now turn to Human Resources Management – HRM. Over time reference to “human 
resources” has evolved. 
It started with the word “labour”. Economist will tell us that labour is one of the three factors 
of production – the other being land and capital. But obviously this is rather a technical label 
of people. 
The reference quickly shifted to “administration” that deals with the management functions of 
staff such as recruitment, compensation and evaluation. This was obviously the first attempt 
to introduce some “human” recognition of the resources. It then evolved into “personnel” and 
then  “human  resources”.  More  recently  it  has  changed  yet  again  to  “intellectual  or  human 
capital”. 
When I look at the evolution of these references to people, there are two things that strike 
me: 
First – there is a growing understanding that we are dealing with people rather than physical 
assets. Only people have intellect or emotions not machines or financial assets. 
Second  –  there  is  more  appreciation  that  we  are  dealing  with  capital.  The  term  “human 
capital”  reflects  the  notion  that  we  must  grow  this  “capital”  by  investing  in  capacity  and 
relationship building. 
How does HRM fit into good leadership? 
They are connected by people like you and me. HR deals with people. Leadership deals with 
people. How often do we hear the phrase that people are our most valuable assets? As I 
said  before,  people  are  the  key  to  achieving  our  Vision.  As  HR  professionals,  your  work 
centres on people. You motivate people to bring out their very best. 
In the world of work today, leaders are recognising the contribution and importance of HRM 
in  an  organisation.  HR  professionals  are  being  regarded  as  strategic  partners,  employee 
champion, administrative expert and agent of transformation and are assuming broader roles 
in  overall  organisational  strategy  formulation  and  policy  development.  Therefore  HR 
professionals are now required to have a much broader range of skills. You are required to 
have some business sense, follow economic and financial logic, possess IT skills and even 
be  a  counsellor.  The  HR  Manager  of  the  twenty  first  century  is  required  to  go  beyond  the 
traditional function and task and become involved in more strategic responsibilities. 
Values 
I  talked  earlier  on  about  values.  As  HR  professionals,  one  of  your  roles  is  to  help 
management  inspire  everyone  in  your  organisations  to  walk  the  talk  on  corporate  values. 
These values must filter down to all aspects of the organisations. We try to do this in a few 
ways in the Reserve Bank. Firstly, we try to gauge from the interviews the possible alignment 
of  the  interviewees  to  our  organisational  values.  Secondly,  we  induct  our  new  recruits  on 
these  values  as  soon  as  they  enter  the  organisation.  Thirdly,  we  have  established  a 
mentoring  system.  Fourthly,  we  have  now  integrated  the  organisational  values  with  the 
formal  recognition  and  reward  system  of  the  Bank.  Alignment  to  these  values  now 
determines the rewards that one will receive at year end. 
Respect and recognition 
It is very obvious from the surveys and feedbacks that our people want to be treated with 
respect. They want to feel that they are valued. They want to feel that they are recognised for 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2007
their  contributions.  We  have  found  that  non  monetary  incentives  inspire,  just  as  much  as 
monetary  rewards  do  –  a  pat  on  the  back,  a  nod,  a  handshake,  a  staff  notice  an 
achievement, special announcement, a thank you note, a signed certificate and so forth. We 
are trying to avoid recognition systems that create competition and comparisons and in turn 
are destructive to the values of our business. 
Human Resources Management capacity 
There  is  an  obvious  and  urgent  need  to  build  capacity  in  HR  in  Fiji.  A  survey  by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers has identified a huge skill gap in this area. Therefore, the setting 
up of the Institute and this Convention are excellent contributions to this capacity building. In 
addition, I am told that HRM is taught in our local universities from Diploma, Degrees and 
even at Masters level. The Institute is also contributing to this capacity building. I understand 
that FHRI holds seminars, workshops and panel discussions or talanoa sessions to allow the 
sharing  of  HR  information  among  members.  FHRI  allows  membership  not  only  to  those 
already in a HR profession, but to students of HR as well. I understand that a Professional 
Development  and  Recognition  Model  or  grading  system  that  recognises  members’ 
qualifications and competencies is being developed by FHRI and is due to be implemented 
by 2008. The benefit for such a model is that it will raise the profile of HR practioners and 
support  professional  accreditation  and  public  recognition.  I  also  encourage  the  Institute  to 
undertake academic research on HRM topics. I urge the Institute to continue and expand on 
these training initiatives and they deserve our full support. 
Professional standard 
Let  me  briefly  say  something  on  professional  standards.  We  in  the  Reserve  Bank  as  the 
financial  supervisor  develop  a  lot  of  these  standards.  I  suppose  that  the  Institute  will  also 
need to do the same. 
A study in 2000 of HR professionals in five US HR-related organisations concluded the need 
for HR professional standards as: 
• 
   Integrity  
To practise the profession with high levels of loyalty, integrity and fairness 
Legality  
To respect individual rights and obey all laws 
Proficiency 
To maintain and improve professional competence 
Professional loyalty 
To support the profession and not misuse professional affiliations for personal 
business gains 
Confidentiality 
To respect the confidentiality of privileged information 
    I would also like to urge the Institute to create and maintain a database on the global best 
practices of HR development and to share these widely in Fiji. 
Conclusion 
I  wish  to  conclude  by  saying  that  nothing  of  what  I  have  said  today  is  profound  wisdom. 
Rather, they really are common sense. What I believe is the key to putting all these together 
is the team spirit that will help propel behaviours and attitudes towards the desired direction 
in our organisations. Building this team spirit must of course start from the top. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 5
On building this team spirit, I urged my Team RBF staff earlier this year that although the 
country  was  going  through  difficult  times,  this  was  not  the  time  for  the  Bank  to  be  pulling 
apart because of different philosophies. This is not the time to take sides. On the contrary – 
this is the time for working together and keeping to our Vision of Leading Fiji to Economic 
Success. 
I wish to leave you with the thought that we need to build this team spirit at the national level. 
We need a Vision. From an economic viewpoint, such a Vision could be the prosperity for all 
the communities. National leadership will need to build this nation as a team. They should 
call for goodwill, hard work and commitment. As a nation of people working together, I am 
confident that we will come through as we had done in the past. 
I  again  wish  the  Convention  every  success  and  trust  that  you  will  have  a  fruitful  and 
rewarding day of discussions. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 108/2007
