Radovan Jelašić: Serbia’s economy – on the right track 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the 7th Serbian 
Economic Summit, Belgrade, 15 October 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I guess there is no “free dinner” for a central banker, let alone a free lunch. And though we as 
central bankers traditionally tend to be more cautious than anybody else, trust me, there is 
no reason for you not to enjoy the rest of your evening! 
The National Bank of Serbia is run by a young management team that strongly believes in 
the “invisible hand of the market” and focuses on the medium and long term objectives only, 
despite  a  wide  mixture  of  different  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  followed  in  our 
region. 
Since  the  very  beginning  of  the  transition  process,  namely  since  October  2000,  we  have 
been  hearing  our  politicians,  scholars  and  economists  speak  of  the  advantages  of  the 
currency board or pegging our currency to the euro or even embarking on full euroization as 
opposed to the free-floating of the exchange rate and active use of monetary policy in order 
to achieve price stability. Recent developments, however, have taught us that all praised and 
hailed examples are very much short-lived, as inflation under the currency board regime is 
rising,  e.g.  9.3%  in  Bulgaria  year-on-year  and  10.2%  in  Latvia,  while  even  Montenegro  is 
facing the challenges of a resurging inflation which reached 4.2% during the first 8 months 
with euro as legal tender! I hope that Mr. Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European Central Bank will allow me to quote from his speech given exactly two weeks ago 
in which he emphasized the very same argument that I would like to share with you tonight! 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  quote  “To  give  you  a  striking  example  of  macroeconomic 
performance depending on the underlying exchange rate regime, the countries with hard peg 
regimes  have  recently  experienced  a  very  rapid  catching-up  process,  with  cumulative  real 
GDP growth standing on average at 18% in the past two years, which is almost twice as fast 
as  the  growth  rates  observed  in  the  countries  with  flexible  regimes.  To  some  extent,  this 
might  also  reflect  the  fact  that  the  income  level  in  the  fixed  exchange  rate  countries  is  on 
average  still  somewhat  lower  compared  with  the  countries  with  flexible  rates.  Likewise, 
inflation in the countries with hard peg exchange regimes was almost one and a half times 
higher  in  the  past  two  years  compared  with  the  countries  with  flexible  regimes.  The 
macroeconomic and financial developments in the CEE countries are puzzling in the sense 
that  they  are  neither  in  line  with  economic  theory,  and  nor  do  they  reflect  the  empirical 
findings  that  are  usually  observed  in  other  catching-up  economies,  including  the  cohesion 
countries in the 1990s.” 
As far as the recent use of policies is concerned, he pointed out four of them, namely fiscal 
policy, structural policy, supervisory and prudential policy and, last, but not least, monetary 
and the exchange rate policy. As far as monetary and exchange rate policies are concerned, 
he  stated  the  following:  “The  ultimate  question  for  a  country  is  which  monetary  policy  and 
exchange rate regime is best suited to ensuring a fast and stable convergence process. Let 
me stress at this point that the relevant question to discuss is not a general discourse about 
the pros and cons of fixed versus flexible exchange rates – we should not try to apply this 
more  academic  debate  to  the  central  and  eastern  European  countries  as  a  whole.  In  the 
same vein, I also do not buy the opposing argument that I hear from time to time, namely that 
rushing into the euro would solve all the problems experienced by the central and eastern 
European  countries.  Rather,  the  relevant  question  to  ask  is  whether  any  exchange  rate 
system is better suited for a country to cope with the country-specific challenges arising from 
real convergence. Obviously, this can only be assessed on a country-by-country basis.” 
BIS Review 117/2007 
 1 
Of course, I am pointing this out for a very good reason. Serbia operates with a) a floating 
exchange rate – for some people even too much “floating” and b) an active monetary policy – 
for  some  even  “overly  active”  or  better  to  say,  too  expensive,  which  is  in  my  view  a  very 
relative  term.  Despite  daily  criticism  of  monetary  policy  costs  and  uncertainties  regarding 
exchange rate developments, we will remain firm in our commitment because we know that 
our way is the right one in the medium and long run! Needless to say, it feels good to get 
confirmation from abroad, specifically from the ECB, that we are on the right track. 
At no time in the history of Serbia and Yugoslavia was the exchange rate floating more freely 
than it is today. Direct involvement of the central bank is limited to a daily calculation of the 
medium exchange rate based exclusively on transactions among commercial banks. This is 
how we have been calculating the exchange rate day-by-day since March this year, and the 
last  time  the  NBS  was  active  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  was  5  months  ago!  Yes,  I 
admit that I also had the “fear of floating”, which was widely present in Serbia, but we have 
done it just the same and done it successfully!  
There is probably no country in the world where more professors of monetary policy are now 
denying  their  own  profession  and  what  they  have  been  teaching  for  years  than  in  Serbia. 
Almost  every  day  we  hear  comments  such  as:  “monetary  policy  can  not  solve  all  the 
problems  without  the support  of  fiscal  policy”,  “central  bank  should  give  in  and  not  pursue 
price stability by using only monetary policy”, and ” monetary policy cannot be successful in a 
euroized country” etc. But look at the results: despite elections that imply fiscal expansion, 
despite  drought  and  the  historically  record  high  oil  prices,  we  have  made  good  on  our 
promises and implemented a monetary policy that works in Serbia! Core inflation is down to 
3.4%  year-on-year  and  our  inflation  target  set  in  August  2006  for  this  year  at  4  –  8%  will 
probably be at the level of 4 to 4.5% at the end of this year.  
But  the  boundaries  of  monetary  policy  must  be  expanded  even  further  if  we  want  it  to  be 
more  efficient:  a)  the  government  needs  to  think  and  act  more  in  terms  of  dinars  than  in 
terms  of  euros,  including,  in  particular,  the  issuing  of  denationalization  bonds  in  dinars  as 
almost  all  regular  budgetary  receipts  are  in  dinars  and  there  is  no  reason  to  increase 
currency risk exposure of the budget any further; b) our citizens should also save more in 
dinars  and  not  only  in  euros  –  process  of  de-dollarization  is  just  finishing  in  Russia,  and  I 
hope that the process of de-euroization will speed up in Serbia as well. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Our mission as a central bank is very clear as our main goal is engraved in the central bank 
law, “to achieve and maintain price stability”. In addition to the clear mandate we also have 
the  tool  independence,  so  we  have  nothing  to  complain  about  and  we  must  succeed. 
Ultimately, only the results matter, and for us that is price stability! 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2007
