Yandraduth Googoolye: Trade finance in a global economy 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the Session on Trade Finance at the FICC-IBA Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm 
Shift”, Mumbai, 13 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good afternoon 
It gives me great pleasure to be in Mumbai for the conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm 
Shift”  jointly  organized  by  the  Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry 
(FICCI) and the Indian Banks Association (IBA). I am also very pleased to chair this session 
on Trade Finance this afternoon at Hilton Towers. I wish to extend my appreciation to the 
FICCI  and  IBA  for  hosting  this  Conference.  I  also  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the 
distinguished speakers and to all delegates from South Asia, Middle East and Africa. 
Before  getting  into  the  crux  of  the  subject,  may  I  mention  that  we  are  meeting  at  a  very 
auspicious  moment  as  the  people  of  this  state  and  the  Hindu  community  at  large  are 
celebrating Ganesh Chaturthi. May Lord Ganesh bless us all! 
Trade  finance  is  a  very  specialized  area  requiring  a  thorough  understanding  of  the 
mechanics and the linkages among the various participants, and a good grasp of the risks 
involved  in  trade  finance.  In  the  global  economy,  trade  finance  is  gaining  momentum. 
Participants, particularly banks, are rethinking the way global transactions are currently being 
done. 
Finance  and  trade  are  linked  in  a  number  of  ways  that  are  not  always  obvious.  Both  are 
important engines of growth in today’s economies and the expansion of their share in output 
shows their growing importance. Indeed trade finance has been a core business for banks 
for decades. Traditionally, banks have offered to the trading community products that include 
among  others  Letters  of  credits,  Factoring,  Early  Pay  or  Dynamic  Discounting  and  Asset 
Based Lending. 
Document-intensive  letters  of  credit  have  indeed  proved  to  be  instrumental  in  the 
development of international trade finance but it must be recognized that there are a number 
of  problems  associated  with  traditional  trade  finance,  for  example  the  limited  connectivity 
among  buyer,  supplier  and  financial  institution;  limited  controls  for  the  supplier  and  most 
importantly,  the  uncertainty  of  payment.  The  traditional  way  of  doing  business  can 
sometimes prove to be administratively cumbersome and inefficient and the costs involved 
are  high.  Moreover,  there  are  a  number  of  risks  associated  with  trade  finance  that,  if  not 
properly managed, can prove to be fatal for the different stakeholders. 
In a global economy, efficiency is the order of the day. Players in the international trading 
arena – banks, suppliers, buyers and shippers are all striving to make the processes easier, 
faster and cheaper. This is where the physical supply chain and the financial supply chain 
have  come  together.  This  “marriage”  is  resulting  in  a  shift  from  a  SINGLE  PRODUCT 
solution  to  a  SUPPLY  CHAIN  finance  solution.  Increasingly,  banks,  buyers,  sellers, 
insurance companies and logistics companies are joining hands to find solutions. On the one 
hand,  banks  are  setting  up  operation  centres  to  centralise  Letters  of  Credit,  Document 
Collection, Letters of Guarantee etc with a view to enhancing efficiency and professionalism, 
and  reduce  costs  and  operation  risks.  They  are  more  and  more  offering  non-traditional 
services  which  may  include  sophisticated  imaging  technology  that  can  assist  with  dispute 
and  discrepancy  management  coupled  with  data  storage,  insurance  products,  document 
preparation services, cash flow modeling etc. On the other hand, the logistics companies are 
providing  banks  with  two  key  elements  –  firstly  the  warehousing  and  transportation  of  the 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 1
goods and secondly the visibility into the movement of those goods. This increased visibility 
into the supply chain encourages banks to extend credit to trading partners instead of issuing 
letters  of  credit.  The  “marriage”  of  the  physical  and  financial  supply  chain  processes 
therefore injects additional and more cost-effective liquidity into the system. 
At  the  base  of  this  shift  from  SINGLE  PRODUCT  solution  to  SUPPLY  CHAIN  finance 
solution are advance in connectivity – the internet, new IT technology and applications and 
efficient capital markets. For instance, readily accessible information improves the ability to 
see where the goods are in the supply chain. If you send goods to Europe, you can log on to 
DHL and track exactly where the goods are. In the same vein, banks which are extending 
lines of credit against inventory or deciding when to make payments to sellers on behalf of 
buyers need to know the whereabouts and the integrity of individual units rather than simply 
knowing where the large shipments are in transport. 
It is clear that banks not only provide finance but need to understand the entire supply chain 
to give value added to their customers. In the process, there can only be a win-win situation 
for banks and the other stakeholders. 
I  believe  that  collaboration  brings  benefits  to  all  participants.  Buyers  are  able  to  negotiate 
better terms and conditions with the suppliers. Suppliers may have cheaper access to capital 
and reduced costs. Funds providers may benefit from higher return on corporate risk than on 
other  products,  they  may  have  cross  sell  and  increased  lending  opportunities.  The 
collaboration may also result in reduced risk for the country and the supplier. 
However,  the  financial  supply  chain  needs  to  be  properly  managed.  There  are  numerous 
challenges in embracing financial supply chain management. Invoices and inventory need to 
be reconciled in a timely manner. If shipping information and payment information cannot be 
combined, payments can be delayed that may result in increased costs. Managing foreign 
exchange risk and cash flow liquidity risks may become a challenge. Contrary to banks, the 
non-bank organizations participating in the financial supply chain may not have systems and 
processes in place to manage credit risk and operational risk. There may be issues like the 
legal enforceability of the collateral documents. 
As I see it, the way forward to manage the financial supply chain is to fully embrace the use 
of  technology.  However,  one  must  keep  in  mind  that  systems  alone  cannot  solve  all 
problems. It is people who need to first understand their environment in depth and come up 
with the necessary solutions for an optimal global chain finance efficiency. 
Mauritius is an open economy dependent on trade. Our geographical location may serve as 
a linkage between Asia and Africa. The new opportunities arising in financial supply chain 
management are relatively unexplored by our banks. I am confident that the representatives 
of our commercial banks here today will benefit a lot from the expertise and experience of the 
other bankers who have started providing financial supply chain solutions. 
May I conclude by saying that the future of trade finance is very much dependent upon the 
collaboration  of  all  stakeholders  –  the  buyer,  the  seller,  the  financial  institution  and  the 
logistics and insurance companies. However, from a regulator’s perspective, there are issues 
that  need  to  be  addressed  such  as  the  development  of  common  standards  and  rules,  the 
long-term  implications  for  the  financial  system  of  the  partnership  between  banks  and  non-
banks, and the proper management of the legal risks involved. 
I  now  invite  the  distinguished  experts  in  the  field  to  enlighten  us  on  the  prospects  and 
challenges facing trade finance. I am sure that the ensuing discussions on the matter would 
prove be very constructive. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2007
Introducing the speakers 
Mr J Chandrasekaran 
1.  
Mr Chandrasekaran is the Chief General Manager, State Bank of India…… 
Mr Asif Raza 
2.  
Mr Asif Raza is head of Asia Pacific trade & logistics Management for JPMorgan Treasury 
Services  and  based  in  Singapore.  In  this  capacity,  Asif  is  responsible  for  origination, 
structuring,  product  management,  insurance,  distribution  activities  and  continue  business 
growth  in  Asia-Pacific.  He  leads  a  team  of  trade  professionals  specialized  in  trade 
relationship  management,  risk  mitigation  strategies,  logistic  management,  structured  trade, 
new  trade  services  and  emerging  payment  channel  instruments  to  provide  integrated 
solutions to financial institutions and corporate clients. 
Prior to his current role, Asif was head of Trade Sales for Europe, Middle East and Africa as 
well as for the firm’s global network trade business. He also worked at JPMorgan New York 
for 7 years and managed various trade teams. 
Asif is a regular speaker of trade industry conferences and has written articles on trade & 
logistics Management. He is also member of Asian Advisory Council of Bankers’ Association 
for Finance and Trade. 
Mr Subin Subaiah 
3. 
Mr  Subin  Subaiah  is  a  Senior  Vice  President  of  Bank  of  America,  heading  their  Global 
Treasury Services business across the Financial Institutions client space in Asia. 
Prior  to  joining  Bank  of  America  in  June  2005,  Mr  Subaiah  spent  6  years  with  Deutsche 
Bank,  Singapore  where  he  held  the  position  of  Managing  Director  in  charge  of  FI 
Relationship  Management  and  had  business  line  responsibilities  for  Deutsche’s  cash  and 
trade business in South/South East Asia and Australia. 
Mr Subaiah spent his first twenty years in banking with Bankers Trust Company holding a 
variety  of  senior  positions  in  India,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  in  their  transaction  banking 
and investment banking businesses, covering clients across Asia. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 109/2007 
 3
