Jean-Claude Trichet: Building Europe in a globalised world 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at Challenges 
of  the  Twenty-first  Century:  European  and  American  Perspectives  Series,  Harvard 
University, Boston, 23 October 2007. 
 Introduction1
1.  
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to Harvard University to talk about a key issue: how 
can  Europe  best  adapt  to  a  globalised  world?  Let  me  start  by  saying  that  the  idea  of  the 
European Union and the concept of the single currency originated about 50 years ago. They 
resulted  from  a  desire  of  European  nations  to  create  conditions  for  lasting  peace  and 
prosperity  after  the  two  devastating  wars  of  the  first  half  of  the  20th  century.  Initially,  the 
prime  focus  of  intra-European  policies  was  on  how  to  facilitate  the  free  flow  of  goods, 
services, capital and people across national frontiers, an initiative which was to become the 
Single Market. Serving as a role model in the creation of such a genuine common market in 
Europe was the unified market of the United States.  
Today,  the  EU  is  considerably  larger  than  it  was  all  those  years  ago.  It  comprises  27 
European countries and a population totalling 494 million people, with Romania and Bulgaria 
joining  in  January  this  year.  13  of  these  countries  are  members  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union (i.e. the euro area with its 317 million inhabitants) and have introduced the 
euro. The 13 will become 15 in January next year, when Cyprus and Malta join. Importantly, 
the  impressive  enlargement  of  the  EU  and  the  successful  creation  of  the  euro  area  have 
gone hand in hand with Europe’s integration into the global economy. Globalisation provides 
great opportunities for flexible economies. However, Europe still needs to make progress in 
this field in order to fully gain from globalisation. 
This brings me to the issue I would like to address today, namely the building of Europe in a 
globalised world. First, I would like to share with you some thoughts on Europe in a global 
context. Second, I would like to provide some facts on the process of economic and financial 
integration in Europe and – as a comparison – the United States. Finally, I would like to talk 
about how globalisation influences European macroeconomic policies.  
Europe and globalisation 
2.  
Globalisation has indeed increased significantly over the last couple of decades. Let me first 
present some figures on the degree of global openness. Thereafter, I would like to provide 
some examples of the impact of globalisation, especially on Europe’s economies.  
Global trade openness – measured as world exports and imports of goods and services as a 
share of world GDP – has practically doubled over the last 20 years. In 1986 it accounted for 
34% of world GDP; in 2006 the figure was 61%. A key factor has been the increase in trade 
in intermediate goods and services as a result of the rising internationalisation of production 
processes.  
Financial  systems  have  also  been  deeply  affected  by  globalisation.  The  share  of  gross 
international asset holdings in world GDP – which provides a measure of financial openness 
                                                 
1  
I should like to thank Malin Andersson, Annalisa Ferrando, Martin Heipertz, Keith Kuester and Samu Kurri for 
their input into this speech, Nick Vidalis and Hans-Joachim Klöckers for their helpful comments, and David 
Clarke for his additional contributions. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 1
– has grown eightfold over the last 25 years and now stands at more than 130% of world 
GDP.  
Globalisation is triggering major transformations all over the world, not only in Europe. For 
instance, globalisation has had an impact on inflation.  
Economic theory has identified numerous channels through which globalisation can influence 
price developments. Without doubt, globalisation and the associated rise in world trade have 
contributed  to  import  price  moderation2,  notably  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  which  is 
primarily  due  to  increased  imports  from  low-cost  countries.  Furthermore,  the  widespread 
opening-up of emerging countries and of almost all former centrally planned economies has 
significantly increased the labour pool available, leading to dampening pressures on labour 
costs,  especially  for  unskilled  labour.3  Globalisation  can  also  exert  indirect  downward 
pressure on inflation, as increasing international competition may limit the pricing power of 
domestic corporations. However, at the same time, the sudden emergence of fast-growing 
economies  in  the  global  economy  is  exerting  very  significant  upward  pressures  on 
commodity  prices.  This  has  been  particularly  visible  since  2003.  In  addition,  the  prices  of 
certain agricultural products have also risen recently. 
Despite intensive research, there remains significant uncertainty about the overall role and 
impact of globalisation. Even though the net effect of these counterbalancing forces is mostly 
believed  to  have  reduced  the  level  and  volatility  of  inflation,  how  long  this  disinflationary 
effect will last remains an open question. Still, in view of the much lower price levels of the 
economies  in  emerging  markets,  they  are  expected  to  increase  their  market  shares  in  the 
developed economies, which in turn will help to contain import price pressures there. 
Ultimately,  globalisation  is  an  opportunity,  not  a  threat.  Globalisation  fosters  economic 
prosperity and raises living standards. It may facilitate increased labour inflows to the euro 
area,  which,  in  certain  sectors,  would  help  to  reduce  bottlenecks  in  labour  markets  and 
hence  ease  wage  pressures.  Meanwhile,  resources  are  allocated  to  the  most  profitable 
activities  across  the  world.  In  addition,  globalisation  helps  to  intensify  the  exchange  of 
investment  capital  for  know-how  between  regions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  euro  area  has 
become an attractive place for foreign direct investment (FDI). IMF statistics reveal that FDI 
into the euro area amounts to more than 30% of euro area GDP, whereas the comparable 
figure for the US is 16%.  
In sum, increasing globalisation leads to structural changes that are sometimes difficult to 
quantify.  Developed  economies  need  to  be  sufficiently  flexible  in  order  to  absorb  these 
structural  changes  smoothly.  Overall,  however,  these  developments  should  be  seen  as 
increasing economic prosperity as they improve the international allocation of resources. In 
addition to globalisation, European countries are facing the challenge of integration in their 
product, labour and financial markets. I will turn to these issues now. 
3.  
Economic and financial integration in Europe and a comparison with the 
United States 
In  a  monetary  union,  economic  and  financial  integration  is  crucial  as  it  ensures  smooth 
adjustment processes to economic shocks. In a monetary union like the United States or the 
                                                 
2   See  Box  13  in  the  June  2007  issue  of  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  entitled  “Is  the  downward  impact  of 
globalisation on import prices waning?” 
3   There  are,  however,  other  factors  –  independent  of  globalisation  –  that  can  help  to  explain  the  decline  in 
global  inflation,  such  as  rapid  technological  progress  and  structural  reforms.  These  factors  have  helped  to 
increase the growth potential of economies and thus to facilitate price stability. Moreover, greater budgetary 
discipline  and  “better”  monetary  policy  that  enhances  the  credibility  of  central  banks  have  probably  also 
contributed. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2007
euro  area,  where  regional  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  are  options  that  are  no 
longer  available,  it  is  important  to  make  sure  that  other  shock  adjustment  mechanisms 
function properly. Such mechanisms are needed in order to prevent a country or region from 
entering  into  a  period  of  protracted  low  growth  and  higher  unemployment,  or  into  a  long 
period of overheating, after experiencing a country-specific shock.  
Allow me, now, to elaborate on four main features of economic and financial integration in 
Europe,  namely 
labour  mobility  and  business  cycle 
synchronisation. I will also compare these features with those in the United States, in order to 
illustrate some of Europe’s achievements and remaining challenges. 
i) 
integration, 
financial 
trade, 
First,  economic  integration  has  been  reflected  in  a  marked  increase  in  intra-euro 
area  trade  in  goods  and  services.  Let  me  mention  some  figures.  The  share  of 
exports and imports of goods in terms of GDP within the euro area increased by 6 
percentage  points  between  1998,  the  year  before  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  and 
2006,  when  it  amounted  to  around  32%  of  GDP.  The  share  of  intra-euro  area 
exports and imports of services increased by about 2 percentage points from 1998 
to 2006, to almost 7% of GDP.  
As  trade  integration  within  the  euro  area  becomes  stronger,  the  region  is  also 
becoming a more open economy to the outside world. The share of extra-euro area 
exports and imports of goods rose by about 9 percentage points between 1998 and 
2006, to around 33% of GDP. Over the same period, the share of extra-euro area 
exports and imports of services increased by about 2 percentage points, to almost 
10%  of  GDP.  These  developments  clearly  show  that  we  are  not  witnessing  the 
creation  of  a  “fortress  Europe”.  On  the  contrary,  the  euro  area  is  a  more  open 
economy  than  the  other  two  G3  economies,  the  United  States  and  Japan.  In  the 
United  States,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  represented  about  22%  of  GDP  and 
trade in services 6% in 2006. The corresponding figures for Japan were 27% and 
6%. 
As a second feature, the introduction of the euro has contributed to intra-European 
financial integration which, in turn, improves the free movement of capital in the euro 
area.  Financial  integration  enhances  the  efficiency  of  economic  mechanisms, 
strengthens  competition  and  raises  the  potential  for  stronger  non-inflationary 
economic  growth.4  Financial  integration  also  improves  the  smooth  and  effective 
transmission of the single monetary policy throughout the euro area. More precisely, 
financial integration helps financial systems to channel funds from those economic 
agents  that  have  a  surplus  of  savings  to  those  with  a  shortage;  in  particular,  it 
enables agents to effectively trade, hedge, diversify and pool risks. As a result, there 
is  a  better  sharing  and  diversification  of  risk.  In  the  US,  over  the  period  1963-90, 
capital  markets  smoothed  out  39%  of  the  shocks  to  gross  state  product  (the 
equivalent  to  GDP),  the  credit  channel  smoothed  out  23%  and  the  federal 
government, through the fiscal channel, 13%.5 Around 25% of the shocks were not 
smoothed out. Hence financial markets and financial institutions contributed 62% to 
the absorption of idiosyncratic state shocks. We therefore see from the US example 
ii) 
                                                 
4   A research study conducted by London Economics a few years ago estimated the benefits of the integration of 
European  bonds  and  equity  markets  to  be  around  1%  of  additional  GDP  over  a  ten-year  period.  London 
Economics, 2002, “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report 
to the European Commission. See also “EU Productivity and Competitiveness: an Industry Perspective. Can 
Europe Resume the Catching-up Process?” by Mary  O’Mahony and Bart Van Ark, European Communities, 
2003, for a comparison of the financial sector contribution to annual labour productivity growth in the US and 
the euro area. 
5   See P. Asdrubali, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, 1996, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-
1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 111. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 3
that the financial channel can be much more important than the fiscal channel. This 
is an additional reason to speed up financial integration in Europe. In a more recent 
study, it was found that the euro area situation has begun to converge towards the 
situation  of  the  United  States  and  that  there  is  already  modest  but  non-negligible 
insurance  through  inter-state  capital  flows.  It  was  found  that  in  the  euro  area 
(excluding  Luxembourg),  capital  markets  would  have  smoothed  out  about  10%  of 
the country-specific shocks to GDP between 1993 and 2000.6 
A  set  of  indicators  published  by  the  ECB  also  points  to  an  increasing  degree  of 
integration  of  euro  area  financial  and  banking  markets.7  For  instance,  there  is 
significant  evidence  that  euro  area  corporations  are  taking  advantage  of  the 
possibility  to  raise  funds.  As  a  result,  the  euro  corporate  bond  market  has  grown 
significantly  since  1999,  and  has  the  potential  to  grow  even  further,  judged  by  a 
comparison with the US. In 1999, the outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-
financial corporations was just 3.9% of GDP in the euro area and 24.3% in the US; 
by  2006  it  had  increased  to  12.5%,  but  relative  to  GDP  the  US  corporate  bond 
market is still one and a half times larger than that of the euro area.  
Integration  in  retail  banking,  by  contrast,  has  been  slow  so  far,  although  it  has 
picked  up  in  the  last  two  years.  There  are  still  differences  in  bank  deposit  and 
lending interest rates across euro area countries, whose cross-country dispersion is 
higher than the intra-regional dispersion of the same rates in the US.8 However, a 
number of indicators point to increasing cross-border banking activities in the euro 
area, such as the growing cross-border share in the financial holdings of banks as 
well as cross-border mergers and acquisitions. 
In  terms  of  fiscal  transfers,  obviously  in  the  US  there  are  inter-regional  transfers 
which add to the degree of integration, while transfers in the euro area are almost 
exclusively domestic and not cross-border. 
Labour  mobility  constitutes  the  third  feature  of  integration  that  I  would  like  to 
mention.  Labour  mobility  may  dampen  the  effects  from  country-specific  shocks  or 
decrease the risks of wage pressures as labour markets tighten. Comparable figures 
on labour mobility for the euro area and the US are difficult to obtain and any such 
figures  should  be  interpreted  very  carefully.  Available  evidence  suggests  that, 
overall,  cross-border  labour  mobility  is  still  limited  in  most  parts  of  the  European 
Union  with  regulatory  barriers  still  existing,  and  even  within  the  euro  area  with 
respect  to  labour  from  Slovenia.  Linguistic,  cultural,  legal  and  other  differences 
between countries and the costs involved in moving residence also play a role.9 In 
the period 2000-2005 only 0.1% of the working-age population of the then EU 15 
Member States moved  away from their country of origin to another country in the 
EU. Furthermore, only a small proportion of individuals – 0.4% of the EU’s working-
age  population  –  commuted  across  a  national  border  to  work.  In  the  US, 
geographical  labour  mobility  appears  to  be  far  higher.  Evidence  suggests  that 
iii) 
                                                 
6   See S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, 2004, “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary 
union: Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 4463. 
7   “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, 2007. 
8   C.  Kok-Sorensen  and  T.  Werner,  2006,  “Bank  interest  rate  pass-through  in  the  euro  area;  a  cross-country 
comparison”, ECB Working Paper No 580. 
9   See  Blanchard  O.,  L.F.  Kats,  1992,  “Regional  evolutions”,  Brooking  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  and 
Obstfeld M., G. Peri, 1998, “Regional Nonadjustment and  Fiscal Policy:  Lessons for EMU”, NBER Working 
Paper 6431, as references. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2007
iv) 
around 3.1% of the country’s total working-age population moved from one state to 
another each year between 2000 and 2005.10  
A fourth and final feature of the process of economic and financial integration is the 
degree  of  synchronisation  or  co-movement  between  different  cyclical  positions 
across the euro area countries. This degree of synchronisation has increased since 
the beginning of the 1990s. In other words, a large number of euro area economies 
now share similar business cycles.  
In  addition,  current  inflation  and  output  growth  differentials  between  euro  area 
countries  are  relatively  limited  compared  with  the  past.  Indeed,  the  decline  in 
inflation differentials across the euro area countries has been impressive in recent 
years.  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  the  dispersion  in  inflation  rates  across  the 
countries which now belong to the euro area was, on average, around 6 percentage 
points (standard deviation measured in unweighted terms). Last year, the inflation 
dispersion was  only  0.7  percentage  point.  This  implies  that  dispersion  in  the  euro 
area  is  currently  broadly  in  line  with  inflation  dispersion  among  the  14  US 
Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas,  where  it  has  fluctuated  around  1%  in  the  last  two 
decades.  Dispersion  in  real  GDP  growth  rates  (standard  deviation  measured  in 
unweighted  terms)  across  the  euro  area  countries  has  been  fluctuating  around  a 
level  of  2  percentage  points  over  the  past  few  decades.  This  is  similar  to  the 
dispersion observed in output growth across regions within the United States.11 Still, 
with a view to further enlargements of the euro area, these issues need to be kept in 
mind.  For  the  proper  functioning  of  the  single  monetary  policy  in  Europe  all 
participating  countries  are  required  to  display  high  degrees  of  convergence  with 
each other and to do this on a sustainable basis. In all enlargement decisions for the 
euro area, we refer to some clearly defined “convergence criteria” and apply them in 
a very strict manner. We did so in the past and will do so in the future.  
In sum, there is evidence of growing economic and financial integration among the 
countries  of  the  European  Union.  The  adoption  of  the  euro  has  particularly 
contributed  to  this  development  by  reducing  information  costs,  enhancing  price 
transparency and eliminating exchange rate risk between countries in the euro area. 
Nonetheless, in some fields, Europe is lagging behind the US and a lot remains to 
be done, for instance, in order to increase labour mobility and financial integration in 
retail  banking.  Progress  in  these  fields  is  clearly  needed  in  order  to  adapt  to  a 
globalised world. 
How globalisation influences European macroeconomic policies 
4.  
As I claimed earlier, globalisation and integration brings clear benefits to the economy. At the 
same time, however, European policy-makers need to ensure that Europe quickly adapts to 
a globalised world. 
Globalisation increases the pressure on national policy-makers to implement reforms and to 
pursue structural policies that enhance competition and foster flexibility in product and labour 
markets. In fact, globalisation brings opportunities for flexible economies but penalises rigid 
                                                 
10   Data  on  the  US  and  the  EU  stem  from  the  “Economic  Survey  of  the  European  Union”  published  on  20 
September,  OECD,  2007.  For  a  discussion  on  labour  mobility  see  also  F.  F.  Heinz  and  M.  Ward-
Warmedinger, “Cross-border labour mobility within an enlarged EU”, 2006, ECB Occasional Paper No 52, and 
“Action plan for skills and mobility”, European Commission, 2002. 
11   It  should  be  stressed  that  while  some  differences  are  temporary,  others  are  more  persistent.  Sustained 
differences in economic growth or inflation rates between some euro area countries are normal in a monetary 
union, to the extent that they are related to catching-up phenomena. However, it is also true that persistent 
differentials which reflect structural rigidities are a concern. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 5
ones.  In  many  euro  area  countries,  structural  reforms  have  been  too  slow  to  facilitate  the 
reallocation  of  resources  to  their  most  productive  uses  and  to  foster  labour  productivity 
growth  and  technological  progress.  The  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is  envisaged 
under a wide-ranging programme for economic, social and environmental reform in the EU, a 
programme  known  as  the  Lisbon  strategy.  In  particular,  Member  States  are  required  to 
reduce  tax  burdens  on  low-wage  earners,  to  bring  wage  developments  into  line  with 
productivity,  to  raise  the  skill  level  of  the  workforce  as  well  as  to  adopt  active  ageing 
strategies to encourage older workers to stay in the workforce. This strategy should increase 
the flexibility of, and lower the adjustment costs for, European firms and workers confronted 
with globalisation. Improving competitiveness is the main condition for making globalisation a 
success for the citizens of Europe.  
As for fiscal policies, in the global economy, capital and labour mobility puts pressure on tax 
bases. Rather than a “race to the bottom”, with only tax rates reduced, we begin to see tax 
reforms  that  make  a  country  more  “competitive”  and  more  attractive  for  investment  and 
human capital. On the expenditure side, the influence of globalisation appears to be more 
limited.  We  should  expect  a  tendency  towards  smaller  but  more  efficient  budgets,  with 
“higher-quality” public spending. This implies, for example, more emphasis on “tomorrow” – 
i.e. investment and education (also for older workers) – and less on “yesterday” – e.g. less 
money spent on unemployment benefit for unskilled workers or on large and inefficient public 
administrations.  On  this  issue,  the  debate  has  only  started  in  the  European  Council  of 
Ministers of the EU Member States (ECOFIN). In this respect, a number of important moves 
towards structural reforms are also currently under discussion in the ECOFIN to make the 
public sector more efficient. Finally, in a globalised world, the soundness of public finances 
becomes ever more important. The links between financial markets are growing closer and 
all  governments  must  ensure  the  sustainability  of  their  fiscal  positions.  In  this  context,  the 
ECB calls upon the Member States of the EU to comply fully with the Stability and Growth 
Pact, an agreement which aims to ensure that they conduct prudent fiscal policies. 
Globalisation  changes  the  environment  also  for  monetary  policy-making.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  globalisation  intensifies  global  competition  –  for  example  by  reducing  the  pricing 
power of firms – and necessitates adjustments to relative prices. In the presence of nominal 
rigidities, changes in relative prices and the pricing power of firms can affect inflation in the 
short run. But even in the long run, when all adjustment processes have come to an end, 
globalisation is likely to affect the transmission of economic shocks to inflation. 
Let me give you an example to illustrate the effects of globalisation on the transmission of 
shocks.  I  will  consider  the  case  of  a  shock  to  production  costs,  e.g.  due  to  high  wage 
pressures in one country. Increased competition implies reduced pricing power of firms. In 
response  to  increases  in  costs,  competitive  forces  may  prevent  individual  firms  from 
adjusting prices by as much as in a low-competition environment. As a consequence, shocks 
to production costs might have a smaller effect on domestic inflation than what we are seeing 
today but a larger effect on output and employment.  
In Europe, this implies a very important message to the social partners, notably trade unions 
and  employers’  organisations.  Excessive  wage  agreements  in  a  highly  competitive 
environment have much higher costs in terms of growth and employment than they had in 
the past. Social partners in Europe seem to have understood this, as inflationary pressure 
coming from labour costs has been much lower in recent years than in previous decades. 
This,  in  turn,  has  led  to  significant  employment  gains  in  Europe,  now  amounting  to  14.9 
million new jobs created since the euro was introduced, compared with only 3 million jobs in 
the 8½ years before its launch. This gives us hope that the structural reforms which have 
been implemented in recent years have helped to create jobs. 
But we cannot simply assume that these trends will continue. Therefore, the pursuit of price 
stability  will  remain  a  demanding  task.  Central  banks  will  need  to  carefully  monitor  the 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2007
changes to the structure of the economy and to the behaviour of economic agents brought 
about by globalisation. 
How should monetary policy respond to the effects of globalisation on inflation? I would like 
to  stress  that  globalisation  does  not  affect  the  central  role,  the  capability  and  overriding 
responsibility of central banks to preserve price stability.12 In the long run, when adjustment 
processes  are  over,  globalisation  will  affect  real  quantities  only.  After  all,  whatever  the 
influences  being  exerted  in  the  context  of  globalisation,  the  basic  tenet  of  monetary  policy 
remains:  in  the  long  run,  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon.  Globalisation  can  at  times 
mean fairly  rapid changes in relative prices. In such an environment, I would argue that a 
credible  commitment  to  maintaining  price  stability  is  essential.  Most  importantly,  such  a 
commitment  helps  consumers  and  firms  to  accept  changes  in  relative  prices  while  the 
aggregate  price  level  is  largely  unaffected.  Central  banks  should  not  prevent  efficient 
changes  in  relative  prices  triggered  by  a  move  towards  a  new  equilibrium  due  to 
globalisation,  but  they  are  well  advised  to  prevent  significant  second-round  effects  from 
spreading to other parts of the economy. 
Conclusion 
5.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. Economic integration within Europe has gone hand 
in  hand  with  Europe’s  integration  into  the  global  economy.  These  forces  call  for  structural 
adjustment in order to fully grasp the opportunities they provide. To this end, we should make 
our  markets  even  more  flexible  and  promote  further  economic  and  financial  integration  in 
Europe’s economies. At the same time, we need to have fiscal policies which are disciplined, 
in  line  with  the  objective  of  reaching  balanced  or  surplus  budgets  over  the  medium  term. 
Finally,  monetary  policy-makers  need  to  carefully  monitor  the  ongoing  structural  changes 
globalisation  brings  about.  In  this  context,  monetary  policy  has  to  ensure  that  inflation 
expectations  are  well  anchored,  which  means  a  strong  commitment  to  pursuing  price 
stability. Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
12   See, e.g., M. Woodford (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control”, NBER Working Paper 13329. 
BIS Review 120/2007 
 7
