T T Mboweni: Annual conference on global imbalances, competitiveness 
and emerging markets 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the CEPR/ESI 
11th  Annual  Conference  on  Global  Imbalances,  Competitiveness  and  Emerging  Markets, 
Pretoria, 28 September 2007. 
 Distinguished delegates  
This  is  the  eleventh  year  that  representatives  from  the  academic  world  and  central  banks 
across  the  world  meet  to  discuss  topics  that  are  very  relevant  in  the  prevailing 
macroeconomic environment. On this occasion, the organisers have selected the issues of 
global imbalances, competitiveness and emerging markets. From the programme, it is clear 
that  we  can  look  forward  to  some  interesting  views  and  insights  into  these  issues.  In  my 
keynote  address,  I  will  focus  on  a  few  aspects  relating  to  central  banks,  in  particular  in 
emerging-market  countries,  and  the  challenges  faced  in  formulating  and  implementing 
monetary policy in a globalised financial system characterised by imbalances. 
When referring to global imbalances, the most obvious ones that spring to mind are the US 
twin  deficits  and  global  trade  imbalances,  which  have  probably  been  the  most  publicised 
imbalances  over  recent  years.  Yet  the  world  is  characterised  by  many  other  imbalances. 
Some of these are embedded in the structure of the world economy as it has developed over 
the centuries, such as the income gaps between developed, underdeveloped and emerging-
market countries. Others are more cyclical in nature. The current fallout in the US sub-prime 
market is an example of a reaction to a more cyclical imbalance caused by low interest rates, 
high  liquidity  and  a  general  under-pricing  of  risk  over  recent  years.  Cyclical  balances  are 
normally restored through a combination of policy adjustments and market forces. However, 
this  can  be  a  painful  process,  as  many  financial  institutions,  investors  and  sub-prime 
mortgage  lenders  and  borrowers  that  were  directly  affected  by  the  recent  events  in  global 
credit markets can bear witness to.  
Another example of a current cyclical imbalance is the extent of carry trades and build-up of 
long/short investment positions globally, which resulted from loose monetary policy in some 
countries and tighter policy in other countries, mostly emerging-market countries. This has 
enticed  investors  to  borrow  in  the  low-interest-rate  currencies  and  invest  in  the  high-yield 
currencies. 
Most  cyclical  imbalances  result  from  the  boom  and  bust  characteristics  of  the  global 
economy and financial markets. In his last speech, read on his behalf at the Jackson Hole 
Conference on 31 August 2007, the late Edward Gramlich had some interesting things to say 
about booms and busts. Essentially, he argued, American history showed that boom periods 
followed  a  pattern  of  initial  discoveries,  breakthroughs,  widespread  adoption,  widespread 
investment, and then a collapse where prices cannot keep up and many investors lose a lot 
of money. In the bust that follows the boom, there is generally an overreaction, but after the 
dust clears investors emerge a little bit wiser and some of the benefits that led to the boom in 
the first place remain.  
The  challenge  to  central  banks,  as  well  as  to  academic  researchers,  is  to  be  able  to  see 
through the dust and noise of market talk, commentary, newspaper and television reports, 
speeches and comments by politicians and trade unions and many others with the interest of 
particular  individuals  or  groups  in  mind.  Instead,  central  banks  need  to  make  an  effort  to 
understand  the  processes  that  are  underway  and  to  apply  the  appropriate  dose  of  policy 
measures, at the right time, for the longer-term benefit of the economy as a whole. This is 
much easier said than done. 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 1
When considering the issue of global imbalances, one can imagine the world economy as a 
giant pendulum swinging to and fro. A stationary state of balance (what economists like to 
call equilibrium) never exists for very long, if at all. Indeed, Newton’s laws of motion, that for 
every action there is an equal an opposite reaction, can be equally well applied to the world 
of economics. A trend or event that pushes the economic pendulum to one side is usually 
corrected  by  a  counter  action,  which  can  be  brought  about  by  means  of  countercyclical 
policies, or merely through the self-correcting nature of markets. 
However,  while  these  booms  and  busts  can  be  fascinating  to  analyse  with  the  benefit  of 
hindsight, they make the lives of policy makers considerably more difficult. Referring back to 
the analogy of a pendulum: it is easy to see from the side whether a pendulum is swinging to 
the left or to the right, but if you sit right on top of it, it becomes much more difficult to know 
exactly where the balancing point is. Central bankers are part of the global economy as it 
unfolds day by day, yet they have to judge the balancing point of policies that can affect the 
global economy and financial markets for many years to come. This is not an easy task, and 
policies can easily under or overreact to boom and bust cycles. 
Many  of  the  global  imbalances  in  the  world  today  can  be  related  to  the  process  of 
globalisation,  which  facilitated  almost  unlimited  cross-border  flows  of  funds.  The  wave  of 
financial globalisation and innovation that has flooded over financial markets during the past 
two decades has also complicated the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. I 
would like to also make a few comments in this regard.  
Globalisation has been brought about by a number of factors, including: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
the increasing free flow of capital across national borders;  
the emergence of global financial institutions;  
a technological revolution that made geographical location almost irrelevant; 
an explosion of new financial instruments; and  
new  insights  and  developments  in  the  areas  of  asset  management  and  risk 
management.  
risk-reducers 
recognised  as  both  yield-enhancers  and 
These developments facilitated the significant cross border flows that emanated from global 
savings imbalances and a search for higher yields at a time when interest rates in developed 
markets were low. 
Emerging markets have been affected by these changes in very particular ways. Emerging-
market assets have increasingly become an acceptable and desired asset class in diversified 
global  portfolios, 
through 
diversification.  This  is  partly  attributable  to  the  improved  macroeconomic  and  financial 
profiles  of  many  emerging  markets.  On  the  one  hand,  this  appetite  for  emerging  market 
assets has contributed to a steadier and more sustainable flow of funds to emerging markets: 
once accepted as part of an investment mandate, certain portions of portfolios are allocated 
to these assets for longer periods. On the other hand, large inflows of capital relative to the 
size  of  domestic  financial  markets  have  a  significant  impact  on  domestic  asset  prices, 
volatility, liquidity and external vulnerability. Domestic asset prices become very sensitive to 
changes in sentiment or risk appetite among global investors.  
Significant  foreign  investment  flows  to  emerging  markets  have  also  to  some  extent 
contributed to imbalances between domestic and foreign assets and liabilities. Countries that 
have received large amounts of inflows, while enjoying the benefits of these, should always 
keep in mind that they are also building up increasing foreign liabilities, which are likely to 
affect future outflows of dividends and interest payments. This holds equally true for foreign 
direct  investment  and  portfolio  investment.  There  is  also  an  ever-present  risk  that  foreign 
investors could withdraw again if the global environment changes. South Africa is a classic 
example of a country with such an exposure, and it is precisely for this reason that the South 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2007
African Reserve Bank has used the opportunity of increased flows to emerging markets to 
strengthen its foreign reserves position. 
These  developments  have  complicated  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary 
policy by central banks, in particular in emerging markets. Globalisation of financial markets 
has to some extent blurred the conventional ways in which markets react to monetary policy. 
As a result, the extent and direction of changes in asset prices in response to changes in 
monetary  policy  are  becoming  increasingly  uncertain.  For  example,  while  conventional 
unhedged  interest-rate  parity  theory  predicts  that  exchange  rates  should  strengthen  when 
interest rates are increased, the South African experience of late showed that the opposite is 
just as likely. During the current tightening cycle, the South African rand on more than one 
occasion weakened when interest rates were increased, and appreciated when interest rates 
remained  on  hold.  Clearly,  in  these  instances  global  investors’  views  about  the  impact  of 
rates on the growth trajectory overruled other influences and conventional relationships. 
The build-up of carry trades globally has been mentioned earlier in this address as a current 
example of imbalances caused by different monetary policy stances among countries, within 
the context of globalised financial markets. The extents to which carry trades are conducted 
globally amplify the effects of relative changes in asset prices – not only for the high-yielding 
investment destinations, but also for the relatively low-yield origins of funding. Carry trades in 
their broadest sense comprise any investment made with borrowed funds. Short positions in 
low-yielding financial markets or instruments are typically used to fund long positions in high 
yielding markets or instruments. In practice, such funding can take numerous forms in the 
money,  capital  and  derivatives  markets  across  the  world,  making  it  very  difficult  for  an 
individual government agency or central bank to obtain an exact indication of the extent of 
these trades in the domestic market. There is also much uncertainty about the triggers that 
could reverse carry trades, and the speed with which they could be reversed. These are all 
factors that add to the uncertainty of central bankers about the likely effects of their policies 
on financial markets and asset prices. 
A  similar  “black  box”  of  uncertainty  that  can  have  an  impact  on  monetary  policy  is  the 
activities  of  hedge  funds  in  global  financial  markets.  We  know  that  hedge  funds  influence 
markets  in  significant  ways,  but  find  it  very  difficult  to  determine  exactly  to  what  extent. 
Although the term is loosely used, it is not always clear which institutions should be referred 
to as hedge funds: traditional fund managers and so-called hedge funds seem to be moving 
closer  together  in  their  strategies  and  activities.  Also,  the  complex  structures  of  some 
derivative instruments and investment conduits make it almost impossible to determine who 
is  exposed  to  whom,  and  to  what  extent.  The  current  turmoil  and  illiquidity  in  the  major 
financial markets is largely attributable to this uncertainty and lack of trust. 
Emerging  markets,  in  particular,  are  vulnerable  to  the  contagion  effect,  which  is  regularly 
illustrated. This has affected South Africa on a number of occasions during the past year and 
contributed to volatility in domestic financial markets. In times where risk aversion increases 
and investors pull out of riskier assets, the rand tends to be in the basket of currencies that 
suffers the most. This can be related to some extent to the liquid nature of the rand market. 
Nevertheless, despite the risks and complexities associated with financial globalisation, there 
are  also  clear  benefits.  Speaking  from  a  South  African  perspective,  the  central  bank’s 
inflation targeting framework has been well supported by the benign global inflation outlook 
over recent years, as well as by conditions in global financial markets that led to increased 
foreign  capital  inflows  to  emerging  markets.  The  combination  of  global  liquidity,  combined 
with  favourable  conditions  in  the  domestic  economy,  caused  demand  for  South  African 
equities by non-residents to increase at an exceptional pace, recording net purchases of R33 
billion in 2004, R50 billion in 2005, R74 billion in 2006 and a record R66 billion in the year to 
20  September  2007.  In  the  bond  market,  activity  has  been  a  little  more  volatile,  with  non-
residents  purchasing  a  net  R365  million  in  2004,  selling  a  net  R10,7  billion  in  2005  and 
purchasing a net R34 billion in 2006. Partly supported by these activities, but also in line with 
BIS Review 108/2007 
 3
global  trends,  the  JSE’s  All-share  index  recorded  a  succession  of  record  highs,  while 
domestic bonds hardly interrupted their five-year rally, despite a cumulative increase of 300 
basis points in the Reserve Bank’s repo rate since June 2006. 
To date, the significant foreign portfolio inflows, combined with a favourable outlook for the 
domestic  economy,  have  enabled  the  country  to  finance  a  relatively  large  current  account 
deficit,  which,  in  turn,  was  to  a  large  extent  driven  by  investment  expenditure  and 
infrastructural developments – hopefully efforts from which the country would benefit in years 
to  come.  Capital  inflows  have  also  enabled  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  to  increase 
official  reserves  to  a  much  healthier  level,  contributing  to  a  series  of  upgrades  in  the 
sovereign risk ratings, while the exchange rate of the rand has become much more stable 
compared to a few years ago. 
My comments have highlighted some of the uncertainties that central banks have to deal with 
in  their  policy  making.  I  would  like  to  also  focus  a  bit  on  how  these  challenges  should  be 
approached. 
Good  central  bankers  and  good  academics  have  a  number  of  unique  characteristics  in 
common, which distinguish them from other market participants when faced with uncertainty, 
volatility and imbalances. Firstly, they both have to take a long-term view, focusing on their 
primary  objectives.  Investors  and  politicians  often  worry  more  about  their  next  quarterly 
results or the outcome of the next election than about the shape of the overall economy in 
five or ten years’ time. They can exert significant pressure on central banks to apply policies 
that  are  likely  to  benefit  their  own  positions.  By  contrast,  central  bankers  and  academics 
should  try  to  focus  beyond  the  prevailing  noises  of  volatility,  imbalances  and  uncertainties 
and  focus  on  long-term  objectives  and  relationships.  This  requires  independence  and  the 
ability to resist pressures to succumb to short-term gains rather than long-term benefits. 
A second commonality between central banks and academics is that they should be impartial 
and objective, acting without self interest: Monetary policy, like academic research, should be 
based on sound and consistent principles and methodologies.  
A third commonality is that, however good a policy or research output may be, it has to be 
communicated effectively. Even the most brilliant new theory or discovery will be of no value 
if  it  cannot  be  communicated  and  understood  by  the  target  audience.  Similarly,  monetary 
policy  loses  its  effectiveness  if  it  is  not  understood  and  if  the  central  bank  does  not  have 
credibility. The uncertainties, complexities and imbalances that exist in the global economy 
make appropriate communication strategies by central banks all the more important. Clear 
and regular communication about policy objectives, the policy outlook, risks and objectives 
becomes an increasingly important policy instrument, in addition to setting interest rates. 
It is at conferences such as this one that central banks and academic researchers can meet, 
exchange  views  and  support  each  other  in  their  commonalities.  Policy  makers  have  an 
opportunity  to  learn  from  new  theories  that  emanate  from  academic  research,  while 
academics  have  an  opportunity  to  apply  their  minds  to  current,  relevant  and  complex 
problems facing the global economy. I look forward to a stimulating programme. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 108/2007
