Klaus Liebscher: Currency and competitiveness 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the 
CEEI 2007 – “Currency and Competitiveness”, Vienna, 19 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  open  our  annual  Conference  on  European  Economic 
Integration.  I  take  the  participation  of  a  sizeable  number  of  key  experts  from  national  and 
international institutions, outstanding policymakers, bankers and academics as proof of the 
high  importance  that  is  attached  to  currency  and  competitiveness  matters,  which  we  have 
chosen as the theme for this year’s conference. Let me extend a warm welcome to all of you. 
Let  me  pick  out  a  few  currency  and  competitiveness  issues  to  give  you  an  idea  of  our 
motivation for this conference. 
Currencies  are  at  the  core  of  central  banks’  business:  As  a  form  of  money,  currencies 
facilitate the transfer of goods and services by serving as a means of exchange, enable the 
storage of wealth and serve as a unit of accounting. 
In order to help money accomplish its tasks across national boundaries we need exchange 
rates  –  the  prices  at  which  currencies  can  be  traded  against  each  other.  With  respect  to 
exchange rates, three main questions have been debated by academics and central bankers 
for  years:  How  are  they  determined?  What  is  their  economic  impact?  And  how  should 
monetary policy act? 
In  today’s  first  two  sessions  we  will  try  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  the  drivers  of 
exchange rate changes. Factors influencing both supply and demand forces can be either 
structural or monetary policy related.  
1. 
As for long-term structural factors, one usual suspect is the purchasing power parity 
theory. It states that identical baskets of goods should ultimately cost the same in 
one  currency  as  in  another  currency  times  the  exchange  rate  between  these 
currencies. 
Another possible long-run factor of real exchange rate movements – that take into 
account inflation – is the development of overall or relative productivity levels. 
A more medium-term structural factor is the balance of payment model, which holds 
that a foreign exchange rate in an equilibrium level requires a stable current account 
balance. 
Another,  rather  short-term  explanation  related  to  monetary  policy  is  suggested  by 
the  so-called  uncovered  interest  rate  parity.  Under  this  condition,  differences  in 
interest rates between two economies should be equal to the expected change in 
exchange rates between their currencies. 
A  further  element  of  explanation  can  be  derived  from  asset  market  models 
identifying interconnections between stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. 
Finally, ever more research is devoted to non-fundamental causes of exchange rate 
instability.  The  “overshooting  hypothesis”  helps  explain  why  unstable  foreign 
exchange  markets  can  be  efficient.  Yet,  looking  at  the  microstructure  of  foreign 
exchange markets, individually rational behavior might generate complex dynamics 
in which bubbles and crashes can occur. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
BIS Review 144/2007 
 1
So far the debate on determinants of currencies seems to be far from being conclusive. Alan 
Greenspan1 once noted that “forecasting exchange rates has a success rate no better than 
that  of  forecasting  the  outcome  of  a  coin  toss”.  I  wonder  whether  we  can  derive  valuable 
insights  from  hindsight.  Getting  answers  about  the  consequences  of  exchange  rate 
movements for the economy seems to be by no means easier. The impact of the exchange 
rates changes depends on a set of interrelated transmission channels, of which  
1. 
the trade channel probably is the most obvious way in which currency developments 
can impact the economy. An appreciation is likely to entail a negative trade balance, 
as the prices of foreign currency-denominated exports increase while import prices 
fall. 
Apart  from  that,  there  are  financial  market  channels  through  which  currency 
movements have an impact on the economy: A trend increase in the exchange rate 
raises  the  relative  attractiveness  of  assets  denominated  in  that  currency  while  it 
results in the loss of value of investment abroad. 
Currency  fluctuations  are  also  transmitted  through  the  consumer  prices  channel, 
according to which exchange rate appreciation would lower consumer prices. In this 
sense the “strong euro” has cushioned our economies from recent crude oil shocks. 
Finally, the confidence channel completes the list. However, consumers and firms 
can react asymmetrically, since appreciation dampens inflation pressure on the one 
side but challenges the competitiveness of firms on the other. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
If exchange rates and their impact on the economy are apparently so difficult to explain, let 
alone  predict,  should  monetary  policy  interfere?  As  for  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has  no 
exchange rate target. A key implication of flexible exchange rate system is that the external 
value of the currency is determined by financial markets and hence cannot be an instrument 
of  economic  policy.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Eurosystem,  that  is  the  ECB  and  the 
national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  is  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium  term. 
However, when analyzing the economic situation and taking monetary policy decisions the 
Governor Council of the ECB considers all parameters – including exchange rates – to the 
extent  that  they  influence  risks  to  price  stability.  In  this  respect,  excessive  exchange  rate 
volatility is not welcome! 
Turning from currency issues to our second topic, competitiveness, I am tempted to use a 
play  on  words  and  ask:  “does  competitiveness  still  have  currency?”  My  answer  to  this  is 
definitely yes! Competition should not be understood as a zero-sum game, where winners 
can only gain what losers lose. A competitive environment might lead to situation where both 
sides  are  absolutely  better  off.  More  importantly,  it  is  the  consumers  who  are  the  ultimate 
beneficiaries of competition. Competition gives incentives for self-improvement and produces 
excellence.  Competitiveness  is  linked  with  the  creation,  diffusion  and  application  of  new 
knowledge  resulting  in  technological  progress.  And  I  do  believe  that  there  is  still  room  for 
further improvement when it comes to the euro area’s international competitiveness. 
Extensive global imbalances have built up between major economic regions during the last 
few years. Whatever their presumed causes, either overspending or underinvestment in the 
USA; or the saving glut in surplus economies, particularly Asian emerging markets and oil 
exporting countries – current account imbalances have undoubtedly amplified the pressure 
on currencies, with possible harmful consequences for global financial stability. It is clear that 
all regions involved have to assume their responsibility for ensuring the sustainability of their 
external  and  internal  balances,  and  for  enhancing  their  growth  potential.  However,  for  the 
time being it appears that the euro area takes the major burden of this adjustment process. 
                                                 
1   Remarks  by  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  at  the  European  Banking  Congress  2004,  Frankfurt,  Germany; 
November 19, 2004; http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/Speeches/2004/20041119/default.htm 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2007
The  G7  meeting  of  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  of  this  past  October, 
including the president of the ECB, reaffirmed that “exchange rates should reflect economic 
fundamentals. As announced, they “welcome China’s decision to increase the flexibility of its 
currency, but “stress its need to allow an accelerated appreciation of its effective exchange 
rate”2. Earlier in October, the Finance Ministers of the Euro group noted with great attention 
that  the  “US  authorities  have  reaffirmed  that  a  strong  dollar  is  in  the  interest  of  the  US 
economy”3 and commented that “the sustainable recovery path” of the Japanese economy 
should “be incorporated in the assessment of risks”. 
Meanwhile  “the  Euro  area  is  playing  its  role  by  implementing  structural  reforms  and 
contributing to a rebalancing of growth.” 
For  the  first  time  in  its  existence  the  euro  area  outpaced  the  United  States  in  terms  of 
economic growth. The euro area’s seasonally adjusted jobless rate came to 6.9% in 2006, 
thus  hitting  its  lowest  level  in  more  than  a  decade.  This  drop  is  not  only  the  result  of 
economic  activity.  The  labor  market  and  welfare  reforms  of  the  past  few  years  have  also 
reduced structural unemployment. Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, some 15 million 
new jobs have been created in the euro area. This is not to depict an unduly positive picture. 
The inflation rate for October came to 2.6% after being below the 2% mark for a year. The 
outlook for price stability over the medium term is subject to upside risks as increased oil, 
commodity and food prices as well as the favorable labor market situation are likely to make 
higher wage settlements possible. 
Nevertheless, there are signs that the competitive position of the euro area has improved. 
Since 2002, productivity growth has contributed considerably to falling unit labor costs in the 
euro area. Also, the shock resilience of the euro area seems to have improved owing to the 
“stability architecture” of the Eurosystem. This architecture rests on three pillars: a stability-
oriented monetary policy, sustainable public finances, and growth- and competition-oriented 
structural policies. As for the third pillar, the Lisbon strategy adopted in 2000 with the aim of 
creating a modern and competitive economy seems to be finally bearing fruits. 
However,  the  observed  persistent  divergences  in  unit  labor  cost  growth  and  inflation  in  a 
number of euro area countries clearly point to increasing risks of further competitive losses 
and  potentially  costly  real  economic  adjustment.  Since  the  single  monetary  policy  cannot 
address  inflation  divergences  in  individual  countries,  it  is  evident  that  structural  reforms, 
wage-setting processes and budgetary policies must contribute to reverse competitiveness 
losses in individual euro area countries. If the lessons from success stories both within and 
outside  the  euro  area  are  applied  elsewhere,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  will  emerge  as  a 
stronger and more dynamic economy. 
On January 1, 2008, Cyprus and Malta are going to adopt the euro. Let me offer my warm 
congratulations to Governor Orphanides and Governor Bonello for reaching this milestone. 
You  can  be  proud  of  your  countries’  successful  convergence  process.  Looking  ahead,  the 
adoption  of  the  euro  will  allow  you  to  reap  all  the  benefits  of  the  common  currency  and 
enhance  your  integration  with  all  EU  partners.  Together  with  Slovenia,  you  give  a  positive 
example for all other new member countries. 
For these new member states, it is vital to achieve real growth that permits their income-per-
capita levels to gradually approach average EU levels. Therefore, further steps in monetary 
integration should be geared toward achieving sustainable real and nominal convergence. 
                                                 
2   G7/8  Finance  Ministers  Meetings,  Statement  of  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors, 
Washington, October 19, 2007 (http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm071019.htm) 
Monday 
(http://www.reuters.com/article/companyNewsAndPR/idUSL0846597920071008) 
Eurogroup 
meeting; 
position 
G7 
for 
3   Reuters, 
8 
October 
2007 
3
BIS Review 144/2007 
 Since the speed of further monetary integration must not compromise its quality, decisions 
have to be taken on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the Treaty. At the same time, 
equal treatment for new and established EU Member States must be ensured throughout the 
whole process. I am sure that the participation of the new member countries in the stability 
architecture of Eurosystem will make EMU an even greater success. 
This  conference  provides  proof  of  our  research-based  approach  to  the  issues  of  currency 
and competitiveness. It also demonstrates our readiness to open discussion and to address 
understandable apprehension. In the same way it promotes a better understanding of price 
stability  as  an  important  contributor  to  both  orderly  exchange  rate  adjustment  and  the 
maintenance  of  economic  competitiveness.  Taken  together  these  functions  may  help  build 
confidence – probably the most essential task central banks have. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2007
