European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 December 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The latest information has confirmed the 
existence  of  strong  short-term  upward  pressure  on  inflation,  with  the  HICP  inflation  rate 
reaching 3.0% in November. It has also fully confirmed our assessment that there are upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term. Against this background, and with money and 
credit growth remaining very vigorous in the euro area, the Governing Council stands ready 
to  counter  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  as  required  by  its  mandate.  The  economic 
fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  remain  sound.  However,  the  reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial 
markets  is  still  evolving  and  is  accompanied  by  continued  uncertainty  about  the  potential 
impact  on  the  real  economy.  We  will  therefore  monitor  very  closely  all  developments.  By 
acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  on  the  basis  of  our  assessment,  we  will  ensure  that 
second-round  effects  and  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise. 
Firmly anchoring medium and long-term inflation expectations in line with price stability is all 
the  more  important  at  times  of  financial  market  volatility  and  increased  uncertainty.  As 
regards the financial markets, we will continue to pay great attention to developments over 
the coming weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
According  to  Eurostat’s  first  estimate,  the  quarter-on-quarter  growth  rate  of  euro  area  real 
GDP in the third quarter of 2007 was 0.7%, in line with the earlier flash estimate. Domestic 
demand  remained  the  main  driver  of  economic  growth  in  the  third  quarter,  confirming  the 
sustained  nature  of  economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area.  The  latest  information  on 
economic  activity  from  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-based  estimates  supports 
the  assessment  that  economic  growth  has  continued  into  the  fourth  quarter  of  this  year, 
though probably at a more moderate pace than in the third quarter. Overall, the fundamentals 
of  the  euro  area  remain  sound.  Profitability  has  been  sustained,  employment  growth  has 
been robust and the unemployment rate has fallen to levels not seen for 25 years.  
These  factors  are  also  reflected  in  the  December  2007  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections. Annual real GDP growth is projected to lie in the range of 2.4% to 2.8% in 2007, 
and  be  between  1.5%  and  2.5%  in  2008,  and  between  1.6%  and  2.6%  in  2009.  In 
comparison  with  the  September  ECB  staff  projections,  the  range  projected  for  real  GDP 
growth in 2008 has been revised slightly downwards, whereas for 2007 the new range lies 
within the upper part of the previous one. Available forecasts from international organisations 
broadly confirm this outlook.  
The scenario of sustained real GDP growth broadly in line with trend potential is based on 
the expectation that the global economy will remain resilient, with the slowdown of economic 
growth  in  the  United  States  partly  offset  by  the  continued  strength  of  emerging  market 
economies. External demand should therefore provide ongoing support to euro area exports 
and investment. Consumption growth should also contribute to economic expansion, in line 
with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  continued  employment  growth  provides 
supportive conditions. That said, in view of the potential impact of ongoing financial market 
volatility and re-pricing of risk on the real economy, the level of uncertainty remains high.  
BIS Review 145/2007 
 1
In the Governing Council’s view, the risks surrounding this outlook for economic growth lie on 
the  downside.  They  relate  mainly  to  the  potential  for  a  broader  impact  from  the  ongoing 
reappraisal of risk in financial markets on financing conditions and confidence and on world 
and  euro  area  growth, possible  further  oil  and commodity  price  rises, as  well  as  concerns 
about  protectionist  pressures  and  possible  disorderly  developments  owing  to  global 
imbalances.50 
 
As  regards  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  the  annual  HICP 
inflation rate increased sharply again in November 2007, to 3.0% from 2.6% in October. Oil 
prices  have  risen  strongly  in  recent  months,  and  food  prices  have  increased  substantially, 
reflecting higher global demand. In addition, as emphasised on previous occasions, we are 
currently in the midst of a period in which unfavourable effects from energy prices are having 
a strong upward impact on annual HICP inflation rates, owing to the marked decline in oil 
prices a year ago. 
Looking ahead, the HICP inflation rate is expected to remain significantly above 2% in the 
coming months, and is likely to moderate only gradually in the course of 2008. Hence, the 
period  of  temporarily  high  rates  of  inflation  would  be  somewhat  more  protracted  than 
previously  expected.  The  December  Eurosystem  staff  projections  foresee  annual  HICP 
inflation to be between 2.0% and 2.2% in 2007, but then to rise to between 2.0% and 3.0% in 
2008. For 2009, HICP inflation is projected to lie between 1.2% and 2.4%. Compared with 
the September 2007 ECB staff projections, the projected ranges for HICP inflation in 2007 
and 2008 have shifted upwards. Forecasts from international organisations which incorporate 
recent inflation developments give a broadly similar picture. 
These projections largely mirror the assumed path of oil and food prices, for which available 
futures prices suggest a deceleration in the course of next year. On the domestic side, unit 
labour cost growth is projected to increase over the projection horizon. In this context it is 
important  to  emphasise  that  the  staff  projections  assume  that  recent  oil  and  food  price 
dynamics  and  their  impact  on  HICP  inflation  will  not  have  broadly-based  second-round 
effects on wage-setting behaviour. This is a key assumption. A further key assumption is that 
growth in profit margins will moderate over the projection horizon. In combination, these two 
assumptions imply, in the context of the staff projections, a continuation of overall contained 
domestic cost pressures, which contributes to the moderation in inflation projected in 2009.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  view,  risks  to  this  medium-term  outlook  for price  developments 
are fully confirmed to lie on the upside. These risks include the possibility of further rises in 
oil and agricultural prices, continuing the strong momentum observed in recent months, as 
well as increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those foreseen thus far. 
Moreover,  taking  into  account  the  existence  of  capacity  constraints,  the  favourable 
momentum  of  real  GDP  growth  observed  over  the  past  few  quarters  and  the  positive 
developments in labour markets, stronger than currently expected wage growth may emerge. 
Furthermore,  an  increase  in  pricing  power  in  market  segments  with  low  competition  could 
materialise.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned  meet  their  responsibilities  and 
that second-round effects on wage and price-setting stemming from recent commodity price 
rises be avoided. To that end, any explicit or de facto indexation of nominal wages to prices 
should be eliminated.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Money  and  credit  have  both  continued  to  grow  vigorously  in  recent 
months. The annual growth rate of M3 in October, at 12.3%, is likely to have been influenced 
by  a  number  of  temporary  factors,  such  as  the  flattening  of  the  yield  curve,  the  financial 
market turmoil and specific transactions associated with the restructuring of certain banking 
groups.  However,  even  taking  these  special  factors  into  account,  the  underlying  rate  of 
monetary  expansion  remains  strong.  Moreover,  the  sustained  expansion  of  loans  to  the 
domestic  private  sector,  which  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  11.2%  in  October,  points  to  the 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2007
continued  vigour  of  underlying  monetary  dynamics.  Monetary  developments  therefore 
continue to require very careful monitoring, both to detect underlying trends associated with 
inflationary pressures at longer horizons and to better understand shorter-term dynamics.  
Such  monitoring  will  also  provide  a  more  complete  picture  of  the  response  of  the  private 
sector  to  the  increased  volatility  in  financial  markets.  A  broad  assessment  of  underlying 
trends in money and credit growth is particularly important at present given recent financial 
market developments. Heightened financial volatility may influence the short-term behaviour 
of  money-holders  and  thereby  complicate  the  extraction  of  the  underlying  trend  monetary 
developments. At the same time, monetary and credit data can also offer an important insight 
into how financial institutions, households and firms have responded to the financial market 
turmoil.  
For the time being, however, there is little evidence that the financial market turbulence since 
early August has strongly influenced the dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates, 
although specific balance sheet items, such as holdings of money market fund shares/units, 
may have been affected. Indeed, the growth of bank loans to households and non-financial 
corporations has remained robust in recent months, which may suggest that the supply of 
credit has not been impaired. Further data and analysis will be required to develop a more 
complete view of the impact of the financial market developments on bank balance sheets, 
financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis fully confirms the assessment that there are upside risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  term,  in  a  context  of  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  and  against  the 
background  of  sound  economic  fundamentals  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  the 
reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial  markets  is  still  evolving  and  uncertainty  about  the  potential 
impact on the real economy has continued. Consequently, the Governing Council will monitor 
very closely all developments. Our monetary policy stands ready to counter upside risks to 
price stability, as required by our mandate. In particular, for the recent increase in inflation to 
remain temporary, it is of the essence that no second-round effects materialise via an impact 
from  current  inflation  rates  on  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour.  By  acting  in  a  firm  and 
timely manner on the basis of our assessment, we will ensure that second-round effects and 
risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise and that medium and long-
term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. This is all the 
more important in the current context. As regards the financial markets, we will continue to 
pay great attention to developments over the coming weeks. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policy,  the  European  Commission’s  autumn  2007  economic  forecast 
generally  confirms  the  picture  of  improving  budget  balances  in  the  euro  area  this  year. 
However,  progress  with  structural  fiscal  consolidation  in  countries  with  remaining  budget 
imbalances  is  generally  disappointing.  This  lack  of  ambition  unnecessarily  prolongs  the 
correction  of  remaining  fiscal  deficits  and  could  lead  to  negative  surprises  should  the 
macroeconomic  environment  turn  less  favourable.  In  this  context,  Member  States  should 
meet the commitment they made in the Eurogroup’s Berlin agreement of April 2007, namely 
that most euro area members would achieve their medium-term objectives in 2008 or 2009, 
and all should aim for 2010 at the latest. 
With regard to structural reforms, it is important that governments continue their efforts to 
make progress. The improvements in the employment situation over recent years show the 
fruits  of  past  reforms.  It  is  essential  that  the  reform  momentum  to  enhance  competition, 
productivity growth and labour market flexibility is maintained and that there are no reversals 
of the reform process in the countries of the euro area. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 145/2007 
 3
