Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the labour market  
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
conference  to  mark  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Federation  of  Norwegian  Professional 
Associations, Oslo, 24 October 2007. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain assessments of the 
economic situation or the monetary stance.  
 The  Norwegian  economy  is  expanding  sharply  after  the  strong  upturn  began  in  summer 
2003. The upturn followed a period of slow growth from 1998 and a mild slowdown in 2002 
and into 2003. Growth has been stronger than in the cyclical upturn in the mid-1990s. The 
high  rate  of  growth  has  only  to  a  limited  extent  fed  through  to  a  higher  rise  in  prices  for 
consumer goods and services. Electricity prices have fallen sharply this year, contributing to 
low inflation and high real wage growth. But even excluding energy, inflation is still low, even 
though it has gradually picked up since late summer 2006.  
In  recent  years,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  influenced  by  a  number  of  positive 
supply-side factors.  
First, high export prices and low import prices have resulted in a substantial improvement in 
Norway’s terms of trade. We can now import considerably more for a given quantity of export 
goods. 
Second,  productivity  growth  has  been  unusually  strong,  both  for  companies  competing  on 
international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the  domestic  market.  In 
comparison with other countries, productivity gains in banks and other service sectors stand 
out in particular. Examples are automated processes and swifter payments in the financial 
industry, and improved inventory and management systems in commerce and transport. This 
reduces production costs. The business sector is quick to adapt and change, and to make 
use of new technology that is available in an international market. This is probably due to the 
modernisation in the 1980s and 1990s of the way the economy functions, which resulted in 
more efficient markets.  
Although  satisfactory  current  statistics  for  central  government  and  local  government 
productivity  are  not  available,  government  agencies  have  probably  also  become  more 
efficient.  New  technology  and  new  organisational  structures  have  certainly  provided 
opportunities to increase efficiency.  
Third, an ample supply of foreign labour has been an important factor behind output growth. 
In  particular,  the  supply  of  foreign  labour  has  increased  sharply  after  EU  enlargement  in 
2004.  
Improved terms of trade, high productivity growth in the Norwegian business sector and the 
increase  in  labour  supply  have  resulted  in  a  favourable  environment  for  the  Norwegian 
economy. Unemployment has declined considerably and is now very low. The labour market 
is  tight.  Unemployment  has  not  been  as  low  since  the  second  half  of  the  1980s,  and 
employment has risen sharply this year.  
Wage-earners and enterprises have both fared well. Cheap imported goods have resulted in 
a subdued rise in consumer prices and a substantial increase in wage-earners’ real wages. 
High  export  prices  have  restrained  the  rise  in  real  labour  costs.  Combined  with  high 
productivity  growth,  this  has  resulted  in  high  corporate  earnings  and  solid  growth  in 
employment. 
At  the  same  time,  wage-earners  share  of  corporate  value  added  has  been  reduced,  from 
around 75 per cent at the end of the 1980s to 70 per cent at the end of the 1990s, and now 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 1
stands at below 65 per cent. Solid productivity growth and high prices for export goods and 
deliveries to the petroleum sector have contributed to the reduction in the wage share over 
the  past  few  years.  The  ample  supply  of  labour  has  probably  had  a  dampening  effect  on 
wage growth. Increased globalisation may have provided greater opportunities for Norwegian 
enterprises  to  relocate  production  to  other  countries  if  labour  costs  become  too  high.  This 
probably  places  some  restraint  on  wage  demands  among  workers  in  sectors  where 
enterprises have such opportunities. 
Historically,  a  high  wage  share  has  tended  to  be  accompanied  by  low  unemployment. 
Developments in recent years have provided the basis for strong growth in employment while 
the wage share has fallen. 
Is it possible to sustain the combination of low unemployment and a low wage share?  
First, it partly depends on whether the positive supply-side conditions are sustained. There is 
probably symmetry here. Should the terms of trade deteriorate, productivity growth slacken 
and  foreign  workers  return  to  their  home  country,  the  wage  share  will  increase,  profits  fall 
and unemployment increase.  
There is now a prospect of slower global growth. There are also signs that the strong growth 
in  productivity  that  has  been  evident  in  other  countries  –  for  example  in  the  US  –  is 
moderating somewhat. And we may see a similar trend in Norway.  
Second, even without a reversal, profits may fall and unemployment rise. The implications of 
this will depend on how far businesses, in their search for qualified labour, will go in bidding 
up  wages.  It  will  also  depend  on  how  wage-earners  react  and  on  their  ability  to  adapt  to 
change. Furthermore, it must be expected that the strong krone will shave profits in some 
enterprises and industries at the moment, even though many have used currency hedging to 
safeguard their income.  
Even though demand for labour is strong, there is a risk that outflows from the labour market 
to various social security schemes will remain high. Sickness absence is high, and the share 
of  the  working-age  population  on  rehabilitation  schemes  or  receiving  disability  pensions  is 
rising.  Many  workers  choose  to  take  early  retirement  under  the  AFP  scheme  (contractual 
early  retirement)  when  they  reach  62  years  of  age,  and  –  because  this  age  group  is 
expanding sharply – this number will probably increase in the years ahead. In Norway, close 
to  600  000  persons  of  working  age  receive  social  security  benefits  or  pensions.  This  is 
equivalent to 25 per cent of the labour force. This is the Norwegian economy’s Achilles’ heel. 
A particularly disturbing aspect is that disability is increasing among young people1. 
High income growth and a sharp rise in the number of households laid the basis for a sharp, 
long-term rise in house prices. Self-reinforcing mechanisms were also at work, generating an 
atmosphere  approaching  euphoria.  People  hurried  to  buy  dwellings  in  order  to  take 
advantage  of  the  rise  in  value.  It  now  appears  that  the  housing  market  is  cooling  after  an 
almost three-fold rise in prices in real terms in the course of the past 14 years. House price 
inflation  has  been  accompanied  by  strong  growth  in  household  debt.  Household  debt  in 
Norway  is  now  about  twice  the  level  of  disposable  income,  making  the  debt-income  ratio 
higher than ever. At the same time, saving is declining and now seems to be negative. This 
means  that  in  addition  to  fully  financing  their  housing  investments  through  mortgages, 
households are also raising loans to finance current consumption.  
As I mentioned earlier, the favourable developments in the Norwegian economy of the past 
few years are primarily due to supply-side changes. A flexible inflation target for monetary 
policy – as in Norway and a number of other countries – provides a sound basis for coping 
with the shocks to our economy that have occurred in recent years. The aim of preventing 
                                                 
1   See Elisabeth Fevang og Knut Røed (2006): ”Veien til uføretrygd i Norge” (The road to disability pensions in 
Norway), Report No. 10 2006, Ragnar Frisch Centre for Economic Research. Norwegian only. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2007
inflation expectations from becoming entrenched below the operational target of 2.5 per cent 
was one of the main reasons the interest rate was lowered to a very low level in 2003 and 
2004,  when  inflation  receded  and  approached  zero.  Low  interest  rates  have  stimulated 
demand  and  output  and  gradually  led  to  the  prospect  of  higher  inflation,  which  we  are 
addressing  by  increasing  the  interest  rate.  Consumer  price  inflation  is  still  fairly  low,  but 
capacity utilisation is now at such a high level that inflation is projected to move up gradually 
to 2.5 per cent. Higher interest rates will contribute to a gradual decline in capacity utilisation, 
thereby preventing inflation from becoming too high.  
In the long term, monetary policy cannot influence real economic variables such as output 
and  employment;  it  can  only  influence  nominal  variables  such  as  inflation,  the  nominal 
interest rate and the nominal exchange rate. When monetary policy serves as an anchor for 
inflation expectations, it allows the interplay between monetary policy and other components 
of the economy to function.  
A good result can be achieved if the social partners take the role of "leader" and the central 
bank  the  role  of  "follower".  Wage  growth  can  then  be  determined  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
monetary  policy  response.  Flexible  inflation  targeting  provides  a  fixed  framework  for 
monetary policy and gives a clear indication of how the central bank is to respond in different 
situations. The "leader" – the social partners – can internalise the monetary policy response 
and  take  the  "follower’s"  –  Norges  Bank’s  –  response  to  their  actions  into  account.  This 
approach  is  most  relevant  when  wage  setting  is  centralised.  A  number  of  studies2  have 
shown that countries with a relatively high degree of centralisation and coordination, such as 
Norway,  can  achieve  relatively  low  unemployment.  When  wage-setting  is  decentralised, 
monetary  policy  will  instead  influence  wage  growth  via  market  mechanisms,  by  stabilising 
aggregate demand for goods, services and labour. Monetary policy that is flexibly oriented 
towards low and stable inflation will function well whether wages are set at the central, local 
or individual level2. 
In the initial period after the introduction of the inflation target in 2001, it appeared that the 
social  partners  had  not  yet  internalised  the  response  pattern  ensuing  from  the  monetary 
policy mandate. We are now well into a cyclical phase with very high capacity utilisation and 
low  unemployment.  In  this  situation,  there  may  be  a  risk  that  wage  growth  will  again 
accelerate. On the other hand, the experience gained by the social partners that large pay 
rises  push  up  interest  rates  may  have  the  effect  of  curbing  pay  increases.  In  local  wage 
negotiations at enterprise level, competition, the supply of foreign labour and the possibility of 
outsourcing or relocating activities may dampen the impact.  
Low  and  stable  inflation  should  not  be  taken  for  granted.  Norway’s  and  other  countries’ 
economic history shows that inflation and inflation expectations can become unhinged. There 
are many self-regulating mechanisms in the economy, but inflation does not regulate itself.  
The inflation target of 2.5 per cent also provides a framework for the social partners. Over 
time,  nominal  wage  growth  above  2.5  per  cent  will  entail  higher  real  wages  and  higher 
purchasing  power.  Real  wage  growth  that  exceeds  productivity  growth  may  lead  to  higher 
inflation and higher interest rates.  
In government-financed enterprises, which are often labour-intensive, budgets are adapted 
to expected wage growth. This is usually in line with assumptions about cost inflation in the 
economy  as  a  whole  and  with  the  inflation  target.  If  wages  rise  more  than  this,  efficiency 
must  be  increased  in  order  to  minimise  the  adverse  impact  on  service  production  and 
customers. 
                                                 
2   Calmfors  and  Driffill  (1988):  “Bargaining  structure,  corporatism  and  macroeconomic  performance”,  in 
Economic Policy, April, 14-61 and Driffill (2006): “The Centralization of Wage Bargaining Revisited. What have 
we learned?” in Journal of Common Market Studies, Vol. 44, no. 4, November, 731-756. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 3
All economic agents can plan ahead on the assumption that inflation will be about 2.5 per 
cent  over  time.  This  is  the  most  valuable  contribution  Norges  Bank  can  provide  the  social 
partners and other economic agents.  
Thank you for your attention. 
    4 
 BIS Review 122/2007
    BIS Review 122/2007 
 5
    6 
 BIS Review 122/2007
    BIS Review 122/2007 
 7
 8 
 BIS Review 122/2007
