European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
8 November 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since our previous meeting fully confirms that the outlook for price stability over the medium 
term is subject to upside risks. Against this background, and with money and credit growth 
vigorous in the euro area, our monetary policy stands ready to counter upside risks to price 
stability, as required by our mandate. The economic fundamentals of the euro area remain 
sound  and  support  a  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  economic  activity.  However,  the 
ongoing  reappraisal  of  risk  in  financial  markets  has  led  to  continued  uncertainty.  This 
warrants a thorough examination of additional information before drawing further conclusions 
for  monetary  policy  in  the  context  of  our  medium  term-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy 
focused on maintaining price stability. Accordingly, the Governing Council will monitor very 
closely  all  developments.  By  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  on  the  basis  of  our 
assessment,  we  will  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not 
materialise and that medium and long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in 
line with price stability, which is all the more important at times of financial market volatility 
and increased uncertainty. This will favour an environment conducive to sustained economic 
growth, well-functioning markets and job creation. As regards the financial markets, we will 
continue to pay great attention to developments over the period to come. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
On  the  basis  of  the  available  data,  it  appears  that  the  sustained  real  economic  growth 
experienced in the euro area in the first half of 2007 has continued through the third quarter, 
as  reflected  in  the  data  for  industrial  production  and  retail  sales  that  have  been  released 
since  our  meeting  in  early  October.  While  financial  market  volatility  seems  to  have 
contributed  to  a  decline  in  euro  area  consumer  and  business  confidence  indicators  in  the 
past  few  months,  these  indicators  generally  remain  above  their  historical  averages  and 
continue  to  point  to  ongoing  sustained  growth.  Overall,  the  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area 
remain  sound,  including  in  particular  sustained  corporate  earnings  and  profitability,  robust 
employment growth and falling unemployment to levels not seen for 25 years. 
Available forecasts for 2008 continue to confirm our main scenario of real GDP growing at 
around trend potential. This scenario is based on the expectation that the global economy 
will remain resilient, with the slowdown of economic growth in the United States partly offset 
by the sustained strength of emerging market economies. Continued strong external demand 
should provide ongoing support to euro area exports and investment. Consumption growth in 
the euro area should also contribute to economic growth, in line with developments in real 
disposable  income,  as  continued  employment  growth  provides  supportive  conditions.  That 
said, in view of the potential impact of prolonged financial market volatility and the re-pricing 
of  risk  on  the  real  economy,  the  level  of  uncertainty  surrounding  this  broadly  favourable 
outlook for economic activity remains high.  
On  balance,  risks  to  the  outlook  for  growth  are  judged  to  lie  on  the  downside.  These 
downside  risks  relate  mainly  to  the  potential  for  a  broader  impact  from  the  ongoing 
reappraisal of risk in financial markets on confidence and financing conditions, further oil and 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 1
commodity  price  rises,  as  well  as  concerns  about  protectionist  pressures  and  possible 
disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
As  regards  price  developments,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  the  annual  HICP 
inflation rate increased very strongly to 2.6% in October 2007, from 2.1% in September. This 
sharp  increase  is  a  matter  of  particular  concern  and  it  is  essential  that  it  does  not  affect 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  To  that  effect,  we  have  already  indicated  on 
previous  occasions  that  we  are  now  in  a  period  during  which  unfavourable  effects  from 
energy prices will have a strong upward impact on annual HICP inflation rates, owing mainly 
to  the  marked  decline  in  energy  prices  a  year  ago.  In  addition,  these  effects  have  been 
strengthened  by  recent  substantial  further  increases  in  oil,  non-oil  commodity  and,  in 
particular,  food  prices.  Overall,  we  expect  the  HICP  inflation  rate  to  remain  significantly 
above 2% in the coming months before moderating again in the course of 2008.  
Risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments  are  fully  confirmed  to  lie  on  the 
upside.  These  risks  include  the  possibility  of  persistently  high  oil  and  agricultural  prices, 
continuing  the  strong  momentum  observed  in  recent  months,  as  well  as  unanticipated 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes.  Moreover,  taking  into  account  the 
existence  of  capacity  constraints,  the  favourable  momentum  of  real  GDP  growth  observed 
over  the  past  few  quarters,  and  the  positive  signs  from  labour  markets,  stronger  than 
currently  expected  wage  developments  may  occur.  Furthermore,  an  increase  in  pricing 
power in market segments with low competition could materialise. Such developments would 
pose upward risks to price stability. It is therefore crucial that all parties concerned meet their 
responsibilities and that second-round effects be avoided. In addition, the explicit or de facto 
indexation of nominal wages to prices should be reduced and ultimately eliminated. 
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term horizons. The strength of both money and credit growth in recent months – with 
the annual growth rates of M3 and MFI loans to the private sector both at more than 11% in 
September – may have been influenced by a number of temporary or special factors, such 
as the flattening of the yield curve and the recent financial market volatility. However, even 
taking into account these special factors, the underlying rate of money and credit expansion 
remains strong. Monetary developments therefore continue to require very careful monitoring 
so  as  to  detect  underlying  trends  on  the  one  hand  and  to  better  understand  shorter-term 
dynamics on the other. This monitoring will provide a more complete picture of the response 
of the private sector to the increased volatility in financial markets. 
A broad assessment of underlying trends in money and credit growth is particularly important 
given recent financial market developments, since financial volatility may influence the short-
term behaviour of money-holders and thereby affect monetary developments. Monetary and 
credit data can therefore offer an important insight into how financial institutions, households 
and  firms  have  responded  to  the  financial  market  volatility.  Indeed,  previous  episodes  of 
heightened financial market uncertainty have been associated with large portfolio shifts into 
safe  and  liquid  monetary  assets.  For  the  time  being,  however,  there  is  little  evidence  that 
such shifts have influenced the dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates since the 
onset  of  financial  market  volatility  in  early  August,  although  specific  balance  sheet  items, 
such as holdings of money market fund shares/units, may have been strongly affected.  
The rate of growth of bank loans to households and non-financial corporations has remained 
robust in recent months, tentatively suggesting that there is no impairment in credit supply. 
However, it cannot be excluded that the strong loan flows partly reflect the re-intermediation 
of some financing onto bank balance sheets given illiquidity in some segments of the asset-
backed  securities  markets.  Further  data  and  analysis  will  be  required  to  develop  a  more 
complete  view  of  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  volatility  on  bank  balance  sheets, 
financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the information identified under the economic analysis with the 
outcome of the monetary analysis has fully confirmed the existence of upside risks to price 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2007
stability over the medium term, with money and credit growth vigorous in the euro area, and 
against the background of sound economic fundamentals in the euro area. At the same time, 
given the continued uncertainty, additional information is needed before further conclusions 
for  monetary  policy  can  be  drawn.  Consequently,  the  Governing  Council  will  monitor  very 
closely all developments. Our monetary policy stands ready to counter upside risks to price 
stability, as required by our mandate. By acting in a firm and timely manner on the basis of 
our  assessment,  we  will  ensure  that  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not 
materialise and that medium and long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in 
line with price stability, which is all the more important in the current context. As regards the 
financial markets, we will continue to pay great attention to developments over the period to 
come. 
Turning to fiscal policy, the Governing Council welcomes the ECOFIN Council’s agreement 
to  strengthen  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  Governing  Council 
also  welcomes  the  recent  confirmation  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  of  a  reinforcement  of  its 
commitment  to  the  full  implementation  of  the  Pact.  In  particular,  the  provisions  of  the 
preventive  arm,  including  the  call  for  a  structural  adjustment  of  at  least  0.5%  of  GDP  per 
annum, need to be adhered to by all countries with fiscal imbalances. In this regard, 2008 
budget  plans  in  a  number  of  countries  point  to  a  pro-cyclical  fiscal  stance  and  an 
unwarranted relaxation of consolidation efforts. This gives rise to concern as consolidation 
shortfalls  undermine  in  particular  the  Eurogroup  agreement  to  achieve  sound  budgetary 
positions by 2010 at the latest.  
With regard to structural reforms, the Governing Council stresses that a key effect of well-
designed  structural  reforms  is  a  sustainable  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation  of  workers  and  households.  Reforms  which  increase  the  incentives  for  firms  and 
individuals  to  invest  in  human  capital  tend  to  enhance  overall  labour  demand  and 
productivity. Reducing non-wage labour costs would also enhance employment and the net 
income levels of workers. Moreover, labour market regulations should not discourage firms 
from offering jobs, or workers from accepting them. It is encouraging to see that past labour 
market reforms have contributed to job creation and reduced unemployment. It is important 
that governments continue in this direction and do not reverse past reforms just at the point 
when  they  are  starting  to  bear  fruit.  Moreover,  the  Governing  Council  reiterates  its  full 
support  for  all  efforts  which  foster  market  flexibility  and  enhance  competition.  This  also 
applies  to  the  agricultural  markets.  Against  the  background  of  a  marked  increase  in 
international  food  commodity  prices,  further  liberalisation  and  reforms  in  EU  agricultural 
markets  would  help  to  enhance  their  efficiency  and  benefit  European  consumers  through 
lower prices. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 128/2007 
 3
