Zamani Abdul Ghani: Reinventing retirement strategies in the new world 
of risks 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  4th  Asian  Conference  on  Pensions  &  Retirement  Planning:  "Reinventing 
Retirement Strategies in the New World of Risks", Kuala Lumpur, 26 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at  the  4th  Asian  Conference  on  Pensions  and 
Retirement  Planning.  Let  me  first  extend  a  warm  welcome  and  Selamat  Datang  to  all  the 
participants from abroad and fellow Malaysians here today. During this "Visit Malaysia Year", 
which  is  also  the  year  Malaysia  celebrates  its  50th  year  of  independence,  I  do  hope  our 
foreign  participants  will  make  time  to  enjoy  Malaysia's  diverse  culture,  and  experience  the 
many unique sights, sounds and flavours, as well as discover why Malaysia is “truly Asia”.  
I am indeed very pleased to be invited by the Asia Insurance Review to address this major 
Conference. This Conference brings together both experts and learners who all share deep 
interests in the development of the pension and retirement planning. I was told that we have 
amongst us today distinguished market practitioners and participants from the insurance and 
banking industry, regulators, pension providers, consultants, and investment managers from 
17 countries. I wish to congratulate the Asia Insurance Review for bringing together such a 
gathering here in Kuala Lumpur , and organizing this Conference for the fourth consecutive 
year.  
The theme for this year's conference, "Reinventing retirement strategies in the new world of 
risks" is most appropriate and relevant to Asia . As we are aware, the ageing population is 
also  an  issue  in  this  part  of  the  world.  Statistics  have  indicated  that  worldwide,  a  greater 
number of people are reaching old age and living longer than before. For Asian countries, the 
World  Bank  reported  that  by  2040,  the  number  of  the  elderly  will  surpass  the  number  of 
children and by 2050, it is estimated that there will be nearly 1 billion elderly in Asia . The 
increasing  number  of  ageing  population,  relative  to  a  declining  workforce  in  Asia  ,  would 
significantly  increase  the  dependency  ratio  in  the  Asian  region  from  approximately  10% 
currently to 25% in 2050. Some Asian countries' dependency ratio is expected to reach even 
as high as 70% in 2050.  
Malaysia too is not spared from this worldwide phenomenon. The proportion of Malaysians 
age above 60 is expected to be more than doubled from 7% of the total population in 2000 to 
16%  in  2020.  With  improved  standards  of  living,  life  expectancy  is  expected  to  further 
increase  to  79  years  for  females  and  75  for  males.  By  2040,  therefore,  one  fifth  of 
Malaysians  are  expected  to  be  in  the  more  than  60-years  age  bracket.  During  the  same 
period, the ratio of population between the ages of 15 to 60 years is expected to increase 
albeit at a slower rate until 2020, and then decline to form about 63% of the population in 
2040.  
The  increase  in  life  expectancy,  or  longevity,  is  very  much  attributable  to  advances  in 
medical science and technology, as well to improved access to such facilities, resulting in a 
steady rise in the average age of the population throughout the world. This trend, and the 
falling of fertility rates, perhaps due to urbanization and higher number of working women, 
has  long  been  experienced  by  the  developed  countries  and  is  rapidly  emerging  in  the 
developing economies.  
This demographic change has also brought with it an observable change in the social values 
of  societies.  The  World  Bank  estimated  that  currently,  about  74%  of  the  elderly  in  Asia  is 
being  supported  by,  and  live  with  their  children  or  grandchildren.  This  finding  is  also 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 1
consistent with a recent survey conducted in Malaysia which revealed that 67% of retirees' 
main  source  of  income  originated  from  their  children.  This  “extended  family”  factor  has 
often  been  quoted  as  the  reason  why  retirement  planning  may  not  really  be  necessary  in 
Asia . However, findings from the UN suggested that, as countries mature and develop, an 
increasing number of elderly are left to fend for themselves without their children's or family's 
support. This shift is seen as a form of natural adjustments, when the population in general 
embraced  increasing  progress  and  that  a  fast  changing  modern  environment  requires 
precious resources to be well spent in a short period of time.  
Premised against these demographic and societal value changes, many countries worldwide 
have  placed  greater  effort  and  emphasis  in  reviewing  the  sustainability  and  long-term 
affordability  of  their  pension  systems,  culminating  in  several  reforms  to  their  pension 
structures.  The  reforms  are  in  fact  inevitable,  as  most  of  the  existing  public  pension 
schemes, whether pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system or a fully funded system, were ill-designed 
to  deliver  fair  benefit  levels  to  pensioners  in  the  future.  This  is  so  as  they  were  originally 
crafted  without  taking into  account  the  demographic  and socio-economic  changes  that  are 
being seen today.  
In  reformulating  retirement  strategies,  therefore,  due  emphasis  must  be  given  to  several 
main challenges, foremost being longevity risk posed by an ageing population. A majority of 
pension schemes are built on the premise that the government is able to support the defined 
benefit pension payments as and when they become due. In simple terms, this essentially 
means that I will be financially taken care of by the government when I'm old. However, this 
notion  may  not  be  financially  sustainable  anymore  as  most  pension  schemes  have  not 
imputed the impact of longevity risk at the outset. Longevity had resulted in a higher number 
of  retirees  drawing  pension  benefits  vis-à-vis  the  gainfully  employed  tax-paying  persons, 
thereby contributing to untenable fiscal deficits. In response to this challenge, some countries 
are shifting towards the defined contribution (DC) schemes . However, while a DC scheme 
could address the issue of sustainability, it would not adequately cater the need to provide a 
stream of benefit payment throughout the lives of retirees, especially for those who outlived 
their retirement savings.  
In Malaysia , for example, most of those employed are mandated to contribute to a defined 
contribution (DC) scheme known as the Employees Provident Fund (EPF for short). A recent 
survey  conducted  revealed  that  a  bout  72%  of  EPF  contributors  spend  their  entire  EPF 
savings within 3 years of retirement, i.e., by the age of 58, an average retiree would have all 
his retirement savings depleted. In the case of a man, he has to be financially self-supporting 
for the next 17 years of his life, assuming he lives till 75. Presumably, his retirement needs 
will  be  met  by  family  members.  However,  with  diminishing  “extended  family”  values,  it  is 
uncertain if this will eventually happen.  
Another significant challenge is to modify the structure of mandatory pension schemes itself, 
of which many are based on a full-time employment model. Most countries in this region do 
not  have  extensive  pension  schemes  to  cover  both  the  formal  and  informal  sectors.  I 
understand that in Thailand and China , for example, only about 4% and 60% of the labour 
force is respectively covered. The full-time employment model does not adequately address 
the profound changes in employment patterns, which economies are now experiencing, such 
as the increasing number of women in the workforce.  
Then again, most pension schemes are also designed for workers with full and uninterrupted 
careers. This does not reflect the experience of women, as we see more and more today, 
who  may  leave  their  jobs  to  become  full  time  housewives  or  homemaker.  Breakdown  of 
marriage institutions, which is now not uncommon, and the fact that women typically outlive 
their husbands, place women at greater risk of being in poverty in old age unless pension 
schemes are adapted to meet their needs. Pension schemes must also take into account the 
changing work patterns in economies, which in the recent decade had seen an increase in 
part-time workers, the self-employed and temporary workers.  
2 
 BIS Review 137/2007
The third challenge is in instilling public awareness on planning for retirement, particularly 
on having an appropriate level of retirement income to support retirees' healthcare and long-
term  care.  A  recent  survey  conducted  in  Malaysia  revealed  that  more  than  80%  of 
Malaysians are either indifferent or not worried whether or not they have enough money for 
retirement. Only 34% are consciously saving regularly for retirement and an alarming 60% do 
not know exactly how much they need during retirement. In this regard, there is a significant 
role  for  key  stakeholders,  including  industry  players,  to  educate  the  public  to  be  more 
responsible for their retirement needs, enhance understanding of the risks faced by retirees 
and design products and services that provide long term financial security for the retirees.  
Another  major  challenge  facing  pension  systems  is  the  implication  of  financial  market 
environment  on  pension  investment  strategies  .  While  the  demand  for  savings  and 
retirement products exert growing influence on financial markets, subsequent falls in asset 
prices have led to wide-spread funding pressures in the past for most pension systems. This 
was  exacerbated  by  the  limited  supply  of  financial  instruments  to  meet  the  long-term 
liabilities of pension funds leading to asset liability mismatch and enhanced exposure of the 
fund to short-term price volatility.  
Another observation worth highlighting under the current pension setup in most jurisdictions 
is  the  absence  of  a  single  regulatory  body  to  oversee  the  functions  of  an  effective  and 
efficient pension delivery system, both public and private. The absence of a single regulatory 
body has its list of drawbacks such as impeding the development of market infrastructure, 
the  ability  to  conduct  effective  oversight  of  the  providers'  performance  and  strategies  and 
monitor the investments made by pension funds. A pension industry that is not cohesively 
governed may result in duplications and unnecessary administrative cost. Hence, to strike a 
balance  between  achieving  goals  of  market  efficiency  and  reducing  contingent  fiscal 
liabilities,  while  promoting  appropriate  social  benefits,  may  warrant  a  singular  and  unified 
approach under a single regulatory body.  
Amidst such challenges, there have been substantial reforms to pension systems in recent 
years to avoid systemic risks implications to financial stability and fiscal sustainability. Allow 
me  to  briefly  outline  the  reforms  undertaken  by  various  jurisdictions.  One  of  the  most 
common features of reforms involves raising the age at which eligibility of benefits can occur. 
For  some,  especially  in  European  countries,  large  tax  increases  were  introduced  as  an 
alternative  to  address  serious  problems  of  financing  pension  benefits.  In  countries  with 
severe demographic challenges, pension benefits were reduced by way of indexing benefits 
to  wages  and  consumer  price  indices.  Essentially,  much  of  the  pension  reforms  were 
focussed on reducing fiscal deficits.  
However, the impact of such reforms has achieved varying degrees of success and in some 
cases has been noted to have regressive effects. While it is not expected that all countries 
may make similar choices, striking a balance between maximising returns on pension fund 
investments  and  ensuring  stable  retirement  incomes  may  result  in  trade-offs  that  could 
compromise  other  developmental  needs.  For  example,  poor  investment  returns  on  asset 
classes  arising  from  funded  pension  schemes  may  require  the  Government  to  secure 
alternative funds to provide sufficient returns for the workers making such contributions. This 
could potentially stifle the development of other sectors in the economy.  
Moving  forward,  the  challenge  is  to  provide  sufficient,  affordable,  sustainable  and  robust 
pension  schemes.  In  this  connection,  I  will  attempt  to  raise  pertinent  initiatives  that  will 
accord  the  opportunity  for  us  to  discuss  and  develop  coherent  and  converging  solutions 
which are both effective and timely.  
Firstly, the design of a suitable policy framework to provide incentives for more stable long 
term savings that could negate the effects of reducing living standards after retirement and 
fiscal  strains  in  the  government  budget.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  strong  need  to  pursue 
measures  to  incentivise  and  marshal  long  term  savings  without  making  it  compulsory,  a 
worthwhile effort in the wake of managing retirement risk implications. The measures involve 
BIS Review 137/2007 
 3
raising  financial  literacy  and  public  awareness  of  the  perils  of  the  aging,  describing  the 
uncertainties of health care and the limited capacity of government funded schemes;  
Secondly, with the increasing demand for suitable financial instruments to hedge long-term 
liabilities and with increased emphasis to strengthen asset-liability management practices to 
meet projected obligations, further development of the financial instruments that facilitate risk 
management is therefore critical. In this regard, the Government could play a crucial role in 
the  development  of  financial  instruments  and  the  associated  market  infrastructure.  For 
example, the issuance of large amounts of very-long dated bonds and index-linked bonds in 
some industrialised nations have helped mitigate risks associated with the duration gaps of 
asset against liability, inflation and longevity risks;  
Thirdly  is  the  careful  design  and  implementation  of  an  appropriate  tax  mechanism  for 
pension  system  that  will  encourage  greater  retirement  savings.  Again,  the  role  of  the 
Government must be re-emphasized, primarily in packaging suitable tax advantages which 
can  be  offered  in  order  to  incentivise  even  the  population  outside  the  formal  sector  of 
employment to promote higher contributions. Some pension markets remain underdeveloped 
or  at  least  underutilised  in  part  due  to  tax  disincentives.  As  such,  the  design  and 
implementation  of  an  appropriate  tax  framework  incorporating  preferential  tax  treatment 
could facilitate the promotion of long-term savings.  
The problems experienced in recent years by public funded pension systems highlighted the 
importance  of  complementary  or  supplementary  forms  of  private  savings  initiatives.  The 
emergence  of  institutional  investors  in  particular,  primarily  as  risk  transfer  conduits  and  as 
collectors  of  savings  has  shifted  focus  from  publicly  funded  pensions  systems  to  private 
savings schemes. This is the fourth and last initiative I will attempt to raise.  
In  order  to  reduce  the  cost  of  providing  for  the  social  security  of  the  ageing  population, 
developed countries have encouraged the development of private pension schemes through 
tax incentives. In some developed countries, employees are given higher personal tax relief 
for  contributions  to  approved  pension  schemes.  While  some  countries  have  made  private 
pensions mandatory, others continue to grapple with ways to promote participation in private 
pension  systems  in  order  for  households  to  meet  adequate  retirement  income  needs.  As 
such,  measures  need  to  be  taken  to  incentivise  private  pension  schemes.  The  enhanced 
savings intermediation could, to a large extent prompt the development of a more diversified 
financial  system  which  would  be  less  reliant  on  banks  and  consequently  help  reduce  the 
overall risk of contagion.  
The  past  decade  has  underscored  the  importance  of  pension  systems  to  the  economic 
stability of countries and the security of their ageing population. The experience with reforms 
has  also  shown  that  no  one  size  fits  all,  that  countries  have  different  combinations  of  the 
elements  of  an  effective  pension  system  to  consider  depending  on  their  individual 
circumstances.  However,  what  remained  relevant  are  the  two  broad  aims  of  any  pension 
system, that is to reduce poverty and eliminate the risk of rapidly falling living standards in 
retirement.  In  this  regard,  The  Multi-pillar  Pension  Framework  as  advocated  by  the  World 
Bank  would  be  a  good  guide  to  mobilize  both  the  Government  as  well  as  the  insurance 
industry to develop a sustainable pension system. The application of the reform framework 
nonetheless  requires  a  combination  of  measures  that  include  effective  fiscal  policy  and 
incentives as well as the development of the capital market so that the collective outcome is 
effective in its entirety.  
On that note, I wish you all success and may you have a productive and fruitful conference. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 137/2007
