Ardian Fullani: The development of the financial market and money 
market in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the General Assembly of 
the Dealers Association, Tirana, 25 October 2007. 
 Mr. Chairman 
Distinguished Guests, 
It is a great pleasure to be here amongst old and new friends and colleagues. I have dearly 
welcomed the reorganization and reactivation of the Albanian Association of Dealers, and the 
attempts made by its new board to affiliate ACI-Financial Market Association. I am confident 
that  this  reactivation  will  promote,  above  all,  the  market  development,  education  and 
professional training of new members.  
I deem that the meetings of the Dealers Association is a good opportunity to share with you 
some thoughts and concerns regarding the development of the Albanian financial market in 
general and the money market in particular.  
I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  interbank  money  market  is  the  starting  point  to  the 
transmission  mechanism,  driven  by  base  interest  rate  change.  Currently  it  is  the  most 
important channel of transmitting monetary policy decisions to the economy. I have to remind 
you that where you realize the profit, the Bank of Albania implements the monetary policy, 
whose efficiency depends directly on your capability to maximize profit in this market. This 
policy  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  market  participants  are  rational  and  their  primary 
purpose  is  profit  maximization  under  the  conditions  of  a  competitive  environment.  The 
current development of the interbank market in Albania does not fulfil these assumptions yet 
and therefore, it makes the work of the Bank of Albania difficult in carrying out this essential 
function.  
Year  2002  recorded  the  start  of  the  interbank  market,  the  same  year  when  the  indirect 
instruments were introduced by the Bank of Albania to conduct its monetary operations. The 
Bank of Albania has attended the developments of the interbank money market in the last 
five  years.  During  this  period  the  trading  volume  has  been  fifteen  folded,  climbing  from  a 
daily average of 130 million lek in 2002 to a daily average of around 2 billion lek in 2007. Also 
there has been an increase in the maturity of the traded funds, from only trading overnight 
back in 2002 to trading up to three months in 2007.  
Also there has been an increase in the maturity of traded funds, from only trading overnight 
back in 2002 to trading up to three months in 2007. From the beginning of this year, we have 
been able to publish the fixed interest rate indexes, TRIBOR and TRIBID, which is hoped to 
promote the development of the interbank money market.  
However, we have to admit that this development has been a very slow one. During the last 
five years, the lek liabilities of the banking system have increased by 135 billion lek, which 
makes the increase in the trading volume of interbank market by a daily average of 1.9 billion 
lek, only a peanut in a big cake. On the other hand, besides an increase in the volume of 
one-week maturity transactions, longer term transactions are very sporadic. In addition, this 
low development of the interbank money market is also reflected to the wide spreads of the 
quotations for trading, published by commercial banks.  
Nevertheless, the development of the interbank money market is made difficult also because 
of other reasons, some of which are of objective nature.  
It  can  not  be  developed  as  an  isolated  market.  It  progress  is  highly  correlated  to  the 
economic  development  in  general  and  the  development  of  other  financial  markets  in 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 1
particular. The financial market is still characterized by the domination of the banking system, 
while  its  other  segments  continue  to  be  in  a  minor  state  of  their  development.  There  are 
interesting developments in the insurance companies market, while the segment of pension 
funds is still underdeveloped. Furthermore, other specialized intermediaries are completely 
missing, including here even the capital market. All the above and other reasons such as the 
high degree of informality in the economy, credit demand dominated in foreign currency, are 
factors which directly or indirectly impede the enhancement of money market efficiency.  
However, rightly comprehending that many of the reasons are of objective nature, we believe 
that within the limitations imposed by the abovementioned factors, still there are gaps, about 
which I encourage you, to jointly fill as soon as possible.  
In the latest survey conducted by the Bank of Albania on “Money Market Issues”, 7 out of 14 
respondents (commercial banks), (which possess 59 per cent of the market share), outlined 
“the  excess  structural  liquidity”  as  the  main  barrier  to  the  development  of  the  interbank 
money  market,  while  4  out  of  14  banks  (which  have  a  market  share  of  30  per  cent) 
highlighted  “the  credit  risk”  as  the  second  most  important  barrier.  The  tendency  to  keep 
excess structural liquidity as a bank policy was pinpointed by 13 out of the 14 interviewed 
banks,  otherwise  meaning  that  banks  that  share  92  per  cent  of  the  market  do  have  a 
tendency to keep excess structural liquidity.  
We notice that the reasons and obstacles brought up by banks are mostly subjective, and 
their  prevention  depends  more  or  less  depend  on  their  policies  and  behavior.  Banks  keep 
excess liquidity because there is no a developed money market where they could invest this 
liquidity at all times at a fair market price.  
This market can not be developed on its own! 
It is banks’ active liquidity management as opposed to a passive one that creates incentives 
for  developing  the  markets.  In  this  context,  I  would  highly  recommend  you  to  implement 
stricter internal control policies and procedures, so that they can identify opportunity cost and 
missed  profit  opportunities.  Such  a  thing  will  lead  to  improved  efficiency  and  competitive 
positions of the bank on the one hand and market development on the other. The Bank of 
Albania  requires  that  you  design  management  policies  that  are  oriented  toward  profit 
maximization.  The  limitation  to  simple  financial  intermediation,  such  as  collecting  public 
savings and keeping them in the form of excess reserves waiting to be invested in low risk 
government papers, is not a characteristic of contemporary financial markets. All I mentioned 
above implies the indispensability for a more effective management under the conditions of 
enhancing the transparency.  
As to the structural excess liquidity, the Bank of Albania is currently targeting to keep it under 
appropriate levels, in order to increase the degree of the banking system reaction to Bank of 
Albania’s operational decisions. At the same time, we are carefully evaluating necessary 
refinements  to  monetary  policy  instruments,  to  further  promote  the  trading  in  the 
interbank money market. 
Beyond the structural liquidity position, another important issue is the existence of limits that 
certain banks apply in lending relations with one-another. From a pure academic viewpoint, it 
is  quite  easy  to  label  these  limits  as  an  effort  to  ensure  an  oligopolystic  structure  in  the 
market. I do not like to prejudice the prudent stance and measures reflected in these limits. 
However, I should state that in your business with non-bank clients, there may be identified 
elements, to which you take a higher degree of risk than the one materialized in interbank 
money transactions.  
Considering the need for market development and the identification of the role of the 
Bank of Albania in these markets as the Lender of Last Resort as indispensable, we 
have  prepared  and  will  soon  enough  implement  a  complete  package  of  regulations, 
whose purpose is to establish incentives and minimize risks in the Albanian financial 
market. Concretely, these changes consist in:  
2 
 BIS Review 122/2007
The  law  on  repurchase  agreements.  There  is  compiled  the  draft-law,  which  enables  the 
risk-free conduct of repurchase agreements among commercial banks. It will guarantee the 
prevention of credit risk, which is cited by commercial banks as one of the primary causes for 
the existence of limits in the lending relations among banks. This law will also prevent the 
legal risk the banks are faced with when using repurchase contracts.  
Drafting  of  the  regulatory  framework  and  putting  into  application  the  custodian 
principle of delivery versus payment. In order to minimize the payment settlement risk and 
facilitate  the  intermediation  in  all  types  of  transactions  involving  securities,  such  as 
collateralized loans, repurchase agreements, and outright purchase and sale of government 
papers, it is being worked on to put into practice the principle of delivery versus payment.  
Reducing the frequency of government treasury bill auctions. In collaboration with the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  we  have  agreed  on  less  frequent  and  increased  size  auction 
schedule of the government treasury bills. This less frequent auction schedule will limit the 
opportunity of banks to “be liquid” based on distributing their treasury bill investment in such 
a way that liquidity is generated by maturing these government papers.  
Increasing the investment base of investors. In cooperation with the Ministry of Finance 
and  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  it  is  agreed  upon  increasing  the  investors’  base, 
eligible to directly invest in the auctions of government papers. The new agreement signed 
between the Bank of Albania and the Ministry of Finance provides the necessary regulative 
framework for giving an end to the monopoly that the banking system has had in investment 
in  the  primary  market  of  government  papers,  leaving  space  to  natural  and  legal  persons, 
foreign and domestic individuals.  
I do not feel well to assert that this step became indispensable, under the conditions of high 
commissions  applied  by  commercial  banks  in  providing  this  service,  making  the  clients 
reluctant to this kind of investment.  
Earnestly believing in the efficiency and development driven by competition, I am convinced 
that  increasing  the  number  of  operators  licensed  to  trade  government  papers  has  also 
become a necessity. 
Primary rate for favorable clients. Being convinced that the monetary policy efficiency is 
enhanced through transparency, the Bank of Albania aims at including even this rate to the 
entirety of orientation rates used by commercial banks.  
This package is designed to increase incentives for you to find new profit opportunities and 
secure  the  necessary  liquidity  at  a  fair  price  in  the  secondary  security  markets.  These 
measures are oriented toward promoting the activity, so that you will not wait for the client to 
ask for the government papers but search and find this client yourself. And the very first step 
you should make in this direction is: abandon the traditional pension fund security portfolio 
classification  as  “hold  to  maturity”.  In  other  words,  this  implies  the  necessity  for  more 
flexibility,  more  diversification  and  for  the  existence  of  efficient  risk  management 
structures.  
A constant concern, which I want to pay particular attention and get your highest interest on 
it, is the professional development of human skills. I am not making any prejudice about the 
human resources that are currently working at the banking system, but I would like to point 
out that the mobilization of capable human resources, devoted to and shaped professionally 
is  vital  for  the  accomplishment  of  success.  To  be  more  competitive  and  bring  new 
developments, we have to constantly upgrade the skills of each employee at all levels. It is 
true  that  the  majority  of  the  banks  of  our  banking  system  represent  international  well 
experienced banking groups. However, I would like to emphasize that there is still room for 
more expertise and qualified human resources, so that the best practices of the international 
markets are infiltrated in our banking system.  
In  addition,  within  the  framework  of  this  association,  I  would  advocate  that  the  Dealers 
Association must very soon come up with a Code of Conduct, agreed by all its members. 
BIS Review 122/2007 
 3
While this code is a non-statutory body, with no executive powers, it complements the self-
regulation of the market by bringing together the best minds of the market participants and 
professionals to create a reliable trading practice. 
Concluding, I would say that developing the interbank money and security markets is among 
the top priorities of the Bank of Albania. As such, we will make all our efforts to create the 
necessary conditions to minimize the trading risks, as well as create and support initiatives to 
active trading in the these markets. I hope these efforts will receive your understanding and 
more  important  your  cooperation.  It  will  be  very  satisfactory  indeed,  that  in  my  next 
appearance in this platform I will be able to bring concrete results of our common efforts to 
develop interbank money market and secondary market. 
Concluding my speech, I would like to emphasize once more that no long-term and stable 
development may exist, without having effective financial markets. The financial market with 
all its segments, should precede the signals and novelties brought about by rapid dynamics 
of development of the private sector and the economy in general.  
Thank you all for your attention! 
4 
 BIS Review 122/2007
