Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Situation of the Spanish economy and 
financial sector  
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the 
XV Financial  Sector  Meeting  “The  way  forward  for  the  Spanish  banking  business  model”, 
Madrid, 15 April 2008.  
 I  shall  be  focusing  today  on  the  Spanish  economy  which,  naturally  enough,  has  been 
affected by the changes in the international environment prompted by the further slowdown 
in the US economy, the rising course of oil prices and the prolongation of the bout of financial 
turbulence.  
To this end, I shall begin with a brief reference to the situation in the United States and in 
Europe, focusing thereafter on the macroeconomic outlook for Spain in an attempt to define 
its  degree  of  exposure  to  the  international  financial  turbulence.  Finally,  I  shall  offer  some 
economic policy considerations.  
It is in the United States that the deterioration in macroeconomic conditions has been most 
marked. The effects of the sharp adjustment in the US real estate sector have been amplified 
by  the  consequences  of  the  instability  in  international  financial  markets,  severely  affecting 
business and household confidence. The outlook of most analysts for 2008 points to a strong 
deceleration in the first two quarters of the year, and even to a recession at some point along 
the line, although any more medium-term projection is shrouded in considerable uncertainty.  
In  the  euro  area,  some  of  the  risks  to  continued  economic  dynamism  progressively 
materialised  during  2007.  These  were,  namely:  the  appreciation  of  the  euro;  higher  oil, 
commodity  and  food  prices;,  worsening  confidence  and  tighter  financing  conditions, 
prompted  by  the  financial  strains;  and,  of  course,  the  effects  of  the  above-mentioned 
weakening in the US economy. In Europe, this made for a slowdown in the pace of activity in 
the  second  half  of  the  year,  although  euro  area  growth  remained  more  robust  than  in  the 
United States. The resilience shown by the euro area has led analysts to project growth for 
the coming quarters that will be slacker but not far off potential, albeit with a similar measure 
of uncertainty to that expressed in the case of the US economy.  
Turning to prices in the euro area, the rate of inflation stood at 3.5% in March 2008. This 
worrying figure reflects the strong short-term upward pressures stemming from energy and 
food price rises in recent months. Foreseeably, although inflation may hold at a rate of over 
2% for a number of months more, it should begin to move back to this level in the second 
half of 2008. That said, considerable upside risks remain, linked essentially to the possibility 
of second-round effects emerging in wage- and price-setting.  
The Spanish economy ended the year 2007 with a GDP growth rate (of around 3.5%) that 
we  might  qualify  as  robust.  But  it  began  to  show  signs  of  undergoing  a  change  in  cycle, 
following  an  upturn  that  had  lasted  for  more  than  ten  years.  Into  2008,  the  information 
available confirms this perception of the domestic macroeconomic situation.  
In 2007, GDP growth averaged 3.8%, the result of some easing in domestic demand and an 
improvement  in  the  contribution  of  net  external  demand  to  output  growth.  Against  this 
background,  the  slowing  trajectory  on  which  the  Spanish  economy  embarked  during  2007 
was consistent with the tailing off of some of the impulses behind the buoyancy of spending 
in previous years, and with the maturing of the business cycle. Undoubtedly, the raising of 
interest  rates  by  the  ECB  –  from  end-2005  to  June  2007  –  and  the  increasingly  subdued 
rises in house prices began to temper consumption and residential investment decisions as 
early as 2006. This gradual loss of momentum in domestic demand continued in 2007, but 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
was  not  reflected  on  a  similar  scale  by  GDP,  owing  to  the  offsetting  effect  of  net  external 
demand.  
Adding  to  this  domestic  adjustment  dynamic  was,  from  summer  2007,  the  effect  of 
international  financial  market  instability.  This  translated  into  a  deterioration  in  agents' 
expectations, and made itself felt in some spending components – consumption and, above 
all, residential investment – as early as late 2007, but more clearly in the opening months of 
this year.  
However, the weakening in consumption is based on comparison with the relatively high end-
2007 figures, with growth close to 3%, held up by the dynamism of disposable income. And I 
believe it is particularly worth noting that investment in equipment ended the year at a rate of 
increase of close to 9%, highlighting the robustness of business activity in the closing months 
of 2007 against a backdrop of sound corporate earnings and a favourable demand outlook.  
The  demand  for  housing,  which  had  moved  onto  a  mildly  slowing  path  in  mid-2006  in 
response to higher borrowing costs and lower real estate appreciation expectations, appears 
to be showing greater sensitivity to the deterioration in agents' confidence, according to the 
latest  available  information.  Recent  figures  reveal  a  loss  of  momentum  in  activity  and 
employment  in  the  construction  and  related  sectors,  as  they  do  more  generally,  but  on  a 
lesser  scale,  in  the  rest  of  the  economy.  In  any  event,  when  considering  the  ongoing 
adjustment in the residential sector, which was largely inevitable following a prolonged phase 
of  growth  in  supply,  we  should  not  overlook  the  considerable  forces  underpinning  the 
demand for housing in the medium term in Spain, which should help temper the scale and 
intensity of the adjustment.  
The performance of trade in goods and services with the rest of the world has been relatively 
favourable  in  recent  quarters,  and  has  helped  net  external  demand  to  make  a  positive 
contribution  to  GDP  growth  and,  therefore,  to  alleviate  the  loss  of  momentum  in  domestic 
demand. I would highlight the resilience of exports in the past year, despite the significant 
appreciation of the euro and the somewhat diminished dynamism of export markets. Indeed, 
an  incipient  change  in  the  direction  of  our  exports  towards  more  buoyant  markets  is 
becoming perceptible.  
Nevertheless, the nation's net borrowing continued to increase, albeit at a slacker pace than 
in previous years, reaching 9.5% of GDP in 2007, mainly due to the marked and expected 
deterioration in the income balance. The tendency towards a gradual easing in investment by 
firms  and,  above  all,  by  households  should  help  move  the  current  account  deficit  onto  a 
declining course.  
The pace of employment generation adapted to the gradual slowing of activity in the second 
half  of  2007,  ending  the  year  at  a  growth  rate  of  2.5%.  This  trajectory  has  continued, 
somewhat  more  sharply,  in  the  opening  months  of  2008.  It  has  particularly  affected 
employment in the construction industry and also, though to a lesser extent, in manufacturing 
activities,  some  of  which  are  closely  related  to  the  construction  branch.  In  contrast, 
employment in services is proving far more resilient.  
Despite this loss of dynamism in the labour market, labour costs began to rise in 2007, when 
compensation per employee grew at a rate of 3.6%, and have continued to do so in early 
2008, with growth in wage settlements to February of 3.5%. It is highly likely, once the effect 
of indexation clauses (for the deviation by inflation from its official target in 2007) is taken into 
account, that labour costs will rise by more than 4% in 2008 for almost 70% of private-sector 
workers subject to a collective bargaining agreement.  
This  development  is  rather  unfortunate  given  the  change  in  cycle  facing  the  Spanish 
economy, as it may ultimately have an adverse effect on firms’ hiring decisions, accentuating 
the  employment  adjustment  in  a  setting  of  macroeconomic  uncertainty.  But  it  is  also 
inappropriate from the standpoint of its impact on inflation, at a time when this variable, as 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2008
you know, is deteriorating sharply. In recent months, the growth rate of the consumer price 
index has exceeded 4.5%.  
Undeniably,  the  rising  course  of  inflation,  driven  by  the  substantial  increases  in  oil  and 
agricultural commodity  prices on international markets, is a phenomenon common to most 
economies.  But  in  Spain  these  pressures  are  compounding  a  situation  in  which  upward 
biases  in  cost  and  price  formation  persist,  accentuating  the  risk  of  the  deterioration  in 
inflation spreading to the rest of the economy.  
With a view to the immediate future, the macroeconomic projections recently published by 
the  Banco  de  España  suggest  national  demand  will  continue  to  lose  steam,  in  both  its 
consumption  and  capital  investment  components.  This  is  expected,  however,  to  be  partly 
offset by the improved contribution of the net external balance. In this setting, GDP growth is 
projected  to  stand  at  around  2.4%  in  2008.  As  to  the  inflation  outlook,  the  private 
consumption  deflator  will  foreseeably  increase  to  an  average  rate  of  3.6%,  albeit  on  a 
slowing path during the year.  
On numerous occasions the Banco de España has indicated that the Spanish economy has 
undergone far-reaching changes in recent years. These have increased its growth potential 
and provided it with elements of flexibility that leave it better placed to face any shocks that 
may  arise.  Acting  along  these  lines  have  been  Spanish  euro  area  membership,  notable 
population dynamism and the investment drive made in recent years, which have equipped 
the Spanish economy with sound foundations to maintain sustained growth in the medium 
term. Undoubtedly, though, the external turbulence that arose during 2007 may detract from 
the effectiveness of this flexibility.  
One possible source of risks is lower growth of the world economy, either because certain 
economies – particularly the United States – may contract more than expected, or because 
the loss of dynamism may spread more intensely to other areas. This would hinder the buffer 
role that external demand should play in the context of slowing domestic demand. Another 
series  of  potential  risks  are  those  that  would  arise  from  any  prolongation  of  the  financing 
difficulties in international markets generated by the turmoil. Let me go more deeply into this 
second area, as I believe it is of particular relevance for this Meeting.  
Much  has  been  written  and  said  in  recent  months  on  the  origins  and  propagation  of  the 
turbulence. I shall therefore focus here on the consequences of this episode for the Spanish 
financial system, a matter on which there has also been no shortage of comment, though not 
perhaps always well-founded.  
As you know, Spanish credit institutions have based a substantial portion of their business in 
the recent upturn on the granting of loans for housing development and purchases. And a 
large  number  of  these  loans  have  ultimately  been  repackaged  as  negotiable  financial 
instruments by means of securitisation.  
These  two  phenomena  are,  as  you  all  know,  at  the  root  of  the  problems  experienced  by 
certain  credit  institutions  in  other  regions.  But  before  drawing  any  insufficiently  founded 
conclusions from this, we must bear in mind the differences between Spanish institutions and 
those  beyond  our  borders  that  have  been  more  severely  impacted  by  the  effects  of  the 
turbulence. As I shall explain, these differences are substantial and place Spanish financial 
institutions in a sound position to withstand these effects.  
The  first  and  certainly  one  of  the  most  significant  differences  lies  in  the  fact  that  Spanish 
banks have kept the risks of the loans they have securitised on their balance sheets. The 
"originate-to-distribute"  model  followed  elsewhere  has  not  been  developed  at  all  in  Spain 
and, consequently, credit institutions' incentives to value loan risks in a cautious and rigorous 
manner have not been weakened. Under these conditions, it is perfectly understandable why 
products  like  the  US  subprime  mortgages,  which  triggered  the  current  situation,  have  not 
emerged.  
BIS Review 44/2008 
 3
Secondly, Spanish banks have used securitisation not as a mechanism for transferring risks 
off  their  balance  sheets,  but  as  a  means  of  raising  resources  on  the  wholesale  financing 
markets in order to meet the demand for loans from households and businesses. That gives 
rise directly to a second significant difference in favour of the Spanish financial system, since 
when the main objective is to raise funds and not transfer risks, it is not necessary to resort 
to the issuance of overly complex financial instruments.  
Indeed, the securities issued by Spanish banks are characterised by their simplicity, by their 
relatively long maturities (matching, therefore, those of the assets they are financing) and by 
their  needing  only  moderate  credit  enhancements  to  attain  a  high  rating.  This  is  clearly  in 
contrast with other systems, in which complex structured products and rather ad hoc vehicles 
such as conduits and SIVs have proliferated to channel the financing of low-grade loans.  
Likewise,  in  Spanish  bank  portfolios  the  weight  of  these  structured  products,  which  have 
burgeoned  in  the  countries  most  affected,  and  of  the  securities  issued  by  these  special 
financing vehicles, is negligible. In Spain, the traditional retail banking model has continued 
to  prevail.  And  this  prevalence  also  explains  the  minimal  direct  exposure  of  our  financial 
institutions to other factors of risk associated with recent developments in the international 
financial markets. Such is the case, for instance, with leveraged buy-outs (LBOs) and the so-
called  monolines,  which  specialise,  as  you  know,  in  insuring  the  payment  of  numerous 
bonds, including those linked to the securitisation of US subprime mortgages.  
In these circumstances it is easy to understand why the profits reported by Spanish banks in 
2007 have scarcely been affected by the financial turbulence and have continued to increase 
at  a  rate  of  around  19%,  firmly  underpinned  by  their  improved  efficiency  ratios.  Their 
profitability, both in terms of assets and in relation to capital, also grew compared with 2006. 
Indeed, the ROE stood at almost 20%.  
Profitability  is  obviously  the  first  line  of  defence  for  Spanish  banks  against  any  adverse 
shock.  But  their  resilience  is  also  based  on  two  other  pillars:  a  significant  volume  of 
provisions, accumulated by the system during the period of strong credit growth thanks to the 
prudential mechanisms set in place by the Banco de España in the past; and a comfortable 
solvency position. To quantify these two aspects, loan loss provisions widely exceed doubtful 
assets, while the system’s solvency ratio, measured in accordance with the Basel regulatory 
standards, is 11.4%, 3.4 percentage points higher than required.  
These factors mean that Spanish credit institutions face the current situation from a position 
of soundness which, in the international context, is fairly unique. Soundness however is not a 
synonym  for  immunity  and  it  would  be  imprudent,  and  not  befitting  a  supervisor,  to  fail  to 
consider thoroughly the potential risks.  
In this respect, I should first like to refer to the recent developments in the doubtful assets 
ratio for loans granted to households for house purchase. For the last few months, this ratio 
has been on a rising trend. And as it will no doubt continue to grow in the future, I feel we 
should  view  it  as  a  worrying  factor,  but  only  a  moderately  worrying  one,  for  the  following 
reasons. Primarily, because we must not forget that this ratio had been at exceptionally low 
levels as a result of the high rates of growth of lending itself (the denominator of the ratio), so 
that  increases  would  have  been  expected  even  in  the  absence  of  the  present  tensions. 
Secondly,  because  the  current  levels  are  still  relatively  low  and  well  below  those  of  other 
markets. However, in addition, there are some specific features of our financial practices that 
tend to limit the scope of this source of risk. I am basically referring to the fact that in Spain, 
unlike in the United States, households tend to default on their mortgage payments only in 
really extreme conditions.  
The causes for concern may be greater in the case of loans for property development. True, 
the  coincidence  of  the  maturing  of  the  property  cycle  and  the  triggering  of  international 
financial  tensions  has  been  particularly  untimely  for  the  Spanish  economy.  But,  the  stress 
tests we have performed at the Banco de España to calibrate the potential scale of this risk 
for banks show, broadly speaking, that the policy followed in recent years of accumulating 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2008
provisions  and  capital  has  given  rise  to  a  buffer  that  would  enable  shocks  of  an  order  of 
magnitude  comparable  to  those  experienced  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  the  90s  to  be 
absorbed.  
I now come to what I consider to be the main source of uncertainty at the present moment. 
This  is  none  other  than  future  developments  on  the  international  wholesale  financing 
markets, where the possibilities of raising funds have been at extraordinarily restricted levels 
that are not in keeping with a developed international financial system.  
Spanish  banks  have  so  far  largely  managed  to  evade  the  consequences  of  this  sudden 
financial  market  squeeze.  Firstly,  because  their  liabilities  were  issued  at  relatively  long 
maturities,  so  that  the  need  to  refinance  the loans  granted  is  arising much  more  smoothly 
than in other systems in which the relative weight of short-term securities is greater.  
The  low  level  of  dependence  on  funds  raised  in  the  interbank  deposit  markets  has  been 
another mitigating factor. I should point out here that once the subsidiaries and branches of 
foreign banks have been excluded, whose liquidity management is strongly governed by the 
geographical diversification strategies decided by their parents, the rest of the Spanish credit 
system does not borrow in these markets but instead maintains a net credit position in them.  
And  I  should  not  fail  to  mention  either  that  the  recent  dynamism  of  Spanish  households' 
deposits  and  the  progressive  return  of  credit  to  a  more  sustainable  growth  rate  has  also 
helped cushion Spanish banks’ funding requirements.  
In  these  conditions,  the  Spanish  credit  system  has  found  alternatives  to  recourse  to  the 
markets  for  medium-term  financing  to  cover  its  funding  requirements.  More  specifically, 
issuance of shorter-dated securities, such as commercial paper, has been stepped up and 
more intensive use has been made of the leeway provided by the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy operational framework to cover liquidity requirements. In relation to the latter, I should 
like to emphasise that this possibility has been available to Spanish banks, as it has to all 
other banks of the area, since the very outset of monetary union, and it therefore comes as 
no surprise that it is used to a greater extent  at times like the present. That said, the use 
currently being made of this facility remains moderate, as shown by the fact that the liquidity 
raised  by  Spanish  banks  as  a  proportion  of  total  Eurosystem  operations  is  barely 
commensurate with the weight of Spanish GDP in the euro area, or that this facility accounts, 
according to end-2007 data, for only 1.3% of the total bank balance sheet.  
Clearly, recourse to these alternative facilities is to some extent temporary; it is taking place 
in a situation of heightened uncertainty and it is not reasonable to think that it is going to be 
perpetuated. But it is also clear that if this episode continues much longer, its effects on the 
Spanish  economy  may  be  significant,  as  is  to  be  expected  in  the  case  of  an  economy  in 
which external financing is one of the fundamental elements underpinning growth.  
When  the  ability  of  the  international  financial  system  to  perform  its  role  of  allocating 
resources  efficiently  is  seriously  curtailed,  as  at  present,  the  financial  soundness  of 
borrowers  is  not  sufficient  to  attract  the  financing  they  need.  Thus,  if  the  strains  currently 
affecting  the  main  wholesale  markets  for  medium  and  long-term  financing  are  prolonged 
excessively,  we  cannot  ultimately  rule  out  greater  constraints  on  the  raising  of  external 
financing by the economy.  
The  poor  functioning  of  these  wholesale  markets  has  a  global  dimension  and  there  is 
relatively little that the Spanish authorities can do to help mitigate it. However, the Banco de 
España  can  and  will  proceed  to  ensure  that  Spanish  banks  continue  managing  their  risks 
prudently  and  have  appropriate  risk  provisioning  policies  that  guarantee  their  financial 
soundness. This is undoubtedly the best way of ensuring that, once uncertainties have been 
dispelled  and  normal  market  functioning  restored,  financial  institutions  can  continue  to 
efficiently perform their role of channelling financial flows between our country and the rest of 
the  world.  In  addition,  the  Banco  de  España  will  continue  encouraging  banks  and  savings 
banks  to  start  issuing  medium-term  bonds  again  and  to  place  them  on  the  international 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 5
markets. The positive experience of Spanish banks that have already done this during the 
last  fortnight,  and  the  improvement  in  bank  risk  recorded  in  certain  markets,  make  these 
issues  a  unique  window  of  opportunity  for  the  financial  system's  use  of  international  euro 
markets to return to normal. Also, and as part of the Eurosystem, the Banco de España will 
continue to help facilitate the adequate provision of liquidity, to ensure the proper functioning 
of money markets.  
But,  apart  from  the  functions  assigned  to  the  Banco  de  España  in  relation  to  financial 
stability,  in  our  capacity  as  a  central  bank  and  bank  supervisor,  it  is  also  our  duty  to 
contribute our opinion, in the performance of our task of overseeing macroeconomic stability, 
on the design of the response that should be framed in a situation such as that described. 
This  response  must  include  both  the  role  of  the  economic  policies  of  the  various  tiers  of 
government  and  the  responsibilities  that  must  be  assumed  by  the  various  economic  and 
social agents.  
We should all accept that in a situation like the present one in which the economy is facing a 
slowdown,  in  an  adverse  international  setting  and  surrounded  by  risk  factors,  it  is  more 
important than ever that economic policies be firmly geared in two directions: first, towards 
safeguarding  macroeconomic  stability;  and  further,  to  promoting  the  adoption  of  structural 
measures and reforms in product and factor markets, to enhance the degree of competition 
in the environment in which agents take their decisions, the mobility of factors of production 
and  the  flexibility  of  price  and  wage-setting  mechanisms.  I  believe  that  both  strategies 
generate substantial synergies if they are pursued simultaneously. And in Spain we have the 
experience of the key role they have played in the real convergence of the Spanish economy 
over the last decade.  
And this is so because it is essential that the response of supply and demand to the changes 
required  to  rebalance  the  various  sources  of  spending  and  the  various  sectors  of  activity 
should be flexible, so as to ensure that the slowdown is mild and leads promptly to a new 
path  of  high  growth,  in  line  with  the  economy’s  potential,  that  is  more  balanced  and 
sustainable.  
This is the stance that should, in my opinion, inform the actions of central government and 
other  government  bodies,  which  in  Spain’s  highly  decentralised  system  of  regional 
government have very significant responsibilities, as well as the behaviour of economic and 
social agents, whose attitude may determine the degree of flexibility of the productive system 
and of the institutional framework and the viability of the necessary reforms.  
We should be aware that there is very little room for expansionary demand policies here and 
that  inappropriate  use  of  such  policies  may  even  be  counter-productive.  Monetary  policy 
ceased to be an autonomous economic policy tool a decade ago. Its primary objective is to 
maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  From  the  point  of  view  of 
domestic requirements, the monetary and financial conditions in which Spanish households 
and  businesses  have  been  operating  have  been  becoming  progressively  tighter  and  are 
currently more in line with the need to stem inflationary pressures in the Spanish economy.  
For its part, the fiscal position is in a favourable starting position since public finances were 
again in surplus in 2007 (2.2% of GDP) and the debt ratio stood at 36.2% of GDP, levels 
unprecedented in the recent history of the Spanish economy. These results reflect the strong 
commitment of previous governments to fiscal discipline, but also substantial growth of the 
Spanish  economy  in  recent  years  and  the  buoyancy  of  the  property  market.  That  has 
resulted  in  strong  growth  in  tax  revenues,  exceeding  that  seen  in  previous  upturns. 
Accordingly,  the  fiscal  projections  that  are  consistent  with  the  macroeconomic  scenario  I 
have set out today point to the fiscal surplus almost disappearing in 2009.  
With this in mind, when designing the appropriate fiscal policy strategy for the downturn in 
the Spanish economy, it makes complete sense to give free rein to the automatic stabilisers, 
whose movement tends to counter cyclical fluctuations. This is one of the great advantages 
arising  from  the  fiscal  consolidation  drive  that  took  place  during  the  expansion.  The 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2008
automatic nature of these instruments makes them the most suitable ones for stabilisation, 
because  they  respond  rapidly  to  changes  in  the  cycle,  they  help  agents  to  form  correct 
expectations  regarding  the  authorities’  actions  and  they  boost  confidence.  However, 
discretionary increases in public spending and tax reductions beyond the specific scope of 
the automatic stabilisers should be avoided, since they may compromise the maintenance of 
medium and long-term budgetary stability and eliminate the fiscal policy leeway to respond to 
sharper slowdowns.  
Maintaining a stance of budgetary stability during the downturn is, in any case, compatible 
with measures that may alter the composition of revenues and spending, without giving rise 
to  a  permanent  deterioration  in  the  budgetary  situation,  especially  if  such  measures 
contribute to enhancing the quality of public finances and the efficiency of the economy. But, 
for  this  to  be  possible,  it  is  essential  to  strive  to  contain  expenditure,  by  means  of 
countermeasures in those areas that offer the most scope for cost reductions, at all levels of 
general government.  
It would seem, then, that the promotion of structural measures and reforms, geared towards 
improving  the  functioning  of  markets,  making  wage  and  price-setting  mechanisms  more 
flexible  and  facilitating  the  reallocation  of  factors  of  production  across  sectors,  is  the  main 
instrument available to economic policy makers and economic and social agents to enable 
each,  in  their  respective  areas  of  responsibility,  to  contribute  to  easing  the  downturn  and 
promoting prompt recovery.  
All matters relating to the functioning of the labour market, good industrial relations, collective 
bargaining and outstanding reforms take on great importance in the current situation. This is 
because  the  dynamism  of  the  Spanish  population  as  a  supportive  factor  for  limiting  the 
intensity  and  scope  of  the  slowdown  largely  depends  on  labour  market  flexibility.  This  is 
especially  so  at  the  current  juncture,  with  rising  wages  and  a  deteriorating  inflationary 
situation.  Hence,  the  search  for  formulas  permitting  a  resumption  of  a  trajectory  of  wage 
moderation has become a priority, such moderation, with the support of social agents, having 
yielded such good results in terms of employment generation in the recent past. Among other 
measures, I have in mind changes to the current wage indexation arrangements, which tend 
to  prolong  the  impact  of  inflation  surges.  Changes  are  also  needed  in  the  collective 
bargaining framework and in labour hiring, in order to facilitate the adjustment of wages to 
the new cyclical situation and to smooth the adjustment in employment.  
Obviously, however, these measures need to be complemented by resolute reforms to the 
competitive environment in which firms and agents take their decisions through liberalisation 
and  deregulation  policies  that  help  reduce  the  constant  growth  in  profit  margins  in  less 
competitive sectors and to boost efficiency and productivity. From the viewpoint of the long-
term  needs  of  the  Spanish  economy,  all  this  should  be  accompanied  by  improvements  in 
education  and  in  training  in  order  to  adapt  workers’  skills  to  the  new  requirements  and  to 
boost their inter-sectoral mobility.  
Allow me one final reflection not so much on what should be done as on what should not. It is 
true that the global slowdown is leading many governments to embark on different forms of 
protectionism,  responding  to  the  calls  of  those  economic  agents  who  are  demanding  help 
against foreign competitors. It is a mistake to succumb to such calls. Spain should not follow 
this bad example, since any measures in favour of specific agents solely on the basis of their 
nationality would ultimately harm other Spanish companies and all Spanish citizens. On the 
contrary,  we  should  continue  to  adhere  to  increasing  openness  to  competition  and  to  the 
foreign  investment  that  has  contributed  so  much  to  our  well-being  in  recent  decades, 
focusing our efforts on promoting a climate conducive to business activity and on removing 
all obstacles and rigidities that hamper enterprise.  
To conclude, I wish to affirm my confidence that the Spanish economy has sufficient factors 
of resilience to successfully face the inevitable slowdown, even in an unfavourable external 
environment. Such resilience has been built up through the efforts of everyone (State, central 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 7
government  and  other  government  bodies,  and  social  agents),  and  has  demonstrated  the 
benefits  of  policies  geared  towards  stability  and  long-term  growth,  particularly  when  the 
economy faces significant challenges such as those at present.  
Thank you very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2008
