 Rundheersing Bheenick: “Thou art translated” 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of the re-branding of First City Bank Ltd to Bank One Ltd, Port Louis, 8 August 2008. 
 A very good evening to all of you.  
Today is a propitious day. Indeed a palindromic day. A day when forwards and backwards it 
remains the same. We have the quintuple palindromic zeros of the Olympics, opening today. 
Then today itself of course is palindromic (the triple 8’s of today’s date: the 8th day of the 8th 
month of the 8th year of this century). So I am delighted to be present here on this occasion 
when we witness the translation of the First City Bank Ltd into Bank One Ltd. The first Bank 
into Bank number one! How fitting a symmetry for a palindromic day! 
My name is Bheenick. Manou Bheenick. And I am a double O too; or perhaps a double O 
three. For those of you who are familiar with the opus of Ian Fleming, that’s one better than 
the  eponymous  James  Bond.  I  have  three  licences;  and  for  the  very  first  time,  I  shall  be 
operating all three licences on the same propitious day.  
I have a licence to print money: we are always doing a bit of that, though in the name of St. 
Milton, not too much! Then I have two other licences: a licence to open banks and a licence 
to kill them. Mercifully, today I am operating those in reverse order. Killing off one Bank and 
then  opening  Bank  One!  Here,  I  have  to  confess  to  a  secret  dream…a  monthly  recurring 
dream, about applying this power to certain of my committees operating at the Central Bank! 
But let us examine how the translation procedure for this bank has come about. Our hosts 
have had, if I may use the phrase, a rather chequered past. No secret this. First in the guise 
of BCCI, which became quite notorious in international banking. Then a makeover to become 
Delphis  Bank  Ltd,  whose  promoter  seems  to  have  done  a  fair  bit  to  live  up  to  BCCI’s 
unsavoury reputation. Then transmuted to be fashioned as the First City Bank which became 
the first bank in the city which I had to worry about when I became Governor. And now, its 
warmly anticipated reincarnation. The new management of Bank One Ltd is in the hands of a 
well-regarded Kenya-based Investment and Mortgage Bank and a prominent local business 
house,  CIEL  Group.  Bank  One  Ltd.  is  now  being  set  up  to  become  a  fresh  and  exciting 
player on the field for a new premier banking season full of promise. 
You  might  ask,  what’s  in  a  new  name?  But  changing  names  is  often  a  special  event.  On 
marriage for example; what was she before she was Mrs. Thatcher? On stardom: to take a 
couple  of  well-known  examples  from  Tinseltown,  what  was  the  name  of  John  Wayne  or 
Marilyn  Monroe?  On  religious  conversion;  that  great  Olympian  with  that  great  punch  will 
surely be always renowned as Mohamed Ali. And it was not just for a change of name that 
we as a nation underwent mass conversion into the Republic of Mauritius. 
Thus a new name is an integral part of re-branding. It is a signal to the world; a break from 
the past. A much-needed one in this case. But as such it must not be merely a signal for the 
outside  world;  it  must  also  be  internalized  in  the  very  spirit  of  operation  of  the  bank.  The 
essence is in the transformation of the inner space. This re-branding exercise must renew 
the  very  gears  of  this  bank,  to  give  it  the  capacity  to  adjust  effectively  to  the  ever  more 
challenging banking world.  
New customers come to you if you offer a distinct and improved level of service. The new 
branding makes the promise; it is now for you and your staff to deliver on it. These good first 
impressions  will  only  yield  returns  if  they  are  matched  by  the  lasting  reality  of  the 
accessibility,  profitability  and  security  of  transacting  business  with  you,  and  your  positive 
contribution to the economic growth and development of this country. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 1
 We at the Central Bank, share in the joy of this occasion with you today. Yet we shall keep 
an ever-watchful eye on your development, as a watchdog must, to safeguard this country’s 
reputation for probity as an international financial centre. A central bank always welcomes 
new  ventures;  and  a  failure  or  two:  “pour  encourager  les  autres!”.  Today  we  have  in  a 
nutshell one of each; a demise and a resurrection.  
Looking beyond our shores, it is not a good time for banks. Many, today, are suffering from a 
liquidity crunch from the extremes of the credit delinquencies of the past. Can we be sure 
that the Basel II framework can provide greater protection in the future? Capital adequacy, 
even when risk-based, is no substitute for liquidity when markets dry up. You will know that 
we at the Central Bank have also embarked on a review of the operational guidelines to give 
banks  more  functional  freedom,  without  losing  sight  of  prudence.  Growth  in  the  financial 
sector must be matched with the best standards of governance. 
It is heartening to note that the banking system in Mauritius has remained insulated from the 
meltdown in the west in the wake of the sub-prime mortgage lead crisis. Today, looking back 
over the twelve months ended June 2008, we are seeing strong growth in the banking sector. 
The number of bank branches in the country has increased from 178 to 186. The number of 
ATMs has gone up from 334 to 382. We are now on the threshold of issuing licenses for the 
first Islamic Banks. These fresh players will keep you all on your toes. 
June to June figures show the total balance sheet of our banks growing from about Rs 624 
billion to Rs 729 billion in June 2008, that is an increase of over Rs 100 billion in one year. 
There is more than adequate liquidity in the system. The declining trend in the percentage of 
NPLs to total loans continued. Profits during the year shot up by Rs 1 billion, or 11 per cent 
higher than the previous year, and were just shy of Rs 10 billion. The capital base of banks 
continues  to  be  strong.  The  shares  of  the  two  listed  banks  have  held  steady  on  the  local 
stock exchange. So much so that these two banks now account for an astounding 42 per 
cent of total market capitalisation, compared to little above 30 per cent in June last year. We 
trot  out  these  figures  with  some  satisfaction.  We  are  nevertheless,  aware  that  there  is  no 
room for complacency either on our part as regulator or on the part of the banks themselves. 
We will maintain our vigilance and we will be proactive in dealing with any asset bubble or 
liquidity crunch, should we foresee any on the horizon.  
As a regulator on banking, one has to say, that in the past there has been rather too much 
inertia in the area of consumer choice, unrelated to evidence-based assessment. We want to 
achieve greater transparency regarding spreads, fees, charges, commission and the like. We 
are  currently  looking  at  ways  of  promoting  both  more  “shopping  around”  and  enhancing 
consumer financial literacy. 
We  are  also  working  with  our  friends  in  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association  to  stimulate 
competition in the cash segment of the foreign exchange market. We have just licensed 14 
new money changers. To bring them on stream in an orderly manner we are putting in place 
an on-line real-time monitoring system. This is all part of the vigilance necessary to improve 
on our record in the implementation of the Financial Intelligence and Anti-Money Laundering 
regime.  
You are all aware of the tough times we are going through now and the even tougher times 
that lie ahead as inflationary pressures intensify. Sustained monetary and credit expansion 
have  compounded  these  pressures.  Broad  money  and  private  sector  credit  have  been 
accelerating, almost doubling their rate of growth. Credit to the private sector increased by 22 
per cent during the fiscal year 2007/08, compared with 12 per cent last year: Broad money 
supply expanded by a hefty 17 per cent, as against an increase of 8.6 per cent in the fiscal 
year 2006/07. Headline inflation has climbed to 9.1 per cent in July 2008, while the year-on-
year inflation, has crossed into double digits to stand at 11.5 per cent at the end of July 2008. 
How I wish I had been wrong when I forecast precisely this kind of outcome two months ago! 
At  this  present  juncture,  we  at  the  central  bank  have  been  examining  the  various  options 
available at hand. Here, I feel I must preface what I am going to say by pointing out that I 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2008
 was actually looking forward to abolish the Cash Reserve Ratio. Such a step would level the 
playing field between domestic and offshore banks, or more precisely in our jargon between 
Segment  A  and  Segment  B  activities  of  banks.  It  would  enhance  our  status  as  an 
international  financial  centre.  It  would  naturally  have  to  be  preceded  by  other  measures 
relating  to  depositor  protection  and  prudential  requirements.  These  are  all  issues  that  we 
have on the drawing board. I still hope to be able to implement them on my watch. But they 
are not to be ….. not just yet. We have to put them on the back burner. We have other, more 
urgent, fish to fry. We cannot allow an inflationary psychology to take hold. We must protect 
the purchasing power of the people. Much as we would have liked to avoid it, we seem to 
have  very  little  option  than  to  raise  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  requirement.  Let  us  remind 
ourselves that this tool is being resorted to by several central banks around the world in their 
own fight against inflation, often in conjunction with steep rate hikes. Therefore, after careful 
consideration of all aspects, the Bank has decided to raise the Cash Reserve Ratio from 4 
per cent to 6 per cent. 
I  must  reiterate  here  that  any  tightening  of  monetary  policy  stance  is  always  a  painful 
exercise for central bankers. 
Finally, while I am on this subject of inflation, let me add that in the debate surrounding the 
recent  discussions  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  on  inflation  generally,  it  is 
important  to  distinguish  between  the  medium  and  the  message.  I  depart  somewhat  from 
Marshall McLuhan’s message that the medium is the message. This is certainly not the case 
here. As Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, I am reminded of some other more 
appropriate  words  of  McLuhan  who  said  on  one  occasion  “I  don’t  necessarily  agree  with 
everything I say”. As Governor, I must stay on message with the mantra of monetary stability. 
Let us focus the debate on the evidence, the options in dealing with inflation and the signals 
to be made. Forget the medium. Hear out the message. And yes, don’t shoot the messenger. 
With these words, I sincerely hope that this re-branding exercise will steer a new path for this 
new  bank.  I  wish  the  new  owners  and  the  new  management  all  the  very  best  in  their 
endeavour. 
So,  as  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Mauritius,  on  this  most  propitious  day,  I  do  now 
exercise two of my powers and hereby revoke the licence of the First City Bank……Oh yes, 
of course, ….. and it is my great pleasure to inaugurate a new licence for Bank One Ltd.  
Thus in the words of Peter Quince: 
“Bless thee …Thou art translated!” 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 3
