Bandid Nijathaworn: How strong are Thai banks to weather the turmoil? 
Keynote address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
Fitch Thailand’s 2008 Annual Conference, 10 September 2008. 
 Thank you, Chairman. 
First,  let  me  thank  Fitch  Thailand  for  the  invitation  to  address  this  year’s  conference  as  a 
keynote  speaker.  Our  topic  this  morning  is  “How  strong  are  Thai  banks  to  weather  the 
turmoil?”  My  answer  is  short  and  simple:  Thai  banks  are  strong  enough  to  weather  the 
current global turmoil. The sector is also well positioned to support the economy. This is the 
message  I  gave  six  weeks  ago  when  we  had  a  press  briefing  at  the  Bank  of  Thailand. 
Although conditions in the global economy and financial markets have changed somewhat 
since then, it is the same message of resiliency and strength that I want to echo to you this 
morning. 
I  agree  with  the  two  previous  speakers  that  global  financial  market  conditions  and  growth 
prospects have further weakened especially in the past two months. In financial markets, we 
continue to see falling share price indices and increased spreads in a large number of US 
dollar products, including high-quality US corporate bonds, money market spreads, and bank 
credit  default  swaps.  Doubts  about  additional  losses  by  banks  in  major  economies  also 
persist and this has made it more difficult for banks to raise capital. As a result, funding costs 
for  households  and  businesses  in  the  major  economies  have  risen  as  banks  continue  to 
tighten credit standards, which is not positive for growth. On account of this, global growth 
prospects seem to have further weakened, while the decline in oil price have helped ease 
concerns about global inflation. Future direction of the oil price, however, is still very much 
uncertain. 
The global economy and conditions in the global financial markets, therefore, have become 
more  challenging,  and  they  are  likely  to  have  important  implications  for  emerging  markets 
through the usual trade and financial channels. This is, therefore, an important area that we 
need to pay close attention to in the next few months.  
Under the current global setting, a decline in oil price will be positive for emerging markets 
like  Thailand,  and  as  a  group,  the  growth  prospect  of  emerging  markets  should  remain 
satisfactory  given  their  abilities  to  support  domestic  demand.  But  questions  remain  about 
individual economies on how resilient they would be in the face of such shocks, including the 
banking sector. 
In the Thai case, our assessment is that the Thai banking sector is strong enough to weather 
the current turmoil. This conclusion is supported by the following five important reasons. 
First and foremost is the low direct exposure that the Thai banking sector has to sub-prime 
credit and CDO. CDO exposure of Thai banks at the second quarter of last year was less 
than 0.3 percent of total asset. Banks with CDO exposure have already made full provision 
and recognized losses in line with IAS 39, and presently all sub-prime related CDO positions 
have been unwound. More importantly, Thai banks also do not have investment in US GSE 
securities.  This  is  another  positive  point  that  will  help  insulate  the  banks  from  any  further 
spillovers. Reflecting this, the direct impact of the turmoil so far, on the Thai banking sector, 
has been limited. 
Second,  on  the  issue  of  liquidity  and  financing,  banks  in  Thailand  are  predominantly 
domestic-owned.  Hence,  they  rely  more  on  deposit  funding  rather  than  external  funding. 
Domestic funding is a more stable source of funding and is not affected by the turmoil. This 
feature will help cushion Thai banks from the effects of the global credit crunch. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 1
Third, fundamentals of the Thai banking system have improved and the key fundamentals 
are sound and resilient. As a sector, banks in Thailand have enjoyed good profits for the past 
seven years and are well capitalized with the BIS capital adequacy ratio at 15.2 percent at 
end  of  June  this  year.  Over  the  years,  better  risk  management,  improved  asset  quality, 
greater provisioning coverage against losses, and the regulatory and supervisory frameworks 
that meet international standards, have significantly improved the overall risk profile of the 
sector. 
As  for  the  most  recent  quarter,  net  profit  of  57  billion  baht  was  registered  in  the  second 
quarter of this year. Loan growth in July increased to 11.8 percent while deposits including 
bill  of  exchange  grew  by  1.9  percent.  Liquidity  in  the  system  remains  adequate,  with 
loan/deposit ratio excluding interbank transactions at 90.1 percent in July. On asset quality, 
gross  NPL  ratio  edged  downward  to  6.4  percent  in  June.  These  numbers  show  that  the 
performance of the Thai banking sector is quite robust, and is well positioned to support the 
economy. 
Fourth, a more difficult picture to assess is the impact of the turmoil on the economy and how 
this would translate into the impact on the banking sector. So far, notwithstanding the less 
helpful  global  environment,  the  Thai  economy  has  performed  relatively  well,  with  growth 
averaging  5.7  percent  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  But  going  forward,  market  participants 
expect the economy to become more affected by the slowing global economy. 
Our  own  forecast  also  sees  growth  to  be  less  buoyant  in  the  second  half  of  the  year, 
reflecting a more adverse impact on exports. But overall, the momentum of growth should 
not  be  too  adversely  affected  given  the  support  that  growth  could  gain  from  domestic 
demand  which  is  being  supported  by  high  farm  income,  continued  credit  availability,  and 
supportive  fiscal  policy.  Moreover,  lower  oil  prices  and  monetary  policy  that  focuses  on 
inflation  should  provide  a  stable  price  environment  conducive  to  domestic  demand  and  to 
export  competitiveness.  Also,  continued  current  account  surpluses, 
lower  external 
indebtedness,  and  high  domestic  savings  have  made  the  economy’s  financial  conditions 
more stable, by reducing its dependency on capital flows. 
In  all,  our  view  is  that  the  improved  economic  fundamentals  and  the  more  flexible  policy 
regime should place the economy in a better position to weather the current turmoil without 
too  much  impact  on  growth  and  economic  stability.  And  with  growth  continuing,  the 
performance of the banking sector will also benefit. 
My  last  point  is  that  the  ability  of  the  Thai  banking  sector  to  weather  the  turmoil  is  also 
confirmed  by  our  recent  stress-testing  exercise  which  covers  credit  risk,  market  risk,  and 
liquidity risk, linked to a macroeconomic impact scenario. The result indicates that the Thai 
banking system is quite resilient. Thai banks can withstand sharp economic slowdown and 
unfavorable  market  volatility  quite  well.  This  is  a  result  of  strong  profitability  and  capital 
accumulation, as well as prudent credit and investment policies over the years. 
And  for  our  part,  given  the  increased  uncertainty  in  the  external  environment,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  will  continue  to  monitor  our  banking  sector  and  financial  markets  closely,  and  to 
move forward in our regulatory reform to enhance the risk management and the efficiency of 
the banking system. In the near-term, what we have in the pipeline is a full implementation of 
Basel  II  by  2010,  which  includes  the  introduction  of  Pillar  I  by  the  end  of  this  year, 
implementation of Pillar III by the middle of next year, and the introduction of Pillar II by 2010. 
In addition, to strengthen supervisory framework in line with financial and risk structures of 
financial groups, consolidated supervision will be phased-in in two steps: first is to introduce 
qualitative  measures  this  year  which  have  already  been  done,  and  the  second  is  the 
implementation of the quantitative measures by 2010. 
To  conclude,  conditions  in  the  global  economy  and  global  financial  markets  have  become 
more challenging. So, this calls for a time of greater caution as we move forward. Also, this 
means the ability of the banking sector to withstand shocks will be an important prerequisite 
for  any  economy  in  managing  the  spillovers  from  the  slowing  global  economy  and  volatile 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2008
financial markets. In the Thai case, the strength and the resiliency of the banking sector is 
with us, and thus they should be well placed to weather the turmoil, without adverse effects 
on their roles in supporting the economy and in maintaining financial stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 3
