Donald L Kohn: Comments on “Financial Regulation in a System 
Context”, “Beyond Leveraged Losses: The Balance Sheet Effects of the 
Home Price Downturn”, and “The Central Role of House Prices in the 
Financial Crisis: How Will the Market Clear?” 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at 
the  Brookings  Panel  on  Economic  Activity,  Washington  DC, 
11 September 2008.  
 I appreciate the opportunity to comment on these three papers.1 They illuminate the sources 
and effects of the current financial market turmoil, and I learned a considerable amount from 
reading them and thinking about their implications. Instead of providing detailed comments 
on  each  paper,  I'd  like  to  draw  out  the  relationships  among  them  and,  in  the  process, 
comment a little on the papers and their implications. To foreshadow: I will be highlighting the 
role of leverage – in the household sector and in financial intermediaries – as a critical factor 
in understanding the buildup of excesses and their unwinding.  
At  the  beginning  of  the  chain  of  causation  is  the  housing  cycle  in  the  United  States.  Chip 
Case points out the difference between this housing cycle and others over past decades and 
asks  why  the  difference  developed.  One  culprit  he  identifies  is  changes  in  the  financial 
system  that  affected  the  way  that  mortgage  credit  is  made  available  to  borrowers.  A  key 
element of these changes, and one that accounts for a good part of the subsequent effects of 
the financial system and the economy, is the rise in leverage in housing finance. As Case 
notes,  for  several  years,  mortgage  indebtedness  rose  substantially  relative  to  the  value  of 
owner-occupied  housing.  The  willingness  of  lenders  to  tolerate  –  or,  in  some  cases, 
encourage  –  huge  increases  in  loan-to-value  ratios  added  to  the  demand  for  housing, 
especially by people who normally might not have had the savings to enter the market, and 
contributed to the rise in home prices.  
One  reason  for  the  loosening  of  standards  was  the  expectation  that  house  prices  would 
continue to rise – and even more certainly that they could not fall in all regions at the same 
time, supporting diversification through securitization. Rising prices would enable lenders to 
recoup their funds even if the borrower was unable to service the loan, mostly because the 
borrower would be able to obtain extra cash through refinancing. Expectations of house price 
appreciation facilitated and interacted with the increasing complexity of mortgage securities, 
including  multiple  securitizations  of  the  same  loan,  which  made  it  virtually  impossible  for 
ultimate  lenders  to  monitor  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers  –  a  task  they,  in  effect,  had 
outsourced to credit rating agencies. The absence of investor caution and due diligence was 
especially noticeable for the highest-rated tranches of securitized debt.  
Elevated leverage in housing markets has meant that as prices have fallen, lenders have had 
to  absorb  an  unusually  high  proportion  of  the  losses.  As  Case  points  out,  foreclosures  by 
lenders  have  added  to  the  downward  pressure  on  those  prices.  Conceptually,  such  price 
declines moving down the demand curve for housing services could accelerate and cushion 
the adjustment in activity necessitated by previous overbuilding. I am encouraged that Case 
                                                 
1   The views I express are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors. The 
three papers discussed and their authors are as follows: (1) "Financial Regulation in a System Context," by 
Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin, professors of economics at Princeton University; (2) "Beyond Leveraged 
Losses: The Balance  Sheet  Effects of the  Home Price Downturn," by  Jan  Hatzius, chief U.S. economist at 
Goldman  Sachs;  and  (3)  "The  Central  Role  of  House  Prices  in  the  Financial  Crisis:  How  Will  the  Market 
Clear?"  by  Karl  Case,  professor  of  economics  at  Wellesley  College.  Information  about  the  2008  Fall 
Conference on the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity is available at the Brookings website. 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
finds  the  pace  of  declines  abating  in  a  number  of  markets.  However,  partly  owing  to  the 
feedback of price declines on lenders, mortgage conditions have tightened some since the 
late  spring  readings  he  is  using  for  his  conclusion,  and  in  my  view,  the  jury  is  still  out  on 
whether housing prices are close to finding a bottom.  
The  heavy  involvement  of  financial  intermediaries  in  amplifying  the  housing  boom  and  the 
subsequent  economic  effects  of  the  bust  brings  me  to  the  Morris  and  Shin  paper,  which 
raises a host of important issues related to the systemic aspects of financial intermediation 
and the lessons from the recent turmoil. As they emphasize, one of the important lessons 
has  been  the  greater-than-expected  vulnerability  of  secured  financing  when  intermediaries 
are engaged in maturity, credit, and liquidity transformation. Recall that the turmoil first came 
onto the balance sheets of the banks through the collapse of the asset-backed commercial 
paper market last fall before it affected the funding of investment banks through the triparty 
repurchase agreement market. The new vulnerability results importantly from the extension 
of  secured  short-term  financing  to  increasingly  illiquid  and  riskier  long-term  assets.  As 
uncertainty  about  the  liquidity  and  creditworthiness  of  those  assets  –  especially  related  to 
mortgage-backed  securities  –  was  called  into  question,  lenders  became  more  concerned 
about the possibility that they might end up owning the underlying assets, and they raised 
haircuts or simply refused to roll over loans.  
Clearly, as Morris and Shin point out, what we have learned about various risks implies the 
need for intermediaries to build greater liquidity and capital buffers in good times, as well as 
to improve their abilities to manage their risks. And those larger buffers would help to offset 
the moral hazard that may have been created through the expansion of our liquidity facilities. 
Getting  the  micro-prudential  piece  right  –  having  each  institution  adequately  protected  – 
would go a long way toward making the whole system more robust and resilient.  
But  Morris  and  Shin  would  go  further;  they  would  impose  additional  requirements  on 
institutions to take account of the externalities for the system created when common shocks 
impair  markets  and  credit  availability  by  provoking  widespread  actions  to  preserve 
shareholder value. They would do this through a higher liquidity requirement and through the 
imposition of a leverage ratio on investment banks, which is already in place for commercial 
banks.  
I agree with the authors, and with Chairman Bernanke, that we need to consider the level of 
buffers that is appropriate to ameliorate systemic risk. That said, a host of difficult judgments 
are inherent in how we establish such a system, and I'll raise just a few on a very general 
level. One set concerns the size of the buffers. How far into the tail should intermediaries be 
required to insure themselves? Shouldn't the Federal Reserve take some of the liquidity tail 
risk to facilitate intermediation of illiquid credits, as was intended at our founding? Moreover, 
the  larger  the  regulatory  tax,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  activity  will  migrate  to  unregulated 
sectors  in  an  environment  of  fluid  and  free  capital  movements.  How  can  we  gain  better 
assurance of systemic stability when we are unlikely to be able to continuously extend the 
reach of regulation, and will it be sufficient to deepen the moats around the core institutions? 
In  this  regard,  the  leverage  ratio  gives  incentives  to  move  some  activities  away  from 
regulated institutions.  
A  second  question  is,  How  we  can  structure  these  requirements  and  other  aspects  of 
regulation to damp, rather than reinforce, the natural procyclical tendencies of the financial 
system?  Among  the  challenges  will  be  encouraging  firms  and  supervisors  to  comfortably 
allow  buffers  to  be  eroded  in  bad  times.  Interestingly,  prompt  corrective  action  under  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  Improvement  Act  of  1991  was  intended,  in  part,  to 
induce an element of countercyclical behavior by banks. It gives banks an incentive to build 
excess  capital  –  on  both  a  risk-based  and  leverage  ratio  basis  –  in  good  times  to  avoid 
prompt corrective action when circumstances are less favorable. Now that we are in the latter 
state of the world, a study of how commercial banks are viewing capital ratios, including the 
leverage ratio, could inform consideration of the Morris and Shin proposal.  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
The  Morris  and  Shin  paper  also  provides  a  framework  for  thinking  about  the  Federal 
Reserve's  credit  facilities.  On  page  9,  they  note  that  liquidity  makes  borrowers  feel  more 
robust and lenders less likely to withdraw, raising the odds for a more stable equilibrium for 
the entire system. That is exactly what we have been trying to do with our various discount 
lending  facilities.  The  assurance  of  the  availability  of  liquidity  to  sound  institutions  against 
good collateral should counter the greater uncertainty and risk aversion that have impaired 
normal  arbitrage  and  intermediary  functions  by  making  those  institutions  more  willing  to 
extend  credit  and  take  positions  in  the  process  of  making  markets.  It  should  also  assure 
other creditors of those institutions that illiquid markets will not impede the repayment of their 
loans, and therefore make them more willing to keep lending. A number of markets remain 
disrupted and illiquid. But I believe that they would have been even more illiquid and the risk 
of  disruptive  runs  even  greater  without  our  various  facilities;  that's  certainly  what  market 
participants are telling us.  
Jan Hatzius is trying to gauge the combined effects on spending of the losses generated by 
the effects of the decline in housing prices outlined in the Case paper and the impulse for 
deleveraging in the financial sector inherent in the processes discussed by Morris and Shin. 
To restore capital ratios depleted by mortgage losses and to raise those ratios even further in 
order  to  reduce  leverage  to  safer  levels  demanded  by  counterparties,  banks  and  other 
lenders need to reduce assets. They do so by tightening terms and standards across a broad 
array  of  credit  –  and  we  have  seen  this  behavior  reflected  in  our  surveys  of  bank  lending 
officers and in various spreads and other measures of risk perceptions, risk aversion, and 
reduced supply of credit at benchmark interest rates. In the current circumstances, some of 
the  tightening  we  have  seen  has  been  in  anticipation  of  possible  adverse  events  in  the 
economy and in confidence toward the financial sector. These types of actions not only move 
up the demand-for-credit curve, but they also bolster profits going forward to cover potential 
write-offs and to attract new equity capital. Pressures on profits arise not only from write-offs, 
but  also  because  some  sources  of  earnings,  like  securitization  of  mortgages  or  leveraged 
loans, are no longer available.  
In the steady state, lenders will get greater returns for taking risk than they did two years ago, 
intermediaries will be less leveraged and better capitalized, and the financial system will be 
more  robust  and  resilient  to  shocks.  The  transition  to  the  new  steady  state,  however,  as 
lenders  deleverage  and  protect  themselves  against  various  downside  risks,  involves  some 
overshooting – making terms and standards tighter than will be necessary over the long run. 
This story is completely consistent with the one told in the Hatzius paper, which relies mostly 
on quantity relationships to gauge the possible effects on gross domestic product (GDP). My 
instinct has been to go from the actual and expected indicators of tightening supply, such as 
the instrumental variables used in the paper, directly to estimates of the effects of that supply 
shift on GDP. Measures of flows would fall out of that exercise, but not be its focus. And I 
have  questions  about  the  stability  and  reliability  of  the  debt-GDP  relationship  used  in  the 
forecasts at the end of the paper. But I will admit that we are in uncharted waters here, and 
the navigators shouldn't discard any potential information about the location of the shoals.  
The  message  of  the  paper  is  that  restraint  on  credit  supplies  is  likely  to  persist  because 
intermediaries  have  some  way  to  go  to  rebuild  their  balance  sheets.  The  process  of 
adjustment to a safer, more resilient financial system is going to take a while. I agree with 
this observation.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 3
