Randall S Kroszner: Improving risk management in light of recent market 
events 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk 
Convention, New York, 25 February 2008.  
 I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  by  GARP  to  share  a  few  of  my  thoughts  about  risk 
management practices at financial institutions. Recent events remind us that markets can be 
quite complex and difficult to predict and that sound risk management is fundamental to the 
health and resiliency of both individual financial institutions and financial markets generally. 
Today I want to highlight two fundamental elements of sound risk management: information 
and  incentives.  These  two  elements  lie  at  the  very  heart  of  good  risk  management. 
Information is vital to good decisionmaking, and incentives send the right signals and create 
beneficial outcomes both within individual institutions and to the financial system as a whole.  
I should note that my thoughts on recent events are preliminary. Because risk-management 
challenges have affected a number of global institutions, we are working very closely with our 
supervisory counterparts in other countries to learn from recent events and to coordinate with 
financial institutions in determining what additional steps may need to be taken. As part of 
this important international effort, we should seek to align market participants' incentives with 
our own supervisory objectives; otherwise, behavior will not be altered appropriately and the 
proposed remedies will not prove durable.  
Key elements of sound risk management 
As is well known to the impressive international group of risk professionals in this audience, 
models  are  critical  to  understanding  the  nuances  of  risks  embedded  in  complex  financial 
transactions  and  portfolios,  but  I  am  sure  all  of  you  would  agree  that  sophisticated 
techniques cannot be relied upon without the proper risk-management foundation. Integral to 
this foundation are timely and accurate information and the will and ability to act on it. Since 
the fortunes of even the most technically sophisticated financial institutions ultimately depend 
on  the  decisions  and  judgments  of  individual  managers  and  traders,  senior  management 
must ensure that the right incentives are in place so that risk taking is appropriately captured 
in business-line performance evaluation and employee compensation. Senior management 
must understand the risks assumed by each individual business line and communicate the 
firm's strategy and risk appetite back down to those business lines. At the same time, senior 
management  must  send  each  business-line  manager  clear  signals  about  which  risk  levels 
are tolerable and which practices are not acceptable. In this way, information and incentives 
are  threads  of  sound  risk  management  that  must  be  woven  into  the  fabric  of  each  firm's 
management culture.  
Enterprise-wide risk assessments 
A good risk-management structure must encompass risks across the entire firm, gathering 
and processing information on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. Good information is the 
lifeblood of sound risk management. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not 
know  what  they  are.  Managers  of  financial  institutions  need  to  ensure  that  they  fully 
understand the risks assumed by each of their institutions' business lines, and for that they 
need  high-quality  information  –  both  qualitative  and  quantitative.  Aggregating  information 
across  a  large,  diversified  financial  institution  is  not  easy  and  should  be  done  with 
appropriate  care  and  with  adequate  resources  for  checking  timeliness  and  veracity.  Risk 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
managers  should  live  by  the  adage  "Trust  but  verify,"  being  careful  not  to  rely  on 
assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence.  
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  financial  institutions  should  gather  a  wide  range  of  relevant 
information  before  they  see  market  troubles  brewing.  In  other  words,  scrambling  for 
information  once  turbulence  sets  in  is  not  good  practice.  Understanding  a  firm's  true  risk 
exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet 
risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify. Latent 
risks  from  certain  complex  products  and  certain  risky  activities  should  be  properly 
recognized, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress 
testing and scenario analysis are of paramount importance here. 
Even  when  risks  are  properly  identified  and  measured,  that  information  needs  to  be 
presented  to  senior  management  and  to  others  in  the  firm  who  can  use  it  in  their 
decisionmaking,  and  presented  in  a  timely  way.  In  other  words,  information  should  be 
adequately  distributed  both  vertically  and  horizontally.  Adequate  distribution  of  information 
allows  for  an  enterprise-wide  perspective  on  risks  that  affect  the  whole  organization. 
Information must be provided up to senior management, but their views and analysis then 
must be sent back down through the business lines. To put it another way, institutions should 
develop an "information circulatory system" to ensure the flow of information that is crucial to 
the health of the firm.  
It  is  also  clear  that  financial  institutions  should  draw  on  several  types  of  information  from 
various sources when assessing their risks, particularly when dealing with complex products. 
No single source of information is perfect or adequate. Management benefits from having a 
number  of  tools  at  its  disposal  to  assess  risk  positions  that  draw  on  differing  underlying 
assumptions. Properly  designed, these tools offer different perspectives on exposures and 
are flexible enough to allow perspectives on risk to change as business conditions change 
and new data become available. 
Governance structure 
To ensure sound risk management, boards of directors and senior management at financial 
institutions must also establish an overall governance and control structure that is credible, 
robust, and consistent throughout the firm. It is critical that senior management set the tone 
at the top, communicate it, and lead by example. This strategy should be clearly articulated 
and should be recognizable in the actions of the firm's employees. Business lines should be 
held equally accountable and there should not be any special treatment for "star" employees, 
even if they are bringing sizable revenues into the institution in a particularly year.  
While certain financial institutions may choose to conduct business on a decentralized basis, 
they must always remember that in the end the exposures and obligations are rolled up and 
combined into one consolidated legal entity. In addition, the institution's commitment to and 
emphasis on risk management should be eminently visible – both within and outside of the 
organization.  For  example,  the  firm  should  demonstrate  that  its  risk  managers  have  direct 
access to top management and play a key role in decisionmaking. They also must be able to 
speak  authoritatively  about  the  risk  profile  and  risk-management  strategy  of  the  whole 
organization to market participants and counterparties.  
Durability of risk-management structures 
Of  course,  risk-management  structures  are  successful  only  if  they  are  sturdy  and  durable. 
These  structures  and  their  associated  strategies  should  be  embedded  in  the  firm's  culture 
and not be dependent on just one or a few people. They should be part of the fabric of the 
organization,  not  just  a  few  catchy  phrases  repeated  from  time  to  time.  For  example, 
understanding  and  living  up  to  the  firm's  risk-management  standards  should  be  a 
prerequisite for advancement to a senior management position.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
Effective  risk  management  remains  sturdy  and  durable  only  if  supported  by  strong  and 
independent  risk  functions  that  produce  unbiased  information.  Having  independent  risk 
managers  with  a  certain  amount  of  authority  allows  for  clear,  dispassionate  thinking  about 
the entire firm's risk profile, with no favoritism toward any business unit. Senior management 
should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover latent risks and point out cases in 
which certain business lines are assuming too much risk. In other words, it is good to have a 
few people within the institution who – to paraphrase a former Federal Reserve Chairman – 
know  when  to  take  away  the  punch  bowl.  Being  the  party  pooper,  however,  can  be  very 
difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known as 
an independent voice who is influential with top management. 
Ensuring adherence to risk-management practices 
Any successful organization needs to develop appropriate mechanisms to ensure adherence 
to and sustainability of its risk-management structures, and incentives structures are a key 
mechanism  for  this  purpose.  Appropriate  incentives  reward  good  behavior  and  penalize 
inappropriate  behavior.  Of  course,  incentives  work  best  when  they  are  known  well  in 
advance, that is, when they serve as ex ante signals of what should and should not be done. 
Naturally,  in  very  large  organizations  it  is  difficult  for  senior  management  to  monitor  each 
individual,  so  incentives  need  to  be  consistent,  permeate  even  the  lowest  levels  of  the 
organization,  and  remind  each  individual  that  his  or  her  risk-taking  affects  the  whole 
enterprise.  
Limits  and  controls  can  be  useful  tools  for  creating  the  right  incentives  and  sending 
appropriate signals, but they of course need to be tailored individually to each firm. Problems 
can arise when incentives are not properly structured and appropriate "risk discipline" is not 
exercised  –  for  example,  when  limits  and  controls  are  not  set  or,  if  they  are  set,  when 
adherence to them is not monitored or enforced. Such controls are incentives for business-
line leaders to assume only the risks that the firm can absorb because they penalize those 
who try to take on excessive risk or inadequate mitigation in the name of short-term profit 
maximization.  One  good  practice 
interconnected  enforcement 
mechanisms  within  the  institution,  mechanisms  that  can  –  and  will  –  enforce  limits.  An 
example is a good centralized treasury function. 
to  have  reliable, 
is 
Risk-adjusted performance evaluation and compensation 
In  trading  and  certain  other  activities,  there  is  a  tendency  for  business-line  heads  or 
individual employees to focus on their short-term compensation and not think about the long-
term  risks  that  their  activities  create  for  the  firm.  But  it  is  the  responsibility  of  senior 
management  to  provide  the  proper  incentives  and  controls  to  counter  the  potential  for 
individuals within financial firms to discount risks to the broader institution, and of course to 
ensure that nefarious activity is promptly uncovered and stopped.  
Clearly, it is up to financial institutions themselves – not bank supervisors – to decide how 
compensation  should  be  structured,  but  managers  and  boards  of  directors  should 
understand  the  consequences  of  providing  too  many  short-term  and  one-sided  incentives. 
They  would  benefit  from  thinking  about  compensation  on  more  of  a  risk-adjusted  basis. 
Accordingly,  I  encourage  institutions  to  think  about  ways  to  alter  existing  compensation 
schemes  to  include  some  types  of  deferred  compensation,  since  the  risks  of  certain 
investments or trades may not manifest themselves in the near term. Thus, it makes sense to 
try to match the tenor of compensation with the tenor of the risk profile and thus explicitly to 
take  into  account  the  longer-run  performance  of  the  portfolio  or  division  in  which  the 
employee  operates.  This  type  of  compensation  arrangement  is  already  in  use  at  many 
nonfinancial firms. 
Of course, star performers may prefer to have compensation more front-loaded and threaten 
to  leave  a  firm  for  another  one  that  would  not  have  the  same  longer-term  risk-sensitive 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
compensation  structure.  It  is  important  for  firms  to  have  the  flexibility  to  choose  how  they 
reward their employees, but it may be valuable to consider the development of industry-wide 
principles of sound risk management that would touch upon incentive-compensation issues. 
Such principles could foster market discipline in firms if investors were to view the principles 
as best practices and were to more heavily discount the reported short-term earnings of firms 
that  failed  to  adopt  best  practices.  Although  reaching  consensus  on  principles  for 
compensation would be difficult, it seems well worth the effort.  
Reflecting risk-management practices outside the firm 
Information  and  incentives  play  an  important  role  not  just  within  an  institution,  but  also 
outside it. By this I mean the ability of the marketplace – and supervisors, when necessary – 
to  gather  information  about  financial  institutions  and  give  the  right  signals  to  bank 
management about risk taking. Naturally, this requires proper disclosure of information by the 
financial  institution  so  that  depositors,  counterparties,  shareholders,  and  other  market 
participants can judge the riskiness of the institution and act accordingly. Institutions that are 
able to provide a continual and accurate flow of information to market participants generally 
benefit from such transparency. Certainly, this is an important part of the motivation behind 
pillar 3 of the new Basel II capital rules emphasizing the role of public disclosure. This benefit 
can be even more prominent during financial turbulence, when market participants become 
fearful of latent risks and "surprise" losses. Confidence in the risk-management practices of 
individual  firms  can  be  valuable  in  maintaining  confidence  in  the  markets  in  which  they 
operate. 
Risk-management performance during recent market events 
Although some of the risk-management techniques applied during the past nine months were 
successful, in other areas challenges remain. In risk identification and quantification, as well 
as  liquidity-risk  management,  for  example,  the  importance  of  information  and  incentives  is 
evident.  
A  number  of  risk-measurement  and  risk-quantification  challenges  relate  to  valuation 
practices, particularly with new products. As I noted in a speech last fall, firms should have 
greater motivation for applying proper valuation practices as part of good risk management.1 
At the center of these practices is the ability to make appropriate judgments about the quality 
of  information  being  used  for  valuations.  The  process  usually  starts  with  an  initial 
experimentation  phase  in  which  market  participants  learn  a  great  deal  about  the  product's 
expected performance and risk characteristics, preferably under different market conditions. 
Conducting due diligence about new products can be costly and take time, but it is usually 
worth it. Unfortunately, in some recent cases new products were developed very quickly and 
not properly road tested. In observing the valuation challenges, the "Trust but verify" adage 
has  equal  application.  Market  participants  must  ensure  that  they  do  not  make  valuation 
decisions based solely on excessive reliance on external ratings or evaluations, but that they 
also undertake their own assessment. And I would suggest that the value of independent due 
diligence on the part of market participants is especially high for newer and more-complex 
products.  
We all know that reductions in market liquidity played a large role in recent events, affecting 
the  valuation  of  financial  products.  As  with  other  risk  areas,  a  number  of  practices  were 
applied over the past nine months to identify and try to quantify the potential for disruptions in 
market  liquidity.  Good  practices  included  attempts  by  business  lines  and  trading  desks  to 
                                                 
1   Randall  S.  Kroszner,  2007,  "Innovation,  Information,  and  Regulation  in  Financial  Markets,"  speech 
delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2008
embed market-liquidity premiums or to apply market-liquidity haircuts in pricing models and 
valuations.  That  is,  there  was  an  understanding  that  information  in  benign  periods  did  not 
reveal  the  full  set  of  potential  outcomes,  and  that  disruption  of  market  liquidity  had  the 
potential  to  affect  market  prices  by  driving  down  the  value  of  certain  instruments  and  to 
create  losses.  Conversely,  problems  arose  when  some  managers  did  not  make  market-
liquidity adjustments in their quantitative estimates and models and simply relied on recent 
information from good times, when there was ample liquidity.  
The  Basel  Committee's  working  group  on  liquidity  began  an  exercise  to  review  liquidity-
supervision practices early last year and just last week issued a public report that builds on 
the Basel sound practices for managing liquidity risk issued in 2000. The report emphasizes 
that financial institutions should conduct stress tests and contingency planning exercises to 
prepare  for  potential  problems  in  both  funding  and  market  liquidity,  capturing  market-wide 
events, events affecting multiple markets or currencies simultaneously, and the combination 
of  idiosyncratic  and  market-wide  shocks.  In  conducting  this  analysis,  firms  should  better 
integrate stress tests and contingency funding plans.  
As with other risk areas, weaker performance in funding and liquidity-risk management can 
sometimes  stem  from  inadequate  information  and  poor  incentives.  During  recent  events, 
firmwide  liquidity-management  strategies  were  most  effective  when  they  included  proper 
incentives  and  all  relevant  information,  including  information  about  the  potential  for  certain 
exposures to be added to a firm's balance sheet – so-called unplanned asset expansions.  
Successful plans also contained information about the potential liquidity needs of individual 
business lines and how those might affect funding for the entire organization. In other words, 
individual business lines were instructed to evaluate their likely needs for funding and relate 
those  needs  to  the  treasury  function.  In  some  cases,  managers  have  considered  the 
potential adverse liquidity outcomes from engaging in certain businesses and therefore have 
decided to limit their involvement or stay out of those activities altogether.  
Concluding thoughts 
The  banking  industry  has  the  primary  responsibility  for  fostering  a  culture  of  effective  risk 
management,  but  of  course  supervisors  have  their  own  role  to  play  in  ensuring  the  safety 
and  soundness  of  individual  firms  and  a  viable  financial  system.  Therefore,  both  should 
continue  to  work  hard  to  improve  risk  management  in  light  of  recent  market  events.  U.S. 
supervisors  are  cooperating  with  their  counterparts  in  other  countries  to  help  the  industry 
address risk-management issues – bilaterally as well as through international forums such as 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  I  am 
delighted to represent the Federal Reserve in both forums. 
Of  course,  appropriate  remedies  will  not  be  developed  overnight  and,  when  they  are 
developed,  may  take  some  time  to  implement.  Institutions  should  make  appropriate 
adjustments to risk management and should do so thoughtfully and carefully. Indeed, firms 
should  focus  on  long-term  improvements  in  their  risk-management  culture  and  remember 
that  practicing  good  risk  management  is  an  ongoing  process  that  needs  to  be  continually 
updated and reviewed for its efficacy.  
Given  the  challenges  in  information  flows  and  incentives  I  highlighted  earlier,  firms  should 
devote  particular  attention  to  these  two  areas.  Even  an  institution  that  was  relatively 
untouched  by  recent  events  should  remain  vigilant  about  the  next  potential  source  of 
turbulence, to ensure that it is prepared to analyze information about its risk exposures and 
distribute that information throughout the firm. Going forward, therefore, senior management 
at financial institutions should ensure that they have complete and timely information about 
risk and demonstrate the ability and will to act on it. They should also be aware that the next 
crisis could come precisely in the area where they are most exposed or have weaknesses. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 5
That is, a certain degree of humility is wise, because all firms have a limited understanding of 
what might happen next.  
All senior managers would benefit from taking a fresh look at the incentive structures within 
their firm. For example, are all parties being compensated on a risk-adjusted basis that takes 
into account longer-term performance? Is management able to determine how risk taking at 
the business-unit level affects firm-wide risks? Do business units have the right incentives to 
consider  their  units'  risk  taking  in  the  context  of  the  entire  institution?  These  and  other 
questions deserve attention, given some of the risk-management challenges seen lately. But 
I  am  confident  that  the  industry  can  find  appropriate  solutions,  and  supervisors  will  assist 
them in those efforts.  
6 
 BIS Review 23/2008
