Donald L Kohn: The changing business of banking – implications for 
financial stability and lessons from recent market turmoil 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond's  Credit  Market  Symposium, 
Charlotte, North Carolina, 17 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 turmoil  certainly  has  underscored  how  banking  and 
financial 
The  recent  market 
intermediation  have  been  changing,  and  it  has  taught  some  important  lessons  about  the 
implications  for  financial  stability  that  I  don't  believe  were  previously  well  understood. 
Commercial banks and other financial market participants need to incorporate those lessons 
into  their  risk-management  practices.  Bank  supervisors  need  to  encourage  and  monitor 
banks'  efforts  to  strengthen  their  practices  and  we  need  to  consider  how  regulatory  and 
supervisory policies should be modified to reinforce incentives for sound practices. Finally, 
changes in the ways savings are channeled to borrowers have also affected the role of the 
nonbank  sector.  Central  banks  and  other  policymakers  need  to  think  carefully  about  the 
implications of these changes for financial stability and the appropriate prudential regulation 
of nonbank financial institutions.1  
The changing business of banking  
Even before the recent market turmoil, it was abundantly clear that the business of banking 
has  changed  quite  significantly  over  the  past  several  decades.  The  primary  impetus  for 
change has been intensified competitive pressures from the securities markets. Changes in 
technology (for example, the development and expansion of credit-scoring techniques) have 
allowed a larger share of credit extensions to households and businesses to be packaged in 
securities and sold to entities that often can fund the securities more cheaply than banks can 
fund  loans.  The  effects  probably  have  been  greatest  for  the  U.S.  household  sector. 
Securitization  of  residential  mortgages  began  in  the  1970s;  the  share  of  outstanding 
mortgages that have been securitized grew fairly steadily throughout the 1980s and 1990s 
and  has  fluctuated  between  50  and  60  percent  since  then.  Nonmortgage  consumer  credit 
(credit  card  and  installment  debt)  began  to  be  securitized  in  the  late  1980s,  and  in  recent 
years more than 20 percent of the outstanding stock has been securitized. Until the summer 
of  2007,  there  was  very  strong  demand  for  securitized  credit  from  mutual  funds,  pension 
funds, and other institutional investors. Throughout that period, household wealth was rising 
rapidly,  and,  directly  or  indirectly,  households  were  allocating  an  increasing  share  of  their 
wealth  to  vehicles  that  were  managed  or  advised  by  professional  asset  managers.  At  the 
same time, advances in the technology of modeling, pricing, and trading of risk over the past 
several decades gave added impetus to the migration of credit to securities markets.  
Competition from the securities market has significantly affected all segments of banking, but 
the most dramatic changes have occurred at the very largest banks. One could say that their 
strategic response was, "If you can't beat them, join them." Freed from the constraints of the 
Glass-Steagall  Act  by  incremental  regulatory  changes  that  were  expanded  and  codified  in 
the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  of  1999,  the  very  largest  banking  organizations  have 
                                                 
1   Michael  Gibson  and  Patrick  Parkinson,  of  the  Board's  staff,  contributed  to  these  remarks.  The  views 
expressed in these remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of 
Governors. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 1
significantly increased their capital markets businesses, including arranging and underwriting 
securitizations,  securities  custody,  prime  brokerage,  and  both  over-the-counter  and 
exchange-traded  derivatives.  They  have  also  made  significant  inroads  into  both  traditional 
asset  management  and  the  management  of  hedge  funds.  Indeed,  the  largest  commercial 
banks are now major competitors in many of the business lines that were historically viewed 
as  the  province  of  investment  banks.  Together,  the  very  large  commercial  and  investment 
banks  have  become  indispensable  to  the  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  securities  markets. 
For  example,  the  $2  trillion  hedge  fund  sector  is  critically  dependent  on  a  relatively  small 
number of commercial and investment banks that serve as secured creditors and derivatives 
counterparties.  And,  as  the  financial  market  turmoil  has  revealed,  banks  provide  liquidity 
support to various short-term financial markets, including the commercial paper market and 
markets for various types of tax-exempt debt. 
Competition  from  securities  markets  has  also  affected  smaller  banks  significantly,  though 
less  dramatically  than  larger  banks.  For  example,  the  portfolio  share  of  commercial  real 
estate  loans,  which  are  not  amenable  to  standardization  and  therefore  are  difficult  to 
securitize,  has  increased  markedly.  Setting  aside  the  100  largest  banks,  the  share  of 
commercial real estate loans in bank loan portfolios nearly doubled over the past 10 years 
and is approaching 50 percent. The portfolio share at these banks of residential mortgage 
and other consumer loans, which are more readily securitized, fell by 20 percentage points 
over the same period.  
The implications for financial stability from the recent market turmoil 
The  changing  business  of  the  largest  commercial  banks  means  that  threats  to  financial 
stability  do  not  necessarily  come  from  traditional  sources  such  as  a  deposit  run  or  a 
deterioration  in  a  bank's  portfolio  of  business  loans.  The  largest  banks'  capital  markets 
businesses  have  given  rise  to  new  threats  to  financial  stability.  These  threats  stem  from 
banks' securitization activity, from the complexity of banks' capital markets activity, and from 
the  services  that  banks provide  to  the  asset-management  industry,  including  hedge  funds. 
And risks that are more traditional to banking, such as liquidity risk and concentration risk, 
have appeared in new forms. 
The securitization activity of the largest banks is often described as following an originate-to-
distribute  model.  Chairman  Bernanke  described  this  model  in  some  detail  in  a  speech  he 
gave  last  week  in  Richmond.2  In  an  originate-to-distribute  model  of  banking,  assets  are 
originated to be packaged into securities, which are distributed broadly.  
However,  in  the  recent  market  turmoil,  problems  arose  at  both  ends  of  the  originate-to-
distribute  chain  as  it  was  being  applied  to  subprime  mortgages.  The  quality  of  subprime 
origination  declined  because  of  a  serious  erosion  in  underwriting  standards  at  banks  and 
especially at nonbanks. Underwriting standards for subprime mortgages fell as loans were 
increasingly made on the basis of expected increases in collateral value, without a careful 
evaluation of the borrower's ability to repay. Several years of rapidly rising house prices had 
reduced  the  delinquency  rates  on  mortgages  with  historically  high  loan-to-value  ratios, 
making these mortgages look less risky than they, in fact, turned out to be. As loan amounts 
rose relative to the value of properties, the performance of the subprime mortgage sector as 
a whole became sensitive to even small declines in house prices, with the distressing results 
that we have seen since house price growth decelerated beginning in 2006. A similar decline 
in  underwriting  standards  occurred  in  other  market  segments,  such  as  the  market  for 
leveraged  loans,  where  banks  increasingly  originated  loans  with  less-stringent  covenants 
                                                 
2   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2008),  "Addressing  Weaknesses  in  the  Global  Financial  Markets:  The  Report  of  the 
President's Working Group on Financial Markets," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Greater 
Richmond's Virginia Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Va., April 10. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2008
through  the  first  half  of  last  year.  More  generally,  insufficient  appreciation  that  economic 
conditions  might  not  always  be  benign  and  that  trading  conditions  in  markets  might  not 
always be highly liquid led to an underpricing of both credit and liquidity risks.  
At the other end of the originate-to-distribute chain, a good part of the risk associated with 
the securitization of subprime mortgages was not distributed into the market but was retained 
by  banks.  The  most  glaring  example  is  their  exposures  to  super  senior  tranches  of 
collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  that  had  invested  in  subprime  mortgage-backed 
securities.  Super  senior  CDO  tranches  –  the  last  to  bear  the  costs  of  defaults  on  the 
underlying mortgages – were considered to be extremely safe investments, and little of the 
risk of these instruments was truly distributed into the market.  
Three things hindered the distribution of super senior CDO risk. First, underwriters sold some 
of  the  risk  to  off-balance-sheet  vehicles,  but  they  also  provided  explicit  or  implicit  liquidity 
backstops  to  the  vehicles.  Much  of  this  risk  came  back  onto  banks'  balance  sheets  when 
liquidity pressures emerged in the second half of last year. Second, underwriters chose to 
retain some of the super senior exposure, in some cases reportedly because they met some 
resistance when they attempted to sell them at very slim spreads. The underwriters evidently 
misjudged  the  risk  of  those  positions,  in  some  cases  because  they  relied  too  heavily  on 
external triple-A ratings. Third, underwriters hedged some of the risk with monoline financial 
guarantors.  But  some  of  the  guarantors  took  on  so  much  subprime-related  risk  that  their 
financial  condition  had  become  highly  correlated  with  the  performance  of  the  subprime 
mortgage sector, which has called into question the effectiveness of those hedges. 
As I mentioned earlier, the growth of securitization is in large part a response to the growing 
demands of institutional investors for fixed-income securities. These investors clearly had a 
financial incentive to do better due diligence on the subprime risks they were taking on, but 
they largely failed to do so. We can only speculate as to why this was the case. I see three 
possibilities: First, they underestimated the potential for a nationwide decline in house prices; 
second, they relied on credit-rating agency analyses that have proven to be inadequate; or 
third, they simply misunderstood the risk of these often very complex securities. 
The complexity of CDOs is one example of a widespread increase in the complexity of the 
capital  market  activities  in  which  the  largest  banks  now  engage.  Some  banks'  failure  to 
adequately  manage  this  complexity  has  weakened  financial  stability  in  the  current  market 
turmoil.  CDOs  and  other  structured  credit  products  can  be  very  complicated.  Among  the 
CDOs  that  invested  in  subprime  mortgage-backed  securities,  it  was  common  for  a  single 
CDO  to  own  hundreds  of  different  mortgage-backed  securities,  each  with  its  own  pool  of 
underlying  mortgage  loans.  Clearly,  the  valuation  of  such  products  and  the  measurement 
and  hedging  of  the  risks  they  entail  are  very  complicated.  Securities  pools  reduce 
idiosyncratic  risk  –  the  potential  for  problems  particular  to  individual  borrowers  to  have  a 
material effect on overall values – but they are quite subject to systematic risk from broad-
based macroeconomic developments that affect all loans at the same time. I believe it is fair 
to  say  that  the  creation  of  new,  innovative  financial  products  outstripped  banks'  risk-
management  capabilities.  As  I  noted  earlier,  some  banks  that  chose  to  hold  super  senior 
CDO  securities  did  so  because  they  trusted  in  an  external  triple-A  credit  rating.  Because 
some  banks  did  not  fully  understand  all  aspects  of  these  exposures,  once  the  risks 
crystallized  last  year  in  a  weak  house  price  environment,  compounded  by  widespread 
liquidity  pressures  in  many  markets,  banks  had  to  scramble  to  measure  and  hedge  these 
risks. 
Another aspect of the changing business of banking with possible implications for financial 
stability  is  the  growth  of  services  that  banks  provide,  including  running  their  own  asset-
management businesses and providing prime brokerage services to hedge funds. Banks with 
asset-management businesses must manage the reputation risk that such businesses entail. 
Because  institutional  investors  are  naturally  sensitive  to  the  reputation  of  their  asset 
managers, losses elsewhere in the bank can be compounded if they leave the bank's asset-
BIS Review 45/2008 
 3
management business exposed to a flight of business and a sharp reduction in fee income. 
An increase in the business that banks do with highly leveraged investors, like some hedge 
funds,  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  attention  that  banks  must  pay  to  counterparty  risk 
management. 
Liquidity risk is a familiar risk to banks, but it has appeared in somewhat new forms recently. 
While the originate-to-distribute model aims to move exposures off of banks' balance sheets, 
the risk remains that a sudden closing of securitization markets can force a bank to hold and 
fund exposures that it had originated with the intent to distribute. And in many cases when 
banks did distribute exposures, they did so to various off-balance-sheet financing vehicles in 
which  they  retained  contractual  and  reputational  liquidity  exposures.  These  vehicles,  like 
banks  themselves,  were  funding  longer-term  assets  with  short-term  liabilities,  and,  like 
banks, they were subject to a run when their lenders became concerned about the quality of 
the assets. Some banks wound up using their own liquidity to support financing vehicles that 
were no longer able to fund themselves on anything like the same terms and conditions as 
before the market turmoil began. And as banks made good on the implicit or explicit liquidity 
insurance  they  sold,  they  found  themselves  with  larger  balance  sheets  and  less-robust 
capital  cushions  than  they  anticipated.  As  the  banks'  capital  and  liquidity  cushions 
unexpectedly eroded, they became quite cautious about extending credit, a dramatic change 
from the more complacent attitudes of previous years.  
Concentration risk is another familiar risk that is appearing in a new form. Banks have always 
had  to  worry  about  lending  too  much  to  one  borrower,  one  industry,  or  one  geographic 
region.  But  as  smaller  banks  hold  more  of  their  balance  sheet  in  types  of  loans  that  are 
difficult  to  securitize,  concentration  risks  can  develop.  Concentrations  of  commercial  real 
estate exposures are currently quite high at some smaller banks. This has the potential to 
make the banking sector much more sensitive to a downturn in the commercial real estate 
market. 
The private sector needs to respond  
To  protect  their  capital  and  liquidity,  banks  and  other  financial  market  participants  are 
addressing  the  weaknesses  revealed  by  market  developments  by  becoming  much  more 
careful about the risks they are taking. This is a necessary process, but it has been a difficult 
one  as  well;  it  is  reducing  the  values  of  some  assets  and  tightening  credit  cost  and 
availability  across  a  wide  range  of  instruments  and  counterparties,  despite  considerable 
easing in the stance of monetary policy. It is this tightening that is accentuating the downside 
risks for the economy as a whole. And in some sectors, as lenders seek protection against 
perceived  downside  risks,  it  is  probably  going  further  than  is  necessary  to  foster  financial 
stability in the long run. But we will end up with a safer, more robust financial system. 
For banks, a safer and more robust financial system will be characterized by improved risk 
management  that  incorporates  the  lessons  from  the  recent  turmoil.  Successful  risk 
management  looks  comprehensively  across  business  lines  and  is  fully  integrated  into  the 
decisionmaking of senior management. It identifies stresses and scenarios that might seem 
remote,  but  that  could  threaten  safety  and  soundness.  Banks'  own  self-interest  clearly 
provides a strong incentive to improve risk management, but better risk management at the 
largest banks would benefit the broader financial system, too.  
A  more  resilient  financial  system  will  also  require  banks  to  strengthen  all  aspects  of  the 
originate-to-distribute model. They need to pay more attention to origination, including when 
they are distributing credits they have not originated. And they need to ensure that when they 
distribute risks into the market with securitization, the risks really are distributed and will not 
come back onto their balance sheet later. If the credits end up in off-balance-sheet entities, 
banks  need  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  capital  and  liquidity  impact  of  any  residual  claim 
these entities may have on the banks, even where that claim may arise through a desire to 
protect the bank's reputation rather than through any contractual obligation.  
4 
 BIS Review 45/2008
The structured credit products that are part of a safer banking system are likely to be simpler 
and more transparent. Recent experience has shown that more readily understood products 
would  be  in  banks'  own  self-interest.  Banks  and  investors  must  devote  more  effort  to  due 
diligence when investing in structured products, and they must avoid relying so heavily on 
credit rating agencies to do all their homework for them. 
Banks must continue to focus on improving their management of counterparty risks. During 
the financial market disruptions surrounding the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management 
almost 10 years ago, counterparty risk was a central concern. Subsequently, a private-sector 
group  called  the  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  developed  a  set  of  best 
practices  for  counterparty  risk  that  greatly  helped  to  set  the  tone  for  the  needed 
improvements. These efforts do not appear to have been wasted, as attested to by the lack 
of serious losses from defaults of hedge fund counterparties in the recent turmoil. However, 
banks do not appear to have followed those best practices for their counterparty relationships 
with monoline financial guarantors, where counterparty risk has crystallized into large losses. 
Banks must come to grips with the implications that their capital markets businesses have for 
liquidity risk management. While securitization can transform illiquid assets into more-liquid 
securities, risk managers must be more aware of the ways that securitization can become a 
drain on a bank's liquidity position in times of stress.  
Smaller  banks,  too,  need  to  improve  aspects  of  their  risk  management.  They  should  take 
steps  to  manage  any  portfolio  concentrations  that  may  arise  because  competition  from 
securitization is less intense in certain market segments. When they do increase the share of 
their portfolio in a given market segment above historical levels, they must ensure that their 
risk-management processes and controls are commensurate with the level and complexity of 
their exposures. 
All banks – large and small – need to consider whether they need greater capital cushions. 
The largest banks should consider whether their changing business model means that they 
need to hold more capital against some of the newer risks I discussed earlier. It is especially 
concerning that so many of these newer risks have arisen at the same time. Smaller banks 
must  make  sure  their  capital  is  sufficient  to  protect  against  the  risk  associated  with  the 
greater  concentrations  that  have  seemed  to  accompany  the  increased  competition  from 
securities markets.  
Banks might find the current circumstances to be especially favorable for raising new capital. 
Not only would more capital provide a cushion against the sorts of unexpected declines in 
creditworthiness  and  asset  values  that  have  marked  recent  months,  it  would  also  position 
banks well for expansion. The safer, more resilient financial system that will emerge from this 
episode is likely to be characterized by a greater reliance on bank financing, as borrowers 
and lenders take on board the weaknesses that have become evident in securities markets. 
It also is likely to offer more generous compensation for risk-bearing. For banks with plenty of 
capital,  that  adjustment  process  is  likely  to  present  a  chance  to  pick  up  business  that, 
appropriately managed, will prove quite profitable over time.  
I acknowledge that this is a formidable "to do" list for banks. But it has been a formidable 
episode of financial turbulence that has revealed major weaknesses in our financial system, 
including the business practices of many banks. And this episode has also left the regulators 
with many issues to consider.  
The Federal Reserve and other regulators need to respond 
At  the  Federal  Reserve  and  at  other  bank  regulatory  agencies,  our  job  is  to  reinforce  the 
incentives and actions that are building a more resilient financial system. We need to make 
sure that regulatory minimum capital requirements and liquidity management plans protect 
reasonably well against shocks becoming systemic. Our supervisory guidance needs to be in 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 5
place to prevent backsliding when, over the coming years, the memories and lessons of the 
current market turmoil fade, as they certainly will. 
To  these  ends,  we  are  reexamining  a  host  of  things  ranging  from  Basel  II  to  liquidity  to 
transparency.  Working  with  our  domestic  and  international  colleagues,  we  are  looking  to 
raise  the  Basel  II  capital  requirements  on  specific  exposures  that  have  been  troublesome, 
such as super senior CDOs of asset-backed securities and off-balance-sheet commitments. 
We are looking to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to update its guidance on 
liquidity  management  in  light  of  the  recent  experience.  And  we  and  our  supervisory 
colleagues are looking to require better disclosures of off-balance-sheet commitments and of 
valuations of complex structured products.  
Threats to financial stability from outside the banking system 
In  the  past,  commercial  banks  and  securities  markets  could  be  considered  as  separate 
channels for credit intermediation. One important implication of this was that if one channel 
for  credit  provision  became  impaired,  the  other  would  usually  be  functioning  and  able  to 
insulate, to a degree, overall credit provision and the economy from financial sector shocks. 
For  example,  when  the  depository  credit  channel  became  impaired  in  the  late  1980s  and 
early  1990s,  many  borrowers  were  able  to  turn  to  liquid  securities  markets  to  meet  a 
substantial portion of their needs for credit.  
That  isn't  working  in  the  current  period  of  turmoil,  and  for  the  reasons  inherent  in  our 
discussion  so  far.  First,  securities  markets  have  become  so  large  that  commercial  banks 
simply lack sufficient capital and balance sheet capacity to readily fill the gap when markets 
are  impaired.  We  saw  this  initially  in  mortgage  markets  when  the  securitization  of 
nonconforming  mortgages  seized  up;  banks  stepped  up  to  make  more  jumbo  prime 
mortgages and hold them on their books, but the cost of such credit rose substantially, and 
the amount of lending was reduced.  
Second, banks themselves are more dependent on well-functioning securities markets, and 
as that dependence and the important role of banks as ultimate providers of funding to those 
markets became clearer, pressures on banks mounted. So, in August, the turmoil crossed 
into the banking system when banks were challenged to backstop asset-backed commercial 
paper conduits and structured investment vehicles; under these circumstances, they were no 
longer  comfortable  fulfilling  their  traditional lending  roles,  and  they  tightened  lending  terms 
substantially, becoming part of the problem of credit availability, rather than a solution to it. In 
our  more  security-oriented  intermediation  systems,  both  commercial  banks  and  security 
markets seem to be critical to the stability of the financial system and the economy.  
Third, large commercial banks and investment banks have increasingly similar risk profiles, 
so  that  all  are  subject  to  the  same  risk-management  challenges  under  the  same 
circumstances.  As  the  activities  and  risk  profiles  of  large  banks  and  securities  firms  have 
become increasingly similar, and as financial intermediation has run more through securities 
markets, we've certainly learned in the past month or so that it is not only commercial banks 
that can threaten financial stability.  
So we must worry about excessive leverage and susceptibility to runs not only at banks but 
also at securities firms. To be sure, investment banks are still different in many ways from 
commercial  banks.  Among  other  things,  their  assets  are  mostly  marketable  and  their 
borrowing  mostly  secured.  Ordinarily,  this  should  protect  them  from  liquidity  concerns.  But 
we  learned that  short-term  securities  markets can  suddenly  seize  up  because  of  a  loss  of 
investor confidence, such as in the unusual circumstances building over the past six months 
or so. And investment banks had no safety net to discourage runs or to fall back on if runs 
occurred. Securities firms have been traditionally managed to a standard of surviving for one 
year without access to unsecured funding. The recent market turmoil has taught us that this 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2008
is not adequate, because short-term secured funding, which these firms heavily rely upon, 
also can become impaired.  
With  many  securities  markets  not  functioning  well,  with  the  funding  of  investment  banks 
threatened,  and  with  commercial  banks  unable  and  unwilling  to  fill  the  gap,  the  Federal 
Reserve  exercised  emergency  powers  to  extend  the  liquidity  safety  net  of  the  discount 
window to the primary dealers.3 Our goal was to forestall substantial damage to the financial 
markets and the economy. Given the changes to financial markets and banking that we've 
been discussing this morning, a pressing public policy issue is what kind of liquidity backstop 
the central bank ought to supply to these institutions. And, assuming that some backstop is 
considered necessary because under some circumstances a run on an investment bank can 
threaten financial and economic stability, an associated issue is what sorts of regulations are 
required to make the financial system more resilient and to avoid excessive reliance on any 
such facility and the erosion of private-sector discipline.  
I don't have ready answers to these difficult questions. It is evident that the balance of market 
discipline and regulation is in the process of being adjusted to the reality of how our financial 
system has evolved. In my remarks, I've stressed the need for both private and public actions 
to build a more resilient financial system. But we need to make adjustments in such a way as 
to preserve the benefits of highly innovative  financial markets where many advances have 
enabled risks to be better diversified and credit more readily available to more people.  
Whatever type of backstop is put in place, in my view greater regulatory attention will need to 
be  devoted  to  the  liquidity  risk-management  policies  and  practices  of  major  investment 
banks. In particular, these firms will need to have robust contingency plans for situations in 
which their access to short-term secured funding also becomes impaired. Commercial banks 
should  meet  the  same  requirement.  Implementation  of  such  plans  is  likely  to  entail 
substitution of longer-term secured or unsecured financing for overnight secured financing. 
Because  those  longer-term  funding  sources  will  tend  to  be  more  costly,  both  investment 
banks and commercial banks are likely to conclude that it is more profitable to operate with 
less leverage than heretofore. No doubt their internalization of the costs of potential liquidity 
shocks will be costly to their shareholders, and a portion of the costs likely will be passed on 
to other borrowers and lenders. But a financial system with less leverage at its core will be a 
more stable and resilient system, and recent experience has driven home the very real costs 
of financial instability. 
                                                 
3   Primary  dealers  are  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of  New  York. On  behalf  of the Federal  Reserve  System, the New York Fed's Open 
Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 7
