Randall S Kroszner: Prospects for recovery and repair of mortgage 
markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Conference of State Bank Supervisors Annual Conference, Amelia 
Island Plantation, Florida, 22 May 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 As all of you well know, it was just about one year ago that the turmoil in the mortgage and 
financial markets emerged. Today I will offer my perspective on the prospects for recovery 
and repair of the mortgage markets, which I believe will be a gradual process that requires 
both market and regulatory discipline.  
Greater transparency and less complexity in credit instruments will help to promote broader 
scrutiny  of  credit  risk.  Investors  with  more  and  better  information  from  the  originators  and 
sponsors  of  credit  products  will  be  able  to  more  easily  conduct  proper  due  diligence  and 
verify evaluations of credit risk. Financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments 
and  that  have  similar  or  correlated  exposures  through  various  business  lines  should  also 
strengthen  risk-management  practices.  As  supervisors,  we  must  insist  on  effective  risk 
management and take the steps necessary to ensure that changes are implemented where 
needed. 
Although any assessment at this stage about the recovery and repair of mortgage markets is 
preliminary, I will outline some steps, many of which are already in train, that can foster the 
rehabilitation process. As part of this discussion, I will highlight what the Federal Reserve is 
doing to facilitate improvements in the mortgage markets, some of which involve important 
collaborations with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). 
Background 
As you know, the initial shock to financial markets was essentially a rapid deterioration in the 
performance  of  subprime  and  so-called  alt-A  mortgages  in  the  United  States,  particularly 
among  such  loans  that  were  originated  after  the  middle  of  2005.  A  large  share  of  those 
mortgages  were  funded  through  structures  known  as  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS), 
and many of those structures were, in turn, funded by other structures called collateralized 
debt obligations (CDOs), in which subprime and alt-A MBS represented the collateral.  
These  CDOs  were  ultimately  held  by  a  wide  range  of  investors  and  financial  institutions. 
Much of the issuance of these securities over the past few years occurred in an environment 
of tightly compressed risk spreads – that is, the difference between the yields on what were 
perceived as relatively safe and relatively risky assets was much smaller than usual. Indeed, 
many  of  the  structures  seemed  to  be  created  to  satisfy  investors'  strong  demand  for 
securities that carried investment-grade ratings but that might provide slightly higher yields 
than other investment-grade securities, such as corporate bonds. In many cases, however, 
investors  seem  to  have  been  attracted  to  these  structured  securities  without  a  thorough 
understanding of the underlying risk profiles.  
Although MBS and CDOs had been around for many years, the more recent structures were 
significantly  different  and  more  complex  than  their  earlier  counterparts.  Investors'  earlier 
experience with CDOs, for example, was mainly limited to cases in which primary securities, 
such as corporate bonds, business loans, or other simple securities, formed the underlying 
collateral.  In  contrast,  the  more  recent  CDOs  frequently  were  themselves  backed  by 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 1
structured  securities,  resulting  in  so-called  two-layer  securitizations  in  which  structured 
products are used to fund other structured products.  
These  two-layer  securitizations  are inherently  more  complex  and  are  more  exposed  to  tail 
risk  than  their  earlier  one-layer  counterparts.  Indeed,  in  its  recent  report  on  credit-risk 
transfer, the Joint Forum – an international collaboration of financial supervisors – noted a 
cliff effect that is associated with the distribution of returns that can be realized on the more 
senior tranches of two-layer securitizations.1 Simply put, the cliff effect refers to the fact that 
investors  of  higher-rated  tranches  of  complex  securities  can  expect  to  receive  a  small 
positive return in most circumstances, but they are vulnerable to extremely large losses in 
those rare events of widespread financial stress.  
Despite the greater complexity, it seems that many investors assumed that the evaluations of 
credit-rating  agencies  would  work  well  and  be  sufficient  for  the  new  structured  securities. 
Investors  ended  up  relying  too  heavily  on  those  assessments  rather  than  requiring  ample 
information  about  the  underlying  assets  and  demanding  extra  transparency  in  order  to 
estimate projected risk-return trade-offs.  
Role of information and transparency in corporate bond market 
To illustrate how important information and transparency will be in the recovery and repair 
process of the securitization markets going forward, it might be helpful to review a case in 
which, on the whole, market functioning has held up relatively well. I'm thinking specifically 
about the market for corporate bonds issued by investment-grade nonfinancial firms. 
To be sure, over the past year, growing concerns about individual firms' earnings and about 
the  overall  macroeconomic  outlook  have  contributed  to  significantly  wider  risk  spreads  on 
corporate  bonds.  Nonetheless,  investment-grade  nonfinancial  companies  in  the  United 
States  have  been  able  to  issue  a  sizable  volume  of  traditional  debt  instruments  rather 
consistently,  even  as  demand  for  some  other  types  of  securities  has  been  substantially 
curtailed.  In  addition,  on  the  whole,  liquidity  in  the  secondary  markets  for  corporate  bonds 
has  been  perceived  to  be  much  better  than  liquidity  for  non-agency  mortgage-backed 
securities and for more-complex structured securities. Part of the reason that the markets for 
high-grade  nonfinancial  bonds  have  continued  to  function  relatively  well  is  that  those 
securities have not experienced widespread ratings downgrades or defaults.  
The extensive amount of data available about nonfinancial corporations and the performance 
of corporate bonds over time has made it easier and less costly for investors to conduct due 
diligence  –  or  to  put  it  another  way  –  to  trust  but  verify  credit-risk  evaluations.  The  same 
cannot be said of many residential MBS created over the past couple of years and the many 
complex structured products that held MBS as collateral, where the complexity of the pay-off 
structures (including so-called cliff effects) made expected returns and risks more difficult to 
model. 
Recovery and repair going forward 
As I have said, recovery in the mortgage market will take time and will require more market 
and regulatory discipline. I would now like to discuss this process in further detail as it relates 
to  the  credit-rating  agencies,  the  originate-to-distribute  model  for  mortgage  lending,  the 
important  role  of  the  new  Basel  II  framework,  and  improvements  in  risk-management 
practices that financial institutions will need to make in several key areas. 
                                                 
1   The Joint Forum (2008), Credit Risk Transfer – Developments from 2005 to 2007 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank 
for International Settlements). 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2008
Credit-rating agencies 
As  I  mentioned,  establishing  sound  and  thorough  independent  risk  evaluations  is  costly, 
particularly for complex structured products that have only recently been created. To address 
problems with risk evaluations, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) 
has  recommended,  among  other  things,  that  the  credit-rating  agencies  themselves  should 
display greater skepticism when they are presented with complex and opaque instruments to 
rate.2 The PWG also suggested that the credit-rating agencies would better serve investors 
by providing greater transparency about the models, estimation methods, and assumptions 
used to evaluate credit risk for complex structured securities. In addition, it is important for 
the rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a complex structured credit product 
may  have  a  different  risk  than  the  same  rating  applied  to  a  simple  security,  such  as  a 
corporate bond. 
that 
loans 
including 
layered  multiple  sources  of  credit  risk, 
Originate-to-distribute approach to mortgage lending 
The  growth  of  the  originate-to-distribute  approach  in  the  mortgage  market  played  an 
important role in the rapid expansion of mortgage lending in the United States until the onset 
of the recent market turbulence. That expansion was concentrated in the subprime and alt A 
segments of the mortgage market, where underwriting deteriorated at the point of origination. 
To  an  ever-increasing  extent  from  around  the  middle  of  2005  until  about  a  year  ago, 
originators  made 
low 
documentation of borrower income, very high combined loan-to-value ratios, and loans with 
nontraditional payment schedules that sometimes allowed principal and interest payments to 
be deferred. In an environment of compressed risk spreads, investors have  more  difficulty 
signaling concerns about credit risk, which may have reduced the incentives for originators to 
maintain strict underwriting.  
I  would  expect  the  originate-to-distribute  model  to  continue  to  be  an  important  part  of  the 
modern financial market landscape, but, I hope, in a much stronger form. The model works 
best  when  the  resulting  credit  instruments  are  less  complex  and  opaque,  as  analysts  and 
investors can evaluate the underlying risks with greater certainty. And originate-to-distribute 
is  most  effective  when  the  incentives  of  originators  and  investors  are  closely  aligned  and 
when  market  pricing  reinforces  incentives  for  originators  to  perform  careful  underwriting. 
Firms surveyed about their risk-management practices by a group of supervisory agencies 
from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States – known as 
the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG) – have  emphasized the importance of understanding 
the quality of new credits that their businesses originate or purchase from others.3
The  process  of  recovery  and  repair  in  non-agency  mortgage  securitization  markets  would 
also be aided by more clarity and consistency in underwriting standards. This would provide 
more certainty to the mortgage market, thereby helping to revive investor confidence in this 
market  and  to  promote  the  flow  of  credit  to  borrowers.  Both  to  protect  consumers  and  to 
foster the revival of these markets, the Federal Reserve has proposed stricter underwriting 
rules  for  high-cost  mortgages  under  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act 
(HOEPA),  which  could  also  help  to  increase  the  transparency  and  improve  the  quality  of 
underlying assets in private mortgage pools.  
The Federal Reserve's proposed rules would better protect consumers from a range of unfair 
or  deceptive  mortgage  lending  and  advertising  practices.  Our  proposal  includes  four  key 
                                                 
2   President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market 
Developments" (Washington: Department of the Treasury). 
3   The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," is available 
at: http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.html. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 3
protections for higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling: (1) 
creditors  would  be  prohibited  from  engaging  in  a  pattern  or  practice  of  extending  credit 
without  considering  borrowers'  ability  to  repay  the  loan;  (2)  creditors  would  be  required  to 
verify  the  income  and  assets  they  rely  upon  in  making  a  loan;  (3)  prepayment  penalties 
would only be permitted if certain conditions are met, including the condition that no penalty 
will  apply  for  at  least  sixty  days  before  any  possible  payment  increase;  and  (4)  creditors 
would have to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance. We are working toward 
issuing final regulations in July. 
Role of Basel II 
Individual institutions are responsible for maintaining sound risk-management practices. But 
supervisors, of course, also have a role to play in both promoting effective risk management 
and offering incentives for bankers to make improvements to their practices.  
The new Basel II framework is a substantial supervisory initiative that seeks to improve risk-
management  practices  at  banking  organizations.  The  framework  more  closely  aligns 
regulatory  capital  requirements  with  actual  risks,  which  should  lead  institutions  to  make 
better  decisions  about  extending  credit,  mitigating  risks,  and  determining  overall  capital 
needs.  For  example,  unlike  under  Basel  I,  the  risk  weights  applied  to  first-lien  residential 
mortgages  will  be  subject  to  a  more  refined  differentiation  depending  on  whether  the 
borrower has low or high credit risk. Similarly, Basel II attempts to more fully capture risks in 
securitization transactions.  
Just  as  lessons  learned  from  recent  events  can  help  bankers  improve  risk-management 
practices,  they  can  also  help  supervisors  further  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the  Basel  II 
framework. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision plans to strengthen 
the  resiliency  of  Basel  II  by  revising  it  to  establish  higher  capital  requirements  for  certain 
complex structured credit products, such as CDOs of asset-backed securities, among other 
enhancements.4  
Improvements in risk-management practices 
Studies of last year's events have concluded that part of the reason that the problems with 
subprime and alt-A mortgages led to much wider financial market turmoil was weaknesses in 
the  risk-management  practices  at  some  large  global  financial  firms  that  created  and  held 
complex  credit  products.  Recent  events  have  highlighted  the  need  for  risk-management 
improvements in four fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk 
management, governance and risk control, and valuation practices. 
First, for risk identification and measurement, as all of you here know, good information is the 
lifeblood  of  sound  risk  management.  A  good  risk-management  structure  is  designed  to 
identify the full spectrum of risks across the entire firm, gathering and processing information 
on an enterprise-wide basis in real time. In short, you cannot manage your risks if you do not 
know what they are.  
Recent  events  have  illustrated  that  many  large,  complex  institutions  had  exposures  to 
subprime mortgages that ran across independent business lines, through off-balance-sheet 
conduits  such  as  structured 
to  numerous 
counterparties such as monoline financial guarantors. But too few institutions fully recognized 
their  aggregate  exposure  to  risks  that  turned  out  to  be  highly  correlated.  Latent  risks  from 
certain  complex  products  and  certain  risky  activities  are  particularly  problematic  because 
investment  vehicles,  and  with  respect 
                                                 
4   For  further  discussion  of  plans  to  strengthen  the  resiliency  of  the  framework,  refer  to  Randall  S.  Kroszner 
(2008),  "Risk  Management  and  Basel  II,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  AMA 
Conference, May 14. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2008
they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in. Stress testing and scenario 
analysis are essential because they can reveal potential risk concentrations that may not be 
apparent when using information gleaned from normal times. 
The second fundamental area is liquidity risk management. Because of its central role in the 
business  of  banking,  liquidity  risk  requires  rigorous  and  effective  management.  Recent 
events  have  shown  that  during  times  of  systemwide  stress,  liquidity  shocks  can  become 
correlated, so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets 
or  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  can  simultaneously  put  pressure  on  a  bank's  own  funding 
liquidity. Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times 
of  stress  and  at  that  time  adversely  affect  capital  positions,  it  is  particularly  important  that 
firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels. 
The  third  fundamental,  governance  and  risk  control,  has  been  a  key  factor  that  has 
differentiated performance across financial institutions during the recent turmoil. Firms that 
operated  with  the  two  main  ingredients  for  solid  governance  and  controls  –  thorough 
information  and  strong  incentives  –  have  come  through  this  tumultuous  period  in  better 
condition.  
Lastly,  supervisors'  comparative  reviews  also  identified  valuation  practices  as  critical.  The 
SSG reported that those firms that paid close attention to the problems associated with the 
valuation of financial instruments, particularly those for which markets were not deep, fared 
better.  These  more-successful  firms  developed  in-house  expertise  to  conduct  independent 
valuations and refrained from relying solely on third-party assessments.  
Federal Reserve's mortgage initiatives  
I would now like to discuss some of the actions the Federal Reserve is taking to address the 
ongoing  challenges  in  the  mortgage  market.  The  Federal  Reserve's  decisions  regarding 
monetary  policy  and  our  efforts  to  promote  financial  stability  affect  mortgage  and  housing 
markets, of course. But, we are also working on these issues more directly on a number of 
fronts as we are very concerned about the high rate of mortgage foreclosures. 
We are contributing to initiatives already under way at the local and national level, as well as 
collaborating  with  other  regulators,  community  groups,  policy  organizations,  financial 
institutions,  and  public  officials  in  an  effort  to  identify  ways  to  prevent  unnecessary 
foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities. In doing so, we are 
taking advantage of the decentralized geographic structure of the Federal Reserve System, 
which  consists  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  the  twelve  Federal 
Reserve Banks that each represent a region of the country.  
In recent months, for example, I have had the opportunity to get a firsthand look at what is 
happening in various parts of the country. I have met with local community groups, bankers, 
housing  advocates,  counseling  agencies,  and  state  and  local  government  officials  in 
Cincinnati,  Minneapolis,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  Miami,  and  Las  Vegas.  The  Reserve  Banks 
representing  those  areas  have  helped  facilitate  these  meetings,  which  have  enhanced  my 
understanding  of  the  challenges  being  faced  across  the  country  and  of  how  policymakers 
should think about these issues at both the local and national levels. 
We are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face when 
modifying  loans  or  offering  other  alternatives  to  foreclosure.  We  have  encouraged  the 
mortgage  industry  to  increase  their  efforts  to  work  with  troubled  borrowers,  to  develop 
guidelines and templates for reasonable standardized approaches to various loss-mitigation 
techniques,  and  to  adopt  transparent  reporting  standards.  Clear  disclosures  of  loan 
modifications  will  not  only  make  it  easier  for  regulators,  the  mortgage  industry,  and 
community groups to assess the effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will 
also foster greater transparency, and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 5
We are also using our analytic resources to conduct research that the Reserve Banks can 
disseminate  to  local  community  groups,  counseling  agencies,  financial  institutions,  and 
others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities. Earlier this month, we 
announced  a  new  partnership  with  the  nonprofit  NeighborWorks  America  to  develop 
materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage 
vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing and new 
homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  collaborated  with  the  CSBS  on  several  interagency  initiatives  to 
help struggling homeowners and to enhance the functioning of the mortgage markets. The 
federal  banking  agencies  and  the  CSBS  last  fall  issued  guidance  urging  lenders  and 
servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to 
foreclosure. Reaching borrowers before they fall too far behind in their payments is important 
to effecting a sustainable workout and may help more borrowers remain in their homes. In 
some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent 
reductions  in  interest  rates  or  an  extension  of  the  loan  term  may  be  called  for.  In  some 
situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way 
to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing.  
We are also coordinating with the CSBS, the American Association of Residential Mortgage 
Realtors  (AARMR),  and  other  federal  agencies  on  consumer  compliance  reviews  of  non-
depository mortgage lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations. These reviews, 
which  began  earlier  this  year,  are  aimed  at  evaluating  underwriting  standards,  risk-
management strategies, and compliance with certain consumer protection laws.  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  working  cooperatively  with  the  states  to  provide  data  and 
analysis on subprime mortgage loan performance to inform the states' policies in this area. 
These  efforts  will  be  supported  by  the  new  system  for  registering  and  tracking  mortgage 
brokers that the CSBS and the AARMR launched earlier this year. The Nationwide Mortgage 
Licensing System should better protect borrowers by bringing greater consistency across the 
states to the supervision of mortgage lenders. Nationwide licensing should prevent lenders 
who  run  afoul  of  authorities  in  one  state  from  simply  relocating  their  business  to  another 
state. 
Conclusion 
As market participants take steps to foster greater transparency and to reduce the complexity 
of structured credit instruments, I believe that recovery and repair in the mortgage markets 
will  take  hold  over  time.  Moreover,  as  financial  institutions  strengthen  risk-management 
practices  and  as  supervisors  ensure  that  the  necessary  actions  are  taken,  I  expect  the 
financial system as a whole to become more resilient. A number of efforts are under way by 
the  Federal  Reserve,  jointly  and  independently  with  the  CSBS  and  other  organizations,  to 
help prevent avoidable foreclosures and to promote responsible mortgage lending. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2008
