Axel A Weber: Financial markets and the central bank 
Keynote speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
SUERF Colloquium “New trends in asset management: exploring the implications”, Munich, 
12 June 2008. 
 1 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen 
In  recent  years,  we  have  seen  far-reaching  structural  changes  in  global  financial  markets. 
Financial  innovation  has  manifested  itself  in  various  ways,  the  most  prominent  being  the 
growing importance of new and complex financial instruments, the increasing significance of 
new  business  models,  especially  in  the  realm  of  securitisation  and  disintermediation,  and 
intensifying  competition,  partly  owing  to  the  consolidation  process  in  the  banking  sector, 
partly owing to the rising importance of relatively new, largely unregulated players, such as 
hedge funds, private equity firms, conduits and SIVs. 
These remarkable financial developments are bound to alter the range of activities financial 
market  participants  pursue.  But  are  they  also  changing  financial  markets’  reaction  to 
monetary policy? 
The  starting  point  for  answering  this  question  is  easy  to  find:  the  monetary  policy 
transmission process. This term describes the long, variable and uncertain process by which 
a  change  in  a  central  bank’s  official  interest  rate  impacts  first  on  financial  markets  and  is 
ultimately  transmitted  to  the  economy  in  general  and  the  price  level  in  particular.  As  a 
significant part of this monetary policy transmission process takes place in financial markets, 
it goes without saying that the recent trends in global financial markets are of special interest 
to central bankers – and it would not have needed the recent financial market turmoil to drive 
home that point. 
Against this backdrop, I will focus my remarks today on the following three issues. First, have 
the recent structural changes in the global financial system altered the transmission process 
of monetary policy – and, if so, do these changes make a central banker’s life more – or less 
– difficult? Second, how can central banks help avoid disturbances in the financial system? 
This  is  a  crucial  question  because  financial  stability  is  a  precondition  for  the  effective 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the  real  economy.  Third,  how  does  financial 
integration  affect  monetary  policy  transmission?  Specifically,  what  is  the  current  state  of 
affairs in the euro area? 
Financial markets and monetary policy transmission 
2  
I shall start with the most general question. To what extent have the recent financial market 
trends changed the way monetary policy affects the economy and its price level? This is a 
crucial  issue.  Without  a  fair  knowledge  of  the  monetary  transmission  process,  its  key 
variables and the lags involved, central banks will face a tough job when deciding on official 
interest rates. For this reason, the Eurosystem closely monitors structural developments in 
financial  markets.  We  also  try  to  detect  how  financial  innovations  could  have  modified  the 
way changes in short-term interest rates are transmitted to other financial variables, output 
and inflation. 
Without wanting to go into too much detail, it is essential to point out that, when it comes to 
the  impact  the  recent  financial  trends  have  on  monetary  policy  transmission,  several 
countervailing  effects  are  in  play.  These  countervailing  effects  are  best  captured  when 
unravelling  monetary  policy  transmission  into  its  different  channels,  that  is  by  considering 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
individually  the  different  ways  in  which  a  change  in  central  bank  interest  rates  affects 
economic variables – at least in the short term. 
Let me focus on the channels and arguments that are the most prominent in the euro area. 
To  begin  with,  there  is  the  interest  rate  channel.  According  to  the  existing  literature,  the 
development  of  deeper,  more  complete  and  more  competitive  financial  markets  seems  to 
have strengthened the pass-through from central bank interest rates to market interest rates. 
This  can  be  put  down  to  two  factors:  Consolidation  in  the  banking  system,  implying  the 
emergence of (fewer and) larger banks and thus improved arbitrage opportunities between 
different financial markets, and an enhanced availability of alternative capital market-based 
instruments for debt financing. 
It is indeed likely that the increased competition between banks, as well as between bank 
loans and different financial market products, has led to a closer relationship between market 
and  bank  interest  rates.  Consequently,  the  deepening  of  financial  markets  should  have 
amplified and/or speeded-up the effects of monetary policy on bank interest rates (and, other 
things being equal, on other financial variables, output and inflation). 
Financial  developments  over  the  past  decade  should  also  have  strengthened  the  balance 
sheet  channel.  Basically,  the  idea  is  that,  in  an  economy  with  highly  developed  mortgage 
markets  and  a  proliferation  of  mark-to-market  accounting  rules,  changes  in  the  value  of 
collateral  and  wealth  have  a  greater  impact  on  the  economy.  In  such  an  environment, 
borrowers’  balance  sheets  tend  to  fluctuate  more,  which  leads  to  a  higher  volatility  in  the 
amount  of  funds  banks  are  willing  to  lend  to  households  and  firms.  Obviously,  greater 
changes  in  the  supply  of  credit  will  translate  into  greater  changes  in  consumption  and 
investment, thereby strengthening monetary policy transmission. 
At the same time, a third prominent monetary policy transmission channel, the bank lending 
channel, is generally supposed to have become less important. Comparable with the balance 
sheet  channel,  the  bank  lending  channel  emphasises  that  monetary  policy  can  influence 
aggregate demand not only through interest rates, but also through its impact on the supply 
of bank loans. Whereas the balance sheet channel focuses on the availability and value of 
collateral necessary for borrowing operations, the bank lending channel refers to changes in 
the banks’ and borrowers’ funding possibilities. 
Usually, two reasons are put forward why the balance sheet channel has weakened of late. 
Banks  have  become  more  flexible  because  of  the  growing  use  of  securitisation  and 
improvements  in  risk  management.  Consequently,  banks  can  respond  more  flexibly  to 
changes in financial market conditions and will therefore not pass through each and every 
change in the central bank’s official short-term interest rate. Hence, other things being equal, 
the effect of monetary policy on the overall loan supply has decreased. Moreover, financial 
development has not only broadened banks’ options in terms of responding to interest rate 
changes; 
their 
dependency on bank loans. 
To put all the arguments in a nutshell, monetary policy seems, on balance, to have gained 
influence on financial market prices and the real economy in the short run. This is confirmed 
by  the  existing  theoretical  and  empirical  literature,  which,  by  the  way,  delves  much  more 
deeply into the intricacies of the various transmission channels than I am able to do today. In 
any  case,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  evidence  is  still  tentative.  As  financial 
development is an ongoing phenomenon, it should therefore be considered valid only at the 
current  juncture.  Nonetheless,  the  bottom  line  is  that,  in  the  face  of  greater  competition 
among  financial  intermediaries,  financial  innovation  and  financial  globalisation,  monetary 
policy remains a powerful tool for delivering price stability.  
In  this  context,  however,  it  is  of  the  essence  that  the  monetary  policy  strategy  utilises  a 
broad-based approach in order to guarantee a robust assessment of the developments in the 
economy and on financial markets. 
it  has  also  broadened  borrowers’ 
financing  opportunities,  reducing 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
3  
Financial stability 
Financial stability analysis 
3.1 
Let me now turn to financial stability. A widely accepted definition of financial stability is the 
ability of the financial system to perform its key functions efficiently, namely, the allocation of 
capital and risks and the settlement of payments and securities transactions. These functions 
must  be  fulfilled  smoothly  not  only  in  normal  times,  but  also  during  periods  of  structural 
adjustment and stress.  
For obvious reasons, supporting financial stability is an important objective for central banks 
–  and  has  always  been  so.  First,  as  noted  above,  monetary  policy  is  largely  transmitted 
through financial market operations. Hence, the effect that monetary policy has on the real 
economy  depends  crucially  on  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial  intermediaries  and 
financial  markets.  It  is  at  this  point  that  financial  stability  analysis  and  monetary  policy 
analysis are most closely interlinked.  
Second and more generally, major macroeconomic objectives, especially price stability and 
sustainable output growth, are jeopardised if the financial system suffers from instability. This 
is underlined by the generally high macroeconomic costs of financial crises. In addition, this 
aspect  has  gained  importance  since  financial  turbulences  seem  to  have  become  more 
frequent  in  past  decades  owing  to  accelerated  growth  in  financial  transactions  and  the 
greater complexity of new financial instruments. 
Third, financial stability is closely linked to a central bank’s interest in the prudent design and 
management  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  which  process  its  currency.  The 
Eurosystem,  for  instance,  has  the  statutory  task  of  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of 
payment and settlement systems. 
Against this background, referring to financial stability analysis as a new trend among central 
bankers would be something of a misnomer. Indeed, financial stability analysis is anything 
but a passing fashion. It has, in fact, been a field of research of its own right since the mid-
1990s. This is reflected in the wide dissemination of Financial Stability Reports, which are 
now produced in more than 50 countries worldwide.  
Nonetheless, it is fair to say that financial stability analysis is still, to a large extent, work in 
progress.  To  illustrate my  point,  let  me  outline  briefly  the  kind  of  challenges  central  banks 
face. To begin with, financial stability is not easily measured. This is hardly surprising as, in 
contrast  to  monetary  policy  analysis,  there  is  no  single  indicator  (such  as  inflation)  to 
observe.  Similarly,  initiatives  to  create  some  sort  of  an  all-encompassing  financial  stability 
index  have  failed  to  convince  so  far.  Instead,  the  concept  of  financial  stability  involves 
various  financial  intermediaries,  financial  market  segments  and  infrastructure,  for  which  a 
whole  host  of  different  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  exist.  As  a  consequence, 
determining the degree of financial stability remains a highly complex task. 
At  this  point,  the  natural  suggestion  from  an  academic  outsider  would  be  to  construct  a 
theoretical  model.  Such  a  simplified  representation  of  reality  would  help  the  academic  to 
single out the most relevant indicators and to define the interrelationships between financial 
market and economic variables. However, model-based financial stability analysis is still in its 
infancy. Three issues are particularly striking. 
The feedback effects between financial system behaviour and the real economy are difficult 
to model, especially in episodes of stress. Currently, most macroeconomic models treat key 
financial system interactions and feedback effects only in a rudimentary manner. Therefore, 
the  “true”  costs  in  terms  of  real  GDP  that  are  associated  with  systemic  risk  in  financial 
markets are difficult to determine. This is a significant limitation, given that feedback effects 
play a crucial role in assessing a financial system’s vulnerability to contagion and system-
wide stress. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 3
Another  principal  reason  why  episodes  of  stress  are  difficult  to  model  lies  in  the  fact  that 
financial  instability  is  inherently  non-linear.  As  one  consequence  of  this  non-linearity,  risk 
factors typically are not normally distributed. Instead, their distribution is characterised by fat 
tails,  implying  that  extreme  values  are  observed  more  frequently  than  what  would  be 
predicted  under  the  assumption  of  normality.  Modelling  non-linearities  greatly  complicates 
research,  but  it  is  indispensable,  given  the  central  focus  of  financial  stability  analysis  on 
default, contagion and spillover effects.  
A further challenge faced by financial stability analysts is a lack of relevant data. First of all, 
historical  time  series  on  episodes  of  stress  are  rare,  luckily.  But  that  makes  it  even  more 
difficult  to  understand  financial  markets’  behaviour  in  the  fat  tail  of  risk  distributions. 
Moreover, and more generally, some of the data needed for financial stability analysis still 
require development. With the exception of market prices and regulatory information, only a 
limited  set  of  data  is  on  hand  in  a  timely,  comparable  and  satisfactory  manner.  Think,  for 
instance, of financial intermediaries’ financial reporting and the little information available on 
credit risk transfer. Therefore, methods have to be found for handling the shifting demand for 
data in an environment in which financial markets are constantly undergoing change. 
To  sum  up,  feedback  effects,  non-linearities  and  the  handling  of  a  limited  set  of  data  are 
prime  examples  of  the  numerous  challenges  encountered  by  financial  stability  analysts  in 
designing  financial  stability  models.  As  a  consequence,  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that  a 
standard  analytical  model  of  financial  stability  has  not  yet  been  developped.  At  present, 
modelling is often scattered with respect to risk categories, financial market segments and 
structural or regulatory issues. 
Mind  you,  there  is  no  reason  to  play  down  the  progress  achieved  so  far,  on  the  contrary. 
Financial stability analysis is becoming more and more sophisticated, as is borne witness by 
the increasing number of related working papers and conferences.  
As  for  the  recent  financial  market  turmoil  –  the  trigger  for  the  recent  financial  market 
turbulence, the speed at which it spread across global financial markets and its persistence 
were  not  foreseen,  but  that  does  not  conflict  with  my  statement.  Far  from  it  –  financial 
stability analysis does not aim for clairvoyance. Instead, it is most likely that financial crises 
will continue to emerge in spite of perceptible progress in financial stability analysis. But the 
crucial  point  is  that  their  impact  can  be  alleviated  by  warnings,  moral  suasion  and  –  if 
necessary  –  adjustments  to  the  institutional  and  regulatory  framework.  For  this  reason, 
further improvement in the framework for financial stability analysis is a very high priority for 
central banks.  
Dealing with episodes of financial instability  
3.2  
There  is  yet  another  reason  why  central  banks  need  to  keep  well-informed  on  financial 
market  developments.  The  turmoil  that  has  been  affecting  global  financial  markets  since 
summer  last  year  has  been  a  further  example  of  central  banks  not  only  taking  a 
predominantly  passive  role  in  analysing  and  commenting  on  financial  stability,  but  also  of 
playing an active part as well. Indeed, the role of central banks in crisis management dates 
back to the 19th century and was reflected in the views of Thornton and Bagehot. Both noted 
that  a  central  bank  should  –  under  specific  conditions  –  provide  liquidity  to  the  banking 
system as a lender of last resort.  
And that is exactly what happened when the crisis in the US subprime market triggered a 
rapid loss of confidence among financial intermediaries on a global scale. As a result of it, 
uncollateralised interbank lending has been muted – the reasons for which are twofold. On 
the  one  hand,  banks’  willingness  to  lend  has  fallen  sharply  due  to  mounting  counterparty 
risks. On the other, the uncertainty banks face with respect to their own longer-term liquidity 
planning  has  increased  considerably.  To  alleviate  ongoing  tensions  in  interbank  money 
markets, central banks from all over the world have acted as liquidity providers of last resort 
to the banking system.  
4 
 BIS Review 76/2008
As for the Eurosystem, we have so far stood the test in this challenging environment. Owing 
to  the  broad  design  of  our  liquidity  operations  toolbox,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework  has  had  to  change  only  slightly  since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  market 
turbulence.  What  is  more,  the  Eurosystem  succeeded  fairly  quickly  in  reestablishing 
confidence in the functioning of the Euro money market by promptly injecting additional funds 
on a temporary basis. We shall continue to provide liquidity flexibly – which seems warranted 
given  the  ongoing  tensions  in  the  Euro  money  market,  including,  and  especially,  in  the 
longer-term sector.  
Although  there  have  recently  been  some  identifiable  signs  of  easing  in  several  financial 
market segments, it is still too early to give the all-clear. Specifically, the still elevated level of 
money market spreads underlines the fact that there is no room for complacency.  
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  stress  two  points.  In  the  Eurosystem,  we  have  strictly 
separated  our  management  of  aggregate  liquidity  conditions  from  the  determination  of  our 
monetary policy stance. Hence, when deciding on interest rates, the primary objective of the 
Governing Council has been (and will continue to be) price stability. Against the background 
of the continuing and persistently strong upside risks to price stability, the Governing Council 
is in a state of heightened alertness and in readiness to act. Moreover, our strict separation 
makes clear that the Eurosystem does not intentionally and directly offer some sort of ex post 
insurance to financial market participants who have engaged in excessive risk-taking. This is 
intended to limit moral hazard to a large extent. 
Apart  from  this,  it  seems  appropriate  to  point  out  that,  in  a  free  market  economy,  central 
banks’ liquidity support must always be confined to a transitional period. In other words, in 
the  medium  run,  central  bank  interventions  cannot  substitute  the  need  for  financial 
intermediaries to regain confidence gradually. At the top of the list of requirements, I would 
like to see financial intermediaries trying to enhance their transparency regarding credit and 
market risk exposures and also, if necessary, raising capital and adjusting business models. 
Furthermore, it is essential that financial intermediaries convince investors that the financial 
system  as  a  whole  is  capable  of  managing  risks  adequately  in  a  setting  of  continuously 
changing financial market trends. 
Finally, taking a step back from crisis management, the recent financial market turmoil has 
underscored the need for crisis prevention to be strengthened. This is exactly what is taking 
place  at  the  moment.  National,  European  and  international  forums  and  organisations  are 
currently putting a lot of effort into identifying the lessons to be learned. There are various 
initiatives under way, but it is particularly important that the recommendations made by the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  are  implemented  rapidly  and  effectively.  The  implementation  of 
these recommendations, including those on disclosure standards and risk management, will 
be a major step forward in enhancing the resilience of the international financial system.  
Financial integration in the euro area 
4  
If I were governor of a central bank whose currency area coincided with the boundaries of its 
financial markets, I could end my speech here with a brief summary. However, as governor 
of  a  central  bank  that  is  an  integral  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  there  is  yet  another  topic  to 
cover: financial integration. It is generally accepted that, in a currency union, well-integrated 
financial markets facilitate the implementation of the single monetary policy. There are three 
aspects worth mentioning. 
First, a currency union should work more smoothly, the more integrated the national financial 
markets are. Indeed, financial integration can help individual EMU member states to absorb 
country-specific  shocks  more  easily.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  more  diversified  the 
sources of national income and the easier it is to borrow abroad, the less consumption and 
investment need to follow fluctuations in national output. Hence, national consumption and 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 5
investment levels can be insulated from domestic macroeconomic shocks via cross-border 
risk sharing. 
Second, financial integration strengthens the stability of the euro area financial system – and 
of the macro economy in general. Basically, in a well-integrated financial system, risks tend 
to be more diversified on a cross-border scale which should lead to financial intermediaries, 
markets and infrastructure becoming more resilient to idiosyncratic shocks. Having said that, 
integrated financial markets arguably broaden the scope for spillover effects across borders 
– as manifested by the recent US subprime crisis. 
Third,  I  have  already  stated  that  the  Eurosystem’s  tasks  include  the  smooth  operation  of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  –  which  is  closely  linked  to  the  progress  of  financial 
integration.  There  is  an  abundance  of  evidence  that  the  launch  of  the  euro  was  a  major 
catalyst for financial integration in the euro area. 
In general, financial integration is most advanced in those market segments which are the 
closest  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  This  is  particularly  visible  in  the  unsecured  money 
market, which was almost perfectly integrated right at the start of EMU, as measured by the 
low cross-country standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area 
countries. Moreover, the euro has significantly reduced home bias in the euro area bond and 
equity  markets,  albeit  to  varying  degrees.  Principally,  financial  integration  has  progressed 
most in government bond markets and is least advanced in equity markets. Having said that, 
the percentage of cross-border holdings of bonds and equities in the euro area has grown 
over  the  past  ten  years.  In  addition,  bond  market  yields  and  share  prices  are  increasingly 
being  driven  by  common  euro  area  factors,  although  local  factors  continue  to  play  a  role. 
These developments have been supported by the elimination of currency risk within the euro 
area, the higher demand from a larger pool of investors, and – as far as bonds issued by 
smaller member states and companies are concerned – the reduction of liquidity premiums in 
domestic-currency debt. In essence, however, these developments reflect the high degree of 
substitutability among bonds and equities issued by various governments and corporations 
across the euro area. 
Let me also highlight the fact that the recent financial market turbulence has not undone the 
process of financial integration in the euro area. True, euro area sovereign spreads vis-à-vis 
the  German  benchmark  have  increased  substantially.  Moreover,  cross-border  country  and 
cross-sector dispersions in euro area equity returns have risen since the second half of 2007. 
Both  examples  indicate  that  national  factors  in  market  dynamics  and  asset  pricing  have 
regained importance in a time of financial market tensions. But the scale on which this has 
happened is still small in comparison with the major developments of the past ten years. 
As already noted, financial integration in the euro area has not proceeded at the same pace 
across all sectors and markets. Integration of the retail banking markets, for instance, has 
remained limited, reflecting the persistence of legal, institutional and cultural differences. This 
shows that financial integration in the euro area is dependent not only on how close a market 
segment is to monetary policy, but also on how far the relevant market infrastructures have 
become  integrated.  A  case  in  point  is  the  high  degree  of  integration  of  the  large-value 
payment  systems  in  the  euro  area.  They  have  made  possible  the  integration  of  euro  area 
money  markets.  TARGET2,  offered  by  the  Eurosystem,  is  a  further  step  forward  in  that 
direction.  Other  efforts  to  reduce  infrastructure  barriers  are  under  way.  One  of  the  most 
significant  initiatives  in  this  regard  is  the  Eurosystem’s  TARGET2-Securities  project  which 
will provide a pan-European securities settlement platform. These innovations demonstrate 
that the Eurosystem attaches great importance to promoting financial integration in the euro 
area. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2008
Concluding remarks 
5  
Ladies and gentlemen, this has been a wide-ranging overview of the changing relationship 
between  central  banks  and  financial  markets.  I  hope  it  has  given  you  some  flavour  of  the 
importance  that  financial  stability,  financial  market  developments  and  financial  integration 
have for monetary policy implementation. Financial markets have always been a field of vital 
interest  to  the  Eurosystem,  but  certainly,  the  recent  financial  market  turmoil  has  been  a 
further  spur  to  our  efforts  in  coping  with  periods  of  financial  stress,  conducting  financial 
market research, and supporting the integration of the euro area financial markets. 
First and foremost, however, the Eurosystem contributes to safeguarding financial stability by 
maintaining price stability in the euro area in the medium term.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 7
