Glenn Stevens: Monetary policy and inflation – how does it work? 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Treasury Seminar Series, Canberra, 11 March 2008. 
 When I was originally approached to speak to this audience, I was asked to give a Reserve 
Bank perspective on the economy. That was a fairly general brief. Given the current state of 
affairs, it makes sense to fulfil it by talking specifically about inflation and monetary policy.  
There is extensive commentary around at the moment about “blunt” instruments, concerns 
over the effect of rising interest rates on particular indebted sections of the community and 
the appeal in various quarters for some other way of dealing with inflation. Hence, it seems a 
sensible  moment  to  re  visit  just  how  monetary  policy  works.  It  is  also  important  to  have  a 
realistic assessment of the extent to which other instruments are available to help in the job 
that monetary policy is charged with. 
But before tackling either of those issues, there is a prior set of questions that have to be 
addressed, about what is actually happening to inflation. Unless we are clear about that, then 
the subsequent discussion about monetary policy’s role in controlling it is not well based. If 
there is not actually an inflation problem, then presumably monetary policy should proceed 
differently than it would if there is, in fact, a problem. 
So the plan of these remarks is as follows. First, I will address the questions about what is 
happening to inflation and why. Then I will turn to questions of what monetary policy can do 
about it, and what other instruments can do. In both instances, the way I propose to do this is 
to recount some of the questions that we have seen raised in various places. In some cases, 
these are reasonable questions. But there are reasonable answers, and I would like to offer 
them. Finally, I would like to step back from this approach focused on the particular details of 
the current situation to give some broader historical perspective. It is important to keep that 
perspective in mind, not just to be clear how big the challenge is, but also to be clear how 
well the economy has done, so far at least, in meeting it. 
Arguments about inflation  
One argument which has been around is that there isn’t much inflation. On the face of it, 
this is not an unreasonable starting point. The latest CPI headline rate is, after all, only 3 per 
cent.  If  that  is  as  high  as  it  gets  and  it  comes  down  at  some  point  before  long,  then 
presumably there is not that much of a problem. It would, in fact, be quite consistent with the 
inflation  targeting  framework  we  have  been  operating  on for  well  over  a  decade now.  The 
average inflation rate over a run of years would still be “two point something”. 
Unfortunately,  the  situation  at  present  is  not  quite  as  benign  as  that.  The  headline  figure 
owes quite a bit to the unusually low result in the March quarter of 2007, which was affected 
by some unusual and temporary effects. When we get the March 2008 figures towards the 
end of April, we will most likely find that the rise over the four quarters is more like 4 per cent. 
That result itself will have various temporary factors affecting it, so it is not necessarily an 
immediate guide to how concerned we should be. To get a better feel for the component of 
inflation  that  is  likely  to  be  more  persistent,  we  look  at  various  measures  of  underlying 
inflation. As you know, there is more than one way of doing this, and in my judgement it is 
not sensible to be doctrinaire about any one underlying measure. But what is clear is that 
these  series  have  all  picked  up,  with  the  exact  extent  varying  by  measure.  Overall,  the 
Reserve  Bank,  in  its  February  2008  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  put  the  pace  of 
underlying  inflation  over  the  past  year  at  about  3½  per  cent.  That  is  no  disaster  as  a 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 1
temporary phenomenon either, but monetary policy has to be set with a view to winding that 
increase back within a reasonable period.  
Now  I  need  to  be  clear  about  the  status  of  these  underlying  measures.  The  target  for 
monetary policy is set in terms of the Consumer Price Index. The objective is to achieve an 
average rate of CPI inflation of between 2 and 3 per cent. The “on average” specification is 
used precisely because the CPI is sometimes affected over short periods by factors that will 
not be there in a year or two’s time, when the effects of any monetary policy changes will still 
be coming through. For policy to chase those short term fluctuations would risk making the 
economy less, rather than more, stable. So we need to look ahead to where the CPI is likely 
to be in future, as well as where it is now. For that purpose, we employ analytical devices to 
help  us  detect  what  the  ongoing  trend  in  inflation  is  likely  to  be,  and  this  is  where  the 
underlying measures are useful. They are not, themselves, the target variable. But a policy 
that targets future CPI inflation, using underlying inflation as an analytical tool and/or as a 
predictor  of  the  headline  CPI,  would  probably  look  very  similar  to  one  that  was  targeting 
underlying inflation per se. So, in this sense, if one is trying to assess what economists would 
call the Bank’s “reaction function” using particular price series, underlying measures would 
probably be more helpful than the headline rate.  
Another argument we hear is that inflation is higher, but that is due to a few things on the 
supply side that we cannot help, and that cannot be influenced by monetary policy. 
There  are  some  prices  that  historically  have  been  subject  to  large  but  temporary  supply 
disturbances.  Agricultural  produce  is  a  classic  example  –  with  droughts,  floods  or  other 
phenomena sometimes having significant, and even large, impacts. But these effects should 
be expected to be only temporary – when weather conditions change, prices should revert 
back to trend. So there is no need for monetary policy to respond to them, and the various 
underlying measures help us to abstract from their effects in the short term. When Cyclone 
Larry devastated the banana crop in early 2006, the effect was to help push the CPI inflation 
rate up to 4 per cent. That impact has now been reversed. Contrary to what was asserted in 
some quarters, monetary policy did not respond to this event at the time, nor has it since. 
There  are  certainly  some  food  prices  that  have  been  pushed  up  because  of  the  recent 
drought (though others have been pushed down). It is less clear, however, that some of the 
other  unusually  large  price  movements  currently  affecting  the  CPI  can  be  passed  off  as 
temporary  supply  disturbances.  Global  oil  prices  have  certainly  risen  sharply,  but  not 
because the supply of oil has been reduced. In fact, the supply of oil has never been higher. 
The biggest reason for the rise in the price of oil (measured in US dollars) has been the rise 
of  demand.  Of  course  it  is  not  Australian  demand  (though  that  has  risen),  but  demand  in 
Asia, and especially in China, that accounts for much of the rise in global demand. So the 
rise in energy prices is not “our fault”, so to speak, but nor is it temporary. Higher Chinese 
demand is not going to go away. So we have to adjust to higher energy prices. 
People have also pointed out the prominent increases in rents in the CPI as a special factor, 
and  it  is  certainly  true  that  rents  are  rising  quickly.  The  reason  that  is  happening  is  pretty 
clear too: there is strong demand for that type of accommodation, and rents as a yield to the 
supplier have been unusually low. Hence, rents are bound to rise.  
Interestingly,  this  shows  the  lengthy  and  rather  complex  connection  between  asset  price 
changes and consumer price inflation. A key factor behind rental yields being very low was 
that the price of residential property rose so strongly – far faster than rents – in the earlier 
part of this decade, and has stayed high in most places in the country. While capital gains 
were occurring, it mattered little to many investors that rents as a running yield were low. But 
this  was  not  sustainable.  Once  capital  gains  slowed,  the  low  rental  yield  mattered  a  great 
deal. Low yields also prompted more demand for rental accommodation than otherwise. That 
combination  was  bound  to  lead  to  an  adjustment  in  rents,  unless  property  prices  actually 
declined to restore the yield. Since, in most locations, they did not, an adjustment something 
like the one we now see became very likely. It seems likely to continue for a while yet, until 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2008
either  rental  yields  regain  more  attractive  levels  or  some  other  factor  raises  the  effective 
return for investors.  
Suppose, though, that we did take out some of the “special factors” that people nominate. 
Let’s,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  remove  from  the  CPI  rents  and  petrol,  as  well  as  the 
calculation of deposits and loan facilities. If we do that, the rate of inflation of the remaining 
items over the year to December 2007 is 2.1 per cent. No problem, right? Well, not exactly. 
To assess the trend in inflation objectively, you cannot just take out items that rise in price, 
which is why we typically use underlying measures, which trim both extreme rises and falls. 
Suppose for the current purpose, then, that we also remove fresh fruit, as a very volatile item 
and one that happens to have held down the CPI over the past year, due to the unwinding of 
the great banana episode of 2005/06. Let’s also remove the effects of the child care rebate 
changes, treated as a price fall in the CPI, but which we know is a one-time effect and which 
reduced the CPI by 0.2 per cent.  
If we do all that, we get a rate of inflation of 3.0 per cent over the year to December 2007. A 
little elementary figuring and a look at the quarterly profile, moreover, will tell you that, when 
this calculation is done for the year to March 2008, the answer is likely to be higher again. 
This  is  not  all  that  far  from  what  the  statistical  underlying  measures,  which  dampen  the 
effects of large rises and falls in a more systematic way, are telling us the trend inflation rate 
is now.  
So, unfortunately, it will not do to say that just a few items explain it all away. What is really 
going on is that price rises across a pretty wide range of items have picked up. About two 
thirds of the items in the CPI by weight have risen at more than 2½ per cent over the past 
year.  Normally,  we  experience  about  half  the  price  rises  at  that  pace  (which  you  would 
expect if average inflation is 2½ per cent). In essence, to explain away the rise in inflation we 
have seen, the list of special factors to which we have to appeal is growing rather long. 
At  the  same  time,  there  is  no  question  that  aggregate  demand  in  the  Australian  economy 
rose strongly through 2007, and indeed in recent years generally, at a pace well above the 
economy’s likely growth of potential supply. Nor is there much serious argument against the 
proposition that usage of capacity in the economy is very high – business surveys uniformly 
tell  us  that,  as  does  the  measured  level  of  real  GDP  relative  to  trend,  and  the  low 
unemployment rate and high level of vacancies. Firms have struggled to find the additional 
workers to expand their activities – that is what they tell us. 
In short, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that there has been genuine pressure on prices, 
caused not just by temporary supply shortfalls in a few areas, even though there have been 
some of those, but also by persistent strength in demand. 
The next argument that I want to address is that wages have not picked up. Some people 
object  to  our  message  on  inflation,  including  references  we  have  made  to  labour  costs, 
because they seem to think that we are somehow “blaming” wage earners for inflation. We 
are not saying that. This episode has not been caused by some exogenous “break out” in 
wages. Until recently, it was, in fact, possible to say that wages growth had been remarkably 
steady at an aggregate level in the face of a very tight labour market, with relative wages 
across  industries  and  regions  doing  what  one  would  expect  given  the  shocks  hitting  the 
economy.  At  one  stage,  I  described  this  as  a  textbook  case  of  adjustment1,  in  a  labour 
market  made  much  more  flexible  by  a  long  sequence  of  reforms.  Private  sector  wages 
growth may be picking up a little now, and businesses we talk to say that they are having to 
                                                 
1   See  Official  Committee  Hansard  of  the  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics, 
at 
Administration, 
2007,  Gold 
Finance 
http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/reps/commttee/R10393.pdf. 
Available 
August 
Coast. 
Public 
and 
17 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 3
find  ways  to  raise  compensation,  and  in  ways  that  may  not  immediately  be  evident  in  the 
official data. 
But we have certainly not claimed that labour costs are leading the way. It seems to me that 
if labour costs are starting to accelerate, this is mainly a symptom of inflation pressure in a 
very  strong  economy.  Inflation  problems  do  not  have  to  start  with  wages.  Sometimes  in 
Australia in the past they have started that way, but it should not be assumed that it will be 
that way on every occasion. On the other hand, should people come to expect that inflation 
will be higher for a long time, and wage claims and price setting start to reflect that, we will 
have more trouble getting inflation down again. One of the most important jobs of monetary 
policy is to condition expectations. To achieve that, people have to believe we will do what is 
required to control inflation over time.  
The final argument I want to tackle is that the inflation target is too low. This view accepts 
that  inflation  has  increased,  and  that  it  is  not  just  a  few  factors  that  are  responsible,  but 
argues that 3-4 per cent inflation is acceptable, and that it is unrealistic to expect to return to 
the 2-3 per cent standard.  
I  do  not  think  that  the  2-3  per  cent  average  inflation  target  is  too  ambitious.  We  have 
achieved it for the past 15 years, and we achieved average outcomes of that order for long 
periods  in  the  20th  century.  If  we  accept  that  the  target  could  slide  up  to  3-4  per  cent,  to 
match actual inflation, how long would it be before we were debating 4-5 per cent as a goal? 
If the analysis of the economy that we have set out is correct – that overall demand has been 
growing faster than can be sustained – it would not be long. Ongoing demand growth above 
sustainable  rates  would  not  mean  steady  inflation  at  a  higher  level,  it  would  mean  a 
continuing  increase  in  inflation.  If  that  is  the  situation,  then  demand  has  to  be  curtailed  to 
stabilise inflation at any level. Revising the target higher would provide only very temporary 
respite from the measures needed to control inflation, unless we were prepared to revise it 
higher every year.  
Furthermore,  the  argument  that  we  could  accept  a  higher  trend  inflation  rate  ignores  how 
much the structure of the economy has adapted – in good ways – to “two point something” 
inflation. The structure of nominal interest rates, to name just one thing, has been predicated 
on that being the medium term anchor. If that anchor were allowed to drag, higher average 
interest rates in the future would be the result. This is a result amply demonstrated in history: 
the surest way to higher average interest rates is to accept higher inflation. To put it simply, if 
the community wants sustainably low interest rates, we should choose a low inflation target, 
not a high one. 
So accepting a rise in trend inflation because of the short term moderation in demand growth 
needed to contain a pick up in prices would be a very short sighted policy. It would very likely 
condemn us to a repeat of the problems of the late 1960s and 1970s, when we mistakenly 
thought we could live with a bit more inflation, and all the attendant difficulty we had in the 
1980s in fixing the inflation problem, all over again. It is far better to resist rising inflation now.  
Arguments about monetary policy  
I  turn  now  to  arguments  about  monetary  policy  and  inflation.  The  first  one  that  I  want  to 
address  is  the  assertion  that  monetary  policy,  in  adjusting  interest  rates,  is  ineffective  in 
controlling prices, because it is failing to restrain demand. More than once I have seen 
people state that the rises in interest rates seemed not to make much difference. 
But if it were really true that the sequence of adjustments that took place to raise the cash 
rate from its low of 4.25 per cent in 2001 to 7.25 per cent today made no difference to the 
economy or inflation, it would follow that we could reduce the cash rate by 300 basis points 
tomorrow  and  nothing  would  change.  If  we  put  it  like  that,  surely  not  many  people  could 
seriously believe that the changes to interest rates have made no difference. 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2008
More realistically, people might think that it is the changes in rates that matter, more than the 
level,  and  that  the  changes  were  too  small.  In  this  view,  interest  rate  changes  should 
perhaps have been bigger, so as to give more of a “shock” to behaviour on each occasion 
(though they should presumably also have been less frequent – otherwise the level of rates 
we would have reached would have been much higher). 
I suppose it is possible that a different sequence of changes, including some bigger ones, 
would have changed behaviour in the economy. We cannot know because that alternative 
scenario  cannot  be  run,  but  as  everyone  knows,  the  Board  has  on  occasion  in  the  recent 
past considered larger movements. So the idea of larger changes is not absurd. 
Yet it is hardly as though interest rate changes were so small that no one noticed. There are 
few issues reported at more length than interest rates; no one could say they were unaware 
of what was happening. Beginning with the March 2005 rate change, moreover, the extent of 
coverage in the media has been far more intense than it had been prior to then, and far more 
intense than is the case in other comparable countries. We could debate the reasons for that, 
but they do not matter for present purposes. On every one of those occasions, there was no 
shortage  of  dramatic  media  coverage,  and  no  shortage  of  predictions  of  serious 
consequences  for  indebted  households,  the  economy  and  so  on.  If  we  were  looking  for 
announcement effects, surely they should have been at work through this period. 
My own view is that monetary policy is most effective when actions are seen to be consistent 
with  the  factual  evidence  available  on  the  economy,  a  sensible  assessment  about  future 
risks, and a framework that has a clear medium term objective for policy. Apart from that, we 
have to accept that the likely effect of any one move of 25 or even 50 basis points is, while 
uncertain, probably only modest. It is the combination of changes, and more particularly the 
level reached, that will do most of the work. 
A  second  version  of  the  “ineffectiveness”  argument  holds  that  (1)  the  price  rises  are 
coming from factors beyond the control of any Australian policy, and particularly from 
abroad, from which it follows that (2) monetary policy cannot do anything about them. 
For some people, it follows that it is therefore (3) futile, and unnecessarily disruptive, to 
try. 
I have already addressed the question of whether all the price rises can be put down to a few 
special factors, obviously not under our control. The fact is that the price rises are broader 
than that. 
But even if all the initial impetus for higher prices comes from events abroad, we still have to 
decide how we will respond to that shock. In the case of energy prices, while the world price 
of oil in US dollars certainly is completely outside our control, it is the Australian dollar price 
of oil that actually matters for the Australian motorist. That price is lower at present than it 
might have been, because of the rise in the exchange rate. Insofar as interest rates have a 
bearing on the exchange rate, they can affect petrol prices, indirectly, and have done so. 
Looking across the economy more generally, we can all see that the main external event of 
recent years is the rise in the terms of trade, which is obviously completely exogenous as far 
as Australia is concerned. But higher resource prices generate additional income, which then 
affects demand for goods and services at home. That is expansionary, and puts pressure on 
prices for non traded goods and services. Even though monetary policy cannot stop the initial 
shock – of course we cannot stop the Chinese demand for resources – we can, and should, 
seek  to  condition  the  economy’s  subsequent  response  to  that  shock,  rather  than  simply 
letting domestic overheating go unchecked. Tighter policy will dampen domestic demand and 
contain the pick up in non traded prices as well as raising the exchange rate, which makes 
imports cheaper, exports less competitive and fosters a move of productive resources into 
the parts of the economy where more production is needed. That is an appropriate form of 
adjustment to such a shock, particularly if the shock is likely to be fairly persistent.  
BIS Review 30/2008 
 5
So  even  when  events  beyond  our  control  occur  to  put  pressure  on  prices,  we  should  still 
respond, and that response can be quite effective. 
Another line of argument takes quite a different tack. It argues not that monetary policy is 
ineffective, but in fact that it makes the problem worse by actually raising prices. The logic 
here is that interest payments are a cost to business activity, and that raising this cost will 
simply result in businesses passing it on. 
It is obviously true that interest is a cost, and for a business to stay solvent it has to cover 
that along with its other costs in its selling price. But when interest rates rise, can business 
just  pass  this  cost  on  without  losing  sales?  It  might  be  possible  initially,  but  since  higher 
interest  rates  do  eventually  slow  demand,  it  will  get  more  difficult  to  raise  prices  in  due 
course.  So  when  some  people  say  that  higher  rates  will  just  push  up  prices,  I  think  the 
answer is that it is the strength of demand that allows that, and the rise in interest rates will, 
in time, dampen demand. All the historical evidence is that monetary policy is quite effective 
in that regard.  
I turn now to other arguments, not that monetary policy is ineffective, but that it is not terribly 
precise. One common expression is that it is a blunt instrument. People rarely define what 
they mean by that term, but I think they have in mind two things. First, if inflation is rising 
because particular prices are moving a lot, monetary policy cannot focus precisely on exactly 
those particular prices, or those particular features of economic behaviour causing the price 
rises. It is a general, rather than specific, instrument in that sense. Second, I think that when 
people say “blunt”, they mean “unfair” – particularly that when interest rates rise, this affects 
households who owe money on a home loan. (Presumably the same argument would mean 
that it is equally unfair to savers to put interest rates down when the economy is weak.) 
As I noted before, it is not actually true that the recent rise in inflation is confined to just a few 
items.  To  that  extent,  the  use  of  a  general  instrument  would  seem  quite  appropriate.  But 
there  are  also  a  couple  of  other  quite  important  points  to  make  in  regard  to  the  “blunt 
instrument” critique.  
The first is that the transmission channels for monetary policy are much wider than just the 
impacts  on  households  with  home  loans.  Most  businesses  have  debts,  too.2  Floating  rate 
debt costs more for them to service as interest rates rise, which presumably causes some of 
them to reconsider some things they might have been doing or planning. So the “cash flow” 
channel of monetary policy affects business. 
Monetary  policy  also  affects  what  economists  would  call  inter  temporal  decision  making. 
Incentives  to  save,  as  opposed  to  consume,  alter.  It  is  commonly  observed  that  many 
Australians  save  rather  little,  but  the  household  saving  rate  has  in  fact  risen  noticeably  in 
recent years, largely unnoticed by conventional opinion. I do not claim that the increase is 
mainly due to rising interest rates, but I do not think we should assume that these incentives 
do not matter. Despite Australia’s extensive use of foreign saving to build up our economy, 
the bulk of our productive investment is financed via domestic saving of one form or another. 
Changes  in  interest  rates  affect  asset  values  over  time,  through  effects  on  discount  rates, 
expected  earnings  growth  and  so  on.  These  feed  through  into  behaviour  in  several 
dimensions  –  via  the  cost  of  capital  to  firms,  wealth  effects  and  so  on.  Through  complex 
channels,  monetary  policy  can  sometimes  also  affect  the  non  price  terms  of  credit, 
particularly if it manages to affect expectations about future growth, creditworthiness and risk 
appetite. 
Then  there  is  the  exchange  rate,  as  I  have  already  mentioned.  Numerous  factors  affect 
exchange  rates,  and  the  relationships  are  hard  to  pin  down.  However,  interest  rate 
                                                 
2   About 35 per cent of households owe money on their home. If we include debts of all kind, closer to 70 per 
cent of households carry debt of some kind, though many of these other debts are relatively small. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2008
differentials between countries do matter to exchange rates, along with expectations about 
how  those  differentials  may  change  (a  function  of  growth  expectations),  factors  affecting 
trade positions (such as commodity prices in our case), investor risk preferences and so on. I 
have already discussed the case of petrol, but there is surely little doubt that the prices of 
tradable  goods  and  services  generally  are  lower  today  than  they  would  have  been  if  the 
exchange rate had been at its long run average level. This is the case even with much more 
muted  short  term  pass  through  of  exchange  rate  changes  than  we  used  to  have.  In  other 
words, changes in the exchange rate alter the terms at which the rest of the world supplies 
goods and services to Australia in a way that is stabilising for prices.  
All these are channels for monetary policy’s effects. They operate at different speeds, and to 
differing extents in different episodes – but they are all there, and I would say that they are all 
working at present. The transmission of monetary policy is not just about home loan rates, as 
important a channel as that is. 
Secondly,  to  say  monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  instrument  begs  the  question:  where  are  the 
sharp instruments? It is not obvious that there are all that many. People mention supply side 
reforms of various kinds and unquestionably these have been extremely important over the 
years. To the extent that more can be done, that is all to the good for Australians’ standard of 
living. But they are long term. It is hard to deploy them in a hurry. And many of them are very 
general – “blunt” even – rather than specific. 
Many people will appeal, perhaps not unreasonably, to the possibility of using fiscal policy to 
counter inflation pressure. For some time now, fiscal policy has not been actively deployed to 
manage the business cycle. The focus has mainly been on achieving and then maintaining a 
structurally  sound,  long  run  fiscal  position  and,  subject  to  that,  making  tax  and  spending 
decisions aimed at various other objectives that governments have. This does not preclude 
allowing  the  budget’s  “automatic  stabilisers”  to  operate  over  the  cycle  (though  it  might  be 
observed  that,  with  an  elongated  upswing  like  the  one  we  have  been  having,  it  is  getting 
more difficult to decide what should be thought of as a temporary rise in revenue and what 
can be assumed to be permanent). 
It  strikes  me  that  in  the  popular  discussion  about  fiscal  policy,  many  participants  talk  past 
each other because they are looking at different time dimensions. It is not unreasonable to 
say  that  if  the  budget  is  perpetually  in  surplus,  there  is  no  debt  to  speak  of  and  no  other 
looming  large  unfunded  liability,  taxes  should  probably,  over  some  long  run  horizon,  be 
lower. This, it seems to me, is the economic case for structural reductions in taxes, which 
some observers articulate. Others argue that such reductions should be delayed, for cyclical 
reasons, given that demand needs to slow to contain inflation. So there is a structural case 
for taxes to fall, and a cyclical case for them not to. It is no doubt difficult for any government 
to reconcile these two, equally valid, points of view, the more so if the same tension persists 
for a number of consecutive years.  
Leaving that aside, let us give some thought to just how effective an instrument budgetary 
policy is likely to be. If inflationary pressures were just due to specific, narrow issues (which, 
as is clear above, I doubt), precise targeting of the sources of inflationary pressure via tax 
and  spending  measures  could  nonetheless  be  exceedingly  difficult  at  a  technical  level,  let 
alone politically. 
If it is accepted, on the other hand, that inflation is sufficiently general that overall demand 
has to slow, the amount of slowing has to be the same regardless of whether it comes via 
monetary policy or fiscal policy. It would be somewhat differently distributed across sectors 
and  regions,  as  the  impact  of  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  effects  obviously  would  not 
overlap exactly with the tax or spending measures that would occur in their place. I would 
hazard a guess, though, that a good many people who are today paying higher interest rates 
would  instead  pay  higher  taxes  in  a  world  where  fiscal  policy  was  used  more  actively  to 
manage the business cycle. We are unlikely, I submit, to witness a situation where income 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 7
taxes  are  raised  only  for  those  without  home  loans,  or  only  for  those  living  in  Western 
Australia and Queensland, or those working in the mining sector.  
Then  there  are  the  time  lags  in  implementing  fiscal  measures.  The  Budget  occurs  once  a 
year,  and  has  a  very  long  and  gruelling  process  in  the  lead  up.  I  am  not  expecting  to  be 
stampeded  by  people  in  this  room  wishing  to  do  that  more  often.  The  economy  could 
conceivably  look  rather  different  in  mid  May  when  the  Budget  occurs  than  it  did when  the 
budget processes began, and different again by the time the measures actually take effect. 
Monetary  policy  has  its  full  effects  with  a  long  lag,  but  we  at  least  get  to  reconsider  each 
month, and if need be we can reverse direction quickly. 
Don’t  get  me  wrong.  I  am  not  arguing  that  fiscal  policy  does  not  matter  to  the  cyclical 
outcomes, or that fiscal policy should not be made with an eye to the cycle as well as to the 
structural position. To the extent it can be, of course that is welcome. I am not here to offer 
any particular suggestion on what fiscal policy should do at present. I am simply saying that 
the task of fine tuning fiscal policy for stabilisation purposes, if that were thought desirable, is 
unlikely to be any more straightforward than that of using monetary policy. Fiscal policy, in its 
own way and for its own reasons, is also likely to prove a fairly blunt instrument. Inevitably, 
even with fiscal policy ideally calibrated for the conjunctural position, monetary policy would 
still have a lot of work to do managing inflation.  
Broader perspective 
The above remarks address some reservations about the conduct of monetary policy that I 
have seen of late. Some of these reservations are understandable, but there are reasonable 
responses to them. It should also be observed that it is not the first time we have seen most 
of these arguments: they tend to recur each time we reach the top end of the inflation cycle 
and monetary policy has to control it. 
Having said all that, it is important to keep some perspective about the situation in which we 
find  ourselves.  We  have  been  living  through  one  of  the  largest  transformations  in  the 
structure of the global economy, as far as Australia is concerned, for a century. The rise in 
the terms of trade over the past five years is the biggest such event since the Korean War 
boom  in  the  early  1950s.  But  while  the  Korean  War  event  was  a  temporary  one,  all  the 
indications are that the rise of China is not just a cyclical event, but a structural change of the 
first  order. China  certainly  has  a  business cycle,  like  all  other  economies,  and  will  slow  at 
some  point.  Even  so,  it  is  highly  likely  that,  short  of  some  catastrophic  event,  China  has 
many years of strong growth still ahead. It will not be at the 11 per cent per annum pace of 
the past couple of years, and there will be periods of weakness and instability. But the rise of 
China is not a flash in the pan of economic history. 
In essence, we are seeing a very large change in relative prices in the world economy, and a 
relative  price  change  that  is  more  important  to  Australia,  in  particular,  than  to  almost  any 
other  country.  These  sorts  of  events  will  always  produce  stresses  and  strains,  including 
significant divergences in performance across industries and regions (though these are often 
exaggerated in popular discussion). Because the event is, overall, very expansionary, it was 
always likely to be associated with some risk of higher inflation. 
But given the magnitude of the shock, when all is said and done, the economy has coped 
pretty well so far. Yes, inflation has risen. This is a problem, and requires a suitable response 
from  monetary  policy.  But  compare  the  outcomes  on  this  occasion  with  those  in  the 
commodity price booms of the early 1950s or the mid 1970s. In the early 1950s, CPI inflation 
reached  25  per  cent,  then  fell  back  to  zero  within  a  few  years,  associated  with  quite  a 
pronounced recession. In the mid 1970s, inflation reached about 18 per cent, and took a very 
long time to come down to acceptable levels. This time, we are grappling with a peak CPI 
inflation rate that looks like it will be around 4 per cent in CPI terms, and trying to assess how 
8 
 BIS Review 30/2008
soon  it  can  reasonably  return  to  2-3  per  cent.  This  is  a  far  cry  from  the  problems  of 
yesteryear. 
The reason we are doing better this time around is not hard to fathom, either. As work in the 
Treasury has argued persuasively, a flexible exchange rate, a reformed and flexible industrial 
environment,  better  private  sector  management  and  much  stronger  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy  frameworks  have  made  a  lot  of  difference.  The  fruits  of  those  decades  of  effort  of 
reform are  an economy that, for all its strains, is doing well under the circumstances. The 
officers  of  the  Treasury,  past  and  present,  have  played  a  key  role  in  achieving  that.  That 
legacy has been handed to you, and to all of us. Our challenge is to keep those improved 
structures in place and to develop them further, in the period in which we have the privilege 
of having some influence.  
BIS Review 30/2008 
 9
