Ben S Bernanke: Dedication of the new Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Building 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Kansas  City,  Missouri, 
12 June 2008. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  help  dedicate  this  state-of-the-art  facility.  President 
Hoenig,  I  commend  you  and  your  staff,  as  well  as  the  designers  and  builders,  of  this 
impressive structure. It will serve Kansas City and the entire 10th District well.  
Permit me to start with a bit of history that I hope will underscore the crucial role played by 
the  regional  Reserve  Banks.  When  the  Federal  Reserve  was  created  in  1913,  it  was  the 
nation's  third  attempt  at  a  central  bank.  The  First  Bank  of  the  United  States,  chartered  in 
1791, and the Second Bank of the United States, chartered in 1816, did not last. They both 
failed to gain the trust of a public fearful of concentrated power. To address this concern, the 
creators  of  the  Federal  Reserve  crafted  a  plan  for  a  central  bank  with  a  unique  structure: 
what some have called a decentralized central bank. 
An independent federal agency in Washington, D.C., the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve  System  oversees  12  regional  Banks,  which  serve  as  the  operating  arms  of  the 
System  and  blend  public  and  private  elements.  Importantly,  the  presidents  of  the  Reserve 
Banks participate, along with the Washington-based Board members, in the monetary policy 
deliberations  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  The  presidents  bring  a  wealth  of 
knowledge acquired from their regional contacts. Thus, in making policy, we are able to view 
the economy not just from a Washington perspective, or a Wall Street perspective, but also 
from a Main Street perspective. This system has served the central bank and the nation well 
for nearly a century. 
Last  night  I  attended  a  dinner  with  the  Bank's  current  directors  as  well  as  many  former 
members of the Bank's board. Nationally, 278 private citizens – including business people, 
bankers, nonprofit executives, and community, agricultural and labor leaders – serve on the 
boards of our 12 Banks and their Branches. These individuals provide us with extensive and 
current information about economic conditions from a unique local perspective. Often, they 
provide  an  early  warning  of  shifting  economic  conditions  before  they  show  up  in  official 
government  statistics.  I  commend  them  for  their  service  to  both  the  central  bank  and  our 
nation. 
Here in Kansas City, and in all of our Districts, the Bank and Branch directors have played an 
important  role  since  the  Federal  Reserve's  inception.  As  you  might  expect,  at  last  night's 
dinner, we talked to some degree about the Bank's history, our current challenges, and the 
future.  In  preparing  for  this  event,  I  read  a  little  bit  about  the  dedication  ceremony  for  the 
previous Kansas City Fed headquarters at 925 Grand Boulevard. One of my predecessors 
as Chairman, William P.G. Harding, spoke at its dedication on November 16, 1921, and I am 
happy to follow in his footsteps. 
Considering  the  Federal  Reserve's  history,  this  location  is  a  most  appropriate  site  for  a 
Federal  Reserve  Bank,  with  its  new  neighbor  being  the  National  World  War  I  Museum  at 
Liberty  Memorial.  Those  who  have  an  appreciation  of  U.S.  history  know  that  the  Federal 
Reserve played an important role in support of the funding of the First World War and that 
the war forced the early Federal Reserve to contend with an uncertain global environment 
with  wide-ranging  monetary  and  economic  ramifications.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  faced 
many  such  challenges  since  its  founding,  and  the  System  has  evolved  in  response.  Ours 
must be a dynamic institution if it is to successfully fulfill its mission in a changing financial 
and economic landscape. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
When the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City opened in 1914, it operated out of leased 
office space before moving to the building it is now vacating. In the more than nine decades 
since, the world has changed dramatically, especially in the areas of banking and finance; 
however, the Federal Reserve's purpose, mission, and goals remain unchanged. And while 
the Bank's former home on Grand Boulevard served it well, today we celebrate the opening 
of a building that will well serve this country, and this region. 
Looking at the Federal Reserve more broadly, while we must continue to change, we also 
must recognize that one of the Federal Reserve's key strengths continues to be the strong 
regional  connections  fostered  by  the  Reserve  Banks.  To  quote  from  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board's first annual report, published on January 15, 1915: "It should never be lost to sight 
that the Reserve Banks are invested with much of the quality of a public trust. They were 
created because of the existence of certain common needs and interests, and they should be 
administered for the common welfare – for the good of all." 
In that spirit, let us use this ceremony to recognize the Federal Reserve's unique structure 
with roots that are broad and deep in the region. To echo comments Tom Hoenig made at 
the groundbreaking on this site three years ago, let us dedicate this Bank to the service of 
our  nation,  this  great  city  of  Kansas  City,  and  the  other  important  cities,  towns,  and  rural 
regions in the heart of America that define the 10th Federal Reserve District. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
