Martín Redrado: The challenges for emerging markets 
Remarks by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at «Le cercle 
des economistes» – Aix-en-Provence Economic Forum, Aix-en-Provence, 6 July 2008. 
 As the world grows in complexity, it poses major challenges to policy makers. And, definitely, 
the  ability  and  flexibility  to  coordinate  the  different  branches  of  economic  policy  (fiscal, 
monetary, wage, competition) to face the various social and economic tensions lay, today, as 
one of the most significant. As a central banker and former financial market regulator in an 
emerging  country,  i  deal  first  hand  and  on  a  daily  basis  with  regulation  aiming  to  foster 
economic  growth  while  preserving  monetary  and  financial  stability.  So,  let  me  share  my 
thoughts  by  providing  you  with,  sort  of,  a  view  on  the  trade-offs  behind  this  complex  task 
from the emerging world.  
First, let me stress that today’s outlook for developing economies is quite different from other 
turbulent  times.  For  the  first  time,  we  are  not  at  the  epicenter  of  a  financial  crisis.  Also, 
conditions  for  contagion  are  less  evident.  While  there  are  currently  evident  signs  of  a 
slowdown in industrial economies, emerging ones have continued to grow at the rates close 
to the ones seen in recent years.  
Latin  America  in  particular  is,  for  the  first  time  in  decades,  managed  under  stronger 
macroeconomic  principles.  Most  of  the  economies  are  experiencing  robust  growth, 
underpinned  by  a  buoyant  domestic  demand.  They  show  prudent  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies and sounder financial systems. The region is finally leaving behind the well-known 
“original  sin”  as  the  form  of  currency  mismatches  that  characterized  the  recent  past, 
significantly reducing our exposure to foreign currency debt. 
However, despite this rosy scenario, we definitely face several issues in the pipeline and we 
therefore have a tough reforming agenda ahead. Emerging economies, on top of dealing with 
a potential adjustment in global economic conditions, have to confront their own uncertainties 
both at the micro and macro levels as financial markets are being developed.  
There is a widespread debate regarding the amounts of regulation needed. In my view, this 
is  a  misleading  discussion  as  there  is  nothing  like  too  much  or  too  low  regulation.  Every 
single economy has its own idiosyncrasy that calls for a particular regulatory framework. In 
the  case  of  emerging  ones,  more  prone  to  have  incomplete  markets,  government  action 
should be directed through regulation to complete them and to foster its development.  
Let  me  focus  on  one  aspect,  which  I  believe  is  essential  to  achieve  sustained  economic 
growth: to development of a long-term market in local currency.  
Particularly in the case of economies in transition towards its long-term equilibrium, central 
banks include on their agenda other specific tasks that their policy actions cannot ignore: the 
need to increase the depth of the financial system, develop new financial instruments and 
complete existing markets in local currency becomes a priority.  
There is a strong consensus about how important this is for the emerging countries. Different 
kinds  of  factors,  at  both  the  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  levels  are  noteworthy. 
Among the macro factors, progress in the de-dollarization of the economy and the reduction 
of vulnerabilities associated with the possibility of sudden stops stand out.  
This is of special significance because the presence of currency mismatches has been at the 
root  of  the  most  important  financial  crises  (or  has  at  least  contributed  to  amplify  them).  A 
significant  dependence  on  debt  in  strong  currencies  means  that  countries  are  more 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 1
vulnerable  to  depreciations  of  their  currencies  (which  are  severely  contractive).  Also,  the 
development of markets for debt in domestic currency tends to be associated with a better 
liability  management.  In  fact,  the  development  of  a  yield  curve  that  serves  as  the  base  to 
develop new products (like derivatives), makes it easier to mitigate risks. 
Of  the  micro  factors,  it  is  fundamental  to  develop  a  yield  curve  in  domestic  currency  that 
reflects the opportunity costs of funding at different maturities, collaborating to achieve more 
efficient resource allocation. The development of these markets is a more stable source of 
funding for the financial system. In addition, the countries with deeper domestic markets face 
a broader variety of policy instrument choices. Therefore, the lender of last resort role avoids 
the limitations observed in a highly dollarized context, for example. Likewise, less reliance on 
external  capital  flows  (usually  at  short  terms)  allows  for  more  control  over  the  monetary 
policy. 
Despite the achievements observed during this decade, there is still significant progress to 
be attained, which is even clearer for Latin America. Especially as regards the terms of the 
issues (so that the change from issuance in hard currencies to soft currencies does not imply 
excessive  currency  risk  for  interest  rate  risk)  and  a  larger  share  for  the  nominal  fixed  rate 
issues (with the aim of reducing the interest rate risk). In addition, although the liquidity of the 
secondary markets for debt has increased in recent years, it remains limited and unbalanced 
(with less liquidity in the longer term issues). 
Central banks also have a specific interest in the improvement of domestic bond markets, in 
particular for public sector debt. One reason for this is that more complete markets reflect the 
relationship  between  borrowing  costs  and  terms.  Making  an  explicit  yield  curve  reveals 
information  about  the  expectations  that  the  economic  agents  have,  which  is  essential  for 
business  decisions.  Recent  experience  has  shown  that  the  development  of  bond  markets 
must  be  based  on  placing  funds  in  domestic  currency,  which  is  not  only  relevant  for  the 
transmission of the monetary policy but also as a mechanism to reduce external vulnerability.  
I would say that financial integration in general plays and important role enhancing the power 
of  monetary  policy  instruments.  In  particular,  when  assessing  the  effectiveness,  credibility 
and commitment of monetary policy in emerging markets to deal with inflation and inflation 
expectations. The depth of the financial system and its integration with capital markets has a 
powerful disciplinary effect on monetary policy as it reduces incentives to expand as foreign 
capital would flow out to other markets with more predictable returns.  
For this purpose, a precondition is the reduction of the macroeconomic volatility so typical of 
our region. We need not only to sustain but also to strengthen the pillars of, what i call the 
new economic paradigm, with several anti-cyclical components: 
- 
Fiscal  solvency.  Today  fiscal  responsibility  in most  of  the  emerging world  is  not  a 
feature from the left or the right: it is just common sense. 
Monetary robustness and consistency. 
More flexible foreign exchange regimes. 
Reduction  of  net  foreign  debt  and  currency  mismatches.  A  lesson  from  current 
turmoil is that emerging markets with current account deficits and fiscal deficits were 
hit the most as they became more vulnerable to foreign capital outflows. 
Trade dynamism (diversifying destinations and products). Just as an example, the 
share of exports to the United States, one of the major destinations of foreign sales, 
from 2002 to 2006 dropped from 33% to 27% of total Latin American exports and 
from 21% to 18% of the emerging Asia total. This is very important as the US and 
other developed countries face also significant challenges.  
Accumulation of international reserves (insurance against external shocks). And the 
later  has  been,  i  would  say,  the  common  pattern  all  across  the  emerging  world. 
Today, with no international lender of last resort, there is no good substitute for a 
   2 
 BIS Review 87/2008
sound external liquidity policy at the country level. I am afraid it is the responsibility 
of  every  country  to  develop  its  own  set  of  countercyclical policies  that  would  help 
weathering limited access to financial markets, without having a significant impact 
on  domestic  variables.  Building  a  precautionary  cushion  of  foreign  reserves  is 
particularly  important  for  emerging  countries,  where  there  is  a  tighter  connection 
between monetary, fiscal and financial stability. 
improve  standards  of  corporate  governance, 
It  is  also  accepted  that  a  weak  corporate  governance  framework  negatively  affects  the 
investment  process.  The  development  of  a  bond  markets  request  improvements  into  the 
legislation  on  corporate  governance.  Emerging  economies  are  making  efforts  aimed  at 
helping 
focusing  on  shareholder  and 
stakeholder  rights,  board  member  duties,  disclosure,  and  effective  enforcement.  Also  the 
development of a broad debt market, regulatory tools for secondary markets and derivative 
markets  is  key:  the  first  one  for  liquidity  purposes  and  the  second  for  hedging  matters. 
Developing  a  repurchase  (repo)  market  in  securities  has  often  proved  extremely  useful  in 
fostering  market  liquidity.  In  terms  of  infrastructure,  many  countries  need  to  adapt  their 
clearing  and  settlement  systems  to  enhance  integration  of  international  financial  markets. 
Also public policy efforts to improve data dissemination of debt issue in domestic currency 
are required to allow possible investors a better monitoring.  
International  experience  shows  that,  in  many  cases,  the  development  of  a  local  currency 
debt markets need the active participation of the government itself as a market maker. An 
example  for  the  former  is  the  Mexican  case.  Mexico  defined  a  public  debt  strategy  that 
included financing the public deficit in local markets, favoring the issuance of long-term fixed-
rate  securities,  and  decreasing  gradually  the  issuance  of  variable-rate  instruments.  The 
strategy set annual targets for net external debt reduction, to widen and diversify the investor 
base for local debt. The implementation of this strategy needs a minimum level of credibility 
for government which relates with the previous paragraph. 
International  financial  institutions  (IFIs)  have  a  role  to  play  as  well.  They  could  collaborate 
with the acceleration of the deepening process of the local markets debt, enlarging the group 
of  available  instruments  in  local  currencies  both  within  emerging  countries  as  well  as  in 
international  financial  markets.  In  addition,  the  issuance  of  IFIs  has  a  "signaling  effect", 
improving confidence on macroeconomic and financial conditions of that market, attracting 
the  presence  of  international  investors  and  potential  issuers.  One  way  of  achieving  this  is 
that the IFIs itself issued debt in currencies of emerging countries, in line with various types 
of transactions carried out in recent years (usually by taking advantage of their best rating). 
In this sense, IFIs often operate as a catalyst agent, leading the first issuance (start ups) in 
currencies of emerging countries in both local and international markets. The issuing of IFIs 
could  also  help  decoupling  the  sovereign  risk  of  currency  risk,  meeting  the  demand  for 
assets in local currency (for example, from domestic institutional investors, with liabilities in 
local currency but with fear of sovereign defaults). Instruments in local currency rating to AAA 
would be of interest to such investors. 
There are several examples that show the progress institutions such as the World Bank, the 
IDB  and  the  BIS  have  made  over  the  last  years  on  this  field.  With  regards  to  the  BIS,  as 
central  banker  of  the  monetary  authorities,  its  role  in  the  development  of  the  local  debt 
markets  may  have  at  least  two  aspects.  On  the  one  hand,  the  BIS  can  coordinate  joint 
initiatives (and provide certain guarantees) of some groups of central banks that decide to 
unify  part  of  its  reserves  to  invest  in  specific  purposes,  such  as  buying  bonds  in  local 
currencies. Moreover, although most of the resources administered by the BIS are invested 
in financial assets of top quality at international level and their exposure to the various risks 
are  managed  conservatively,  a  greater  portion  of  such  funds  could  be  spend  toward  the 
direct purchase of debt denominated in local currencies of emerging countries or to the use 
of them as collateral of certain bond issuance of countries with limited depth of their financing 
markets in local currency. 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 3
In  a  nutshell,  carrying  out  the  reforms  mentioned  above  does  not  mean  blindly  following 
certain  recipes 
that  must  be  applied  always  and  under  any  circumstances.  This 
acknowledges that there are different ways of putting into practice the adequate policies to 
achieve a stable and deep financial market. Moreover, it is not only necessary to identify the 
adequate economic policies for a country under specific circumstances, but correct timing is 
also  crucial  when  implementing  the  measures.  The  pace  at  which  reforms  and  policy 
measures  are  implemented  cannot  be  independent  from  the  structural  characteristics,  nor 
the economic and social environment in any particular country. Therefore, the pace chosen 
should maximize the likelihood of success of the process.  
Depth, quality and pace of institutional reforms are at least as important as their stability in 
time,  since  otherwise,  any  effort  shall  be  vain.  For  such  purpose,  they  must  be  consistent 
(without generating more losers than winners in the short term, because otherwise they will 
not be politically sustainable) and involve consensus among the different stakeholders. They 
cannot  be  imposed  in  an  authoritarian  way  or  imported  from  other  countries  (transferring 
rules form a developed country to a developing one does not necessarily mean the latter’s 
progress),  rather,  they  are  endogenous  to  each  society.  They  are  the  result  of  collective 
decisions where groups with different attributions and preferences take place, whose political 
power hinges on political institutions (de jure political power) and on distribution of economic 
resources (de facto political power). Even if this collective decision-making process may take 
time, the fact that institutional reforms are carried out based on “conviction” rather than on 
“need” and with the necessary consensus, clearly improves the possibilities of success and 
its long-term persistence. 
Now policy makers worldwide seem to understand that policy recipes vary from one case to 
the other in this complex scenario. This progress is, obviously, welcomed. Especially for us, 
emerging markets’ policy makers, as we have to catch up with growth, deal with the tensions 
derived from buoyant economies and, most importantly, build institutions and credibility at the 
same  time.  In  fact,  it  is  more  a  synchronic  than  a  sequential  two-fold  challenge.  To 
implement these policies effectively, the only possible way is to keep a consistent (I mean 
consistent with the history and idiosyncrasies of each economy) and gradualist approach. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2008
