Stanley Fischer: Education and Israel’s future 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Degree 
Presentation Ceremony of the Open University of Israel, Raanana, 21 May 2008. 
 It gives me special pleasure to participate in this degree presentation ceremony of the Open 
University, because nothing is more crucial to Israel’s future than education. In the long run, 
education is as important as the country’s security and geopolitical situation. 
The  reasons  are  well  known.  Israel  has  hardly  any  natural  resources,  apart  from  human 
capital, i.e., its citizens’ talents and initiative, and these must be nurtured constantly. Thus, 
and only thus, will be able to maintain and increase Israel’s qualitative advantage. 
The State of Israel, and before its establishment the Yishuv (the pre-State Jewish population 
in Palestine), long placed great emphasis on education. This can be seen in various figures 
relating to the position in Israel in 2005 compared with that in other countries: 
A. 
Forty-six  percent  of  those  aged  25-64  years  in  Israel  had  post-high-school 
education, compared with an average of 26 percent in the OECD countries. 
The  ratio  of  government  expenditure  per  student  on  pre-school,  elementary  and 
secondary education to GDP per capita in Israel was similar to that in the OECD, 
and in tertiary education the ratio was higher in Israel than in the OECD. 
As  early  as  at  the  establishment  of  the  State,  Israel  had  two  universities  of 
internationally recognized standing – the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and the 
Technion,  the  Israel  Institute  of  Technology,  in  Haifa.  This  was  an  impressive 
achievement  for  a  population  of  less  than  a  million.  And  today  we  have  a  broad 
network  of  higher-education  institutions,  including  the  Open  University,  which 
provides an opportunity to tens of thousands of Israelis to realize their potential. 
B. 
C. 
However, as is well known, the situation in the education system in Israel no longer occupies 
the  exalted  position  it  held  in  the  past.  For  example,  the  low  position  in  the  scale  of 
achievements attained by students of schools in Israel, e.g., in science, compared with other 
countries  –  based  on  the  PISA  (Programme  for  International  Student  Assessment)  tests 
coordinated by the OECD – stands out like a sore thumb. 
Thus, despite the fact that the government spends a relatively large amount on education, 
students’ achievements are relatively poor. In other words, Israel’s education system is not 
efficient. 
Various reasons may be put forward to explain this: 
A. 
Israel  does  not  have  one  education  system,  but  several,  including  among  others 
Hebrew state education, Arab state education, state religious, and a number of ultra-
orthodox streams, and some of them do not include basics such as mathematics, 
sciences and English in their curricula. 
These  education  systems  do  not have  enough  management  flexibility,  certainly  at 
the school level.  
Between  1995  and  2005  expenditure  per  student  on  elementary,  secondary  and 
tertiary education rose more slowly in Israel than in the OECD countries. 
B. 
C. 
It is clear that a fresh approach is needed also in the field of higher education. In this context 
Israel’s brain drain gives particular cause for concern. We need only look at the number of 
Israelis in the faculties of the leading universities in the US and other countries. We must not 
sit  back  as  passive  observers  of  this  trend,  but  should  take  steps  aimed  at  changing  this 
situation. 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 1
Promoting education should be high on Israel’s list of priorities. If not, we will find our relative 
position deteriorating, and indeed, there are signs that this has started. 
This  is  one  of  the  few  subjects  on  which  there  is  a  consensus;  but  the  fact  there  is  a 
consensus does not itself solve the problem. Two committees have examined the issue and 
formulated  comprehensive  proposals  –  the  Dovrat  Committee  in  2005,  and  the  Shochat 
Committee  in  2007.  The  implementation  of  their  recommendations  –  including  the 
introduction  of  differential  pay  for  lecturers  based  on  their  achievements  –  should  be 
advanced. 
Investment  in  education  is  vital  in  the  long  term,  economically,  socially  and  culturally,  and 
even from the security aspect: 
A. 
Economically  –  education  provides  the  infrastructure  for  rapid  and  sustained 
economic growth; 
Socially and culturally – formal and informal education is the key to the realization of 
individuals’ potential, and also contributes to social mobility; 
Security  –  without  good  education  to  help  boost  and  sustain  growth,  and  without 
maintaining our technological edge, we will be unable to preserve our advantage in 
the field of security. 
B. 
C. 
It is because of the immense importance of education to Israel’s long-term future that now is 
the time to push ahead with the implementation of the recommendations of the Dovrat and 
Shochat Committees. Nothing is more important for Israel and its citizens, and that includes 
you and the coming generations. 
I congratulate you on your achievements and wish you every success in the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2008
