Frederic S Mishkin: The Federal Reserve's tools for responding to 
financial disruptions 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School of Business, 
Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, 15 February 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Since the onset of financial market strains late last summer, the Federal Reserve has been 
acting in a decisive, timely, and flexible manner in fostering the objectives of price stability 
and maximum employment. In particular, the Federal Reserve's actions have been aimed at 
supporting market liquidity, mitigating the downside risks to economic activity, and promoting 
moderate growth over time.  
In my remarks here, I would like to explain how the Federal Reserve has used four different 
tools to accomplish these objectives.1 I will first examine three tools for supporting market 
liquidity – namely, open market operations, the discount window, and the newly developed 
Term Auction Facility. Then I will discuss some important principles for adjusting the target 
federal funds rate, which is the primary tool for addressing the macroeconomic implications 
of a financial market disruption. As usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not 
intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or of anyone else 
associated with the Federal Reserve System.2
Supporting market liquidity 
As I pointed out in a speech last October, one of the fundamental reasons that the Federal 
Reserve  was  established  in  1913  was  to  ensure  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity  during 
financial  market  disruptions  (Mishkin,  2007a).  In  fact,  my  own  academic  research  has 
examined  the  recurring  financial  crises  that  occurred  prior  to  the  founding  of  the  Fed 
(Mishkin, 1991). These crises exhibited a consistent pattern of very sharp upward spikes in 
interest rates, reflecting a surge in demand for liquidity without any corresponding change in 
supply,  and  these  interest  rate  fluctuations  were  associated  with  significant  adverse 
consequences on the broader economy.  
In contrast, during more recent episodes of financial market turmoil, as in October 1987 and 
the  fall  of  1998,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  contributed  to  the  stability  of  short-term  funding 
markets by boosting the supply of liquidity in line with changes in demand. In each case, the 
Federal Reserve's actions were successful in preventing sharp upward spikes in short-term 
interest rates and in insulating the macroeconomy from these financial market developments. 
Moreover, those episodes have highlighted the extent to which the provision of liquidity in an 
environment  of  heightened  uncertainty  can  play  an  important  role  in  allowing  financial 
institutions  to  make  more-accurate  judgments  about  the  solvency  and  creditworthiness  of 
prospective borrowers (Mishkin, 2007a).  
In  that  context,  I  would  now  like  to  describe  the  three  tools  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
used over the past six months in providing liquidity to the financial system. 
                                                 
1   Further details about each of the Federal Reserve's policy tools may be found in chapter 3 of The Federal 
Reserve System: Purposes & Functions (Board of Governors, 2005). 
I appreciate the comments and assistance of Andrew Levin and David Lopez-Salido. 
2  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
Tool #1: Open market operations 
Open market operations are the most powerful and often-used tool for keeping the federal 
funds rate close to the target rate set by the FOMC.3 In principle, the Federal Reserve could 
influence the federal funds rate by purchasing or selling any type of asset, but in practice, 
most assets are not traded readily enough to serve this purpose. For open market operations 
to  work  effectively,  the  Federal  Reserve  must  be  able  to  engage  in  these  transactions 
quickly,  at  its  own  convenience,  in  whatever  volume  may  be  needed  to  keep  the  federal 
funds  rate  near  the  target  rate.  Moreover,  it  is  appropriate  for  such  operations  to  be 
conducted  using  securities  that  are  traded  in  a  broad  and  highly  active  market,  thereby 
ensuring  that  these  transactions  do  not  generate  distortions  or  disruptions  in  that  market. 
Thus, with the broadest and most active of all U.S. financial markets, Treasury securities are 
ideal for conducting open market operations. 
In early August 2007, depository institutions faced the possibility that emerging pressures in 
financial markets could have significant effects on their balance sheets, and this uncertainty 
generated  a  considerable  increase  in  demand  for  short-term  funds.  On  August  10,  the 
Federal  Reserve  underscored  its  commitment  to  providing  ample  liquidity  to  facilitate  the 
orderly functioning of financial markets, stating: "The Federal Reserve will provide reserves 
as necessary through open market operations to promote trading in the federal funds market 
at  rates  close  to  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee's  target  rate"  (Board  of  Governors, 
2007a).  
As is clear in chart 1, the Federal Reserve was generally successful in keeping the federal 
funds  rate  from  spiking  above  the  target  rate;  indeed,  the  effective  federal  funds  rate  was 
somewhat below the target rate at times. Nonetheless, the volatility of the federal funds rate 
in recent months reflects the extent to which daily changes in demand for reserve balances 
have been unusually difficult to predict.4
                                                  
3   Specifically, depository institutions hold balances at Federal Reserve Banks, and the federal funds rate is the 
overnight interest rate at which these balances are traded. See Mishkin (2007b) for further discussion of open 
market operations and other policy tools for keeping the federal funds rate close to its target. 
4   The  daily  effective  federal  funds  rate  is  a  volume-weighted  average  of  rates  on  trades  arranged  by  major 
brokers. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
Tool #2: Overnight lending through the discount window 
The Federal Reserve's second tool for supplying liquidity during a financial disruption is to 
provide fully collateralized overnight loans directly to commercial banks and other depository 
institutions, which I will refer to collectively as banks. The Federal Reserve extends this credit 
through  the  discount  window  –  that  is,  the  lending  facility  at  each  of  the  regional  Federal 
Reserve Banks. (The phrase "discount window" harks back to the good old days when loans 
were provided by a human being sitting behind a bank window.)  
The  primary  credit  facility  is  the  main  program  under  which  the  Federal  Reserve  extends 
loans  to  depository  institutions.5  Under  this  program,  each  loan  is  extended  for  very  short 
terms  (usually  overnight)  to  a  depository  institution  in  sound  financial  condition,  and  the 
interest rate on such loans is referred to as the "discount rate." Since 2003, the discount rate 
has  been set  above  the  usual  level  of short-term  market  interest  rates,  and  during  normal 
times  this  rate  has  been  maintained  at  100  basis  points  (1  percentage  point)  above  the 
federal funds rate target.  
As a tool for providing liquidity to the financial system, the discount window is distinct from 
open  market  operations  in  two  important  respects.  First,  open  market  operations  influence 
the supply of short-term funds to the market as a whole, whereas loans through the discount 
window are made directly to individual institutions with particular needs for liquidity. Second, 
open market operations are conducted using U.S. Treasury and agency securities, whereas 
loans through the discount window can be made against a much wider range of collateral. 
In its August 10 announcement, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed that it stood ready to provide 
liquidity not only through open market operations but also via discount lending by stating: "As 
always,  the  discount  window  is  available  as  a  source  of  funding"  (Board  of  Governors, 
2007a).  By  August  17,  the  Federal  Reserve  had  determined  that  the  significant  strains  in 
short-term  money  markets  warranted  further  accommodation  in  the  provision  of  liquidity 
through  the  discount  window;  thus,  the  spread  between  the  discount  rate  and  the  target 
federal  funds  rate  was  reduced  to  50  basis  points,  rather  than  the  customary  100  basis 
points, and the lower spread has been maintained since then (Board of Governors, 2007b).  
In addition, the Federal Reserve adjusted its practices to facilitate the provision of discount 
window  financing  at  terms  of  up  to  thirty  days,  renewable  at  the  request  of  the  borrower. 
These  changes  were  aimed  at  assuring  banks  of  the  availability  of  a  backstop  source  of 
liquidity. Banks subsequently borrowed only moderate amounts at the discount window but 
some  institutions  placed  additional  amounts  of  collateral  with  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks, 
suggesting that these institutions perceived the discount window as a potentially significant 
source of liquidity under some contingencies. 
Nonetheless, the discount window has two notable limitations as a tool for easing strains in 
money markets. First, a bank may be reluctant to borrow from the discount window, worrying 
that such borrowing might come to light and lead market participants and other institutions to 
draw adverse inferences about the bank's financial condition. This so-called stigma problem 
may  largely  account  for  the  extent  to  which  discount  window  borrowing  has  generally 
remained at moderate levels in recent months.  
Second, lending through the discount window can pose challenges for keeping the  
federal funds rate close to its target, especially during periods of financial market disruption. 
The Federal Reserve's open market desk – that is, the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York  who  actually  conduct  open  market  operations on  a  daily  basis  –  must  take  into 
                                                 
5   Depository institutions that are not eligible for primary credit may apply for secondary credit to meet short-term 
liquidity  needs  or  to  resolve  severe  financial  difficulties.  Seasonal  credit  is  extended  to  relatively  small 
depository  institutions  that  have  recurring  intra-year  fluctuations  in  funding  needs,  such  as  banks  in 
agricultural or seasonal resort communities. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
account the fact that loans made through the discount window add reserves to the banking 
system, and thus, all else equal, could tend to push the federal funds rate below the target 
set  by  the  FOMC.  In  ordinary  circumstances,  these  borrowings  are  relatively  small  and 
predictable,  and  this  influence  can  be  offset  using  open  market  operations  to  drain  a 
corresponding quantity of reserves from the system. But in times of financial market strains, 
these borrowings can become larger and more difficult to predict. 
Tool #3: The new Term Auction Facility 
Despite the Federal Reserve's provision of liquidity through open market operations and the 
discount window, strains in term funding markets persisted and became particularly elevated 
in early December in response to year-end pressures. The magnitude of these strains can be 
gauged using the spread between Libor – that is, the London interbank offered rate – and the 
overnight indexed swap (OIS) rate at the same maturity, because the OIS rate reflects the 
average overnight interbank rate expected over that maturity but is not subject to pressures 
associated with credit and liquidity risks to the same degree as Libor.  
 As shown in chart 2, the one-month and three-month Libor-OIS spreads were at low levels 
through  the  month  of  July  but  increased  markedly  in  August  and  early  September  at  the 
onset of the financial market turmoil.6 The one-month spread declined during the fall but rose 
sharply again toward the end of the year. In association with these wider spreads, liquidity in 
term bank funding markets deteriorated substantially. 
To  address  these  pressures,  the  Federal  Reserve  introduced  a  new  policy  tool  called  the 
Term Auction Facility (TAF).7 With this tool, the Federal Reserve auctions a pre-announced 
quantity of credit to eligible borrowers for a term substantially longer than overnight; thus far, 
each  auction  has  involved  a  term  of  one  month.  As  with  primary  credit,  a  depository 
institution is eligible to participate in a TAF auction if the bank is judged to be in generally 
                                                 
6   Similar  patterns  are  evident  in  the  spread  between  the  term  federal  funds  rate  and  the  OIS  rate  at  these 
maturities. 
7   The TAF was introduced as a temporary measure, but the Federal Reserve has left open the possibility that 
this facility could become permanent (Bernanke, 2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
sound financial condition, and a wide variety of collateral can be used to secure the loan. The 
minimum  bid  rate  for  each  auction  is  established  at  the  OIS  rate  corresponding  to  the 
maturity of the credit being auctioned.  
The  introduction  of  the  TAF  was  announced  on  December  12  in  conjunction  with  related 
announcements by the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, 
and the Swiss National Bank (Board of Governors, 2007c).8 The first two auctions were held 
on December 17 and 20, for amounts of $20 billion each, and were very well subscribed: A 
large  number  of  banks  participated  in  each  auction,  and the  total  value  of  bids was  about 
three  times  as  large  as  the  amount  of  credit  auctioned.  The  resulting  interest  rate  in  both 
cases was about 50 basis points above the minimum bid rate but well below the one-month 
Libor rate prevailing in financial markets at that time. In recent weeks, the Federal Reserve 
has conducted three more auctions (most recently, last Monday) for amounts of $30 billion 
each. The spread over the minimum bid rate was about 7 basis points for the January 14 
auction, 2 basis points for the January 28 auction, and 15 basis points for the February 11 
auction;  these  spreads  were  much  lower  than  in  December,  apparently  reflecting  some 
subsequent easing in the pressures on banks' access to term funding. 
The  TAF  appears  to  have  been  quite  successful  in  overcoming  the  two  problems  with 
conventional discount window lending. Thus far, the TAF appears to have been largely free 
of  the  stigma  associated  with  borrowing  at  the  discount  window,  as  indicated  by  the  large 
number of bidders and the total value of bids submitted.9 Furthermore, because the Federal 
Reserve was able to predetermine the amounts to be auctioned, the open market desk has 
faced  minimal  uncertainty  about  the  effects  of  the  operation  on  bank  reserves;  hence,  the 
TAF has not hampered the Federal Reserve's ability to keep the effective federal funds rate 
close to its target. 
Isolating  the  impact  of  the  TAF  on  financial  markets  is  not  easy,  particularly  given  other 
recent  market  developments  and  the  evolution  of  expectations  regarding  the  federal  funds 
rate.  Nonetheless,  the  interest  rates  in  term  markets  provide  some  evidence  that  the  TAF 
may have had significant beneficial effects on financial markets. As can be seen in chart 2, 
term funding rates have dropped substantially relative to OIS rates: The one-month spread 
exceeded  100  basis  points  in  early  December  but  has  dropped  below  30  basis  points  in 
recent weeks – though still above the low level that prevailed before the onset of the financial 
disruption last August. 
Monetary policy response to macroeconomic developments 
Although the TAF and other liquidity-related actions appear to have had positive effects, such 
policy  responses  cannot  fully  address  fundamental  concerns  about  credit  quality  and 
valuation  or  relax  the  balance  sheet  pressures  on  financial  institutions.  Thus,  these 
measures cannot eliminate the effects of the financial market turmoil that have the potential 
to  lower  aggregate  spending  and  cause  a  contraction  in  economic  activity.  Moreover,  as  I 
have  previously  emphasized,  macroeconomic  risk  refers  to  the  elevated  probability  that  a 
financial  disruption  could  lead  to  an  adverse  feedback  loop  in  which  economic  activity 
declines, leading to even greater uncertainty about asset values that worsens the financial 
                                                 
8   As  part  of  a  coordinated  operation,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Bank  of  Canada  each  conducted  similar 
operations in their own currencies, while the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank extended 
credit in U.S. dollars amounting to $20 billion and $4 billion, respectively. These dollars were obtained from 
the  Federal  Reserve  through  currency  swaps,  that  is,  two-way  lines  of  credit  in  which  each  central  bank 
agrees to lend the other up to a fixed amount in its own currency. 
9   Given the format of these auctions, no bank could be sure that it would win funds; moreover, the three-day lag 
between  bidding  and  receipt  of  funds  implied  that  any  particular  bank's  submission  of  a  bid  would  not  be 
interpreted as a signal of immediate distress. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 5
disruption and generates a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity (Mishkin, 2007c, 
2008). Monetary policy – that is, the management of the target federal funds rate – is the 
Federal Reserve's best tool for influencing the course of economic activity and mitigating the 
degree of macroeconomic risk.  
Tool #4: Changing the federal funds rate target to respond to macroeconomic risk 
In the speech on risk management that I gave last month, I outlined a systematic approach 
for coping with financial market disruptions (Mishkin, 2008). In this approach, policy needs to 
respond  aggressively  when  a  large  financial  shock  becomes  evident,  and  the  degree  of 
policy  inertia  in  such  circumstances  may  well  be  markedly  lower  than  in  more-routine 
circumstances.  By  cutting  the  target  federal  funds  rate  to  offset  the  negative  effects  of 
financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity, monetary policy can reduce the likelihood 
that a financial disruption might set off an adverse feedback loop. The resulting reduction in 
uncertainty can then make it easier for the markets to collect the information that facilitates 
price discovery, thereby hastening the return of normal market functioning. 
To  achieve  this  result  most  effectively,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  timely,  decisive,  and 
flexible.  First,  timely  action  is  crucial  when  an  episode  of  financial  instability  becomes 
sufficiently  severe  to  threaten  the  core  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the  central  bank.  In 
such circumstances, waiting too long to ease monetary policy by lowering the federal funds 
rate could adversely affect the confidence of households and firms and thereby contribute to 
further deterioration of the macroeconomy; waiting too long might also increase the overall 
amount of easing that would eventually be needed. 
Second,  policymakers  should  be  prepared  to  take  decisive  action  in  response  to  financial 
disruptions.  In  such  circumstances,  although  the  most  likely  outcome  –  referred  to  as  the 
modal  forecast  –  for  the  economy  may  be  fairly  benign,  there  may  be  a  significant  risk  of 
more-severe adverse outcomes. In such circumstances, the central bank may prefer to take 
out  insurance  by  easing  the  stance  of  policy  further  than  if  the  distribution  of  probable 
outcomes were perceived as fairly symmetric and more tightly clustered around the modal 
forecast.  
Third,  policy  flexibility  is  crucial  throughout  the  evolution  of  a  financial  market  disruption. 
During the onset of the episode, this flexibility may be evident from the decisive easing of 
policy  that  is  intended  to  forestall  the  contractionary  effects  of  the  disruption  and  provide 
insurance  against  the  downside  risks  to  the  macroeconomy.  However,  it  is  important  to 
recognize that financial markets can also turn around quickly, thereby reducing the drag on 
the  economy  as  well  as  the  degree  of  macroeconomic  risk.  Therefore,  the  central  bank 
needs  to  monitor  credit  spreads  and  other  incoming  data  for  signs  of  financial  market 
recovery  and  should  be  prepared  to  take  back  the  insurance  once  the  recovery  becomes 
clearly established. Thus, at each stage of the episode, the appropriate monetary policy may 
exhibit much less gradualism than would be typical in other circumstances.  
A  central  bank  must  always  be  concerned  with  inflation  as  well  as  growth.  As  I  have 
emphasized  in  an  earlier  speech  about  inflation  dynamics,  the  behavior  of  inflation  is 
significantly influenced by the public's expectations about where inflation is likely to head in 
the  long  run  (Mishkin,  2007a).  Therefore,  preemptive  actions  of  the  sort  I  have  described 
here would be counterproductive if these actions caused an increase in inflation expectations 
and in the underlying rate of inflation; in other words, the flexibility to act preemptively against 
a financial disruption presumes that inflation expectations are firmly anchored and unlikely to 
rise during a period of temporary monetary easing. Indeed, as I have argued elsewhere, a 
commitment to a strong nominal anchor is crucial for both aspects of the dual mandate, that 
is,  for  achieving  maximum  employment  as  well  as  for  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable 
(Mishkin,  2007b).  Policymakers  therefore  need  to  closely  monitor  information  about 
underlying inflation and longer-run inflation expectations, and the central bank must be ready 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2008
to hold steady or even raise the policy rate if the evidence clearly indicates a significant rise 
in inflation expectations. 
In  my  view,  the  Federal  Reserve's  recent  monetary  policy  actions  –  reducing  the  target 
federal funds rate by 1 percentage point last fall and by a further 1-1/4 percentage points in 
January – have been consistent with these principles for coping with macroeconomic risk.  
First, we have been proceeding in a timely  manner in countering developments that could 
threaten economic or financial stability. In particular, the stance of monetary policy has been 
eased promptly in response to the rapid deterioration in financial market conditions, which 
had  worsened  the  economic  outlook  and  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  pronounced 
downside risks to economic growth and employment. 
Second,  I  believe  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  acting  and  will  continue  to  act 
decisively, in the sense that our lowering of the federal funds rate target has reflected the 
evolution of the balance of risks to the macroeconomy. The disruption in financial markets 
poses a substantial downside risk to the outlook for economic growth, and adverse economic 
or  financial  news  has  the  potential  to  cause  further  strains.  In  that  light,  the  Federal 
Reserve's policy strategy is aimed at providing adequate insurance to help mitigate the risk 
of more-severe macroeconomic outcomes. 
Third, because we recognize that financial and economic conditions can change quickly, the 
Federal Reserve is prepared to act flexibly in adjusting the federal funds rate in response to 
incoming  information.  Because  longer-run  inflation  expectations  appear  to  have  remained 
reasonably  well  anchored,  in  my  view,  the  easing  of  the  stance  of  policy  in  response  to 
deteriorating financial conditions seems unlikely to have an adverse impact on the outlook for 
inflation. Although I expect that inflation expectations will remain solidly anchored, we cannot 
be complacent that this will always continue to be the case. Therefore, careful monitoring of 
the  incoming  data  on  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  will  continue  to  be  necessary, 
especially  given  the  potential  risks  to  price  stability  that  are  associated  with  the  rapid 
increase  in  energy  prices  and  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar.  Similarly,  while  the  current 
strains  in  financial  markets  are  likely  to  persist  for  some  time,  there  have  been  instances 
when  financial  markets  have  turned  around  quickly,  and  we  must  be  prepared  for  such  a 
possibility in this instance. 
Conclusion 
In  recent  months,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  faced  a  more  difficult  policy  environment  as  a 
result  of  disruptions  to  the  financial  markets.  We  have  attempted  to  address  the  resulting 
challenges by using four tools. First, we have conducted open market operations to increase 
the  supply  of  reserves  and  keep  demands  for  increased  liquidity  from  causing  sharp 
increases in interest rates. Second, we have provided liquidity through the discount window 
by lowering the spread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate. Third, we have 
developed a new source of liquidity – the Term Auction Facility – to provide a fixed amount of 
funds  for  a  one-month  term  at  a  competitively  determined  interest  rate.  Finally,  we  have 
lowered  the  target  federal  funds  rate  in  a  timely,  decisive,  and  flexible  manner  to  help 
mitigate macroeconomic risk. Although financial disruptions present one of the most difficult 
challenges that central banks can face, I believe that these measures have been appropriate 
for  achieving  our  macroeconomic  objectives  of  promoting  price  stability  and  maximum 
sustainable employment. 
References 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Financial Markets, the Economic Outlook, and Monetary Policy", 
speech  delivered  at  the  Women  in  Housing  and  Finance  and  Exchequer  Club  Joint 
Luncheon, Washington, January 10. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 7
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2005).  "The  Implementation  of 
Monetary  Policy",  in  The  Federal  Reserve  System:  Purposes  &  Functions.  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 27-50. 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007a).  "The  Federal  Reserve  is 
Providing Liquidity to Facilitate the Orderly Functioning of Financial Markets", press release, 
August 10. 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007b).  "Federal  Reserve  Board 
Discount Rate Action", press release, August 17. 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007c).  "Federal  Reserve  and  Other 
Central Banks Announce Measures Designed to Address Elevated Pressures in Short-Term 
Funding Markets", press release, December 12. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (1991).  "Asymmetric  Information  and  Financial  Crises:  A  Historical 
Perspective,"  in  R.  Glenn  Hubbard,  ed.,  Financial  Markets  and  Financial  Crises.  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007a).  "Financial  Instability  and  the  Federal  Reserve  as  a  Liquidity 
Provider",  speech  delivered  at  the  Museum  of  American  Finance  Commemoration  of  the 
Panic of 1907, New York, October 26.  
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b). The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets, 8th 
ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007c). "Financial Instability and Monetary Policy", speech delivered at 
the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2008).  "Monetary  Policy  Flexibility,  Risk  Management,  and  Financial 
Disruptions", speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 
11. 
8 
 BIS Review 18/2008
