Jürgen Stark: Monetary policy and the euro 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  conference  on  “Advantages  and  benefits  of  the  euro  –  time  for  assessment”  at  the 
European Economic and Social Committee, Brussels, 15 April 2008. 
 I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  today  in  Brussels  at  the  European  Economic  and  Social 
Committee  on  the  occasion  of  this  conference  on  the  benefits  of  the  Euro.  Against  the 
background of the tenth anniversary of the European Central Bank (ECB) in June of this year 
and of the euro seven months later, I very much welcome the opportunity to take stock of our 
single  monetary  policy.  It  is  indeed,  as  the  title  of  this  conference  suggests,  time  for 
assessment. 
We have created a new currency in Europe and a new institution which is a guardian of the 
currency. 
The creation of the euro has been one of the greatest endeavours of monetary history and a 
significant step forward for Europe. It is the coronation of a long lasting process of economic 
and monetary convergence and integration. Looking back at almost 10 years since the start 
of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), even the most critical observers cannot deny that 
our single currency has been a great success.  
The institutional framework of EMU 
1.  
Key  to  the  success  of  the  euro  has  been  the  ECB’s  sustained  high  level  of  credibility  in 
effectively safeguarding price stability in the euro area. This credibility is primarily rooted in 
the institutional setting of the ECB enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty. 
The constituent features of the institutional framework for the single monetary policy are:  
• 
• 
Indeed,  price  stability  and  independence  are  the  key  features  of  modern  central  banks’ 
institutional architecture worldwide, not just in Europe. The distinctive feature of the ECB’s 
institutional  setting  is  that  the  mandate  and  the  independence  of  the  ECB  are  particularly 
well-protected since the Treaty can only be amended by unanimous decision of the Member 
States. It is European law. Monetary Policy has been depoliticised and denationalised.  
a clear mandate to safeguard price stability in the euro area, and 
full independence of the ECB in the pursuit of this mandate.  
The ECB’s mandate 
The mandate of the ECB is laid down in Article 105 of the Treaty, which clearly states that 
the  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This 
specification reflects the fundamental insight that price stability is conducive to sustainable 
economic  growth,  job  creation,  prosperity  and  social  stability.  This  insight  has  been 
established  by  historical  evidence  in  Europe,  it  has  been  widely  accepted  in  policy  circles 
and confirmed by a large number of academic studies. 
Why is price stability crucial?  
• 
Price  stability  allows  people  to  concentrate  on  productive  activities  rather  than  on 
strategies to protect their wealth and income against inflation. This is of particular 
benefit  to  the  weakest  groups  of  society,  which  have  only  limited  possibilities  for 
hedging  against  inflation.  In  this  sense,  price  stability  also  makes  an  important 
contribution  to  social  stability.  One  should  never  forget  that  history  is  littered  with 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 1
  episodes  of  inflation  or  deflation  that  paved  the  way  for  social  upheavals  and 
political instability, and even chaos.  
Another important benefit of price stability is that it reduces inflation risk premia in 
long-term  interest  rates.  However,  it  is  occasionally  heard  that  a  monetary  policy 
geared  to  price  stability  will  result  in  excessively  high  real  interest  rates.  The 
contrary is true. A price stability-oriented monetary policy will actually lead to lower 
real interest rates, thereby increasing the incentives to invest. In addition, over time 
inflation  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  real  incidence  of  taxes  and  social  security 
contributions. In the medium term, such inflation-induced decreases in the real after-
tax  salary  and  in  the  real  after-tax  return  on  savings  will  lead  to  a  diminished 
incentive  to  supply  labour  and  capital,  which  will  ultimately  curtail  the  economy’s 
long-run growth perspectives.  
Finally,  the  credible  achievement  of  price  stability  fosters  overall  macroeconomic 
stability.  A  clear  and  credible  focus  on  price  stability  ensures  that  inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored such that increases in inflation are not expected to 
be  long-lasting.  In  addition,  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy  strategy  is  instrumental  in  ensuring  that  price  stability  is  pursued  without 
introducing  unnecessary  volatility  in  economic  activity  and  financial  conditions  in 
response  to  exogenous  shocks,  such  as  an  increase  in  oil  prices.  The  ECB’s 
monetary  policy  can  thus  afford  a  more  moderate  and  steady  course  of  policy, 
creating a more predictable environment which supports economic activity. 
Thus, in fulfilling its mandate to maintain price stability in the euro area, the ECB eliminates a 
large  number  of  inflation-related  distortions,  thereby  enhancing  the  growth  potential  of  the 
euro area economy and the living standards of euro area citizens. 
The ECB’s independence 
Let me now focus on the second feature of the institutional framework for the single currency. 
In order to ensure that the single monetary policy will effectively pursue price stability, the 
provisions  of  the  Treaty  have  granted  the  ECB  far-reaching  independence.  Central  bank 
independence is a necessary precondition for monetary policy to be credibly and effectively 
geared  to  price  stability,  since  it  protects  monetary  policy  from  detrimental  political 
interferences. In the absence of central bank independence, monetary policy can at any time 
be  exposed  to  political  pressures,  motivated,  for  example,  by  short-term  or  short-sighted 
policy considerations, to boost output temporarily in the short run at the expense of higher 
inflation  in  the  longer  run.  The  public  will,  however,  understand  this  problem  and  expect 
higher inflation from the outset, so that the perceived short-term trade-off between inflation 
and  output  will  be  negated  and  a  permanently  higher  inflation  rate  will  ensue  as  the  only 
certain  outcome.  The  only  way  out  of  this  dilemma  is  to  delegate  monetary  policy  to  an 
independent central bank with a clear mandate to safeguard price stability. 
The concept of independence includes 
• 
The institutional independence of the ECB and the national central banks of the 
Eurosystem from any political interference is guaranteed in Article 108 of the Treaty. 
There the Treaty explicitly stipulates that, when exercising their powers, neither the 
ECB nor any member of its decision-making bodies shall seek or take instructions 
from Community institutions or bodies, from any government of a Member State or 
from any other body. The Treaty further states that the Community institutions and 
bodies  and  governments  of  the  Member  States  have  to  respect  this  principle  and 
must not seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the ECB.  
The  ECB’s  far-reaching  functional  independence  ensures  that  it  disposes  of  all 
necessary competences and powers to achieve its mandate. The provisions of the 
BIS Review 44/2008
 2 
 Treaty  guarantee  that  the  ECB  is  insulated  from  political  influence  in  the 
operationalisation of its mandate and in the implementation of its monetary policy.  
The ECB has the exclusive competence for monetary policy in the euro area. The ECB’s full 
control  over  the  monetary  base  is  ensured  by  its  monopoly  on  banknote  issuing  and  the 
requirement that issuance of coins by the Member States is subject to the ECB’s approval.  
• 
Personal independence provides the members of the Governing Council with the 
necessary security of tenure and helps avoid any conflicts of interest. The Statute 
protects  the  personal  independence  of  the  ECB  decision-making  bodies  by 
stipulating  relatively  long  fixed-term  contracts  and  ruling  out  dismissal  on  the 
grounds of past policy conduct.  
Financial  independence,  meaning  autonomy  over  its  financial  resources  and 
income,  enables  the  central  bank  to  effectively  perform  its  tasks.  In  EMU  this  is 
ensured by the ECB having its own budget independent from that of the European 
Union and the full subscription of the ECB’s capital paid up by the national central 
banks of the Eurosystem.  
 Democratic legitimacy 
It is important to note that the far-reaching independence granted to the ECB by the Treaty 
does not mean that it lacks democratic legitimacy. The principle of democratic legitimacy 
must  be  looked  at  in  conjunction  with  the  complementary  principles  of  the  separation  of 
powers,  the  rule  of  law  and  the  relationship  to  the  EC  Treaty.  The  independence  of  the 
central bank from political influence represents an attempt to ensure that the power of the 
state serves the public interest. 
The ECB has been established by the Treaty, which has been ratified by all Member States 
and  the  members  of  the  ECB  decision-making  bodies  are  all  appointed  by  the  Member 
States’  democratically  elected  representatives.  Furthermore,  the  competency  for  monetary 
policy  is  transferred  within  the limits  of  a  clearly  defined,  single  mandate  to  maintain  price 
stability against which the ECB can be held accountable by the European citizens. Problems 
of accountability could only arise if the ECB – having only one instrument at its disposal – 
had  the  mandate  to  pursue  several  objectives.  Then,  it  would  have  to  explain  potential 
conflicts between the objectives and, if necessary, to justify its own prioritisation of objectives 
in a democratic manner. 
In  order  to  foster  the  ECB’s  accountability  to  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area,  the  Treaty 
specifies a number of reporting requirements for the ECB and provides for regular hearings 
before the European Parliament. Yet, in its communication with the general public, the ECB 
goes far beyond these requirements.  
I would like to highlight that our clear mandate and our monetary policy strategy facilitate the 
ECB’s accountability with regard to the citizens of the euro area.  
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
2.  
This brings me to the second cornerstone of the single monetary policy in EMU, the ECB’s 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  provides  a  comprehensive  and  clear 
framework  for  the  conduct  and  communication  of  our  policy.  Our  strategy  was  first 
announced in October 1998 and confirmed in May 2003 with some clarifications.  
It comprises  
• 
• 
a definition of price stability to render our mandate operational,  
and a broad-based analysis of the risks to price stability in the context of our two-
pillar framework.  
BIS Review 44/2008 
 3
Definition of price stability 
The ECB defines its price stability objective as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised 
Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  of  below,  but  close  to  2%  over  the 
medium term.  
By referring to an increase in the HICP of below but close to 2%, the ECB has made it clear 
that HICP inflation of 2% or above, but also very low or negative rates of inflation are not 
consistent with its price stability objective. Therefore, we aim at a low positive inflation rate in 
order to mitigate the detrimental effects of inflation on the euro area economies while at the 
same time maintaining a sufficient safety margin against potential risks of deflation.  
Another  fundamental  aspect  of  our  definition  of  price  stability  is  its  medium-term  horizon, 
which means that we do not attempt to fine-tune the inflation rate at short horizons, but aim 
at keeping inflation below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
The medium-term orientation of our strategy acknowledges that – in view of long, variable 
and  uncertain  transmission  lags  –  monetary  policy  is  not  equipped  to  control  price 
developments at short horizons. Monetary policy can only act in a forward looking manner 
and  maintain  price  stability  over  longer  periods  of  time  when  monetary  policy  measures 
come into effect. 
A two-pillar framework for the monetary analysis 
In  the  context  of  our  two-pillar  framework  consisting  of  the  economic  analysis  and  the 
monetary analysis we assess the risks to price stability in the euro area in a comprehensive 
manner based on two complementary analytical approaches: 
• 
The economic analysis focuses on the short to medium-term risks to price stability, 
based  mainly  on  the  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial  developments 
from  the  perspective  of  the  interplay  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  goods, 
services, and factor markets.  
The  monetary  analysis  focuses  on  a  broad  range  of  monetary  indicators  and 
measures of excess liquidity as well as credit developments. It serves as a means of 
cross-checking, from a medium- to a long-term perspective, the indications coming 
from the economic analysis.  
 This  two-pillar  framework  ensures  that  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  Governing 
Council  are  based  on  an  overall  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  are  robust 
across different analytical perspectives.  
This  strategy  is  the  basis  for  the  soundness  and  transparency  of  our  policy  conduct.  It 
provides a clear orientation to the public with regard to the medium-term goal of monetary 
policy and a clear yardstick against which our policy can be held accountable. And it ensures 
that we take all information relevant to price stability in the euro area duly into account and 
pursue our mandate in a steady and forward-looking manner. 
The  advantages  of  our  strategy  have  become  more  and  more  obvious  over  time.  The 
strategy, with its medium-term orientation and its monetary pillar, ensures that longer-term 
risks to price stability – emanating from the well-documented close link between monetary 
developments and trend inflation – are duly taken into account in the conduct of monetary 
policy.  Moreover,  it  is  increasingly  recognised  that  our  strategy  represents  a  pragmatic 
solution  to  the  challenges  faced  by  central  banks  to  look  beyond  standard  forecasting 
horizons, notably when confronted by inflated asset prices and evolving financial imbalances. 
The  empirically  evident  link  between  monetary  developments  and  evolving  imbalances  in 
asset and credit markets implies that our strategy, with the importance it confers on monetary 
analysis,  enables  us  to  detect  these  imbalances  at  an  early  stage  and  to  respond  to  the 
implied risks to financial, economic and price stability in a timely, forward-looking manner. All 
in all, the strategy has served us well! 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2008
Based  on  its  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
decides, based on consensus, on the level of policy rates it deems consistent with medium-
term price stability in the euro area. The Governing Council of the ECB is composed of the 
six members of the ECB’s Executive Board and the Governors of the national central banks 
of  the  Eurosystem.  The  committee-structure  of  the  Governing  Council,  which  reflects  the 
federal nature of the Eurosystem, benefits the sound conduct of monetary policy in the euro 
area.  The  academic  literature  shows  that  monetary  policy  making  by  committee  leads  in 
general  to  better  informed  policy  decisions  by  bringing  together  information  and  expertise 
from  people  with  different  backgrounds.  For  the  euro  area,  this  argument  is  of  particular 
relevance  due  to  its  characteristic  feature  of  cultural  and  economic  diversity.  Indeed,  the 
composition of the Governing Council enhances the gathering and sharing of information on 
economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  and  ensures  that  this  information  is  duly  and 
effectively reflected in our monetary policy decisions. 
Another  important  feature  of  the  Eurosystem  is  that  monetary  policy  decision-making  is 
centralised,  while  its  implementation  is  decentralised.  The  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  is 
then responsible for the implementation of the policy decision of the Governing Council by 
adjusting the liquidity situation in the money market in a way that steers short-term money 
market rates towards the level of the ECB’s policy rate. These monetary policy operations 
are  normally  carried  out  by  the  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  under  the 
coordination of the ECB. 
This decentralisation of monetary policy implementation offers a number of advantages. The 
ECB can benefit from the expertise, infrastructure and operational capabilities of the national 
central banks of the Eurosystem. Furthermore, the national central banks can provide credit 
institutions in each country with access to the central banking network, which is an important 
benefit in view of the large size of the euro area and the long-standing relationships between 
the national banking communities and their central banks. The Eurosystem’s decentralised 
operational framework has functioned smoothly over the past nine years, in particular also 
during the recent financial turmoil.  
What has been achieved? 
3.  
The key elements of the ECB’s institutional framework and monetary policy strategy are in 
full  continuity  with  the  most  successful  monetary  policy  frameworks  in  continental  Europe 
prior to EMU. At the early stage of EMU, this continuity was of key importance in order to 
ensure that the ECB, which was an entirely new institution without a track record of its own, 
would inherit the credibility of the most successful central banks joining the Eurosystem. 
In  the  now  more  than  nine  years  since  the  start  of  EMU,  the  ECB  has  managed  to  fully 
preserve  this  achievement  by  living  up  to  its  mandate.  Indeed,  by  taking  firm  and  timely 
actions  whenever  needed  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  proved  its  ability  and 
commitment to credibly deliver upon its mandate to maintain price stability. Since the start of 
EMU,  HICP  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been,  on  average,  slightly  above  2%,  an 
unprecedented low level by historical standards. 
This achievement is, however, not entirely satisfactory since our goal is to be below but close 
to 2%. The level of inflation can be explained primarily by the short-term effects of a large 
number of upside price shocks over this period which cannot be fully neutralised by monetary 
policy.  The  sustained  high  credibility  of  the  ECB  to  effectively  deliver  on  its  announced 
medium-term  objective  is  reflected  by  the  fact  that  long-term  expectations  of  euro  area 
inflation have been firmly anchored at levels consistent with the ECB’s quantitative definition 
of price stability since the start of EMU.  
It is sometimes argued that the favourable inflation performance of the euro area has been 
the result of the disinflationary effects of globalisation rather than of a successful monetary 
policy, or, in other words, that EMU has so far been a “fine weather event” and that the ability 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 5
of  the  ECB  to  effectively  deliver  upon  its  mandate  has  essentially  not  yet  been  tested.  I 
strongly disapprove of this view. Indeed, looking back over the last nine years or so, it would 
appear  that  the  euro  area  has  rather  been  affected  by  an  unprecedented,  particularly 
challenging  sequence  of  adverse  shocks  for  monetary  policy,  for  instance  the  burst  of  the 
“New Economy” bubble and the terrorist attacks in 2001.  
In  particular,  there  have  been  a  number  of  significant  upside  price  shocks  caused  by 
exogenous factors outside the realm of monetary policy. In 1999 and 2000, and again in the 
years from 2004 to 2007, there was a rapid increase in the world price of crude oil. In 2001 
there was a sharp acceleration in food prices. We are currently facing rapid increases in both 
the price of crude oil and other commodities and rising food prices at the same time. These 
price  increases  have  been  related  to  events  both  on  the  supply  side,  such  as  geopolitical 
disruptions  and  animal  diseases,  and  on  the  demand  side,  more  recently  in  particular  the 
accelerated  integration  of  China  and  other  Asian  countries  in  the  world  economy  and  the 
concomitant increase in the global demand for food and commodities. 
With 3.5 % in March the inflation rate has reached a new high in EMU. This is a reason for 
concern.  The  current  elevated  level  of  inflation  is  having  already  an  adverse  effect  on 
consumer  confidence,  as  households  observe  an  erosion  of  their  purchasing  power. 
Containing these inflationary pressures is therefore crucial to supporting domestic demand. 
The public well understands the centrality of credible price stability for sustainable economic 
growth. 
As you know, monetary policy can, because of the long transmission lags of monetary policy 
measures,  not  fend  off  the  inflationary  effects  of  such  price  shocks  at  short  horizons.  Any 
attempt  to  do  so  would  instead  make  monetary  policy  itself  a  source  of  volatility  and 
instability.  Therefore,  monetary  policy  has  no  choice  but  to  accommodate  the  mechanical 
first-round  effects  of  these  shocks  on  headline  inflation.  Accommodating  these  first-round 
effects of price shocks does not pose a risk to price stability over the medium term per se, 
since  the  effect  of  even  a  permanent  increase  in  the  level  of  the  relative  prices  of 
commodities and food will have only a temporary impact on inflation. 
What is key for the maintenance of price stability over the medium term is that the temporary 
increases in inflation arising from such exogenous price shocks do not become ingrained in 
inflation expectations, giving rise to broad-based second-round effects on wage and price-
setting  behaviour,  eventually  turning  an  initially  transitory  increase  in  inflation  into  a 
permanent one. The lessons of history have taught us that once inflation expectations have 
become  unanchored  and  a  wage-price  spiral  has  started,  restoring  price  stability  is  very 
costly. Therefore, such a development has to be avoided under all circumstances. 
Whether second-round effects materialise depends on people’s expectations regarding the 
commitment of monetary policy to safeguard their purchasing power over the medium term. If 
people  are  convinced  that  the  central  bank  will  ultimately  succeed  in  maintaining  price 
stability, inflation expectations will remain centred on the central bank’s objective – also in 
face  of  significant  temporary  price  shocks,  so  that  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour  will 
remain consistent with price stability.  
In the context of its broad-based analysis of the risks to price stability, the ECB’s Governing 
Council is actively monitoring the situation for early signs of second-round effects. So far we 
have received mixed signals. 
It is important that the wage increases that have recently been negotiated in some Member 
States do not set a precedent for others, in particular for those that have lost competitiveness 
in  recent  years.  Without  sustained  improvements  in  labour  productivity,  higher  nominal 
wages  do  not  lead  to  sustainable  improvements  in  real  purchasing  power,  but  only  fuel 
inflationary  pressures,  thereby  making  it  more  difficult  for  the  ECB  to  safeguard  the 
purchasing power of all euro area citizens. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2008
In order to effectively maintain price stability and to retain its credibility to do so, monetary 
policy has to make clear that it will act decisively at the first signs of a broader based spill-
over of temporary price shocks to general price inflation. In this vein, the Governing Council 
remains strongly committed to preventing any second-round effects from materialising and to 
maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  There  is  no  room  for 
complacency. We believe that the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving 
our  objective.  But  we  cannot  be  sure  and  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments. 
Inflationary pressures have increased further in the short-term. Over the medium-term there 
has been a confirmation of the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail. This is 
strongly  supported  by  our  monetary  analysis.  Monetary  expansion  remains  robust  and  is 
largely  driven  by  fundamental  factors.  We  have  also  to  take  into  account  that  there  is  a 
further  boost  of  liquidity  creation  at  the  global  level,  which,  in  turn,  bears  the  risks  of 
increasing inflation rates, upward pressures on some asset prices and of further commodity 
price rises. 
In  the  light  of  such  a  potential  acceleration  of  nominal  trends  at  the  global  level  and  the 
experience  of  the  1970s,  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  is  clearly  oriented  towards  price 
stability is particularly warranted. 
An upsurge of inflation from the mid-1960s to the early 1980s was not just “bad luck”. It was 
the result of bad economic policies. The OPEC’s oil price increases in 1973 and 1979 were 
facilitated by the global liquidity conditions that had been created by loose policies and the 
attendant collapse of the Bretton Woods system. However, the common inflationary shocks 
from commodity price hikes did not transmit in a similar manner to all developed economies. 
Those few economies with a price stability oriented monetary policy framework succeeded 
much better in containing the impact from external pressures. 
The clear focus on price stability as the overriding guiding post of our monetary policy also 
prevails against the background of the current turmoil in financial markets. 
The turmoil has its roots in a long period of benign economic and financial conditions. These 
benign conditions increased the amount of risks that borrowers and investors were willing to 
take on in the rapid expansion of asset securitisation, often in the form of complex or even 
esoteric  financial  instruments,  combined  with  a  significant  underpricing  of  credit  risks  over 
the past years. 
The trigger of the crisis was mounting evidence of tensions in the subprime segment of the 
US  mortgage  market  in  the  middle  of  last  year,  which  led  to  a  fundamental  reversal  of 
investors’  attitudes  towards  risk.  The  previous  significant  underpricing  of  risk  turned  into  a 
pronounced  risk  aversion  and  an  unprecedented  increase  in  uncertainty  regarding  the 
conditions and prospects of the financial sector. The uncertainty was further amplified and 
perpetuated by the complex nature of the financial instruments that had been issued, which 
is  making  an  assessment  of  the  credit  risk  individual  credit  institutions  are  exposed  to 
extremely difficult, even for the institutions themselves. 
As  a  result  of  this  widespread  uncertainty  regarding  the  potential  credit  risk  exposures  of 
their  counterparties  and  the  risks  they  themselves  are  exposed  to,  banks  have  been 
hoarding  liquidity  and  curtailing  their  lending  to  other  banks.  This  ultimately  gave  rise  to 
liquidity shortages in the interbank money markets around the world, including the euro area. 
As  a  result,  interest  rates  for  the  very  short-term  funds  increased  several  times  to  levels 
significantly above the ECB’s main policy rate. 
The ECB has, over the past months since the inception of the turmoil, taken the necessary 
steps to create liquidity conditions in the money market that support its proper functioning. 
Maintaining liquidity in the money market serves two purposes.  
• 
It  avoids  disturbances  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  by  ensuring  that 
shorter-term  interbank  money  market  rates  remain  aligned  with  the  level  of  the 
BIS Review 44/2008 
 7
ECB’s key policy rate so that they properly reflect the ECB’s monetary policy stance 
determined by the Governing Council with a view to maintaining medium-term price 
stability in the euro area.  
It avoids liquidity bottlenecks that could impair the working and, potentially, even the 
stability of the financial system. 
 However, while the ECB can make an important contribution to the smooth functioning of the 
money  market  by  means  of  its  liquidity-providing  measures,  it  cannot  solve  the  underlying 
problems. Market participants and supervisory authorities must ultimately take measures to 
address the roots of the current mistrust. The best contribution the ECB can make to foster 
confidence  in  the  current  situation  is  to  continue  to  firmly  anchor  medium  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  by  keeping  its  policy  uncompromisingly  geared  to 
pursuing  price  stability.  Adopting  a  more  activist  policy  stance  in  the  current  situation,  as 
some outside observers recommend, would only exacerbate uncertainty without helping to 
resolve the causes of the turbulences, which are outside the realm of monetary policy. 
Market  participants  have  to  bear  the  consequences  of  their  excessive  risk  taking.  A  more 
activist monetary policy stance would increase moral hazard risks and lay the basis for future 
excesses.  Both,  in  normal  and  in  turbulent  times  we  are  well-advised  to  apply  well-
established guiding principles and practices in central banking.  
The role of monetary policy in the economic governance framework of EMU 
4.  
Indeed, since the start of EMU, the lack of a more activist policy conduct is a reproach that 
the  ECB  has  faced  on  and  off  from  some  critical  observers.  They  believe  that  an  activist 
monetary policy could effectively promote growth and employment. This raises a question of 
fundamental  importance  which  requires  clarification:  can  we  expect  more  from  monetary 
policy than the maintenance of price stability? 
The answer to this question is very clear and uncontroversial among leading academics and 
policy-makers: price stability is the only and the best contribution monetary policy can make 
to the prosperity of the euro area economies. 
As I have already explained, beyond safeguarding price stability, there is nothing monetary 
policy can do to promote growth and employment. Monetary policy measures will, in the long 
run,  only  influence  the  level  of  prices,  whilst  leaving  the  levels  of  growth  and  employment 
unchanged – a basic insight of monetary economics referred to as the “long-run neutrality of 
money”. Historical experiences, in particular the experience of the 1970s’ stagflations, have 
clearly shown that any attempts by central banks to systematically stimulate demand beyond 
potential eventually lead to more inflation, not to more growth. At the same time, long and 
variable transmission lags obviate any attempt to fine-tune the real economy by means of an 
activist conduct of monetary policy. 
Therefore,  medium-term  price  stability  is  the  only  objective  monetary  policy  can  effectively 
and  credibly  pursue  with  the  single  instrument  at  its  disposal,  the  short-term  policy  rate. 
Central Banks cannot and should not try to replace the market. Moreover, monetary policy is 
not  equipped  to  compensate  for  deficiencies  arising  from  the  shortcomings  of  economic 
policies,  in  particular  the  still  significant  structural  rigidities  in  labour  and  product  markets 
impairing the euro area’s growth potential. 
This  fundamental  insight  is  reflected  in  the  economic  governance  framework  of  EMU  laid 
down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  establishes  a  clear  and  efficient  allocation  of 
responsibilities.  
• 
The  single  monetary  policy,  under  the  responsibility  of  the  ECB,  has  the  task  of 
maintaining price stability in the euro area.  
8 
 BIS Review 44/2008
   The remit of the Member States’ structural policies is to create flexible and efficient 
product and labour markets with a view to fostering the growth potential of euro area 
economies and to improving the adjustment mechanisms in EMU.  
In line with the Stability and Growth Pact, Member States are supposed to maintain 
sustainable  public 
limiting  public  deficits  and 
indebtedness and ensuring an effective working of automatic fiscal stabilisers.  
Social  partners  in  the  euro  area  countries  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  wage 
developments are compatible with the trend development of productivity in order to 
foster employment and for fostering wage flexibility as a key equilibrating adjustment 
mechanism in a currency union. 
thereby  effectively 
finances, 
The  clear  allocation  of  responsibilities  established  by  the  Treaty  reflects  the  fact  that 
assigning  policy  instruments  primarily  to  one  single  policy  objective  and  making  individual 
policy-makers  responsible  for  one  single  policy  instrument  ensures  a  high  level  of 
effectiveness  and  accountability.  If  the  conduct  of  all  individual  policy  areas  is  effectively 
geared  to  the  task  that  each  area  has  been  assigned,  this  would  de  facto  create  an 
environment that is beneficial to sustainable growth and employment in the euro area.  
Conclusions 
5.  
To conclude, let me briefly summarise the main points of my talk. 
• 
to 
The high credibility and success of the single monetary policy in the euro area over 
the past nine years rests on the institutional framework of the ECB enshrined in the 
Treaty, and on the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy. The constituent 
features  of  the  ECB’s  institutional  setting  are  a  clear  mandate  to  safeguard  price 
stability and full independence in order to ensure that monetary policy is effectively 
geared 
this  mandate.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  provides  a 
comprehensive  and  clear  framework  for  the  conduct  and  communication  of  our 
policy. 
Based on this stability-oriented monetary policy framework, the ECB has managed 
to maintain price stability and to firmly anchor inflation expectations in the euro area 
in an environment that has been characterised by an unprecedented sequence of 
upside price shocks.  
Medium-term price stability is the only objective monetary policy can effectively and 
credibly pursue with the single instrument it has at its disposal, the short-term policy 
rate.  In  maintaining  price  stability,  monetary  policy  can  make  an  important 
contribution  to  economic  welfare  by  eliminating  various  distortions  arising  from 
inflation or deflation.  
However, the development of growth and employment are ultimately determined by 
the  structural  features of  an  economy.  Well-designed  structural  policies  promoting 
flexibility in product and labour markets are therefore crucial in order to unleash the 
growth potential of the euro area economies. The important responsibility of social 
partners is to ensure that wage developments in the euro area economies take into 
account the low trend development of labour productivity growth and the often still 
high level of unemployment, as well as the significant deterioration in cost and price 
competitiveness that many countries have experienced over the past years. 
   BIS Review 44/2008 
 9
