Ben S Bernanke: Mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Columbia  Business  School's  32nd  Annual  Dinner,  New  York, 
5 May 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 President  Bollinger,  Dean  Hubbard,  Co-Chairman  Kravis,  and  distinguished  guests,  I  am 
very pleased to be here and especially honored to receive the Columbia Business School's 
Distinguished  Leadership  in  Government  Award.  This  evening  I  would  like  to  offer  a  few 
thoughts  on  mortgage  markets  and  the  recent  increase  in  the  pace  of  delinquencies  and 
foreclosures.  My  particular  focus  will  be  on  geographic  variation  in  mortgage  performance 
and  how  that  variation  can  help  us  better  understand  and  prevent  foreclosures.  I  will  also 
discuss some initiatives taken by the Federal Reserve to address the foreclosure crisis as 
well as other policies that might be used to strengthen mortgage and housing markets.  
Geographic variation in loan mortgage performance 
As my listeners know, conditions in mortgage markets remain quite difficult, and mortgage 
delinquencies  have  climbed  steeply.  The  sharpest  increases  have  been  among  subprime 
mortgages, particularly those with adjustable interest rates: About one quarter of subprime 
adjustable-rate  mortgages  are  currently  90  days  or  more  delinquent  or  in  foreclosure.1 
Delinquency  rates  also  have  increased  in  the  prime  and  near-prime  segments  of  the 
mortgage market, although not nearly so much as in the subprime sector. As a consequence 
of  rising  delinquencies,  foreclosure  proceedings  were  initiated  on  some  1.5  million  U.S. 
homes during 2007, up 53 percent from 2006, and the rate of foreclosure starts looks likely to 
be  yet  higher  in  2008.  Not  all  foreclosure  starts  result  in  the  borrower's  loss  of  the  home; 
sometimes the borrower is able to make up the missed payments or other arrangements are 
made with the lender. But, given the number of borrowers in distress and the weakness of 
the general housing market, the share of foreclosure initiations that ultimately result in the 
loss of the home seems likely to be higher in the current episode than customarily has been 
the case. 
Many foreclosures are not preventable. Investors, for example, are unlikely to want to hold 
onto a property whose value has depreciated significantly, and some borrowers – perhaps 
because they were put into an inappropriate loan or because personal circumstances have 
changed  –  cannot  realistically  sustain  homeownership.  However,  if  a  foreclosure  is 
preventable,  and  the  borrower  wants  to  stay  in  the  home,  the  economic  case  for  trying  to 
avoid  foreclosure  is  strong.  Because  foreclosures  impose  high  costs,  including  legal  and 
administrative  costs  as  well  as  the  costs  of  leaving  the  property  vacant  for  a  possibly 
extended period, both the borrower and the lender often are better off avoiding foreclosure. 
Moreover, it is important to recognize that the costs of foreclosure may extend well beyond 
those borne directly by the borrower and the lender. Clusters of foreclosures can destabilize 
communities,  reduce  the  property  values  of  nearby  homes,  and  lower  municipal  tax 
revenues. At both the local and national levels, foreclosures add to the stock of homes for 
sale, increasing downward pressure on home prices in general. In the current environment, 
more-rapid declines in house prices may have an adverse impact on the broader economy 
and, through their effects on the valuation of mortgage-related assets, on the stability of the 
                                                 
1   Based on servicer data from First American LoanPerformance. 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 1
financial  system.  Thus,  finding  ways  to  avoid  preventable  foreclosures  is  a  legitimate  and 
important concern of public policy. 
To  determine  the  appropriate  public-  and  private-sector  responses  to  the  rise  in  mortgage 
delinquencies  and  foreclosures,  we  need  to  better  understand  the  sources  of  this 
phenomenon. In good times and bad, a mortgage default can be triggered by a life event, 
such as the loss of a job, serious illness or injury, or divorce. However, another factor is now 
playing  an  increasing  role  in  many  markets:  declines  in  home  values,  which  reduce 
homeowners'  equity  and  may  consequently  affect  their  ability  or  incentive  to  make  the 
financial sacrifices necessary to stay in their homes. 
On  the  principle  that  a  picture  is  worth  a  thousand  words,  Federal  Reserve  staff,  using 
detailed, county-by-county information on mortgage performance, have developed a series of 
"heat maps," which summarize the incidence of serious mortgage delinquencies across the 
nation as well as some of the key drivers of loan performance. As the examples will make 
clear, the figures use warmer colors – orange and red – to show counties for which the factor 
being considered has a higher value or change. Lower values or changes are indicated by 
cooler  colors  –  shades  of  green  –  and  yellows  indicate  areas  where  the  factor  under 
consideration has a moderate value or change.  
Nationally, as of the fourth quarter of 2007, the rate of serious delinquency, as measured by 
credit records, stood at 2 percent of all mortgage borrowers, up nearly 50 percent from the 
end of 2004.2 The fourth quarter of 2004 is a useful benchmark, because general economic 
conditions were fairly normal and the lax underwriting that emerged later was not yet evident. 
Figure 1 shows the national patterns of serious mortgage delinquency in 2004, which, again, 
I am taking as representative of a relatively normal period, with orange and red indicating the 
highest  rates  of  delinquency  and  greens  indicating  the  lowest.  In  2004,  the  areas  of  the 
country  with  the  highest  rates  of  serious  delinquency  included  significant  portions  of  the 
Southeast;  parts  of  the  Midwest,  most  notably  Ohio  and  Indiana;  portions  of  the  Rocky 
Mountain  region;  and  Texas,  Oklahoma,  and  areas  in  the  Mississippi  valley.  In  contrast, 
many  parts  of  the  country  experienced  exceptionally  good  loan  performance  at  that  time, 
including most of the West Coast, New England, and much of southern Florida. 
However,  conditions  in  some  areas  changed  greatly  in  a  relatively  short  period  of  time. 
Figure 2 shows the pattern of delinquency rates as of the last quarter of 2007. Many of the 
areas  that  exhibited  elevated  delinquency  rates  in  2004  continued  to  show  relatively  high 
rates of delinquency in 2007. But some areas that had low rates in 2004 experienced high 
rates  three  years  later.  Figure  3  makes  this  point  more  sharply  by  showing  the  pattern  of 
increases in delinquency rates between 2004 and 2007, with the largest increases shown in 
red. The strong regional pattern is evident in the figure. Although many parts of the country 
have  seen  significant  increases  in  mortgage  delinquencies  and  foreclosures,  a  number  of 
areas – such as California, parts of Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, Florida, portions of the upper 
Midwest, and New England – have been particularly hard hit. 
The regional pattern of the recent rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures requires 
explanation. Again, we  can use heat maps to  examine the underlying  relationships across 
geographic regions between changes in mortgage delinquency rates and factors identified as 
driving loan performance. For example, the change in the unemployment rate in a county can 
be used as a proxy for disruptions in family incomes and subsequent financial stress. Figure 
4 shows changes in average annual unemployment rates across counties between 2004 and 
                                                 
2   This information from TrenData is drawn from the credit records of a geographically stratified random sample 
of more than 20 million individuals (roughly a 1 in 10 sample of all credit records) for each calendar quarter 
beginning  in  1992.  TrenData  is  a  registered  trademark  of  TransUnion  LLC.  "Serious  delinquency"  includes 
accounts that are 90 days or more past due or in foreclosure. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2008
increases 
increased  mortgage  delinquencies  and  notable 
2007, with counties indicated in red experiencing the largest increases in joblessness.3 The 
data suggest that increases in unemployment rates account for at least some of the recent 
increases in mortgage delinquencies. Parts of New England, states in the Great Lakes region 
–  including  Minnesota,  Michigan,  and  Wisconsin  –  and  a  number  of  other  states,  such  as 
Nevada,  show  both 
in 
unemployment rates. 
However, the behavior of unemployment does not seem sufficient to explain the increased 
delinquency  rates  in  other  areas,  including  California,  Florida,  and  portions  of  Colorado, 
where mortgage delinquencies increased during a period in which unemployment generally 
decreased. Another important determinant of loan performance, identified by research at the 
Federal Reserve and elsewhere, is changes in house prices.4 Figure 5 shows the regional 
pattern of changes in house prices between 2006 and 2007, with the sharpest price declines 
indicated in reds and oranges.5 The figure shows that Florida, California, Nevada, Michigan, 
and parts of New Mexico and Colorado experienced decreases in house prices between the 
fourth  quarter  of  2006  and  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007  (a  pattern  which  has  continued  and 
intensified in 2008).6 As I noted, sharp declines in house prices, and thus in homeowners' 
equity, reduce both the ability and incentive of homeowners, particularly those under financial 
stress for other reasons, to retain their homes. 
Other factors affect foreclosure rates, and once again the heat maps  can give us a visual 
impression.  Figure  6  shows  the  share  of  home  purchases  by  non-owner  occupiers  – 
investors  or  purchasers  of  vacation  homes,  for  example  –  during  2005  and  2006.7  Again, 
there is some correlation with the increase in delinquencies and foreclosures, as purchases 
by non-owner occupiers were relatively high in the West, Southwest, and in Florida. Figure 7 
shows the incidence of junior liens (or piggyback loans), often an indicator of little borrower 
equity  at  the  time  of  purchase.  The  greater  use  of  these mortgages  in  the  West and  East 
Coasts  presumably  reflects  higher  house  prices  in  those  regions;  again,  the  geographical 
pattern suggests that the use of piggyback loans may also have contributed to the recent rise 
in delinquencies and foreclosures.8
What are the implications of these relationships, particularly the linkage of mortgage payment 
problems  and  falling  house  prices?  Loan  servicers  are  used  to  dealing  with  mortgage 
delinquencies related to life events such as unemployment or illness, with the most common 
approaches being a temporary repayment plan or the folding of missed payments into the 
principal  balance.  A  widespread  decline  in  home  prices,  by  contrast,  is  a  relatively  novel 
phenomenon, and lenders and servicers will have to develop new and flexible strategies to 
deal with this issue. In some cases, when the source of the problem is a decline of the value 
of the home well below the mortgage's principal balance, the best solution may be a write-
down  of  principal  or  other  permanent  modification  of  the  loan  by  the  servicer,  perhaps 
combined with a refinancing by the Federal Housing Administration or another lender. To be 
                                                 
3   Unemployment rate data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
4   For example, see Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen (2007). 
5   Displayed is the annual percentage change in the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight price index 
for each county from the end of 2006 to the end of 2007. 
6   Several different series measure home price changes. The index compiled by the Office of Federal Housing 
Enterprise Oversight uses the values of homes whose mortgages were purchased by Fannie Mae or Freddie 
Mac. 
Information  on  non-owner  occupiers  comes  from  Home  Mortgage  Disclosure  Act  (HMDA)  data.  HMDA  is 
implemented  by  Regulation  C  (12  CFR  203)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  For  more  information  about 
HMDA, see Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2007). 
7  
8   For details about the technique used to identify piggyback loans and for more information about their use, see 
Avery, Brevoort, and Canner (2007). 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 3
effective,  such  programs  must  be  tightly  targeted  to  borrowers  at  the  highest  risk  of 
foreclosure, as measured, for example, by debt-to-income ratio or by the extent to which the 
mortgage is "underwater." Finding the right balance – particularly the need to avoid programs 
that give borrowers who can make their payments an incentive to default – is difficult. But 
realistic  public-  and  private-sector  policies  must  take  into  account  the  fact  that  traditional 
foreclosure avoidance strategies may not always work well in the current environment. 
The Federal Reserve's homeownership and mortgage initiatives 
I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  Federal  Reserve's  efforts  to  strengthen 
homeownership  and  reduce  preventable  foreclosures.  The  Federal  Reserve's  decisions 
regarding  monetary  policy  and  our  efforts  to  increase  financial  stability  affect  housing  and 
mortgage markets, of course. But, as an organization with a national presence in the form of 
regional Federal Reserve Banks and their Branches, we are also working to address these 
issues  more  directly.  We  are  collaborating  with  other  regulators,  community  groups,  policy 
organizations,  lenders,  and  public  officials  to  identify  ways  to  prevent  unnecessary 
foreclosures and their negative effects on local economies. 
Our efforts have taken a variety of forms. First, we have employed economic research and 
analysis,  a  particular  strength  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  to  increase  the  sum  of  knowledge 
about mortgage and housing issues. For example, we are providing community leaders with 
detailed  analyses  identifying  neighborhoods  at  high  risk  of  foreclosures,  analogous  to  the 
heat  maps  I  showed  you  this  evening.9  These  analyses  have  helped  community 
organizations  better  focus  their  scarce  resources,  such  as  deciding  where  to  target 
counseling services or other intervention efforts. A Federal Reserve System work group has 
prepared overviews of the current state of knowledge about housing and mortgage markets, 
and further research is currently under way to fill in the most important analytical gaps. 
Second, we are collaborating with interested parties across the country, taking advantage of 
our national presence and our existing relationships with local lenders, community groups, 
government officials, and other stakeholders, to take practical steps to address the causes 
and consequences of foreclosures. For example, I mentioned earlier the destabilizing effects 
foreclosures have on neighborhoods, resulting from factors such as decreased home values 
and  deterioration  of  vacant  properties  from  neglect.  To  help  address  this  problem,  the 
Federal  Reserve  is  joining  in  a  partnership  with  the  nonprofit  NeighborWorks  America  to 
develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and 
manage vacant properties. The goal is to support the provision of affordable rental housing 
and new homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Federal 
Reserve Banks and Branches have also hosted numerous meetings and workshops to bring 
together local officials, lenders, community groups, and others to try to find ways to reduce 
the incidence of foreclosures and mitigate their economic and social effects. 
Third, we are engaged with mortgage servicers to understand impediments they may face 
when  modifying  loans  or  offering  other  alternatives  to  foreclosure.  Servicers  still  report 
difficulty  connecting  with  troubled  borrowers,  and  we  have  supported  efforts  to  encourage 
borrowers  to  contact  their  lenders  or  housing  counselors.  Working  with  the  Hope  Now 
alliance and independently, we have encouraged the industry to increase their efforts to work 
with  troubled  borrowers,  to  develop  guidelines  and  templates  for  reasonable  standardized 
approaches to various loss-mitigation techniques, and to adopt uniform reporting standards, 
such as those sponsored by Hope Now. Clear disclosures of loan modifications will not only 
make  it  easier  for  regulators,  the  mortgage  industry,  and  homeowners  to  assess  the 
                                                 
9   See www.newyorkfed.org/mortgagemaps/ to view more maps related to mortgage lending. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2008
that  supports 
to  promoting  an  environment 
effectiveness of foreclosure-prevention efforts, but they will also foster greater transparency, 
and hence greater confidence, in the securitization market. 
Prospectively,  we  are  committed 
the 
homeownership goals of creditworthy borrowers. To this end, the Federal Reserve Board has 
proposed  new  regulations  to  better  protect  consumers  from  a  range  of  unfair  or deceptive 
mortgage  lending  and  advertising  practices.  To  help  ensure  that  the  rules  are  broadly 
enforced,  we  are  engaging  in  a  program  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies  to  conduct 
consumer  compliance  reviews  of  nondepository  lenders  and  mortgage  brokers.  These 
reviews  are  targeting  underwriting  standards,  risk-management  strategies,  and  compliance 
with consumer protection laws and regulations. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  is  continuing  its  long-standing  practice  of  providing  educational 
and  information  resources  to  help  consumers  make  informed  personal  financial  decisions, 
including  choosing  the  right  mortgage.  Through  their  community  affairs  offices,  Federal 
Reserve  Banks  are  working  to  establish  foreclosure-mitigation  resource  centers  on  their 
websites to be used by small municipalities, housing counselors, and community groups. For 
consumers  who  have  questions  about  banking  procedures  and  rules  or  who  believe  they 
may have been treated unfairly by their lender, the Federal Reserve Consumer Help Center 
directs queries to the various regulatory agencies so that a consumer has only one call to 
make to ask questions or file complaints.10
Additional mortgage initiatives 
Additional  government  policies  can  help  address  problems  in  the  mortgage  markets.  The 
Congress  can  take  an  important  step  by  moving  quickly  to  reconcile  and  enact  legislation 
permitting  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  to  increase  its  scale  and  improve  its 
management of risks. Such legislation could help the FHA reach a wider range of borrowers 
and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies to deal with any increase in 
credit  risk.  Giving  the  FHA  greater  latitude  to  set  underwriting  standards  and  risk-based 
premiums for mortgage refinancing, as well as more flexibility in product development, would 
allow it to help still more troubled borrowers.  
Separately, the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) – Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – 
could do more. Recently, the Congress expanded Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's role in 
the mortgage market by temporarily increasing the limits on the sizes of the mortgages they 
can  accept  for  securitization.  In  addition,  because  the  GSEs  have  resolved  some  of  their 
accounting and operational problems, their federal regulator, the Office of Federal Housing 
Enterprise Oversight, has lifted some of the constraints that it had imposed on them. Thus, 
now is an especially appropriate time for the GSEs to move quickly to raise significant new 
capital, which they will need to take advantage of these new securitization and investment 
opportunities, to provide assistance to the housing markets in times of stress, and to do so in 
a safe and sound manner.  
As the GSEs expand their role in housing markets, the Congress should move forward on 
GSE  reform  legislation,  which  includes  strengthening  the  regulatory  oversight  of  these 
companies. As the Federal Reserve has testified on many occasions, it is very important for 
the  health  and  stability  of  our  housing  finance  system  that  the  Congress  provide  the  GSE 
regulator  with  broad  authority  to  set  capital  standards,  establish  a  clear  and  credible 
receivership  process,  and  define  and  monitor  a  transparent  public  purpose  –  one  that 
transcends just shareholder interests – for the accumulation of assets held in their portfolios. 
                                                 
10   Consumers can call 1-888-851-1920 or visit http://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/. 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 5
Conclusion 
The realtor's mantra is "location, location, location," and, as I have discussed this evening, 
local variation in housing and mortgage markets is considerable. This variation is useful for 
understanding the sources of the increase in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, and 
it  should  be  taken  into  account  as servicers  and  policymakers  consider  how  best  to  avoid 
preventable foreclosures. 
Most Americans are paying their mortgages on time and are not at risk of foreclosure. But 
high  rates  of  delinquency  and  foreclosure  can  have  substantial  spillover  effects  on  the 
housing market, the financial markets, and the broader economy. Therefore, doing what we 
can to avoid preventable foreclosures is not just in the interest of lenders and borrowers. It's 
in everybody's interest.  
References 
Avery,  Robert  B.,  Kenneth  P.  Brevoort,  and  Glenn  B.  Canner  (2007).  "The  2006  HMDA 
Data," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93 (December), pp. A73-A109. 
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen (2007). "Subprime Outcomes, 
Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Working Paper No. 07-
15. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December 3. 
 
 6 
 BIS Review 55/2008
  BIS Review 55/2008 
 7
  8 
 BIS Review 55/2008
  BIS Review 55/2008 
 9
