Lars Nyberg: It costs to pay – do we use too much cash? 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Finansförbund 
congress, Bålsta, 28 May 2008. 
 Who pays the price? 
When we pay for goods we have bought at the supermarket or for the hamburger we eat for 
lunch we rarely wonder what the actual payment costs. This applies both to when we pay by 
card and pay in cash. And why should we care what it costs to pay? This is not a cost we 
ever see. 
But of course it costs to pay. It uses resources in the economy.  
Why are there costs in cash? Well, ATMs cost money to fill. And banknotes and coins are 
transported around the country by cash-in-transit firms which naturally want remuneration for 
this.  Moreover,  the  costs  for  the  safety  of  their  personnel have  increased  rapidly in  recent 
years.  
Card  payments  also  cost  money.  They  require  terminals  in  shops  and  other  places  that 
accept such payments. And card payments require complex computer systems, which must 
be  maintained  and  developed.  Credit  cards  also  involve  credit,  and  credit  is  never  free  of 
charge. If a shopkeeper pays a charge of 3 per cent to the credit card company, which is not 
unusual, this means an effective annual interest rate of 20 per cent in round figures, given a 
credit period of 30 days. 
What a relief, one might think, that we consumers don't have to pay for all this. But who is it 
that has to pay? Because someone ultimately has to bear the costs. 
It is easy to initially assume that it is the retail trade and the banks that benevolently pay for 
payments.  But  it  is  not  that  simple.  The  merchants  need  to  have  their  costs  covered; 
otherwise they will not be able to run their businesses. And the same applies to the banks. 
The  costs  of  all  payments  therefore  gradually  arise  as  the  markups  on  the  prices  of  the 
goods and services we buy. Milk and vegetables may become a little more expensive in the 
shop and the interest on our deposits at the bank may be a little lower than would otherwise 
have been the case.  
It is thus we consumers and bank customers who ultimately pay the costs of all payments. 
But  we  do  not  see  them.  We  are  therefore  led  to  believe  that  they  do  not  exist  –  or  that 
someone is paying them. 
Shouldn’t the actual costs be visible? 
Is this a good system? Normally, we want to be able to see what various goods and services 
cost.  The  price  helps  us  decide  how  much  we  will  buy.  We  do  not  have  any  such  price 
signals regarding the different methods of payment. The real prices are hidden.  
And this raises the question: If we knew what it actually costs, would we change our method 
of payment? For instance, would we use cash less and cards more, or vice versa? Perhaps 
we are using methods of payment that require an unnecessarily large use of resources? This 
could  mean  higher  costs  than  necessary  and  thereby  higher  price  increases  in  the  retail 
trade or less favourable interest from the bank. 
We  at  the Riksbank  have  devoted  considerable  time  and  effort  to  analysing  what  different 
forms  of  payment  cost  and  how  we  as  consumers  affect  the  efficiency  of  the  Swedish 
payment system when we choose our method of payment.  
BIS Review 68/2008 
 1
Today I intend to describe some interesting results from this research. Firstly, what are the 
social costs of using cash and cards respectively? Secondly, what is in our estimation the 
better  choice  between  card  and  cash  payments,  from  a  welfare  perspective?  Thirdly,  how 
does the general public choose between cash and cards in practice? 
One result of our analysis is that we as consumers probably use more cash and fewer card 
payments than we would do if we realised what cash management costs – and if we had to 
pay for it. 
Why is cash used more in Sweden than in other Nordic countries? 
In  Sweden,  card  payments  have  increased  substantially  since  the  mid-1990s.  But  seven 
years ago Swedes still appeared to be using card payments less than other Nordic residents. 
At the beginning of the 2000s the number of card payments per capita in Sweden was only 
half as high as in the other Nordic countries. This implied that Swedes used more cash.  
In recent years the use of cards has accelerated. With regard to both the number of terminals 
and use of cards per capita, the Nordic countries are now very close to one another. The 
differences in card use between Sweden and the other Nordic countries – particularly with 
regard to Denmark and Finland – declined rapidly after 2001. Nevertheless, cash is still used 
to a greater extent in Sweden than in other Nordic countries. If one suspects that cash may 
be a relatively expensive payment service, the more widespread use of cash in Sweden in 
relation to the rest of the Nordic countries could mean that the Swedish payment system is 
less efficient in this aspect.  
But why do we use more cash in Sweden? We do not have a good answer to this. However, 
experiences from both Sweden and Norway show that demand for payment services is price-
sensitive.1 In Norway, electronic payments, including card payments, increased very rapidly 
after the banks changed their pricing towards charges based to a greater extent on actual 
costs.  For  instance,  they  began  by  making  a  small  charge  for  ATM  withdrawals.2  It  is 
possible that our pricing of card and cash payments respectively – the price the consumers 
see – lies behind the fact that we use more cash?  
When it comes to card and cash payments, it turns out that it is only the retail trade which the 
banks subject to charges.3 Swedish consumers do not usually pay any charges to the banks 
for cash withdrawals and pay only an annual charge for holding a card. The retail trade pays 
charges to the banks for cash and for card payment services, but does not explicitly price 
these services to its own customers. The costs the retail trade has to bear in connection with 
payments are instead transferred to the consumers by means of general markups on goods 
prices. This means that nor does the retail trade give any signals to consumers regarding the 
costs of one form of payment or another.  
                                                 
1   See Humphrey, D., Kim, M., Vale, B., (2001) “Realizing the gains from electronic payments: Costs, pricing and 
payment  choice”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  &  Banking  33,  216  -234  and  Nyberg,  L.,  Guibourg.  G.,  (2003) 
“Card payments in Sweden”, Economic Review 2003, vol.2, Sveriges Riksbank, 29-39. 
2   According  to  information  from  Norges  Bank  this  was  partly  due  to  a  combination  of  changed  pricing  and 
mergers of different card systems. 
3   Guibourg, G. and Segendorf, B., (2007), “A note on the price and cost structure of retail payment services in 
the Swedish banking sector 2002”. Journal of Banking & Finance 31, 2817-2827. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2008
When are cash payments cost effective? 
But are cash payments more expensive to produce than card payments? Our study shows 
that this is often the case.4 In the year 2002 the costs to society for managing cash were 
SEK 6.6 billion or 0.3 per cent of Sweden’s GDP.5 This includes an estimated cost for the 
time the general public spends on fetching cash and managing it. Almost half of the costs to 
society  arose  within  the  banks  and  Svensk  Kassaservice.  Almost  an  equally  great 
percentage  arose  in  the  retail  trade,  among  transport  companies  and  among  the  general 
public together, with costs distributed fairly evenly between the three groups. The Riksbank’s 
and  the  cash  depots’  shares  of  the  total  costs  to  society  were  modest.  The  same  study 
estimated  the  number  of  payments  with  cash  made  in  one  year  at  SEK  1.4  billion.  This 
means that each cash payment made in 2002 led to a cost to society of on average SEK 4.6. 
The  costs  to  society  for  cash  payments  in  2002  were  estimated  at  SEK  1.9  billion,  which 
corresponded to almost 0.1 percentage of GDP. That year, 589 million card payments were 
made.6 This means that each card payment cost society an average of SEK 3.0. An average 
card payment is thus around 35 per cent cheaper than a cash payment. Around 2.3 billion 
transactions were made by card or cash 2002. We estimated that more than 70 per cent of 
these were paid in cash. There thus appear to be evident cost savings to be made through a 
reduction in the use of cash.  
At  first  glance  it  would  appear  that  card  payments  –  which  are  35  per  cent  cheaper  for 
society to produce – should replace cash completely. But it is not quite so simple.  
There are major differences in how cards and cash are produced. Card payments require an 
extensive  infrastructure  of  terminals,  computers  and  lines  of  communication  and  have 
substantial  fixed  costs.  But  the  cost  of  a  card  payment  is  always  the  same,  regardless  of 
whether one uses the card to pay for a purchase amounting to SEK 50 or SEK 50,000.  
For  payments  made  in  cash  the  variable  costs  are  substantial.  Cash  payments  require 
considerable physical management such as transport, counting, storage of banknotes, etc. 
The larger the transaction amount, the more expensive the actual cash payment will be, as it 
involves a larger share of this management. For payments of small amounts the cost of cash 
is therefore lower than the cost of a card payment. This means that from society’s point of 
view, cash may be preferable for making small payments.  
To  obtain  an  idea  of  what  the  size  of  a  transaction  may  mean,  we  estimated  the  costs  to 
society of a cash payment and a card payment respectively as functions of the transaction 
amount. In this way we could also calculate when it was profitable to pay in cash. The results 
show  that  –  at  lease  in  2002  –  it  was  most  cost-efficient  to  pay  in  cash  for  purchases 
amounting up to almost SEK 70.7 Above this, card payments were always preferable.  
And how do consumers make their choice? 
The  next  question  is  how  cards  and  cash  are  actually  used.  How  does  the  Swedish 
consumer make this choice? To find out, the Riksbank ordered a survey of the consumer’s 
                                                 
4   Bergman, M., Guibourg, G., Segendorf, B., (2007), “The Costs of Paying – Private and Social Costs of Cash 
and Card Payments”. Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 212. 
5   The study uses Swedish cost data from 2002. 
6   The Swedish Financial Market 2007, Sveriges Riksbank.  
7   Bergman, M., Guibourg, G., Segendorf, B., (2007), “The Costs of Paying – Private and Social Costs of Cash 
and Card Payments”. Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 212. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 3
choice between cards and cash.8 In addition to the actual choice of means of payment, the 
individuals were asked about the size of their most recent purchase.  
We were able to use data from this survey to estimate the actual cut-off point in the choice 
between  cards  and  cash.  This  was  defined  as  the  amount  at  which  the  probability  that  a 
consumer would choose to pay by card was as great as the probability that the consumer 
would choose to pay by cash. The survey showed that an average consumer chooses to pay 
by card when the amount exceeds SEK 123.9 Neither gender nor region appears to play any 
major role in the choice. But the educational level of the consumer and above all his or her 
age, does have a substantial effect on the result. A 60-year old consumer will only choose a 
card  over  cash  when  making  a  purchase  of,  on  average,  SEK  179,  while  a  20-year  old 
consumer would choose to pay by card for a transaction as low as SEK 60. It would appear 
that  young  people’s  choice  is  fairly  close  to  a  cost-efficient  choice  from  society’s  point  of 
view.  
The  study  is  based  on  data  from  2002,  but  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  consumers’ 
methods of payment have changed radically since then, although cards have continued to 
grow  in  importance.  Use  of  cash  is  still  at  a  high  level  in  Sweden.  The  cost  of  cash 
management  has  probably  risen  more  than  the  cost  of  card  management,  calculated  per 
transaction.  The  costs  for  increasing  security  for  cash-in-transit  and  ATMs  have  been 
substantial. There are many indications that the gap in socioeconomic costs between cards 
and  cash  has  widened  further  and  that  the  cut-off  point  will  therefore  occur  at  an  amount 
lower than SEK 70. In this case, society would benefit even more from a reduction in the use 
of cash.  
Make the costs visible 
An important basic insight is that the costs of different types of payment exist, even if they 
are  not  visible.  They  affect  the  consumers  in  that  goods  and  services  become  more 
expensive. If these choose less efficient instruments of payment to a greater extent, then the 
price  increases  will  be  greater.  There  is  thus  reason  to  choose  a  method  of  payment  that 
saves resources in society. As in other contexts, the consumers benefit most if we receive 
correct information about the price of the services we buy.  
The Riksbank’s studies of the Swedish card and cash market indicate that we use cash too 
much and cards too little from a socioeconomic point of view. On the other hand, the results 
also depend on age, in that the young people’s choice is fairly close to the choice they would 
make if the costs were visible and not hidden. Perhaps payment behaviour will become more 
socioeconomically efficient in future generations? 
I believe that we have all gained a greater insight into the fact that payments cost money. 
The  discussion  of  cash-in-transit  robberies  has  drawn  attention  to  both  the  costs  of  cash 
management  and  the  rising  risks  of  human  tragedy.  The  best  means  of  reducing  cash 
management – and the means that appears most reasonable given the Riksbank’s study – is 
to openly price payments. 
How  should  this  be  done?  To  begin  with,  the  banks  could  make  a  charge  for  withdrawals 
from  ATMs.  Experiences  from  other  countries  show  that  even  a  small  charge  can  have 
significant  effects  on  the  consumers’  choice  between  card  payments  and  cash.  Then  the 
banks could use the income from the ATMs to reduce the fees for card administration that 
                                                 
8   Synovate Temo, 2006. “Survey of banknotes, coins and use of cash and cards”, December 2006. 
9   The average consumer was defined was a 41-year old man with upper secondary school education and an 
annual income of SEK 350,000-400,000 and who lives in a two-person household. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2008
they charge the retail trade.10 In the long term this would benefit us consumers in the form of 
lower goods and services prices. Perhaps the retail trade could also discuss charging a fee 
of those of us who insist on using the most expensive credit cards – that is where the hidden 
cost of the payment is highest.  
Charges on ATM withdrawals have been a hot political topic in Sweden. Should we have to 
pay  to  take  out  our  own  money  from  our  own  accounts?  But  isn't  it  time  to  defuse  the 
question of ATM charges? It costs money to manage cash. And isn’t it better that we can see 
the costs than that we pay a hidden price in some other way at the bank or the supermarket? 
                                                 
10   According  to  an  earlier  study  made  by  the  Riksbank,  the  loss  made  by  an  average  major  bank  in  2002  in 
connection with cash management was approximately equal to the profit it made on the card market. There is 
evidently some subsidising between the card and cash markets. See Guibourg and Segendorf (2007). 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 5
