Ardian Fullani: Electronic data transmission enhancements in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the launch of the electronic 
data  transmission  project  which  relates  to  the  execution  of  primary  market  auctions  of  the 
Government securities, Tirana, 13 March 2008. 
 Dear participants, 
The Bank of Albania, the Ministry of Finance and the REUTERS have successfully finalized 
today after a year of close cooperation the electronic data transmission project, which relates 
to  the  execution  of  primary  market  auctions  for  the  sale  of  the  Albanian  Government 
securities. 
This  project  minimizes  the  time  from  the  submission  of  commercial  banks’  requests  to 
participate  in  the  auction  until  the  announcement  of  the  results  to  the  market  players. 
Otherwise said, the physical delivery of documentation is coming to an end. 
The Bank of Albania as the auction agent and the Ministry of Finance as the securities issuer 
have considered the more developed countries’ standards. These two institutions have had a 
collaborative  endeavour  to  be  close  to  the  market  by  establishing  a  partner  relationship  in 
order to meet the mutual demands.  
However  the  achievement  of  success  cannot  be  understood  without  the  information 
technology support. In this respect the REUTERS has played a key role. 
The auction process goes through the following phases.  
First  phase:  Commercial  banks’  bids  are  made  electronically,  not  physically.  This  way  of 
data transmission avoids the manual entry of bids, reduces the time for their entry, increases 
the  safety  and  accuracy  of  entries  by  providing  at  end-process  the  minimization  of 
operational risk and the required time to process the information.  
Second phase: Following the preliminary processing of data sent by the participants in the 
primary market the Ministry of Finance may be provided with the data electronically as well. 
The provision of electronic data reduces the time required for the Ministry of Finance to be 
informed of through the physically sent documents.  
Third phase: After the decision is taken the Ministry of Finance may transmit this decision 
electronically, contributing further to the reduction of time in informing the market related with 
the auction result. 
The entire process described in these three phases required about 5 to 6 hours but upon the 
implementation of this project it will be reduced to 1 hour.  
Fourth phase: The Bank of Albania transmits this result to commercial banks through the 
REUTERS. At the moment the commercial banks are the main market participants. 
The transmission of this information in a shorter time allows commercial banks to administer 
their free funds more efficiently.  
The  enhancement  of  this  efficiency  is  a  step  further  in  establishing  the  preconditions  for 
developing the money market and the securities market. 
Dear participants, 
In conclusion I would like to underline that this project provides to the market an important 
infrastructural element. Starting from today, the securities market will speak in the language 
of electronics. 
However, the Bank of Albania will introduce in April a full package of improvements which will 
focus on the development of the financial market and stability. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
Hoping that you will be using the new system efficiently, 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
