Usha Thorat: Inclusive financial system for the aged 
Speech  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  8th 
Annual  IEEF  Retirement  Policy  Conclave,  jointly  hosted  by  Invest  India  Economic 
Foundation (IEEF) and the PFRDA, New Delhi, 30 April 2008. 
 Changing contours of Indian population 
India, the seventh largest country in size, continues to occupy the second largest populated 
country  after  China.  The  aged  population  in  India  (i.e.  over  60  years)  that  stood  at  84.7 
million (7.5 per cent) in 2005 is expected to rise to 141 million (10.2 per cent) by 2020 and 
thereafter reach 194 million (13 per cent) in 2030. Even though income levels are going up 
and  poverty  declining,  it  can  be  reasonably  expected  that  a  significant number  among  the 
aged  population  would  be  in  the  low  income  category.  The  aged  population  requires 
additional attention both from the society and from the Government. More funds need to be 
allocated  for  pension,  health  and  other  social  benefits  of  the  aged  people,  while  declining 
savings of the aged population could pose a threat in meeting such additional expenditure.  
India is one of the highest savers among the emerging market economies. Gross Domestic 
Saving,  as  percentage  of  GDP  at  current  market  prices,  increased  from  23.5  per  cent  in 
2001-02 to 34.8 per cent in 2006-07. Household savings rose from 22.1 per cent in 2001-02 
to 23.8 per cent in 2006-07. Financial savings however constituted only 47.5 per cent of total 
household savings in 2006-07. 
Preserving the value of savings 
Till as late as 10 years ago, we had a fairly long period high inflation and interest rates; many 
persons planned their savings for old age, assuming that these rates would continue for long. 
The drop in rates after 1998 led to decline in returns for the retired who were dependent on 
interest  income.  Employers  providing  defined  benefit  schemes  found  that  the  extent  of 
unfunded portion of the liability was increasing. Not all persons realised that they needed to 
save at rates higher than the inflation rate; inflation could erode the value of their savings and 
that  health  care  and  typical  old  age  expenses  could  eat  into  their  capital.  The  Reserve 
Bank’s  goal  of  inflation  of  around  3  per  cent  in  the  medium  term,  as  articulated  in  its 
monetary policy statements, is thus critical not only for maintaining self accelerating growth 
and greater integration with global economy, but also to ensure that the value of savings for 
the  old  age  is  preserved.  The  best  that  Reserve  Bank  can  do  for  ensuring  a  sustainable 
pension system is to accord high priority to price stability, which is precisely what it is doing. 
Financial protection awareness and financial literacy 
Recent surveys such as those conduced by NCAER1 in conjunction with Max Life show that 
higher  rate  of  household  savings  at  macro  level  can  be  explained  in  terms  of  increasing 
concerns  for  social  security,  high  cost  of  education,  health  and  meeting  other  social 
commitments. Saving for old age is not found to be a dominant factor. At the same time an 
overwhelming 96 per cent of households feel that they cannot survive for more than one year 
on their current savings in case they lose their major source of household income; yet 54 per 
cent households feel that they are financially secure. Financially-at-risk urban Indians appear 
to be even more optimistic than their rural counterparts. This clearly indicates that Indians do 
                                                 
1   How India Earns, Spends and Saves’ Results from the Max New York Life-NCAER India Financial Protection 
Survey, Rajesh Shukla. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 1
not take a long-term view of their financial security. There is therefore, a pressing need for 
financial  literacy  for  better  understanding  of  financial  risks.  At  the  global  level,  Olivia 
Mitchell2,  Wharton  professor  of  insurance  and  risk  management,  and  chaired  professor  at 
Singapore  Management  University  is  also  of  the  same  view:  “Global  ageing  makes  for  a 
much riskier world, inasmuch as people tend to retire too young, save and diversify too little, 
and  outlive  their  assets.”  Her  research  shows  that  many  workers  are  underestimating 
retirement challenges, including the risk of outliving their assets, the future cost of healthcare 
and  the  erosive  power  of  inflation  in  retirement  and  she  too,  therefore,  stresses  the 
importance of financial literacy.  
Another compelling reason for financial literacy is the fact that most employers have moved 
or are  moving away from defined benefit schemes to defined contribution schemes, which 
require employees to be able to better estimate their old age needs and plan accordingly, 
starting sufficiently early. Such schemes also allow workers to take their savings with them 
when  they  change  jobs.  In  this  new  environment,  where  individuals  have  greater 
responsibility for determining their own retirement income, factors such as general financial 
knowledge, an understanding of the retirement saving process become critical to achieving 
one’s retirement objectives. A survey showed that only 18 per cent of the people surveyed 
answered  correctly  the  question  as  to  how  much  $200  would  grow  to,  at  the  end  of  two 
years, at 10 per cent per annum interest! The importance of starting early is illustrated in a 
case  where  two  persons  of  same  age  save  Rs  5000  per  month  at  9  per  cent  per  annum 
interest. One starts early at the age of 25 and the other at 35. At 60, the former has Rs 1.23 
crore while the latter ends up with only Rs 53 lakh! 
Greater efforts by employers can assist workers in their retirement planning and enable them 
to achieve their retirement objectives. We, in the RBI, offer an excellent retirement planning 
program  for  employees;  only,  it  is  offered  towards  the  end  of  one‘s  career  rather  than  an 
earlier period when time value of money makes all the difference. 
Financial literacy alone is not enough 
While focus on financial literacy could lead to informed and responsible consumers, it cannot 
by  itself  ensure  consumer  protection.  There  has  to  be  “responsible”  selling  of  products; 
especially to vulnerable sections of society including, among others, senior citizens and low 
income groups. In particular, banks selling insurance, capital market and pension products 
have to be sensitive to the fact that the essence of financial services is trust. A bank accepts 
deposits  on  trust  and  assures  a  return.  A  bank  customer  relationship  is  fiduciary  and  not 
based on transaction –it is a long standing relationship and there is every need for banks to 
act  with  responsibility.  As  a  recent  Penn  study3  on  financial  literacy  put  it,  “Nothing  is 
inherently  wrong  with  consumers  or  the  modern,  complex,  and  ever-changing  financial 
services  marketplace,  but  the  interaction  between  the  two  creates  welfare-impairing 
outcomes.  Potential  general  approaches  to  improve  that  interaction  include  enhancing  the 
resources  with  which  consumers  approach  the  market,  changing  the  financial  decision 
environment,  or  bringing  seller  incentives  in  line  with  consumer  incentives.”  Various 
approaches  suggested  include  providing  affordable  expert  advice,  akin  to  pro  bono  legal 
services, having true transparency requiring simplified products where benefits and costs are 
clearly understood and rules of thumb can be applied, having retirement savings rules with 
default rules that place consumers into higher welfare enhancing rates of retirement savings; 
aligning  incentives  of  sellers  of  consumer  financial  products  to  bring  them  into  closer 
alignment  with  consumers’  best  interests.  According  to  the  study,  regulatory  interventions 
                                                 
2   “Managing  Retirement  Risk  in  an  Ageing  World:  The  Global  Picture”  –  an  article  from  the  Singapore 
Management University’s website http://knowledge.smu.edu.sg/index.cfm?fa=viewfeature&id=1074. 
3   Against Financial Literacy Education, Lauren E. Willis (2008), University of Pennsylvania Law School. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2008
must navigate the heterogeneity of consumer knowledge, skills, and behavioral traits, taking 
care not hinder marketplace changes that would enhance consumer welfare. 
Financial inclusion and financial protection 
As you are aware RBI and the GOI have been pushing for greater financial inclusion. This 
implies, first of all, providing an accessible and safe place to the people at large for putting 
their savings which can be withdrawn in case of emergency. What RBI is trying, is to see that 
the un-banked population gets access to bank accounts. Such bank accounts are also critical 
to ensure a safe and reliable payments system for old age pensions. Pension payment for 
BPL  families  and  unorganised  sector  targeted  at  nearly  300  million  workers,  can  be  paid 
through bank accounts thereby not only saving the cost of making the payments, but also 
minimising leakages and pre-empting payments in the names of persons who do not actually 
exist.  Bio  metric  smart  cards  /mobile  technology  and  use  of  business  correspondents  as 
agents by banks have made “no frills” banking accounts accessible to low income families. A 
very successful example of using such accounts for old age pension payments can be seen 
in the State of Andhra Pradesh, where a pilot carried out in the Warangal district is being up-
scaled  to  cover  all  districts.  Building  up  savings  in  such  accounts  and  provision  of  small 
overdrafts  facilitates  creation  of  track  record  and  gives  confidence  to  the  saver  that 
emergency  needs  will  be  met.  RB  now  treats  such  overdrafts  upto  Rs.25,000/-  against  no 
frills accounts and credit provided under GCC at rural and semi urban branches as priority 
sector  under  indirect  credit  to  agriculture.  Further,  RBI  has  allowed  banks  to  use  ex-
servicemen,  retired  bank  and  government  employees  to  be  business  correspondents  to 
provide doorstep banking to the customers in remote areas that are far from a bank branch. 
These  measures  viz.  use  of  intermediaries  and  IT  solutions  have  now  made  it  possible  to 
provide  accessible  banking  facilities  to  the  large  parts  of  the  population  that  were  hitherto 
outside  the  access  of  formal  banking.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  critical  this  payments 
infrastructure will be for providing old age pensions, besides life, health, weather, asset and 
livestock insurance especially in rural areas – Insurance is very important as it reduces credit 
risk and allows greater flow of credit at lower cost. Thus there is a huge synergy between 
financial inclusion and financial protection for achieving a more inclusive financial system.  
Housing, health and life style 
As is found in surveys, savings in India is mainly for owning a house, meeting emergency 
needs, education of children and social events such as marriages. Compared to the earlier 
period of high interest rates, owning a house in India has became quite affordable with lower 
interest rates and tax breaks. There has been a steady increase in housing loans from 3.4 
per cent of GDP in 2001 to 8.5 per cent of GDP in 2006. As share of credit, it moved up to 12 
per cent of NBC in March 2007. The average interest rate on housing loans has consistently 
declined  from  around  16  per  cent  in  1995-96  to  around  8  per  cent  in  2004-05,  though  it 
hardened moderately thereafter (NHB, 2006). Reflecting these developments, housing stock 
in the country had also increased from 148 million units in 1991 to 187 million units in 2001 
and is expected to further gone up to 218 million units in 2007 (NHB, 2006).  
While on the one hand, there is an improvement in longevity, on the other hand, cost of good 
health care facilities is spiralling and there is little social security. The availability of affordable 
health  insurance  services  to  senior  citizens  is  limited.  The  Government,  on  December  6, 
2006,  launched  an  exclusive  health  insurance  scheme,  Varistha  Mediclaim  for  Senior 
Citizens,  offered  by  National  Insurance  Company.  The  Union  Budget  2007-08  announced 
that the other three public sector insurance companies would also offer a similar product to 
senior citizens. There is, however, still a large gap between the supply of health insurance 
facilities available to older people and demand/requirement for the same. 
The IRDA constituted a committee in April 2007 to look into, among others, issues relating to 
health insurance schemes for senior citizens, streamlining procedures and suggest possible 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 3
incentives  to  the  senior  citizens  for  adopting  healthier  lifestyles.  The  Committee  made 
various recommendations including on proper product designing according to the needs of 
senior citizens and their capacity to pay, drafting of insurance policies in simple language, 
uniform  definition  of  terminology  and  standard  terms  and  conditions  for  the  Industry, 
portability  of  covers,  sharing  of  information  etc.  It  also  recommended  that  insurers  should 
offer  Personal  Accident  coverage  as  an  optional  rider  along  with  the  senior  citizen  health 
insurance products. This would help offer both forms of protection simultaneously.  
Banking/financial products and services for senior citizens 
I  turn  next  to  some  of  the  specific  measures  relating  to  financial  products  and  banking 
services for senior citizens taken by GOI, RBI and the banking system in the recent period. 
Senior Citizens Savings Scheme 
(i)  
Government of India had launched the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme, 2004 (SCSS) with 
attractive interest rate exclusively for the benefit of senior citizens, with effect from August 2, 
2004.  SCSS  accounts  can  be  opened  with  Post  Offices  and  Agency  banks.  The  salient 
features  of  the  scheme  are  available  in  the  RBI’s  website.  An  important  advice  to  senior 
citizens is to fill in Form 15 G and 15H, if they do not attract TDS provisions. 
Senior citizen friendly measures – investment in Government Securities 
(ii)  
Several  friendly  measures  for  senior  citizens  have  been  incorporated  in  the  Government 
Securities Act, 2006 (Act) and the Government Securities Regulations, 2007 (Regulations), 
which have come into force with effect from December 1, 2007. These include  
• 
Automatic  redemption  facility  for  Government  securities,  including  Relief/Savings 
Bond.  
Simplified procedure in the event of death of holder.  
Ability to pledge or borrow against such securities.  
Nomination is permitted.  
 Facilities for pensioners 
(iii)  
Almost all the pensioners, by virtue of the retirement age fixed by the Government, are senior 
citizens. The following facilities, among other, are available to pensioners: 
• 
Credit  of  pension  to  pensioners’  accounts  on  last  4  days  of  month  so  that  the 
pensioner can draw pension on the 1st day of the next month itself.  
Joint account with spouse allowed.  
Pension slips to be issued at first time and thereafter whenever there is a change.  
For incapacitated pensioners – branch to depute an officer to the residence of the 
pensioner for getting/certifying the life certificate.  
Banks to access the Government website and effect payment of revised Dearness 
Relief without waiting for RBI instructions.  
Banks to accept nominations furnished by pensioners in Form “A” or “B” in respect 
of payment of arrears of pension of the deceased pensioner.  
   RBI has issued necessary instructions to all the banks disbursing pension to ensure that the 
pensioners get the best possible customer service. Most of the agency banks have since set 
up Centralised Pension Processing Centres (CPPCs) which will be responsible for receipt of 
the  Pension  Payment  Orders  (PPOs),  calculation  of  pension/Dearness  Relief  etc.  and 
crediting the amount directly to the pensioners’ accounts through this system.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2008
Deposit Scheme for senior citizens 
(iv) 
Banks  have  been  permitted  to  formulate,  with  the  approval  of  their  Boards,  fixed  deposit 
schemes  specifically  for  resident  Indian  senior  citizens  offering  higher  and  fixed  rates  of 
interest as compared to normal deposits of any size. These schemes should also incorporate 
simplified procedures for automatic transfer of deposits to nominee of such depositors in the 
event  of  death.  Deposits  over  five  year  have  enjoy  tax  exemption  under  80C.  TDS  is 
applicable unless Form 15 H is submitted to the bank. Since RBI receives many complaints 
that tax is deducted, senior citizens would do well to file Form 15 H in time. 
Reverse Mortgage Loans 
(v)  
Reverse mortgage provides an opportunity to house owners to avail of a monthly stream of 
income against the mortgage of his/her house, while remaining the owner and occupying the 
house throughout his/her lifetime, without repayment or servicing of the loan. Realising the 
potential  benefits,  the  Union  Budget  2007-08  announced  the  introduction  of  “reverse 
mortgage” by NHB. NHB issued the final operational guidelines for reverse mortgage loans 
(RMLs) on May 31, 2007. Many banks have already introduced RMLs. For tax purposes it 
have  been  clarified  that  reverse  mortgage  would  not  amount  to  “transfer”,  and  stream  of 
revenue received by the senior citizen would not be “income”. 
Simplification of procedure – deceased account holders 
(vi)  
Another area, where Reserve Bank has accorded a lot importance relates the simplification 
of the procedure for handling the accounts of deceased account holders so as to ensure that 
settlement of a deceased account holders account proceedings is smooth and without any 
impediment.  For  those  with  non  resident  legatees,  inheritance  can  be  remitted  within  the 
liberalised remittance scheme of $200,000 per annum available to every resident.  
(vii)  
• 
  Specific instructions issued by RBI to banks in dealing with senior citizens 
Banks have been issued with special instructions aimed at facilitating opening and 
operations of accounts by old and incapacitated people.  
The  banks  have  been  advised  to  invariably  provide  passbooks  to  all  account 
holders. Such an advice to banks was issued only in keeping in mind the interests of 
the senior citizens.  
Changes  in  any  instructions  on  the  operation  of  Senior  Citizens  deposit  accounts 
should be confirmed within one month to the depositor in writing.  
Facilities for remittances and operations on NRE /NRO accounts jointly with NRI 
(viii)  
Some of the facilities that may be of interest to senior citizens are  
• 
Under the Liberalized Remittance Scheme, Residents are permitted to remit up to 
USD  200,000  per  financial  year  (April-March)  for  any  permitted  current  or  capital 
account transactions or a combination of both. This would also include remittances 
towards gift and donation, acquisition of houses, shares, MFs, etc.  
Residents are eligible to obtain USD 100,000 or its equivalent for medical treatment 
abroad. A person visiting abroad for medical treatment can obtain foreign exchange 
exceeding the above limit, provided the request is supported by an estimate from a 
hospital/doctor in India/abroad.  
In  connection  with  private  visits  abroad,  viz.,  for  tourism  purposes,  etc.,  foreign 
exchange up to USD10,000, in any one financial year may be obtained by residents 
from an authorised dealer on a self-declaration basis.  
  BIS Review 69/2008 
 5
   A resident can transfer property to his NRI heirs by a deed of settlement i.e. facility 
whereby  the  property  is  passed  on  to  the  legatees,  during  the  lifetime  of  the 
owner/parent who normally retains a life interest in the property.  
Housing loans taken by NRIs can be repaid by his close relatives in India.  
Resident  power  of  attorney  holder  can  remit  funds  out  of  the  balances  in  NRE 
account to the non-resident account holder provided specific powers for the purpose 
has been given.  
Banks can also allow operations on an NRO account in terms of such a Power of 
Attorney, provided such operations are restricted to (i) all local payments in rupees 
including  payments  for  eligible  investments  and  (ii)  remittance  outside  India  of 
current  income  in  India  of  the  non-resident  individual  account  holder,  net  of 
applicable taxes.  
Monitoring of customer service 
Reserve Bank is continuously taking steps to ensure that customers get treated fairly. The 
quality of service rendered by banks is monitored by Reserve Bank with special emphasis on 
service rendered by banks to pensioners. Banks have been advised to include senior citizens 
in  their  Branch  level  Customer  service  committees.  Any  non  observance  of  the  RBI 
guidelines or bank’s code of commitment to the individual customer can be taken up first with 
the bank’s own consumer redressal machinery and if no satisfactory response is obtained by 
the customer he can complain to the Reserve Bank’s Banking Ombudsmen who have offices 
at 15 centres, details of which are available on the Bank’s website. 
Some tips to the Senior Citizen  
Some tips to the senior citizen 
• 
• 
Obtain from bank and read the BCSBI's Code of Banks' Commitment to Customers.  
Clearly  understand  the  concept  “Average  Quarterly  Balance”  before  opening 
accounts.  
Do not keep the card and its PIN together and never disclose the card number or 
CVV number to others. Beware of “phishing attacks” in the online transactions and 
ensure  that  no  information  about  the  bank  accounts  and  passwords  is  revealed 
except in making a transaction in a secured site.  
Note  that  there  is  no  interest  payable  on  the  post  maturity  in  the  various  senior 
citizen Government deposit schemes.  
Finally, if you have a complaint, first approach his bank for resolution and then take 
up with the Banking Ombudsman if the bank does not resolve your complaint.  
   Banks’ sensitivity to senior citizens 
Senior citizens can be forgetful, they pay attention to detail, they need to be patiently handled 
and finally we all must realize that one day we too will be a senior citizen expect to be treated 
with respect and sensitivity.  
6 
 BIS Review 69/2008
