Nicholas C Garganas: The Greek experience 
Speech  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Economist 
Conference on "Social security reform in Greece", Athens, 14 February 2008. 
 I would like to thank the organisers of the Economist Conference on "Social security reform 
in  Greece"  for  their  invitation  and  for  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  subject  of  the 
implications  of  ageing  populations  –  a  subject  of  great  importance  for  many  countries, 
especially for Greece. 
A main accomplishment of social policies in the second half of the last century – at least in 
the case of advanced countries – is that being old is no longer considered synonymous with 
a low quality of life. That accomplishment has been made possible through the provision of 
public pensions. In Greece, of course, a significant proportion of pensions are still very low, 
but  this  can  be  considered  a  consequence  of  inefficiencies  and  weaknesses  in  the  social 
security system as it stands at present.  
Yet, as Europe’s population ages, a demographic shift will take place in the next forty to fifty 
years  that  will  pose  significant  challenges  to  the  pension  systems  of  our  countries.  The 
ageing  of  society  will  make  it  increasingly  difficult  to  maintain  an  adequate  level  of  public 
pensions  for  our  older  citizens.  To  provide  an  idea  of  the  demographic  changes  that  are 
expected to take place in the next forty to fifty years, consider the following projections with 
respect  to  Greece,  issued  by  the  European  Union’s  Economic  Policy  Committee.  These 
projections cover the period from 2005 to 2050. 
• 
Projection number 1: here is some good news – people will live longer, so that the 
population comprised of ages 65 or above will increase by some 60 per cent. 
Projection  number  2:  low  fertility  rates  will  contribute  to  a  decline  of  some  20  per 
cent in the working-age population, defined as ages 15 to 64. 
Putting these two projections together means that the ratio of the elderly population 
to the working age population – what is known as the old-age dependency ratio – is 
expected to more than double between 2005 and 2050, reaching more than 60 per 
cent.  This  would  mean  that  while  there  are  currently  more  than  three  workers  for 
each pensioner, in 2050 there would be only 1.6 workers per pensioner. 
  Thus, Greece, like many other European countries, will be confronted with a sharp rise in the 
old age dependency ratio. This situation, in and of itself, however, need not put pressure on 
the financing of the country’s pension system. In particular, if the proportion of the population 
of working age that is employed were to rise, this rise could help offset some of the fall in the 
working-age  population.  Unfortunately,  even  here  the  news  is  not  favourable.  The 
employment  rate  is  projected  to  rise  modestly,  but  not  enough  to  raise  the  level  of 
employment.  In  fact,  the  level  of  employment  is  projected  to  decline  by  some  13  per  cent 
between 2005 and 2050. 
To sum up what I have said so far, thanks to advances in health care, people will be living 
longer, so that there will be a large increase in the proportion of the population aged 65 or 
more in the years ahead. At the same time, there will be fewer people of working age and 
fewer people actually working. 
What, then, are the implications of these demographic projections? For one thing, they imply 
a sharp fall in Greece’s potential GDP growth, perhaps more than halving potential growth 
between now and the 2030s and 2040s. With more people, and fewer producing goods and 
services, there will be less output for each of our citizens.  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
For  another  thing,  the  projections,  if  realised,  would  put  enormous  strains  on  our  public 
finances.  To  give  you  an  indication  of  the  magnitude  of  these  strains,  according  to 
projections prepared in 2002, pension expenditures in Greece will rise from 12.4% of GDP in 
2005 to 22.6% of GDP in 2050, i.e. by 10.2 percentage points of GDP. The net increase in 
total old age-related expenditure (excluding spending on long-term care, for which no official 
figures are available) is projected to be 11.5 percentage points of GDP, reaching 32.7% of 
GDP  in  2050.  This  situation  compares  with  rises  in  pension  expenditures  of  slightly  more 
than two percentage points of GDP in both the EU25 and the EU15 over the same period, 
reflecting the implementation of important pension reforms in many of these countries since 
the 1990s. 
Consideration  of  this  set  of  facts  yields  the  conclusion  that  pension  reforms,  public 
expenditure, employment, and growth are interdependent. Pensions constitute a major share 
of  public  expenditure  and  that  share  is  projected  to  rise  sharply  in  the  years  ahead. 
Moreover, pension systems and labour-market performance have close ties, and these ties 
have  important  implications  for  economic  growth.  Pension  systems  embed  incentives  that 
affect  the  labour  supply  of,  and  demand  for,  mature  workers,  while  a  high  level  of 
employment also ensures high levels of contributions into the system and contributes to the 
productive capacity of the economy. 
My discussion has so far focused on the implications of an ageing population for Greece’s 
projected  public  expenditures.  There  is,  however,  another  dimension  with  respect  to  the 
public  finances  that  warrants  attention  –  the  implications  of  population  ageing  for  the 
sustainability  of  the  public  finances.  These  implications  are  especially  unfavourable  for 
Greece in the light of the country’s high debt-to-GDP ratio, which is the second highest in the 
EU. In this connection, European Commission projections of the general government debt-to-
GDP ratio for Greece indicate that this ratio will more than triple between 2005 and 2050, 
reaching 346%, though the ratio would be somewhat lower if the recent GDP revision were 
taken into account.  
Clearly, there is need of a comprehensive set of policies to change demographic prospects, 
enhance employment and its productivity through reform of the product and labour markets, 
reform the pension and healthcare systems, and pursue sustained fiscal consolidation. 
A number of measures can help boost employment rates. Female participation rates could 
be  increased  by  increasing  child-support  and  making  working-time  arrangements  more 
flexible. The latter measure would also attract more younger workers into the labour force. 
Another type of measure that directly confronts the problem posed by an ageing population 
concerns the retirement age, which might be postponed on a voluntary basis. In other words, 
workers could be given a choice of continuing to work, even on reaching minimum retirement 
age.  They  may  want  to  do  so  if  the  pension  gain  from  staying  longer  in  the  workforce 
exceeded the cumulative pension lost from retiring later. 
In addition, greater labour productivity growth in the long run should be achievable through 
accelerated  structural  reforms  in  the  product  and  labour  markets,  increased  productive 
investment in physical capital, and the upgrading of human capital. 
The projected very large increase in Greek pension expenditures over the long term – much 
larger than in most other EU countries – clearly suggests that, in the absence of an early and 
major  pension  reform,  fiscal  consolidation  measures  by  themselves  –  for  example,  tax 
increases or reductions in non-pension public spending – would not be sufficient to eliminate 
the  projected  budgetary  imbalances  without  jeopardising  the  provision  of  essential  public 
services. Pension reforms should aim to ensure the long-term viability of the public pension 
system, which should nevertheless continue to function as an important social safety net.  
Finally, the sooner the fiscal consolidation is undertaken and the reforms are implemented, 
the better, for both fiscal sustainability and for long-term growth. The primary fiscal surplus 
required to stabilise public debt on a sustainable basis is significantly higher in the long run 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
than in an early adjustment scenario. Moreover, delayed adjustment entails lower economic 
growth because of increasing crowding out effects and the economic disincentives stemming 
from rising taxes.  
I began my speech by referring to the remarkable achievement of the second half of the last 
century  whereby  public  pensions  have  greatly  improved  the  quality  of  life  of  our  older 
citizens. A return to a situation – or, in the case of Greece, the persistence of a situation – in 
which older people are poor or dependent on others is unacceptable. As people come to live 
longer  they  should  expect  that  the  quality  of  their  lives  during  retirement  years  will  be 
gratifying. Unless pension reform is implemented – and soon – population ageing will have 
severe economic consequences, including fiscal consequences. There is, however, light at 
the end of the tunnel. Some countries, as we have seen, have already implemented reforms, 
and  their  examples  can  help  show  the  way  for  others.  The  aim  of  reforms  is  to  provide  a 
better standard of living for all of our citizens, not just for today, but for tomorrow as well. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
