Ben S Bernanke: Financial regulation and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation's  Forum  on  Mortgage 
Lending for Low and Moderate Income Households, Arlington, Virginia, 8 July 2008. 
 I would like to thank Chairman Bair for inviting me to address this conference on mortgage 
lending to low- and moderate-income households. The decision to own a home is one of the 
most important decisions that families make. Whether owning a home is the right choice for a 
particular individual (or family) depends on many factors specific to the individual. However, 
for those who are willing and financially prepared to undertake homeownership, we look to 
our financial system to provide access to mortgage credit in ways appropriately tailored to 
each borrower's needs.  
Unfortunately, in the past few years, many mortgage loans were extended that were poorly 
underwritten  or  whose  terms  were  inadequately  disclosed,  particularly  in  the  subprime 
market. As you know, those poor lending practices have contributed to a sharp increase in 
mortgage  delinquencies  and  foreclosures.  The  resulting  costs  have  been  felt  not  only  by 
borrowers  but  also  by  entire  communities,  as 
foreclosure  clusters  have  caused 
neighborhoods to deteriorate and reduced municipal tax bases. The decline in the national 
housing  market,  which  has  been  a  major  cause  of  the  broader  slowdown  in  economic 
activity, was in turn greatly exacerbated by the collapse of subprime lending. And financial 
institutions have suffered large losses, with implications for the cost and availability of new 
credit. 
The recent experience, including the broader turmoil we have seen in the financial markets, 
will have – indeed, is already having – important consequences for U.S. regulatory policy. 
First,  regulators  are  taking  action  to  strengthen  consumer  protections.  Next  week,  the 
Federal Reserve Board will issue new rules on mortgage lending, using its authorities under 
the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act.  These  new  rules,  which  will  apply  to  all 
lenders and not just banks, will address some of the problems that have surfaced in recent 
years in mortgage lending, especially high-cost mortgage lending. We received many helpful 
comments  on  our  proposal  and  we  incorporated  a  number  of  them  into  the  final  rules.  In 
another  effort  to  protect  consumers,  the  Board  has  also  recently  issued  proposals  to 
substantially improve credit card disclosures and to address a number of unfair or deceptive 
acts and practices in credit card lending. 
Second,  regulatory  policy  can  help  to  ensure  that  mortgage  credit  is  available  to  qualified 
borrowers,  including  those  of  low  and  moderate  incomes.  In  particular,  I  welcome  recent 
efforts to improve the regulatory oversight of the government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac. If these firms are strong, well-regulated, well-capitalized, and focused 
on  their  mission,  they  will  be  better  able  to  serve  their  function  of  increasing  access  to 
mortgage  credit,  without  posing  undue  risks  to  the  financial  system  or  the  taxpayer. 
Policymakers are also discussing the modernization of the Federal Housing Administration 
and  the  expansion  of  the  products  and  programs  it  might  offer  to  make  mortgage  credit 
available and to help prevent avoidable foreclosures. 
Third, instability in our financial system over the past year or so has importantly affected the 
availability  and  terms  of  credit  and  the  pace  of  economic  growth.  Thus,  beyond  actions 
focused on mortgage markets, regulators must consider what can be done to make the U.S. 
financial system itself more stable, without compromising the dynamism and innovation that 
has been its hallmark. Several bodies, including the President's Working Group (PWG) in the 
United  States  and  the  international  Financial  Stability  Forum,  have  recently  issued 
comprehensive  reports  on  the  lessons  of  the  financial  turmoil  with  recommendations  for 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 1
regulators and the private sector. Many of these recommendations are being implemented, 
including  more  stringent  regulation  of  mortgage  lending  (recommended  by  the  PWG), 
strengthening of regulatory capital and liquidity management requirements for banks, reforms 
of the credit rating agencies, and others. The Federal Reserve has been actively involved in 
developing  and  implementing  these  necessary  reforms.  In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I 
would like to discuss this more general issue of promoting financial stability, including some 
of the lessons learned, what the Federal Reserve is already doing, and how we as a society 
might wish to go about strengthening our financial system for the future. 
The Bear Stearns episode and its implications 
As you are aware, one of the key events in financial markets in recent months was the near-
bankruptcy in March of the investment bank Bear Stearns. The collapse of Bear Stearns was 
triggered  by  a  run  of  its  creditors  and  customers,  analogous  to  the  run  of  depositors  on  a 
commercial bank. This run was surprising, however, in that Bear Stearns's borrowings were 
largely secured – that is, its lenders held collateral to ensure repayment even if the company 
itself failed. However, the illiquidity of markets in mid-March was so severe that creditors lost 
confidence that they could recoup their loans by selling the collateral. Hence, they refused to 
renew their loans and demanded repayment. 
Bear Stearns's contingency planning had not envisioned a sudden loss of access to secured 
funding, so it did not have adequate liquidity to meet those demands for repayment. If a sale 
of the firm could not have been arranged, it would have filed for bankruptcy. Our analyses 
persuaded us and our  colleagues at the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and 
the  Treasury  that  allowing  Bear  Stearns  to  fail  so  abruptly  at  a  time  when  the  financial 
markets  were  already  under  considerable  stress  would  likely  have  had  extremely  adverse 
implications for the financial system and for the broader economy. In particular, Bear Stearns' 
failure  under  those  circumstances  would  have  seriously  disrupted  certain  key  secured 
funding  markets  and  derivatives  markets  and  possibly  would  have  led  to  runs  on  other 
financial  firms.  To  protect  the  financial  system  and  the  economy,  the  Federal  Reserve 
facilitated the acquisition of Bear Stearns by the commercial bank JPMorgan Chase. 
We  supplemented  our  actions  regarding  Bear  Stearns  by  establishing  the  Primary  Dealer 
Credit Facility (PDCF). Under the PDCF, the Fed stands ready to make fully collateralized 
loans to the remaining four major investment banks plus other broker-dealers, called primary 
dealers, that transact regularly with the Federal Reserve.1 The Fed also created the Term 
Securities  Lending  Facility  (TSLF),  which  allows  primary  dealers  to  borrow  Treasury 
securities using other types of assets as collateral. These new facilities assured the secured 
creditors of primary dealers that those firms had sufficient access to liquidity, reducing the 
danger  of  runs  like  the  one  experienced  by  Bear  Stearns.  Although  short-term  funding 
markets  remain  strained,  they  have  improved  somewhat  since  March,  reflecting  the 
availability of several Fed lending facilities as well as the ongoing efforts of financial firms to 
repair their balance sheets and increase their liquidity. 
The  PDCF  and  the  TSLF  were  created  under  the  Federal  Reserve's  emergency  lending 
powers,  with  the  term  of  the  PDCF  set  for  a  period  of  at  least  six  months,  through  mid-
September.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  strongly  committed  to  supporting  the  stability  and 
improved functioning of the financial system. We are currently monitoring developments in 
financial markets closely and considering several options, including extending the duration of 
our  facilities  for  primary  dealers  beyond  year-end,  should  the  current  unusual  and  exigent 
circumstances continue to prevail in dealer funding markets. At the same time, we are taking 
                                                 
1   Primary  dealers  are  banks  and  securities  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of  New  York. On  behalf  of the Federal  Reserve  System, the New York Fed's Open 
Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2008
measures  that  will  serve  over  time  to  strengthen  the  primary  dealers,  other  financial 
institutions,  and  the  overall  financial  system.  As  I  will  discuss,  these  measures  include 
working  with  the  SEC  and  the  primary  dealers  to  increase  the  firms'  capital  and  liquidity 
buffers  and  cooperating  with  other  regulators  and  the  private  sector  to  help  make  the 
financial infrastructure more resilient. 
Prudential regulation and supervision  
In  general,  our  system  relies  on  market  discipline  to  constrain  leverage  and  risk-taking  by 
financial firms, supplemented by prudential oversight when government guarantees (such as 
deposit insurance) or risks to general financial stability are involved. However, the enormous 
losses and writedowns taken at financial institutions around the world since August, as well 
as  the  run  on  Bear  Stearns,  show  that,  in  this  episode,  neither  market  discipline  nor 
regulatory  oversight  succeeded  in  limiting  leverage  and  risk-taking  sufficiently  to  preserve 
financial  stability.  Working  collaboratively  with  regulators  both  here  and  abroad  as  well  as 
with the firms themselves, the Federal Reserve has redoubled its efforts to strengthen the 
capital  positions,  liquidity  reserves,  and  risk-management  practices  of  the  institutions  for 
which  we  have  supervisory  responsibility,  including  bank  holding  companies  and  state-
chartered banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. Shareholders, managers, 
and  investors  are  likewise  taking  steps  to  protect  their  interests  in  a  period  of  continued 
market strains. 
From a regulatory and supervisory perspective, the investment banks and the other primary 
dealers  raise  some  distinct  issues.  First,  as  I  noted,  neither  the  firms  nor  the  regulators 
anticipated the possibility that investment banks would lose access to secured financing, as 
Bear Stearns did. Second, in the absence of countervailing regulatory measures, the Fed's 
decision  to  lend  to  primary  dealers  –  although  it  was  necessary  to  avoid  serious  financial 
disruptions – could tend to make market discipline less effective in the future. Going forward, 
the regulation and supervision of these institutions must take account of these realities. At 
the same time, reforms in the oversight of these firms must recognize the distinctive features 
of investment banking and take care neither to unduly inhibit efficiency and innovation nor to 
induce a migration of risk-taking activities to institutions that are less regulated or beyond our 
borders. 
Since  March,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  closely  with  the  SEC,  which  is  the 
functional supervisor of each of the primary dealers and the consolidated supervisor of the 
four large firms that are not affiliated with banks (the so-called investment banks). Federal 
Reserve  examiners  are  in  place  at  the  four  investment  banks  and,  along  with  our  SEC 
colleagues, are monitoring the conditions of the other primary dealers. In cooperation with 
the SEC and the investment banks themselves, we are evaluating the capital and liquidity 
positions  of  these  firms  with  the  objective  of  ensuring  that  they  are  strong  enough  to 
withstand severe stresses in the financial environment. In the past few months, these firms 
have  raised  capital  and  expanded  their  liquidity  cushions  to  protect  themselves  against 
extreme events. 
To formalize our effective working relationship, the SEC and the Federal Reserve recently 
agreed to a memorandum of understanding (MOU). Under the MOU, the SEC and the Fed 
will  freely  share  information  and  analyses  pertaining  to  the  financial  conditions  of  primary 
dealers.  The  two  agencies  have  also  agreed  to  work  jointly  with  the  firms  to  support  their 
continued  efforts  to  strengthen  their  balance  sheets,  their  liquidity,  and  their  risk-
management practices. 
Fed-SEC  cooperation  is  taking  place  within  the  existing  statutory  framework  with  the 
objective of addressing the near-term situation. In the longer term, legislation may be needed 
to provide a more robust framework for the prudential supervision of investment banks and 
other large securities dealers. In particular, under current arrangements, the SEC's oversight 
of the holding companies of the major investment banks is based on a voluntary agreement 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 3
between the SEC and those firms. Strong holding company oversight is essential and thus, 
in my view, the Congress should consider requiring consolidated supervision of those firms, 
providing the regulator the authority to set standards for capital, liquidity holdings, and risk 
management.2 More generally, in the longer term, the Congress should consider whether our 
current  regulatory  structure  needs  to  be  modernized  to  address  the  changes  that  have 
occurred in the structure of the financial system, including the enormous growth of nonbank 
financial institutions and the development of new financial products. 
Strengthening the financial infrastructure 
The  potential  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to  the  collapse  of  Bear  Stearns  was 
exacerbated  by  weaknesses  in  the  infrastructure  of  financial  markets.  For  example,  given 
current arrangements, Bear Stearns' counterparties on thousands of over-the-counter (OTC) 
derivatives  contracts  would  likely  have  had  serious  difficulty  promptly  determining  their 
vulnerability to counterparty losses. Furthermore, their efforts to replace the hedges provided 
by  those  contracts  would  have  placed  additional  pressures  on  markets  that  already  were 
quite  stressed.  Likewise,  providers  of  short-term  secured  funding  through  repurchase 
agreements  (repos)  and  other  forms  of  secured  funding,  including  money  market  mutual 
funds and other conservative investors, could have unexpectedly found themselves holding 
various forms of collateral rather than the liquid funds they were expecting. These investors 
would  probably  have  been  hard-pressed  to  dispose  of  this  collateral  and  to  manage  their 
liquidity  needs  in  a  highly  stressed  environment.  More  generally,  in  this  scenario,  sharply 
increased  uncertainty  about  the  liquidity  and  financial  strength  of  a  wide  range  of 
counterparties  would  likely  have  greatly  reduced  the  willingness  of  financial  market 
participants to engage in normal transactions. 
The Federal Reserve, together with other regulators and the private sector, is engaged in a 
broad  effort  to  strengthen  the  financial  infrastructure.  In  doing  so,  we  aim  not  only  to  help 
make the financial system better able to withstand future shocks but also – by reducing the 
range  of  circumstances  in  which  systemic  stability  concerns  might  prompt  government 
intervention  –  to  mitigate  moral  hazard  and  the  problem  of  "too  big  to  fail."3  For  example, 
since  September  2005,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  has  been  providing 
leadership  for  a  major  joint  initiative  by  the  public  and  private  sectors  to  improve 
arrangements for clearing and settling credit default swaps (CDS) and other OTC derivatives. 
As a result, derivatives dealers and other market participants have taken a number of steps 
to  enhance  post-trade  processing  of  CDS,  and  in  2006,  they  expanded  the  effort  to  OTC 
equity derivatives. However, the infrastructure for managing these derivatives still is not as 
efficient or reliable as that for more mature markets, as was evident last summer, when a 
surge  in  CDS  trading  volume  greatly  increased  backlogs  of  unconfirmed  trades.  The  New 
York  Fed  and  other  supervisors  are  working  with  market  participants  to  fundamentally 
change  how  CDS  and  other  OTC  derivatives  are  processed  by  applying  increasingly 
stringent targets and performance standards. They are also emphasizing that dealers must 
demonstrate  their  capability  to  adequately  manage  the  failure  of  a  major  counterparty, 
including  calculating  exposures  rapidly,  having  clear  management  procedures,  and 
conducting internal stress exercises. Finally, they are encouraging the development of well-
regulated  and  prudently  managed  central  counterparty  clearing  arrangements  for  CDS 
trades. 
                                                 
2   Bank-affiliated  primary  dealers  are  already  subject  to  mandatory  consolidated  supervision,  but  the  focus  of 
that  supervision  has  been  on  limiting  risks  to  the  banks  and  other  insured  depository  institutions  within  the 
holding company. Existing provisions may need to be modified to provide regulatory authority to assess and 
limit risks to all functionally regulated entities, including securities subsidiaries, as well. 
3   On the problem of "too big to fail," see for example Gary Stern and Ron Feldman (2004), Too Big to Fail: The 
Hazards of Bank Bailouts, Washington: Brookings Institution Press. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2008
The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of 
the tri-party repo markets, in which the primary dealers and other large banks and broker-
dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money funds and other short-
term, risk-averse investors. For some time we have been working with market participants to 
develop a contingency plan should there ever occur a loss of confidence in either of the two 
clearing banks that facilitate the settlement of tri-party repos. Recent experience, including 
Bear Stearns' liquidity problems, demonstrates the need for additional measures to enhance 
the resilience of these markets, including the development of contingency plans for dealing 
with the sudden loss of confidence in a large tri-party borrower. Given the critical role that 
these  markets  play  in  our  financial  system,  we  need  to  proceed  in  a  prudent  manner  in 
making changes, especially as long as the broader financial markets are experiencing stress. 
Nonetheless,  over  time,  a  stronger  financial  system  may  require  changes  in  the  way 
borrowers  and  lenders  use  these  markets,  as  well  as  in  the  settlement  infrastructure 
operated by the clearing banks. 
More  generally,  both  the  operational  performance  under  stress  of  key  payment  and 
settlements systems and their ability to manage counterparty and market risks are critical to 
the  stability  of  the  broader  financial  system.  Currently,  the  Federal  Reserve  relies  on  a 
patchwork of authorities, largely derived from our role as a banking supervisor, as well as on 
moral suasion to help ensure that the various payments and settlements systems have the 
necessary procedures and controls in place to manage their risks. By contrast, most major 
central banks around the world have an explicit statutory basis for their oversight of payment 
systems, and in recent years a growing number of central banks have been given statutory 
authority  to  oversee  securities  settlement  systems  as  well.  Given  how  important  robust 
payment  and  settlement  systems  are  to  financial  stability,  a  strong  case  can  be  made  for 
granting the Federal Reserve explicit oversight authority for systemically important payment 
and settlement systems.  
Preventing or mitigating future crises 
The  financial  turmoil  is  ongoing,  and  our  efforts  today  are  concentrated  on  helping  the 
financial system return to more normal functioning. It is not too soon, however, to begin to 
think about the steps we might take to reduce the incidence and severity of future crises. 
I have already noted the importance of strengthening capital, liquidity, and risk management 
at major financial institutions, including both commercial banks and investment banks. These 
efforts  are  already  underway  on  a  globally  coordinated  basis.  Together  with 
the 
improvements  to  the  financial  infrastructure  I  have  just  discussed,  these  steps  should 
increase the resilience of the financial system in the face of shocks.  
As I have noted, I believe that the Federal Reserve's actions to facilitate the acquisition of 
Bear Stearns, thereby preventing its bankruptcy and the disorderly liquidation of positions by 
its counterparties and creditors, were necessary and warranted to head off serious damage 
to the U.S. financial system and our economy. That said, the intended purpose of Federal 
Reserve lending is to provide liquidity to sound institutions. We used our lending powers to 
facilitate an acquisition of a failing institution only because no other tools were available to 
the Federal Reserve or any other government body for ensuring an orderly liquidation in a 
fragile market environment. As part of its review of how best to increase financial stability, 
and  as  has  been  suggested  by  Secretary  Paulson,  the  Congress  may  wish  to  consider 
whether new tools are needed for ensuring an orderly liquidation of a systemically important 
securities  firm  that  is  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy,  together  with  a  more  formal  process  for 
deciding  when  to  use  those  tools.  Because  the  resolution  of  a  failing  securities  firm  might 
have fiscal implications, it would be appropriate for the Treasury to take a leading role in any 
such process, in consultation with the firm's regulator and other authorities. 
The  details  of  any  such  tools  and  of  the  associated  decisionmaking  process  require  more 
study. As Chairman Bair recently pointed out, one possible model is the process currently in 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 5
place  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  Improvement  Act  (FDICIA)  for 
dealing with insolvent commercial banks. The FDICIA procedures give the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) the authority to act as a receiver for an insolvent bank and to 
set up a bridge bank to facilitate an orderly liquidation of the firm. A bridge bank authority is 
an  important  mechanism  for  minimizing  public  losses  from  government  intervention  while 
imposing losses on shareholders and unsecured creditors, thereby limiting moral hazard and 
mitigating any adverse impact of government intervention on market discipline. The FDICIA 
law also requires that failing banks be resolved in a way that imposes the least cost to the 
government (in this case, to the deposit insurance fund), unless the Treasury, the FDIC, the 
Federal  Reserve  Board,  and  the  President  agree  that  following  the  least-cost  route  would 
entail significant systemic risk. The hurdle for using the so-called systemic risk exception is 
appropriately high, but the flexibility to respond in a true financial emergency is retained. 
Designing  analogous  rules  for  the  prompt  and  orderly  resolution  of  securities  firms  is  not 
straightforward,  as  these  firms  differ  significantly  from  most  commercial  banks  in  their 
financing,  business  models,  and  in  other  ways.4  Despite  the  complexities  of  designing  a 
resolution regime for securities firms, I believe it is worth the effort. In particular, by setting a 
high bar for such actions, the adverse effects on market discipline could be minimized. 
Another  possible  step  to  reduce  the  incidence  and  severity  of  financial  crises,  recently 
proposed  in  the  Treasury  blueprint  for  regulatory  reform,  would  be  to  task  the  Federal 
Reserve  with  promoting  the  overall  stability  of  financial  markets.  To  some  extent,  the  Fed 
already plays that role, and indeed its founding in 1913 was prompted largely by the desire of 
the  Congress  to  address  the  problem  of  recurring  financial  panics.  In  recent  decades,  the 
Federal Reserve has figured prominently in the government's attempts to address a range of 
financial crises, in part because of the broad expertise derived from the Fed's wide range of 
activities.  Moreover,  the  Fed  is  the  only  agency  that  has  the  power  to  serve  as  a  liquidity 
provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout history. 
That said, holding the Fed more formally accountable for promoting financial stability makes 
sense only if the institution's powers are consistent with its responsibilities. In particular, as a 
practical  matter,  I  do  not  think  that  the  Fed  could  fully  meet  these  objectives  without  the 
authority  to  directly  examine  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  are  subject  to 
prudential  regulation.  During  the  recent  financial  turmoil,  the  ability  of  the  Fed  to  obtain 
information directly from key institutions and from supervisory reviews has been invaluable 
for understanding financial developments and their implications for the economy. To fulfill its 
responsibilities,  the  Fed  would  also  need  to  have  the  ability  to  look  at  financial  firms  as  a 
whole, much as we do today when we exercise our umbrella authority over financial holding 
companies, and the authority to set expectations and require corrective actions as warranted 
in  cases  in which  firms'  actions  have  potential  implications  for  financial  stability. Finally,  to 
identify financial vulnerabilities, the Fed would need general authority to collect information 
on the structure and workings of financial markets. In particular, the recent experience has 
clearly illustrated the importance, for the purpose of promoting financial stability, of having 
detailed  information  about  money  markets  and  the  activities  of  borrowers  and  lenders  in 
those markets. 
If  the  Congress  chooses  to  go  in  this  direction,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  that 
market participants might incorrectly view the Fed as a source of unconditional support for 
financial institutions and markets, which could lead to an unacceptable reduction in market 
discipline. If the Federal Reserve's formal mandate were broadened to encompass financial 
stability, it would be particularly important to make clear that any government intervention to 
                                                 
4   For  example,  many  securities  firms  book  a  large  share  of  their  assets  at  affiliates  of  the  broker-dealer, 
including affiliates abroad that are subject to foreign bankruptcy laws. 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2008
avoid the disorderly liquidation of firms on the verge of bankruptcy should use clearly defined 
tools and processes, along the lines I discussed earlier. 
Conclusion 
The financial turmoil since August underscores the need to find ways to make the financial 
system more resilient and stable. In my remarks today, I have noted several broad areas in 
which constructive work might be done, including improving the regulation and supervision of 
financial institutions, strengthening the financial infrastructure, and the possible development 
of a new resolution process for securities firms. In the longer term, it is up to the Congress to 
determine whether still broader reforms are needed. Making that determination will raise a 
host of complex and challenging issues, but the stakes are commensurately high. 
Financial crises have occurred periodically around the world for literally hundreds of years, 
and it is unrealistic to hope that they can be entirely eliminated, especially while maintaining 
a  dynamic  and  innovative  financial  system.  Nonetheless,  recent  experience  has  illustrated 
once again that financial instability can have serious economic costs. The Federal Reserve 
will continue its efforts to make our financial system stronger and more resilient, so that it can 
continue  to  play  its  necessary  role  of  supporting  economic  growth  and  making  credit 
available to all qualified borrowers. 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 7
