Ranee Jayamaha: Governance, risk management and compliance 
Keynote address by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 
at the Seminar on “Governance, Risk Management and Compliance and the Roadmap for 
Financial Services Industry”, Colombo, 7 February 2008. 
 The Chairman and the Organizing Committee; 
I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude for being given the opportunity to address a 
gathering  that  includes  impressive  groups  of  representatives  from  the  financial  services 
industry, risk management professionals, regulators and businesses. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  year  2008  has  started  off  with  the  continuation  of  some  of  the 
challenges that resulted in significant disturbances in world financial markets: the impact of 
the sub prime market turmoil which originated in the US is still spreading across Europe and 
other  financial  markets;  the  Northern  Rock  crisis  in  the  U.K.  has  raised  serious  regulatory 
issues; and the large frauds in global banks have highlighted the repercussions of the lack of 
internal  controls  and  accountability  in  financial  institutions.  As  in  the  past,  many  of  these 
have  been  due  to  lapses  in  governance  and  risk  management  practices.  Although  Sri 
Lanka’s financial markets have been insulated from these disturbances, they underscore the 
need  for  good  corporate  governance,  better  risk  management  and  compliance  in  our 
financial industry. It is also important for us to learn from the bitter lessons experienced by 
others as our financial services industry too is tempted to provide low quality credit, which 
has been the root cause of the subprime issue. 
The  topic  therefore  is  very  relevant  and  it  is  time  to  generate  a  wider  discussion  on 
Governance, Risk Management and Compliance – in short – GRC, which are considered to 
be the three key pillars or imperatives of financial management. 
1.  
What is GRC? 
1.1  
By  itself,  GRC  is  not  new  or  unknown.  GRC  has  always  been  of  fundamental 
concern to businesses, the financial service industry and to regulators and supervisors. All 
stakeholders  realize  that  there  are  enormous  benefits  of  observing  GRC  and  that  such 
benefits would outweigh the cost of putting in place processes, procedures and controls that 
enable effective implementation of GRC. 
1.2 
 Governance  is  all  about  self-discipline.  It  is  the  process  by  which  the  Board  of 
Directors sets the objectives for an organization and oversees progress towards achieving 
those  objectives.  Put  it  simply,  it  is  the  set  of  procedures  and  processes  that  keeps  the 
organization alive and allows it to operate as a “going concern”. The higher the sophistication 
of the financial system, the higher would be the demand for governance as regulation and 
supervision cannot cover all risk elements in their supervisory processes. 
1.3  
The  next  critical  pillar  or  imperative  is  Risk  Management;  i.e.  identification, 
assessment, continuous monitoring of risks (real or hypothesized) and risk mitigation, while 
maximizing  returns.  In  financial  business,  risk  can  emanate  from  many  areas.  The  well-
known  risks  are  credit,  liquidity,  market,  operational  and  human  capital  risks.  There  are 
several  other  risks,  such  as  cross-border  product  risks,  illiquidity  risks  etc.  The  new  and 
complex products that are being offered by foreign financial markets or institutions can have 
cross-border  risks  as  their  distribution  can  bring  in  serious  contagion  risks  across  global 
markets. Most financial institutions do not view equity as risk capital. In banking, risks must 
include situations of drying up of liquidity. A case in point is the Northern Rock episode in 
which the bank exposed itself to the illiquidity risk. The need to bring in new capital to cover 
illiquidity  was  not  given  adequate  attention  by  Northern  Rock.  Such  risks  should  also  be 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
analysed  by  banks  and  financial  institutions  and  include  them  in  their  risk  management 
framework. Ignoring this risk or not taking action to mitigate can be construed as the “moral 
hazard” we often speak about. Moral hazard leads banks and financial institutions to expect 
the  public  to  rescue their  institutions  and continue  to  run on  an  illiquid  basis,  until  they  hit 
serious  drying  up  of  liquidity.  If  managed  properly,  risks  can  be  confined  to  the  institution 
concerned.  If  not,  any  one  of  these  risks  or  a  combination  can  affect  a  group  of  financial 
institutions or the entire financial services industry thereby creating a systemic risk. As Martin 
Wolf, a well known Financial Times journalist said “The financial services industry is famous 
for  privatizing  its  gains  and  socializing  its  losses  in  that  it  expects  the  society  at  large  to 
rescue them through public funds”. 
1.4  
The third component is Compliance, which relates to laws and regulations, internal 
policies  and  procedures.  Literally,  Compliance  means  obedience  or  dutifulness,  but  it  has 
broad  scope  and  various  interpretations.  Compliance  generally  covers  matters  such  as 
observance, application of standards of market conduct and managing conflicts of interests. 
More  recently,  Compliance  has  expanded  its  scope  to  cover  specific  areas  such  as 
operations of money laundering and terrorist financing and even tax laws that are relevant to 
financial  services.  In  brief,  the  Compliance  function  should  protect  the  institution  against 
unlawful  behaviour  and  strengthen  its  ethical  consciousness.  A  Board  of  Directors  of  any 
financial institution should approve and oversee the institution’s strategic objectives and set a 
compliance  culture.  Similarly,  the  Board  should  ensure  that  the  financial  institution  has 
adequate  policies  and  procedures  that  enable  oversight  activities  to  be  carried  out  on  all 
business lines. Given their fiduciary responsibilities, financial institutions, in particular, should 
comply with applicable laws and regulations in the jurisdiction in which they operate. 
1.5  
The  word  “Compliance”  has  also  a  connotation  of  regulatory  and  supervisory 
structures, which means that there is an external regulatory or supervisory body to ensure 
that financial institutions adhere to norms, guidelines and rules set by it. Compliance efforts 
will be effective and sustainable only in organizations where Compliance emerges from an 
ongoing  board-level  engagement.  Compliance  management  therefore  is  the  execution  of 
business  processes  designed  to  manage  risks  and  to  continuously  benchmark  against 
expected parameters/tolerance levels applicable for the entire industry. 
Compliance is considered to be costly, time consuming and an onerous endeavor. 
1.6  
But, many financial institutions understand the criticality and the importance of better GRC 
and they are willing to devise strategies for leveraging their GRC systems to derive value as 
well  as  increase  their  compliance  performance.  Behind  all  these  imperatives  is  the 
commitment at all levels to manage GRC in an integrated manner and inculcate the culture 
across the financial services industry. 
1.7  
The three GRC imperatives are interrelated in financial business and implementing 
them  in  isolation  or  treating  them  as  separate  elements  would  not  be  fruitful.  In  the  past, 
most  organizations  have  traditionally  viewed,  and  some  still  continue  to  treat,  GRC  as 
separate  components.  The  emerging  perception  of  GRC  is  that  it  is  an  integrated  set  of 
concepts  and,  when  applied  holistically  within  an  organization,  it  can  add  significant  value 
and provide competitive advantage. Further, the holistic approach would be more efficient, 
consistent and legally sound and the Boards of Directors, senior management and staff at all 
levels would be involved in the organization’s conduct of business. Most financial institutions 
have  viewed  GRC  as  discrete  activities  undertaken  by  different  departments  with  no 
coordinated efforts. As a result, there is a lack of integration of GRC across business areas 
or functions. 
New regulations and pressure for integrated risk management 
2.  
2.1 
 During the past few years, regulatory and compliance requirements of the financial 
institutions have strengthened globally. Since the first updating of the Basel Capital Accord in 
the  late  1990s,  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  in  2002,  the  launch  of  new  regulations  seems  to 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
    have become more frequent. With these new requirements, financial institutions are facing 
an amplified focus on risk management with risk based performance measures and capital 
allocation. Rating agencies too have expanded their analysis of Integrated Risk Management 
practices when determining credit ratings. 
2.2  
The  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  in  the  UK,  which  has  come  under  much 
criticism in recent times due to the failure of Northern Rock, has published its risk outlook 
report  in  2008,  which  has  identified  5  priority  risks.  Although  some  of  these  may  not  be 
directly relevant or applicable to Sri Lanka’s financial institutions, they are common risks that 
need to be flagged by the Boards of Directors of financial institutions. The priority risks set 
out by the FSA are: 
• 
Existing business model of some financial institutions are under strain as a result of 
adverse market conditions. Given the nature of financial business, i.e. borrow short 
term  for  funding  longer  term  lending,  it  is  irrational  to  assume  plentiful  liquidity  to 
prevail at all times without treating liquidity as part of risk capital; 
Increased  financial  pressures  may  lead  financial  institutions  to  shift  their  efforts 
away from focusing on the conduct of business requirements and from maintaining 
and strengthening business as usual; 
Market participants and consumers may lose confidence in financial institutions and 
in the authority’s ability to safeguard the financial system; 
A significant minority of consumers could experience financial problems because of 
their high levels of borrowings; and 
Tighter economic conditions could increase the incidence or discovery of financial 
crime or divert the institution’s resources away from tracking financial crime. 
2.3  
In addition to these, there could also be institution specific risks, which may bring in 
potential  disturbances.  Conventional  wisdom  now  is  that  the  more  recent  episodes  like 
Northern  Rock  were  an  accident  waiting  to  happen  as  banking  regulations  have  not  been 
emphasizing  on  liquidity  risks.  The  recent  turmoil  has  exposed  the  vulnerability  of  a 
regulatory framework that places so much emphasis on how well capitalized a bank is, but 
makes little reference to whether it has an adequate cash cushion and liquid securities to see 
the institution through a period of market turbulence. In this instance, the Basel II regime also 
does not seem to offer much help. 
2.4  
Given these challenges in Risk Management, financial institutions are expected to 
move  towards  Integrated  Risk  Management  (IRM)  which,  in  simple  terms,  is  a  continuous 
proactive  and  systematic  process  aimed  at  understanding,  managing  and  communicating 
risks  from  an  organization-wide  perspective.  It  is  about  making  strategic  decisions  that 
contribute  to  the  achievement  of  an  organization’s  overall  corporate  objectives.  In  other 
words,  IRM  requires  an  on-going  assessment  of  potential  risks  at  every  level  and  every 
segment and then aggregating the results at the corporate level to facilitate priority setting 
and  improved  decision-making.  IRM  should  be  embedded  in  the  organization’s  corporate 
strategy  and  it  should  shape  the  organization’s  risk  mitigation  culture  and  highlight  the 
importance of effective coordination among interdependent risks. 
2.5  
Many of you may have been following the rogue trading scandal that cost 4.9 billion 
Euros for Societe Generale – SocGen, the French Bank in recent months. The credibility of 
the  bank  suffered  a  fresh  blow  this  week  following  the  interim  report  handed  over  by  the 
Finance Minister, Christine Lagarde to the Prime Minister. In summary, the findings of this 
report said “Very clearly, certain mechanisms of internal controls of SocGen did not function 
and those that functioned were not always followed by appropriate modifications”. Further, 
the report highlighted 8 elements of internal controls that were clearly inadequate and they 
may  have  been  the  decisive  factors  behind  the  crisis.  Some  of  the  critical  ones  are:  the 
security  of  the  bank’s  IT  systems  and  protection  of  logins;  confirmation  of  all  transactions 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 3
with  all  counterparties;  respect  for  “Chinese  Walls”  between  front  and  back  offices; 
monitoring of cancellations and changes in trades coming from a single trader; and “atypical” 
behaviour such as failure to take holidays by Kerviel – the rogue trader. 
Changes to the regulatory framework in Sri Lanka 
3.  
3.1 
Several new regulatory measures have been introduced to strengthen the regulatory 
and supervisory framework in Sri Lanka. In recent times, the Central Bank has moved away 
from  compliance-based  supervision  to  risk-focused  supervision.  In  2002,  the  Central  Bank 
issued a voluntary code of governance for banks and financial institutions expecting them to 
improve  their  corporate  governance.  However,  the  introduction  of  this  code  did  not  show 
significant improvement at Board level, primarily due to lack of commitment by the Boards. 
The Central Bank’s regulatory examinations of banks and financial institutions have raised 
concerns  on  corporate  governance,  inadequate  systems  and  controls,  exposure  to  related 
party transactions, under-estimation of non-performing loans and inadequate provisioning for 
bad and doubtful loans, weak administration of loan accounts and potential credit risk and 
lapses  in  submission  of  periodical  returns  to  the  regulatory  authorities.  Almost  all  of  these 
concerns are related to non-availability of a proper GRC processes in financial institutions. 
Considering the fiduciary responsibility of the Boards towards their stakeholders, and in the 
interest of wider financial system stability, the Central Bank issued directions on corporate 
governance in December 2007, requiring the banks to streamline their governance practices 
commencing from 2008. 
3.2  
The  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  framework  from  January  2008  is  another 
enhancement  to  the  regulatory  structure,  which  requires  the  financial  industry  to  have  a 
better risk management framework. Most of the leading banks have set up independent risk 
management and compliance divisions to monitor bank-wide risks. These institutions should 
now focus in moving forward to implement advanced approaches under Basel II framework 
by  setting  up  data  warehouses  and  sophisticated  IT  systems  in  order  to  have  better  risk 
management and compliance. Similarly, the adoption of International Accounting Standards 
such as IAS 32 & 39 and IFRS 7, which deal with disclosures, presentation, recognition and 
measurement  of  financial  instruments,  also  highlight  the  need  for  an  integrated  risk 
management, disclosures and compliance. There is, however, reluctance by banks to build 
robust IT infrastructure and advanced IT frameworks due to the high cost of investment and 
the time it would take to reap the benefits. It is important that banks and financial institutions 
change this mindset to pave the way for a GRC management and also to avoid operational 
losses due to product failures and frauds. Risks arising in these areas could spread beyond 
the financial institution concerned and have the potential to affect the entire industry. 
Adopting an integrated GRC framework is a challenge 
4.  
4.1  
Understanding the demands of the organization’s stakeholders is the key in terms of 
performance  and  conformance,  and  aligning  the  organization  to  deliver  against  these 
objectives. Considering the risk appetite and risk tolerance of the organization, the processes 
and technology should be designed and deployed so that the achievement of objectives is 
measured, risks are assessed and continuous improvement is realized in support of effective 
GRC. Integrating GRC has become a challenge for virtually every financial institution looking 
to establish an integrated and consistent approach to controlling exposures, managing risks 
and creating value. 
4.2 
 The major challenge in adopting an integrated GRC approach is the aligning of the 
GRC  framework  and  processes  to  standalone  and  isolated  solutions  that  are  already  in 
place.  The  difficulty  is  to  integrate  these  isolated  solutions  through  a  flexible  and  add-on 
basis to embrace new requirements. Changing core business solutions without overhauling 
business requirements is considered to be a nightmare by many financial institutions. If it is 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2008
properly planned and designed, it would not be that bad and those who have taken the bold 
decision to do so will be the winners in the future. 
4.3  
Another  important  challenge  would  be  to  adopt  a  GRC  framework,  which  is 
consistent with international standards. To enable this, new policies and procedures have to 
be written with links to automated systems. Keeping up with the international best practice is 
not  an  easy  task,  but  we  have  much  less  choice  in  not  doing  so.  It  will  also  bring  in  new 
challenges  for  the  supervisory  and  legislative  community.  The  changes  that  occur  at  high 
speed,  the  new  risks  and  complexities  that  cut  across  the  financial  industry  at  an 
international level may pose difficulties for institutions to be compliant at all times because 
their compliance today may not hold for tomorrow, but it is important to realize that today’s 
challenges are tomorrow’s history. So, it is necessary to act today. 
Given the expansion of financial markets associated with rapid growth in India and 
4.4  
China, it is essential for banking and financial institutions in the Asian region to analyze risks 
relating to innovative financial products that will be sold by these markets. In this regard, the 
wider  financial  system  in  Sri  Lanka  should  be  adequately  robust  and  resilient  to  deal  with 
complex risks associated with these new products. In this context too, Sri Lanka’s financial 
services  industry  should  focus  on  GRC  as  a  package  and  deal  with  these  three  pillars  or 
imperatives within an integrated framework. 
4.5  
Introducing  an  “awareness  culture”  of  GRC  is  also  a  serious  challenge.  It  is 
necessary to ensure that the integrated GRC should be a prime concern of the employees 
and  the  Boards,  as  well  as  the  senior  management  of  financial  institutions.  Continuous 
training of relevant stakeholders would be a solution to this challenge. 
5.  
Key elements of a roadmap 
Firm commitment to implement GRC as a package 
5.1  
5.1.1   The  key  to  meet  these  challenges  is  the  commitment  by  all  stakeholders,  i.e.  the 
Boards  of  Directors,  senior  management  and  employees  of  the  financial  institution.  The 
commitment has to be clearly demonstrated at all levels and not by isolated groups within the 
institution.  Usually,  commitment  should  commence  at  the  top  and  filter  down  to  all  levels, 
which requires a well-coordinated effort. In designing a roadmap, one can begin by reviewing 
the  situation  and  assessing  associated  risks.  It  would  also  be  necessary  to  survey  the 
existing GRC framework and identify gaps focusing on different procedures and processes 
that exist in organizations. All stakeholders should be convinced that the key GRC elements 
point  towards  the  same  goal  and  that  there  is  little  use  in  implementing  these  critical 
components in isolation. An integrated GRC package should then be designed ensuring that 
it relates to the business model of the financial institution and also taking into consideration 
the  fiduciary  responsibilities  of  financial  institutions.  Once  each  financial  institution  has 
designed  its  GRC  framework,  it  would  be  easy  to  roll  it  out  to  the  entire  financial  industry 
through various formal and informal institutions, which coordinates among different segments 
of  the  financial  services  industry.  In  our  context,  the  Sri  Lanka  Bankers’  Association,  the 
Finance  Houses  Association,  the  Leasing  Association  etc.,  should  be  able  to  coordinate 
within and among their segments of the financial services industry in implementing GRC in 
an integrated manner. 
5.1.2 
If  one  financial  institution  experiences  problems  today,  given  the  interrelated 
transactions, it could lead to a systemic issue which will result in the entire system suffering. 
Therefore, it is equally important to use peer pressure to get weak or prodigal institutions to 
comply  with  regulatory  instructions  and  directives.  So,  it  is  everybody’s  responsibility  to 
ensure that outliers are brought on to the desired path. 
5.1.3   Clearly,  training  and  consulting  remain  very  important,  especially  to  change  the 
mindset to a more committed one. All stakeholders need to understand why GRC should be 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 5
implemented  as  a  package  and  the  benefits  attached  to  it,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
institution as well as its clients. 
Leveraging on technology 
5.2  
5.2.1   Technology  is  a  critical  factor,  which  facilitates  efficiency  and  effectiveness  in  the 
GRC processes. A real time risk, compliance and monitoring environment enables financial 
institutions  to  ensure  that  risks  are  being  managed  and  disruptive  events  are  being  acted 
upon.  Therefore,  technology  integration  across  the  financial  institution  would  enable 
institutions to gain more timely and reliable regulatory compliance, more efficient use of IT 
systems,  and  lower  cost  on  development  and  maintenance  of  software  applications.  Many 
organizations  that  apply  GRC  best  practices  have  understood  that  service-oriented 
architecture (SOA) is more appropriate, as it would promote GRC integration while securing 
the  highest  value  that  IT  can  offer.  SOA  is  an  architecture  that  provides  IT  infrastructure 
which  allows  different  applications  to  exchange  databases  and  participate  in  business 
processes that are loosely coupled from the operating systems and programming languages 
underlying those applications. 
5.2.2   SOA is a design for linking business and computational resources that are available 
on  demand  to  achieve  the  desired  results  to  service  consumers.  Under  SOA  models, 
different applications/services can communicate with each other by passing data from one 
application/service  to  another,  or  by  coordinating  an  activity  between  two  or  more 
applications/services. Further, the financial institutions with IT infrastructure based on stand 
alone  systems  acquired  over  time  to  meet  different  business  goals  can  benefit  from  an 
integrated  service-oriented  architecture.  Web  services  can  be  considered  to  implement  a 
service-oriented  architecture  where  certain  functions/services  can  be  accessible  over 
standard Internet protocols that are independent from other IT systems in the institution. The 
Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  is  now  using  a  web-based  application  to  gather  regulatory 
compliance reports from financial institutions. Although it is still at a preliminary stage, it is 
certainly a step towards improving the quality of the GRC in banks. 
financial 
institutions  have 
Conclusion 
6.  
6.1  
Now  is  the  time  to  change.  There  should  be  a  multifaceted  approach  to  face  the 
GRC challenges. GRC should be treated as one package or a set. This approach includes 
governance,  built  on  Principles  and  Rules,  Integrated  Risk  Management  Mechanisms  to 
identify,  assess  and  mitigate  risks  and  a  defined  compliance  mechanism  that  deals  with 
internal  and  external  compliance  requirements.  The 
the 
responsibility to establish a compliance mindset throughout the organization as a foundation 
that places high regard on ethics, trust and values. Energies that are used by some banks 
and  financial  institutions  to  design  ways  and  means  of  flouting  instructions  and  defying 
directives should be diverted to observance of governance and compliance. 
6.2  
I  have  highlighted  the  challenges  that  financial  institutions  could  encounter  in 
implementing GRC amidst ongoing increasing globalization, continuously changing laws and 
regulations, various forms of financial stresses and continuous evolution of complex financial 
products.  These  challenges  underscore  the  importance  of  compliance  and  best  practice, 
which have already been set by the financial services industry regulators and supervisors as 
well as the international standard setters. 
6.3  
In  the  present  financial  industry  environment,  where  the  stakeholders  and  other 
interested  parties  put  pressure  for  greater  transparency  and  corporate  responsibility,  the 
Board of Directors and senior management have to set high standards in all aspects of GRC. 
The  increase  in  investments  to  improve  the  IT  infrastructure  and  human  resources  to 
integrate  GRC  management  can  improve  risk  management  as  well  as  compliance 
performance and its efficiencies. The financial institutions that have strong governance and 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2008
compliance  processes  in  an  integrated  GRC  framework  will  be  more  capable  of  winning 
public confidence, attracting investors, improving corporate reputation and efficiency, as well 
as contributing to promote financial system stability. 
6.4  
Northern  Rock’s  fall  has  become  something  of  a  parable  for  the  times:  a  story  of 
insecurity,  mistrust  and  powerlessness  that  often  seem  to  best  describe  some  financial 
markets in our part of the world as well. It speaks to the fragility of the international financial 
system,  which  is  directly  impacted  by  globalization,  of  the  capacity  of  the  regulatory 
institutions and governments to shape events and the powerlessness of all stakeholders to 
halt an erosion of confidence in once solid institutions. 
6.5  
It is also important to note that markets and investors are much more vigilant than 
banks and financial institutions themselves. They may watch global events with bemusement 
or  with  justified  suspicion  and  feel  that  nothing  is  straightforward  anymore.  We  need  to 
reduce  such  feelings  in  the  public  in  our  country  and  instill  confidence  in  them.  Given  the 
severe impacts of the recent sub-prime crisis and low quality credit decisions in the US and 
Europe  and  large  frauds  in  international  banks,  it  is  important  that  the  financial  services 
industry and the regulatory community reflect on what additional precautionary efforts should 
be initiated to ensure that Sri Lanka’s financial services industry continues to function as a 
stable  and  resilient  one.  I  hope  that  the  deliberations  of  this  seminar  will  lead  to  the 
preparation of a roadmap, which would help to promote a competitive, resilient and dynamic 
financial sector with new initiatives on Governance, Risk Management and Compliance. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 7
