T T Mboweni: Central banks in times of turmoil 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Gordon 
Institute of Business Science, conducted in conjunction with the Helen Suzman Foundation, 
Johannesburg, 28 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The global financial landscape has changed dramatically over the past twelve months, with 
global  financial  markets  experiencing  a  financial  crisis  of  note  in  the  history  of  the  world 
economy. The impact has been severe, with some of the world’s largest and most credible 
financial institutions reporting large consecutive quarterly losses. By the end of March 2008, 
the  market  capitalisation  of  banks  globally  had  declined  by  USD720  billion.  These 
developments prompted the former US Fed Chairperson, Mr Alan Greenspan, to remark that 
“the current financial crisis in the US is likely to be judged as the most wrenching since the 
end of the Second World War”. 
Financial market asset prices have also echoed these extremely distressed circumstances 
and  volatile  conditions,  in  some  instances  requiring  unconventional  responses  by  central 
banks and other international institutions. Recent events again put into full perspective the 
crucial role of central banks in times of turmoil. In particular, the dual responsibility of central 
banks to implement monetary policy as well as contributing to financial stability has become 
much more challenging. 
Causes of the crisis 
2.  
The financial market turmoil, which started around July 2007, was initially triggered by huge 
losses on US sub-prime loans, disclosures of delinquencies and foreclosures by households, 
as well as a number of major hedge funds which reported substantial losses.  
Exceptionally  benign  macroeconomic  and  financial  market  conditions  between  2004  and 
mid-2007,  as  reflected  by  robust  economic  growth  and  low  inflation  and  interest  rates, 
however,  fostered  an  underlying  search  for  yield  over  recent  years.  At  the  same  time, 
decades  of  vigorous  financial  innovation  facilitated  a  deepening  of  capital  markets,  easier 
access  to  credit  by  households  and  enterprises  through  a  variety  of  new  and  complex 
instruments. In recent years, however, financial innovation has been increasingly associated 
with  complacency  in  risk  management.  In  particular,  the  lack  of  transparency  of  these 
complex products may have made it easier for investors to underestimate the risks they take 
on, as well as the under-pricing of risk in some key asset markets. In addition, with prudential 
regulation  sometimes  lagging  behind  financial  innovation,  some  institutions  may  not  have 
been sufficiently transparent about their exposures to complex structured financial products 
on and off their balance sheets. 
In these circumstances it is not surprising that the most recent Triennial Survey of the BIS 
showed  that  the  credit derivatives  market  has  witnessed  substantial  growth,  from  USD118 
billion  in  1998  to  USD52  trillion  in  2007.  The  main  participants  in  credit  derivatives, 
comprising about 80 per cent of the total market, are banks and hedge funds. 
The announcement of losses by hedge funds exposed to US sub-prime mortgages in mid-
July  2007  triggered  the  reappraisal  of  asset  prices,  and  excessive  market  volatility  with  a 
general flight to quality or less riskier assets. Credit risk evolved into liquidity risk and banks 
struggled to obtain funding as interbank liquidity dried up, causing sharp increases in money-
market rates in the major financial centres of the world.  
BIS Review 67/2008 
 1
How deep and widespread? 
3.  
What began as a fairly contained deterioration in portions of the US sub-prime market has 
evolved into severe dislocations in broader credit and funding markets that now pose risks to 
the global macroeconomic outlook. 
In  April  2008,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  estimated  that  declining  US  house 
prices  and  rising  delinquencies  on  mortgage  payments  could  lead  to  aggregate  losses 
related  to  the  residential  mortgage  market  and  related  securities  of  about  USD565  billion, 
including  the  expected  deterioration  of  prime  loans.  Adding  other  categories  of  loans 
originated and securities issued in the US related to commercial real estate, consumer credit 
market and corporations, total losses are estimated at almost USD1,0 trillion.  
Tighter credit conditions imposed by banks, the erosion of consumers’ spending power due 
to rising inflation and continuous increases in energy costs have impacted severely on the 
US economy. According to the IMF, the continuing correction in the US housing market and 
the  unresolved  problems  in  the  financial  sector  have  led  the  US  economy  to  the  verge  of 
recession. The IMF has downgraded its forecast for GDP growth in the US in 2008 to 0,5 per 
cent, while the Fed, in its latest FOMC minutes released on 22 May 2008, expects the US 
economy to expand by between 0,3 and 1,2 per cent. This has serious implications for global 
growth, particularly for countries whose economic performance depends heavily on exports 
to the US. 
One of the interesting developments I would like to mention is that, whereas previous crises 
originated  from  emerging-market  economies,  developed  markets  were  essentially  the 
epicentre of the crisis. So far emerging markets have also proved relatively resilient to the 
financial turmoil. Improved fundamentals, abundant reserves and strong growth rates have 
all helped to sustain flows into emerging market assets. However, there are macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities in a number of countries that make them susceptible to a deterioration in the 
external  environment  –  in  particular  countries  with  current  account  deficits  financed  by 
private  debt  or  portfolio  flows,  and  countries  in  which  domestic  credit  has  grown  rapidly. 
There  is  also  a  risk  that  banks  in  developed  markets  may  pare  back  funding  to  their 
subsidiaries  in  emerging  markets,  particularly  in  circumstances  where  external  imbalances 
are  large.  Emerging  markets  are,  therefore,  by  no  means  isolated  from  the  turmoil  in 
developed markets.  
The role of central banks  
4.  
Central banks assume a crucial role when market liquidity dries up and funding constraints 
cast doubt on the solidity and safety of financial institutions. Central banks have to prevent or 
limit systemic risks. In essence this entails addressing adverse dynamics and preventing the 
collapse of financial intermediation.  
During normal times, central banks provide sufficient liquidity to the banking system to keep 
their policy rates effective. Generally, a reliable relationship links the short-term policy rate 
and longer-term money-market rates and counterparties effectively distribute liquidity to the 
wider market. However, in mid-August 2007, the pattern of banks’ liquidity demand in the US 
changed: the short-term yield curve steepened and became more volatile, the gap between 
secured  and  unsecured  rates  widened,  and  the  broader  interbank  market  that  distributed 
liquidity throughout the system was disrupted. 
At the immediate onset of the crisis, there was a strong increase in demand for central bank 
liquidity  (i.e.,  reserves  at  the  central  bank),  but  as  the  crisis  unfolded,  commercial  banks 
desired increased liquidity beyond central bank balances. Initially, both the ECB and the Fed 
provided additional funds, while the Bank of England allowed banks’ increased demand for 
reserves  to  be  reflected  in  higher  reserve  targets.  As  uncertainty  over  the  financial 
soundness of counterparties increased, trading of unsecured term interbank funds dwindled 
because banks – and other clients – wanted to borrow long-term funds but lend only in the 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2008
short term. Hence, term funding dried up and longer-term yields rose sharply. Central banks 
were able to increase the volume of longer-term refinancing to the market without expanding 
their  balance  sheets  by  withdrawing  liquidity  at  other  maturities  or  periods.  This  approach 
helped to achieve the twin goals of executing monetary operations while addressing financial 
stability concerns.  
Central  banks  had  to  face  a  number  of  challenges  in  addressing  financial  system  stress. 
Firstly,  they  had  to  deal  with  the  breakdown  of  standard  distribution  channels  for  liquidity, 
both nationally and internationally. This was because the provision of sufficient liquidity to a 
small  group  of  intermediaries  no  longer  guaranteed  that  it  would  either  flow  through  the 
system,  or  to  those  in  need  of  funding  in  specific  currencies,  as  stress  in  money  markets 
spread  to  foreign  exchange  swap  markets.  Secondly,  some  banks  lacked  direct  access  to 
open  market  operations  (OMOs),  either  because  they  did  not  belong  to  the  list  of  eligible 
counterparties, or lacked the eligible collateral. Finally, central banks had to project liquidity 
demands at different time horizons, as demand patterns changed rapidly and unexpectedly, 
and the impact of factors such as year-end effects became increasingly unpredictable. 
The decision by central banks whether or not to provide additional liquidity to markets and to 
bail  out  failing  banks  has  its  own  set  of  complexities.  Clearly  central  banks  have  to  be 
concerned about systemic risk. The provision of overall liquidity is probably more clear cut, 
as such provision is generally done against appropriate collateral, although this requirement 
was relaxed in a number of instances. 
With regard to bailing out failing banks, there are more difficult issues. Firstly, there is the 
issue of moral hazard to consider. Should a central bank under all circumstances bail out a 
bank  –  even  when  it  has  been  mismanaged?  How  does  the  central  bank  ensure  that  its 
lender-of-last-resort  assistance  doesn’t  result  in  excessive  risk  taking  and  poor  risk 
management by banks? 
Secondly, the issue of timing and the degree of intervention required has to be considered. 
Acting too soon can increase the risk of moral hazard and favour bad firms over good ones. 
Acting too slowly can exacerbate the consequences. The Bank of England, for example, was 
accused of delaying too long in attempting to save Northern Rock. In my view, there is no 
such thing as the perfect handling of a bank failure. A bank failure is a financial disaster, and 
the most central banks can do is damage control. It is a very difficult call to make whether or 
not  to  try  and  save  a  failing  bank,  when  to  intervene  and  to  what  extent  to  intervene. 
Whatever decision is taken is normally criticised by some or other group of stakeholders. In 
addition, central banks can usually not disclose the information upon which their decisions 
were based. 
However, even central banks that focus primarily on price stability sometimes face possible 
conflicts  of  objectives.  The  most  obvious  one  is  probably  the  potential  conflict  between 
maintaining price stability and financial stability. The issue may be complicated by the fact 
that  there  could  be  a  negative  feedback  loop  from  financial  instability  to  macroeconomic 
instability, which in turn feeds back to the financial sector. 
Central banks potentially have conflicts of interest, being at the same time a participant and 
regulator of financial markets. Banks that are supervised by the central bank are often also 
counterparties.  This  has  the  potential  of  complicating  decision  making,  unless  properly 
governed. I am sure that this is not a major issue affecting the role that central banks play in 
maintaining financial stability: it is generally well managed and control through segregation of 
duties  and  firewalls  between  operational,  supervision  and  policy  departments  or  divisions. 
However, it is something that central banks should remain sensitive to and manage diligently. 
Other role players 
5.  
In all of their activities, central banks have to be very sensitive to changes in the structure 
and functioning of the financial markets. These changes take place on an ongoing basis, and 
BIS Review 67/2008 
 3
a trend normally becomes visible only after it has progressed fairly significantly. One such 
change that is occurring is the bigger role played in global financial markets by a number of 
new  players,  in  particular  sovereign  wealth  funds  (SWFs),  private  equity  funds  and  hedge 
funds. The role of SWFs in the current crisis is particularly of note, and it is also interesting to 
see how the activities of these funds occurred complementary to those of central banks. 
Sovereign  wealth  funds  appear  to  have  played  a  stabilising  role  during  recent  times, 
alleviating capital constraints and absorbing some of the market volatility. These institutions 
contributed  USD41  billion  of  the  USD105  billion  capital  injected  into  major  financial 
institutions since late 2007. There are several factors that facilitate the ability of SWFs to act 
as a stabiliser in times of market stress. These include the fact that they have a long-term 
investment horizon and limited liquidity needs and they have a stable funding base and no 
capital  adequacy  or  prudential  regulatory  requirements  that  could  force  it  to  liquidate 
positions.  However,  the  long-term  impact  and  the  potentially  stabilizing  role  of  SWFs  as 
major institutional investors will require a broader set of data and assessment, and you may 
well be aware that some SWFs are regarded with quite a bit of suspicion as regards their 
long-term motives for investment. 
A  number  of  other  institutions  also  played  important  roles  during  the  current  turmoil,  and 
several initiatives were announced to improve regulations and enforce disclosures, aiming to 
restore and improve financial stability. At the national level, the US Department of Treasury 
issued a blueprint for regulatory reform in the US during April, part of which has come into 
effect, with the US Securities and Exchange Commission announcing its plan to require top 
Wall Street firms to publicly disclose their liquidity and capital positions. 
At a broader level, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) has also been active. From 
mainly  focusing  on  capital  adequacy  over  past  years,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision is now also devoting more time and resources to the analysis of risk and liquidity 
management  of  banks.  It  will  require  wisdom  and  insight  to  draft  and  implement  the  most 
appropriate  regulatory  reforms.  In  addition,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  an 
international  body  under  the  auspices  of  the  (BIS)  has  established  a  Working  Group  on 
Market and Institutional Resilience. 
6. Concluding comments  
We  have  been  relatively  fortunate  in  that  the  Bank  did  not  have  to  deal  with  the  same 
financial stability issues that confronted central banks in Europe and the United States. The 
impact  of  the  current  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  affected  South  Africa  indirectly, 
through changes in share prices, bond prices and the exchange rate, rather than directly, as 
South  African  banks  had  almost  no  direct  exposure  to  the  US  subprime  market.  Not 
surprisingly,  given  the  state  of  the  international  banking  environment,  international  credit 
lines are more difficult to access and the domestic securitisation market is much tighter. Our 
banks however have not had any interbank or liquidity problems of the type experienced in 
Europe and the US, and the South African Reserve Bank has not had to intervene with any 
unusual liquidity provision.  
The fact that we have not had to be concerned about liquidity and financial stability issues 
has allowed the Bank to continue focussing on its objective of bringing inflation back to within 
the target range. As you are aware, our inflation rate is significantly above our target of 3-6 
per cent, and we remain committed to bring inflation back to within this range. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2008
