T T Mboweni: Perspectives on the economic and financial environment for 
exporters  
Keynote address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
annual symposium of the Cape Pomological Association, Stellenbosch, 3 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentleman 
Thank you for your kind invitation to deliver the keynote address at your annual symposium. 
The  deciduous  fruit  industry  is  characterised  by  participation  of  numerous  small  and  large 
entrepreneurs,  and  ranges  from  farming  activities  to  the  processing,  packaging  and 
distribution of deciduous fruit. A significant amount of this output is exported, and therefore it 
is appropriate to be talking about the economic environment facing exporters. It is probably 
not  necessary  to  tell  this  particular  audience  that  exporters  are  likely  to  be  facing  a 
particularly challenging environment going forward. 
Contribution of agriculture to the South African economy 
The Deciduous Fruit Trust estimates that the Western Cape has more than 2 000 deciduous 
fruit farmers, ranging from very small entrepreneurs to well-known large farming businesses. 
Farming  activities  in  the  Western  Cape  provide  nearly  100  000  employment  opportunities, 
and the employees in turn support nearly 400 000 dependants. Apart from fruit production, 
the  subsequent  processing  and  distribution  of  deciduous  fruit  also  contributes  directly  and 
indirectly to economic activity in the Western Cape. The Trust has also estimated that every 
increase of R 1 million in final demand for deciduous fruit creates an equivalent of 115 job 
opportunities through the production and distribution chain. 
In  terms  of  the  overall  scale  of  economic  activity  in  South  Africa,  the  contribution  of  the 
agricultural sector is comparatively small. The contribution of agriculture, forestry and fishing 
to gross domestic product (GDP) was about 2,3 per cent in 2007, down from 2,8 per cent the 
previous  year,  with  the  agriculture  sub-sector  contributing  about  80  per  cent  of  this  figure. 
However,  these  figures  conceal  the  importance  of  agriculture  in  certain  regions  of  our 
country.  In  the  Western  Cape  the  contribution  of  agriculture,  forestry  and  fishing  to  the 
regional GDP is some 40 per cent larger than the national average, as the Western Cape 
accounts  for  nearly  one  quarter  of  the  contribution  of  agriculture,  forestry  and  fishing  to 
domestic GDP. Fruit exports currently account for about 2 per cent of our total exports.1
Despite  its  relatively  small  direct  contribution  to  economic  activity  in  the  country,  the 
agriculture sub-sector must be gauged against its broader contribution to economic activity. 
Considering the strong domestic linkages of the agricultural sub-sector with many suppliers 
and  service-related  industries  in  the  South  African  economy,  the  contribution  of  this  sub-
sector was substantially higher at just over 6 per cent of economic activity in 2006. 
Global financial markets and global growth 
Internationally  the  financial  and  economic  environment  has  become  considerably  more 
uncertain since the advent of the financial system instability in the United States of America, 
caused in the main, but not only by the sub-prime mortgage crisis. Much has been written 
about this crisis, which is in essence the lending of money for purchasing residential property 
                                                 
1   Statistics South Africa. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 1
to borrowers with marginal or no creditworthiness during a period of low but variable interest 
rates  and  rising  house  values.  This  business  model  was  clearly  unsustainable,  and  once 
interest  rates  increased,  delinquencies  increased,  fuelling  a  downward  spiral  of  property 
prices  and  increased  foreclosures.  To  compound  matters,  the  mortgages  were  securitised 
and held by institutions around the world, so the financial market turmoil has not confined to 
the  US.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  estimates  that  total  potential  losses  to  financial 
institutions as a result of the sub-prime crisis could be close to USD  1 trillion. However, it 
would seem that South African financial institutions have no material exposure to the sub-
prime problems. 
The difficulties in the US housing market has had a significant negative impact on consumer 
demand  in  the  US,  despite  significant  interest  rate  reductions  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
and  fiscal  policy  initiatives.  A  consequence  of  these  developments  has  been  a  significant 
worsening  of  global  growth  outlook,  which  is  not  good  news  for  exporters  and  the  global 
economy.  The  latest  IMF  forecasts  are  for  global  growth  to  average  3,7  per  cent  in  2008, 
compared  to  their  previous  forecast  in  September  2007  of  4,8  per  cent.2  The  advanced 
economies are expected to grow by 1,3 per cent, and the US by 0,5 per cent. The euro area, 
which is an important export destination for South African products is now expected to grow 
by 1,4 per cent, compared to 2,1 per cent in the previous forecast. It is of concern that the 
risks are seen to be on the downside and growth is only expected to improve marginally in 
2009. 
On the positive side, our trade with emerging markets has been increasing, particularly with 
Asia, and these economies, while slowing, are still expected to experience relatively robust 
growth.  The  IMF  expects  growth  in  the  emerging-market  and  developing  economies  to 
average 6,7 per cent in 2008, down from the September forecast of 7,4 per cent. Developing 
Asia  is  expected  to  grow  by  8,2  per  cent,  with  Chinese  growth  expected  to  exceed  9  per 
cent. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  whereas  previous  crises  have  often  originated  from  emerging-
market economies, these economies have so far proven to be relatively resilient in the face 
of  the  current  financial  market  turmoil.  Improved  fundamentals,  abundant  reserves  and 
strong growth rates have all helped to sustain flows into emerging market assets. However, 
there are macroeconomic vulnerabilities in a number of countries that make them susceptible 
to a deterioration in the external environment – in particular countries with current account 
deficits financed by private debt or portfolio flows, and countries in which domestic credit has 
grown  rapidly.  Emerging  markets  are,  therefore,  by  no  means  isolated  from  the  turmoil  in 
developed markets. The de-coupling hypo thesis is not supported. 
Real  GDP  growth  in  Africa  is  expected  to  be  a  relatively  robust  6,3  per  cent.  The  African 
continent accounted for some 3,7 per cent of the export value of the deciduous fruit industry 
in 2007, while the United Kingdom and Northern Europe accounted jointly for some 75 per 
cent  of  industry  exports.  Given  the  proximity  of  Africa,  also  in  comparison  to  our  major 
competitors  in  the  fruit  export  business,  there  is  no  reason  why  exports  to  Africa  cannot 
increase  considerably  in  coming  years.  Increasing  such  exports  is  one  of  the  near-term 
challenges  facing  the  industry,  as  African  countries  share  the  concerns  of  developed 
countries about sustained food supply. 
Global commodity and food price developments 
In  addition  to  financial  market  and  growth  uncertainties  in  certain  parts  of  the  world,  we 
currently  also  see  substantial  increases  in  commodity  prices,  particularly  oil  and  food. 
International oil prices have more than quadrupled since the beginning of 2004, and in fact 
                                                 
2   World Economic Outlook, April 2008, Washington. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2008
have more than doubled since January 2007 when North Sea Brent Crude averaged a little 
above US$50 per barrel following a 2006 peak of around US$70 per barrel. This is clearly 
not  good  news  for  anyone  except  those  who  are  making  massive  profits.  Agriculture  is 
directly  affected  through  the  increased  costs  of  diesel  and  fertilisers  (input  costs).  This 
relative price increase is not expected to be reversed significantly any time soon, and most 
analysts  expect  international  oil  prices  to  remain  elevated.  We  in  South  Africa  have  the 
additional  impact  of  movements  in  the  rand  exchange  rate  which  has  exacerbated  the 
impact. 
However  there  is  good  news  for  the  agricultural  sector  in  that  the  commodity  boom  has 
extended to agricultural prices as well, albeit with a lag. The rising trend in international food 
prices  accelerated  in  2008.  According  to  a  recent  World  Bank  study,  U.S.  wheat  export 
prices increased by 18 per cent in the first quarter of 2008, while Thai (Thailand) rice export 
prices increased by 54 per cent in the same period.3 This came on top of an 181 per cent 
increase in global wheat prices over the 36 months to February 2008, and an 83 per cent 
increase  in  overall  global  food  prices  over  the  same  period.  However  not  all  sectors  of 
agriculture have benefited to the same extent as some of the seed crops. While crops such 
as maize are more homogenous, fruit in particular is subject to other factors such as income 
changes, quality, taste changes, market access, and more competitive markets. 
Several factors have contributed to the increase in food prices. As mentioned earlier, farmers 
have recently been exposed to a whole host of increases in the prices of productive inputs, 
particularly oil, which also increase the cost of agricultural production. Linked to the level of 
oil  prices  has  been  the  increased  demand  for  corn  as  an  input  into  the  biofuels  industry. 
Increasing the capacity for the production of biofuels as a replacement for expensive crude 
oil is seen as an important alternative source of energy. Increased biofuels production has 
increased the demand for maize, oilseeds, palm oil and sugar. This increase in demand for 
alternative usage has reduced the available supply for human consumption. The jury is still 
out about the potential benefits to be derived from the biolfuels industry. 
At the same time it would seem that the demand for food has grown in emerging economies 
such as Brazil, China, India, Russia and South Africa owing to improved standards of living in 
these and other countries. On the supply side adverse climatic conditions have contributed to 
lower agricultural output in some parts of the world, with concomitant price increases. In as 
much as agricultural produce is used in the food production chain, rising feed prices (input 
costs) resulted in increases in the cost of animal production and, ultimately, meat prices. A 
number of countries have responded by restricting the export of certain categories of food, 
which  simply  compounds  the  global  problem.  We  are  supposed  to  be  promoting  and  not 
hindering  international  trade.  That  has  been  the  burden  of  the  Doha  round  (WTO 
negotiations). 
This  combination  of  factors  has  contributed  to  world-wide  concerns  about  sustained  food 
supply and food security. It is quite ironic that as recently as 2005, a Food and Agricultural 
Organisation  (FAO)  report  warned  that  “the  long-term  downward  trend  in  agricultural 
commodity prices threatens the food security of hundreds of millions of people in some of the 
world's poorest developing countries where the sale of commodities is often the only source 
of  cash”.4  Clearly  there  has  to  be  a  balance  between  food  supply  sustainability  and 
affordability. 
                                                 
3   Rising  food  prices:  Policy  Options  and  World  Bank  responses:  Background  note  for  the  Development 
Committee meeting, April 2008. 
4   FAO Press Release (15 February 2005) of the FAO Publication: The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets 
(SOCO 2004), Geneva. 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 3
Global and domestic inflation 
Until  recently,  global  inflation  appeared  to  be  relatively  under  control  despite  the  food  and 
energy price developments. According to the IMF, world inflation averaged 4 per cent in 2007 
and is expected to increase to 4,8 per cent this year, although many analysts expect this to 
be  higher.  However  emerging  market  economies  are  expected  to  experience  even  higher 
inflation  because  of  the  higher  weight  of  food  in  their  consumption  baskets.  Inflation  is 
therefore expected to increase to average 7.4 per cent in the developing economies. Food 
price  inflation  is  much  higher  than  overall  headline  inflation  in  many  countries,  including 
South Africa. 
World-wide inflation has been accelerating over the past year in the midst of slower global 
economic  growth.  In  the  1970s  similar  conditions  of  slower  growth  combined  with 
accelerating  inflation  resulted  in  stagflation  –  despite  recessionary  conditions,  many 
economies suffered inflation. One current challenge facing many economies is to prevent the 
development  of  similar  unfavourable  conditions.  For  this  reason  we  have  seen  divergent 
policy  responses.  In  some  countries,  such  as  the  US,  Canada  and  the  United  Kingdom, 
interest rates have been decreased recent months. However the higher inflation has seen a 
tighter  monetary  policy  stance  in  a  number  of  countries  including  Sweden,  China,  Russia, 
Brazil,  Iceland,  Australia  and  South  Africa.  Over  the  next  few  months  we  are  likely  to  see 
increasing numbers of countries trying to contend with higher inflation pressures and lower 
growth. The road ahead is going to be bumpy. 
Domestically, year-on-year CPIX inflation has accelerated during the past few months, and 
reached 10,4 per cent in April of this year. In response, the Monetary Policy Committee of 
the  Bank  has  increased  interest  rates  by  a  cumulative  450  basis  points  since  June  2006. 
Food  and  petrol  prices  are  the  main  contributors  to  inflation,  but  in  recent  months,  more 
generalised price pressures have emerged as well. Food prices increased at a year-on-year 
rate of 15,9 per cent in April, while petrol prices increased by around 30 per cent. According 
to our most recent forecast, inflation is expected to persist above the inflation target of 3-6 
per  cent,  and  is  not  expected  to  return  to  within  the  range  before  the  end  of  2009. 
Unfortunately we see the risks to this forecast to be significantly on the upside. So exporters 
are  likely  to  continue  to  face  an  environment  of  rising  costs  and  high  interest  rates  in  the 
short  term.  We  remain  committed,  however,  to  bringing  inflation  down  to  within  the  target 
range in the medium term. 
Exchange rate issues 
South Africa runs a sizeable current account deficit on its balance of payments. This implies 
that we import more from the rest of the world than we export. For 2007 this deficit amounted 
to  7,3  per  cent  of  GDP.  This  deficit  has  been  sustainable  because  foreign  investment 
attracted to the country has exceeded the deficit on the current account. Given our strong 
infrastructural  expenditure  programme  and  high  crude  oil  prices,  our  import  demand  is 
expected to remain strong. This means that we have to continue to rely on continued capital 
inflows,  or  else  we  need  to  improve  our  export  performance.  Clearly,  from  a  sustainability 
perspective  the  latter  would  be  preferable.  Unfortunately  our  export  performance  has  not 
kept up with imports, despite the significant increase in commodity prices. 
Over the past few years, when the economy was growing at rates above 5 per cent, the bulk 
of  net  capital  inflows  were  into  the  equity  markets.  The  sustainability  of  these  flows  is, 
however,  not  only  dependent  on  domestic  developments.  In  the  final  quarter  of  2007  we 
experienced significant net sales of bonds and equities by non-residents as a result of global 
risk aversion in response to the turmoil in global credit markets. These sales intensified in 
January and February as electricity supply constraints contributed to negative perceptions of 
our  growth  prospects.  These  developments  impacted  on  the  exchange  rate  which 
depreciated by about 20 per cent on a trade weighted basis in the first quarter of 2008. It has 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2008
since  recovered  somewhat,  but  is  nevertheless  about  12  per  cent  weaker  than  at  the 
beginning of this year. 
Fruit and wine exports are particularly sensitive to exchange rate movements, and one of the 
consequences of the current financial market turmoil is that there has been a considerable 
amount of exchange rate volatility in international markets in general. Since the beginning of 
2008, for example, the US dollar has depreciated by about 6 per cent against the euro. So 
even if there were no domestic issues, the rand would still have experienced some volatility. 
The  weaker  exchange  rate  has  generally  been  welcomed  by  exporters.  Of  significance 
perhaps is the fact that while since the beginning of the year the rand has depreciated by 
about 10 per cent against the US dollar, the Chilean peso has appreciated by around 4 per 
cent against the dollar. Given that Chile is a major competitor of South Africa in the European 
fruit market in particular, these developments are seen to give our fruit farmers a significant 
competitive advantage. 
It is sometimes argued by some commentators and researchers that a weaker exchange rate 
is in the long-term interest of the export sector. This is a fallacy. No industry can build a long-
term  business  strategy  on  a  one-way  bet  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  currency, or  on  the 
basis of short-term nominal exchange rate movements. The immediate benefits of a lower 
exchange rate for exporters are soon offset by the increased costs of imported productive 
input such as petrol and chemicals, while cost increases can also feed into higher inflation 
with all its negative consequences. A weaker exchange rate is usually a sign of high inflation, 
and  unless  the  inflation  problem  is  addressed,  it  can  set  in  motion  an  exchange  rate  and 
inflation spiral. In short, a weaker exchange rate can only benefit exporters if the exchange 
rate change is not offset by cost increases. During times of exchange rate volatility, however, 
management of exchange rate risk does become a challenge for exporters. 
Emphasis  should  however  be  made  here  that  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  does  not 
intervene to try and manage the level of the exchange rate. In an inflation targeting context, 
the exchange rate must be determined in the market. We would of course prefer to see a 
stable  and  competitive  currency,  but  the  best  we  can  do  is  to  contribute  to  this  through 
prudent  monetary  policy  which  focuses  on  achieving  and  maintaining  low  inflation  which 
should  prevent  a  continuous  depreciation  of  the  currency.  Stable  macroeconomic  policies 
also  contribute  to  more  stable  capital  inflows,  and  our  higher  level  of  gold  and  foreign 
exchange reserves should also make the currency less vulnerable to speculative attacks. 
The exchange rate is only one aspect of competitiveness in the fruit industry where quality 
issues are paramount. Other challenges relate to the industry commitment at many levels to 
ensure compliance with international best practice and commercial guidelines, for instance 
GlobalGAP.  This  includes  compliance  with  quality  and  safety  standards,  traceability, 
domestic  legislation,  and  social  and  ethical  conduct.  As  compliance  has  a  technical  and 
financial  impact  on  emerging  farmers,  a  challenge  facing  the  industry  is  the  rendering  of 
support  and  assistance  to  ensure  their  export  readiness  and  compliance  with  the  strict 
requirements.  Unfortunately  compliance  costs  are  very  high  and  it  seems  that  producers 
have  not  yet  received  tangible  benefits  for  compliance  in  the  form  of  a  premium  on  their 
products. 
Concluding comments 
Internationally,  concerns  currently  focus  on  the  availability  and  prices  of  food,  and  in 
particular  of  basic  staple  commodities  such  as  maize  and  rice.  Although  the  availability  of 
food domestically may  not be a concern at this point, as noted earlier, South African food 
prices  have  increased  considerably.  South  Africa  is  dealing  with  a  problem  of  food 
affordability, rather than food availability. 
This has serious implications for poor people and the unemployed, as their spending on food 
as  percentage  of  total  spending  is  much  larger  than  is  the  case  with  the  middle  and  high 
BIS Review 69/2008 
 5
income groups. Food accounts for more than 50 per cent of the spending basket of the low 
income group, compared to some 17 per cent of the spending of the highest income group, 
and  some  20  per  cent  of  the  overall  CPI  basket.  Agribusiness  can  make  a  contribution  to 
affordability by containing price increases as far as possible, as is indeed also the case for all 
other productive sectors in the economy in our quest to contain inflation. Cost containment 
will also help to ensure the international competitiveness of agricultural exports. 
The deciduous fruit industry is an important contributor to the regional GDP of the Western 
Cape. It is therefore befitting to wish the industry and its many role players the best wishes 
for success from all of us at the Bank. Your important role in the domestic economy is never 
underestimated and we wish you good harvests, a mild climate with sufficient timely rainfall, 
a healthy crop and international good prices at a level supportive of your business and the 
South African economy. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2008
