Glenn Stevens: Recent financial developments 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Smart Capital 
2008:  The  Euromoney  Australian,  Financial  Markets 
Innovation  Congress,  Sydney, 
27 March 2008. 
 Welcome to Sydney. It is a pleasure to be here to make some remarks at the opening of your 
conference.  The  opportunity  this  forum  provides  to  exchange  ideas  and  participate  in 
vigorous discussions is undoubtedly valuable, not least at this particular juncture.  
The past nine months have certainly been a very challenging time in international financial 
markets.  We  have  seen  a  significant  reappraisal  of  certain  categories  of  risk  and 
considerable  financial  turbulence  in  key  international  markets.  Economic  prospects  in  the 
United  States,  in  particular,  have  taken  a  significant  turn  for  the  worse.  The  extent  of 
disengagement in some core markets, which hitherto had been thought to be extremely liquid 
and reliable, has been quite unsettling. 
The fact that your conference has a focus on innovation is apt as well. It will not have gone 
unnoticed  that  difficulties  associated  with  some  particular  innovations  of  the  past  decade 
have  been  prominent  in  the  recent  period.  It  has  been  remarked  by  others  that  the 
complexity of some new instruments meant that they were not well enough understood by 
investors,  and  perhaps  even  by  those  promoting  them.1  Complexity  is  also  the  enemy  of 
liquidity,  which  proved  to  be  much  less  reliable  than  had  been  assumed.  Perhaps  future 
innovations will need to take account of the difficulty people inevitably have in grappling with 
complexity,  and  the  dangers  of  illiquidity.  In  the  end,  though,  human  nature,  with  its 
propensity  initially  to  underestimate  risk  in  good  times,  then  to  over  react  when  risk 
materialises, is probably a permanent feature of the landscape. 
I will organise my remarks today under three headings: How did we get here? Where are we 
now? And what policy issues arise for future consideration? 
I should be clear that my remarks are principally about global events. They are not directed 
towards  the  Australian  financial  system  in  particular.  The  local  financial  community  has 
certainly  been  affected  by  the  global  turmoil  but,  on  the  whole,  as  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
Financial Stability Review being released later this morning sets out, is weathering the storm 
well. Profitability remains very strong and capital sound. There is very little direct exposure to 
the US sub prime problems, but the main reason for the resilience is many years of robust 
economic growth, sound regulatory foundations and prudent risk management. The Reserve 
Bank has been carefully monitoring access to funding, including offshore funding. We judge it 
to  have  been  more  than  adequate,  even  if  more  expensive,  though,  of  course,  we  will 
continue  to  watch  the  situation  closely.  But  the  centre  of  recent  developments  has  been 
offshore,  so  my  remarks  today  are  about  the  global  scene,  not  the  Australian  one,  unless 
specifically noted. 
Background to the present international situation: how did we get here? 
Although the headlines of the past year have been dominated by stories about the sub prime 
loans in the US mortgage market, in fact the genesis of the problems was much earlier. For 
                                                 
1   This observation has been made by many in the past year, including the Bank of England Governor, Mervyn 
King 
and 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2007/speech324.pdf) and Federal Reserve Chairman, 
Ben Bernanke (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/Bernanke20070515a.htm). 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2008/speech333.pdf 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 1
much  of  the  preceding  decade,  international  capital  markets  were  characterised  by  the 
search for yield. An excess of saving over investment in Asia was a feature, resulting partly 
from the reaction to the late 1990s crisis and the determination to avoid a repeat of it. The 
rapid growth of Chinese incomes and the lag between that trend and a corresponding rise in 
consumption  was  also  a  factor.  These  trends,  associated  as  they  were  with  a  surplus  of 
internationally tradeable goods and services, carried a degree of disinflationary impact for the 
rest of the world, which made strong growth in demand and low inflation easier to combine. 
They also lowered the marginal cost of financial capital in global markets. Somewhat later, oil 
rich nations also provided funds to the global economy and spurred on this search for yield, 
since  mounting  revenues  from  higher  oil  prices  were  invested  rather  than  spent  by 
governments  that  were  now  more  fiscally  conservative.  In  the  major  developed  countries, 
interest rates at the short end were also lower than normal for a long period after the mild 
2001  recession  in  some  of  the  G7  countries,  as  monetary  policies  sought  to  manage  the 
particular circumstances each country faced. 
This  was  associated  with  an  unusually  stable  period  for  macroeconomic  conditions.  The 
“great moderation” in volatility of output and prices had been under way in the United States 
since the mid 1980s but it became more obvious in many other economies in the 1990s and 
2000s. In my mind, there is little doubt that this lowered perceptions of risk, and indeed it is a 
fact  that  default  rates  on  corporate  debt,  even  sub  investment  grade  debt,  were  unusually 
low  through  the  past  decade.  They  remain  low  even  on  the  latest  data,  up  to  end  2007, 
though they will presumably rise somewhat over the next couple of years.  
In this environment, the search for yield continued. This saw end investors consciously begin 
to  accept  more  risk  in  order  to  find  the  returns  they  were  seeking.  Additionally,  the  easy 
availability of credit and benign macroeconomic environment led to an increase in the use of 
leverage to increase returns further. 
It  also  provided  the  demand  side  backdrop  for  the  development  of  new  instruments.  The 
innovative  financial  community  obliged  and  provided  ever  more  sophisticated  ways  of 
achieving  the  returns  desired  by  investors.  The  innate  complexity  and,  in  some  cases, 
opacity  of  these  instruments  made  their  properties  hard  to  assess.  With  this  reduced 
transparency, it was easy for investors to underestimate the risks that they were taking on. 
Observable  compensation  for  risk  declined  over  time,  as  evidenced  by  various  market 
spreads,  non  price  terms  of  loans  and  so  on.  This  was  something  about  which  numerous 
prudential supervisors, central banks and private bankers commented on over some years. 
Eventually,  something  was  going  to  occur  that  would  trigger  a  reappraisal  of  risk.  It  is 
remarkable that this took so long. Over several years, we had a string of events that could 
have,  and  in  other  times  surely  would  have,  triggered  a  reassessment:  prominent  credit 
rating downgrades of some major US corporations to sub investment grade status; a default 
on  foreign  debt  by  Argentina,  followed  by  rather  rancorous  negotiations  over  restructuring; 
political  instability  in  several  countries;  a  very  large  rise  in  the  price  of  oil;  significant 
tightening  of  US  monetary  policy  up  to  2006;  the  list  goes  on.  Through  all  this,  financial 
sentiment barely missed a beat. 
Then, in early 2007, the escalating losses on the 2006 vintage of US sub prime mortgages 
first  started  to  come  to  light.  It  took  some  months  for  those  losses  to  show  up  in  certain 
hedge  funds,  structured  investment  vehicles  and  so  on.  But  by  July  and  August  2007, 
enough had emerged for there to be a marked change in sentiment. 
There  is  no  need  to  give  a  detailed  treatment  here  of  subsequent  events:  they  are  well 
known,  so  it  is  enough  to  observe  the  broad  outlines.  As  the  scope  of  potential  losses 
became clearer, the business models of some of the entities that were exposed came under 
pressure,  particularly  those  which  were  reliant  on  short  term  wholesale  funding  and/or 
securitisation. Markets for asset backed commercial paper stopped the flow of new funding, 
and for a time were very reluctant to roll over existing funding for entities that were seen to 
have sub prime exposure. Much of the resulting funding pressure came back to the balance 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2008
sheets  of  the  major  international  banks  and  investment  banks  that  had  initially  sponsored 
these entities. Essentially, they took the responsibility for funding sub prime assets. At the 
same  time,  these  and  other  institutions  found  that  a  number  of  other  markets  had  also 
become  difficult  to  operate  in.  This  saw  them  unable  to  shift  loans  originated  from  their 
balance  sheets,  even  though  these  loans  were  unrelated  to  the  US  sub  prime  mortgage 
market – for example, loans associated with merger and acquisition activity. 
In this climate of uncertainty over both credit exposures and funding needs, funding liquidity 
pressures  became  acute  on  occasion  during  the  second  half  of  2007.  Short  term  market 
yields became much less closely connected to the overnight rates that central banks typically 
control. Central banks responded by expanding the scope and scale of their routine market 
operations, adding additional liquidity, accepting a wider range of assets in their operations 
and expanding the maturity of their lending facilities. There were also some internationally 
coordinated actions to provide foreign currency funding under swaps between some of the 
major central banks. Practices have continued to evolve.  
The current international situation: where are we now? 
Over the recent period, disclosures of losses associated with various credit products have 
continued.  Financial  institutions  and  investors  have  continued  to  be  wary  of  what  credit 
losses  may  yet  be  unearthed.  Institutions  have  generally  made  strong  efforts  to  disclose 
exposures  appropriately,  but  there  are  major  difficulties  in  valuing  the  relevant  assets,  not 
least  because  some  markets  have  effectively  ceased  to  operate  –  so  no  price  can  be 
observed.  It  appears  that  some  very  high  quality  assets  are  valued  at  prices  that  embody 
extremely pessimistic assumptions about returns. 
Key segments of credit markets remain in difficulty. There have been few, if any, issues of 
mortgage backed securities in recent months, though the commercial paper markets have at 
least  stopped  contracting.  It  appears  that  the  most  highly  rated  corporate  names  can  still 
access  capital  markets,  but  many  corporates  are  approaching  their  banks  for  funding. 
Business credit provided by the banking system has accelerated in the United States over 
the period since mid 2007. 
This process of reintermediation is a very necessary one, if the flow of credit to the major 
economies is not to be seriously disrupted. For the time being, and perhaps for some time 
ahead, the financial intermediaries need to fill some of the gap that the capital markets have 
suddenly left. With this comes, of course, the need for those intermediaries to have adequate 
funding themselves – one obvious reason for the pressure on term funding costs. They will 
also need sufficient capital to take on the risks inherent in the lending, since capital markets 
apparently no longer wish to accept those risks. This is, in fact, a key element of the whole 
situation: more capital needed to be carried by the big international banks to support the risks 
they were taking, and that capital has to be found now. In addition, the risk capital that was 
available from markets is no longer there to the same extent. 
The  intermediaries  have  found  substantial  capital  over  recent  months.  By  curtailing  share 
repurchases  and  reducing  dividends,  several  intermediaries  have  generated  some  of  the 
necessary  capital  internally.  More  crucial  has  been  the  fresh  capital  raised  though  selling 
stakes  in  their  businesses  to  individuals,  institutions  and  governments.2  These  deals, 
however, have been costly, leading to a significant dilution of the interests of their existing 
shareholders.  Irrespective  of  this,  with  both  these  sources  of  capital,  intermediaries  have 
been  able  to  maintain,  and  in  some  cases  increase,  their  capital  ratios  –  even  when  they 
                                                 
2   Sovereign  wealth  funds  have  been  particularly  active  in  providing  this  fresh  capital.  They  have  reportedly 
provided at least half of the capital injected into these intermediaries in recent times, and acquired stakes in 
Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and UBS. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 3
have  reported  significant  losses.  With  this  being  the  case,  they  have  also,  at  least  so  far, 
been able to step in to fill the gap in corporate funding. 
In  addition  to  reintermediation  and  the  pursuit  of  new  capital,  we  are  seeing  a  significant 
process of de leveraging. Entities with high leverage and/or complex structures have come 
under significant pressure in recent months as share markets question their resilience, and 
lenders seek a reduction in risk. We have seen some notable cases of this in Australia, but 
they are merely a reflection of what is going on in the major markets of the world. Private 
equity firms, hedge funds and so on, all find the environment much less accommodating than 
was the case a year ago. This process of balance sheet contraction has been an additional 
further factor disrupting markets of late, as asset sales have to be absorbed under already 
skittish conditions. 
In the meantime, real savings are still flowing into pension funds, insurance companies and 
other institutional investment vehicles. This is genuine capital, seeking a productive use. But 
these investors appear to be taking a more cautious approach to risk, given the short term 
uncertainty  over  asset  valuations.  It  is  a  fair  bet  that  they  have  higher  positions  in  cash  – 
overnight or very short term highly rated securities – than would normally be the case. This is 
placed largely in banking systems, so the major intermediaries are, I expect, generally flush 
with very short term liabilities, even though longer term funding remains difficult. This means 
that these intermediaries may be undertaking more maturity transformation than they would 
ordinarily find comfortable. 
Increasingly,  there  are  good  quality  assets  at  prices  that  would,  in  normal  times,  be  very 
attractive. At some point, investors who are currently on the side lines will need to summon 
enough confidence to take up the opportunities for profitable exposure to risk. It is impossible 
to say when this will occur, but we can perhaps outline what the pre conditions are. Investors 
will want a reasonable level of confidence that the bulk of the losses in the most important 
institutions  have  been  accounted  for  and  disclosed,  that  remaining  “excess”  leverage  has 
been essentially sorted out, and that any remaining downside risks to asset quality stemming 
from  slowing  growth  in  the  major  countries  are  manageable  and  within  the  set  of  normal 
parameter variation that their portfolios can cope with.  
Where to from here? Issues for policy makers 
This  financial  instability  presents  a  difficult  set  of  challenges  for  policy  makers  around  the 
world. First, central banks have the obligation to maintain liquidity at the core of the system. 
In  the  face  of  repeated  system  wide  surges  in  the  demand  for  liquidity,  they  have 
accommodated  that  demand.  They  have  also  been  prepared  to  lend  at  longer  terms  than 
usual,  and  deal  with  a  broader  range  of  counterparties  in  order  to  foster  a  little  more 
confidence in the availability of funding beyond the very short term. The Federal Reserve has 
also facilitated the absorption of Bear Stearns by a stronger competitor, by being prepared to 
use assets from its own balance sheet in a collateral swap. This is, however, not a “bail out” 
– the shareholders and managers of Bear Stearns have lost a great deal of money, but the 
system will be stabilised. 
Turning to the Australian setting for a moment, in the Reserve Bank’s case, we have been 
prepared to increase the total amount of liquidity substantially, as required. We have widened 
the  range  of  eligible  collateral  for  repurchase  agreements  (we  already  had  a  pretty  wide 
range  of  counterparties  prior  to  last  August).  We  have  also  been  prepared  to  enter  into 
repurchase agreements for six months and longer on occasion, given the pressure on market 
funding rates at that horizon. Even with that, however, the relationship between the cash rate 
(or, more correctly, the expected future cash rate) and rates on high quality private paper at a 
three to six month term is much looser at present than it has tended to be over recent years. 
This means that the cost to banks of raising funds in the market has moved independently of 
the overnight rate. The presumption that their lending rates would and should move only in 
line with the cash rate, which had arisen in an earlier period when all these rates were much 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2008
more closely related, has not been a realistic one in the recent environment. Of course, in 
setting the cash rate, the Reserve Bank has taken account of these shifting relationships, just 
as it does shifts in other relationships in the monetary transmission mechanism. 
Returning  now  to  the  global  scene,  central  banks  are  continually  assessing  the  potential 
impact  on  economic  activity  and  inflation  from  these  events,  as  they  evaluate  monetary 
policy  settings.  In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  to  evident 
weakness  in  economic  activity,  and  the  risks  posed  by  the  possibility  of  a  significant 
disruption to credit provision, by lowering overnight rates quickly. 
Elsewhere,  policy  makers  are  trying  to  assess  the  potential  spillovers.  The  weak  US 
economy and depreciating US dollar will have some impact via reduced trade in goods and 
services. But that channel is less important than the possibility of financial contagion from a 
set of forces not confined to the United States but affecting international capital and money 
markets  generally.  What  complicates  matters  is  that  policy  makers  have  to  consider  that 
possibility  at  a  time  when  they  are  also  confronted  with  a  troubling  level  of  inflation  in  a 
number of cases. 
Longer  term,  a  number  of  issues  arise  that  are  the  subject  of  intense  work  in  the  central 
banking  and  supervisory  community.  Arrangements  for  the  provision  of  liquidity  by  central 
banks have been changing in response to the events of the past eight months, but it is likely 
that there will be continued discussion about whether further refinements might be sensible. 
These  will  include  how  to  make  arrangements  sufficiently  flexible  and  adaptive,  including 
across borders, which may be needed given the globalised nature of markets. 
The discussion will also need to pay due regard to the potential for other consequences of 
changes  to  practice  in  this  area,  including  the  possibility  that  private  entities  become  so 
confident that liquidity risk has effectively been removed that they end up taking more risk of 
other types. That could leave both themselves and their central banks in an awkward position 
at  some  point  down  the  track.  So  in  parallel  with  ongoing  development  of  liquidity 
arrangements by central banks, there will need to be a focus in the supervisory community 
and the banks themselves on liquidity management. 
Conclusion 
International financial events over the past nine months have been a source of considerable 
instability. Risk that was always in the economic environment has belatedly been recognised. 
The  ensuing  process  of  assessing  and  disclosing  losses,  finding  new  capital  and  de 
leveraging  has  been  very  difficult.  Matters  have  not  been  helped  by  the  opacity  and 
complexity  of  some  of  the  financial  instruments  involved,  and  the  associated  problems  in 
valuing them. 
For  market  participants  and  policy  makers  alike,  this  environment  has  been  challenging 
indeed. Those of you in the markets are dealing with heightened volatility and uncertainty. 
Policy makers, meanwhile, are working hard to stabilise the present international situation. In 
some  countries,  especially  the  US,  that  involves  being  prepared  to  take  measures  quite 
aggressively,  in  an  effort  to  avert  a  cumulative  spiral  of  declining  asset  values  and 
deteriorating  creditworthiness  feeding  back  on  itself  and  doing  great  damage  to  the 
economy. In other countries, where financial strains are also occurring though not always to 
the same extent, it has thus far involved significant changes to liquidity management, while 
balancing the financial risks against other macroeconomic risks in an effort to foster long run 
stability. In all countries, though, policy makers are also keeping an eye out for the potential 
low probability, but high cost, downside events that could emerge. 
It looks as though the environment will remain quite challenging for us all for a while but the 
strength  of  the  Australian  financial  system  is,  for  Australia,  a  good  basis  for  meeting  the 
challenge. 
BIS Review 34/2008 
 5
