Lim Hng Kiang: Singapore’s significance in Asia against the background 
of global financial crises 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  5th  Annual  Citi  Asia  Pacific  Fixed 
Income Investor Conference, Singapore, 28 January 2008. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning and a very warm welcome to everyone here today, especially to our guests 
from abroad.  
I  am  very  pleased  that  Citi  is  holding  its  Annual  Asia  Pacific  Fixed  Income  Investor 
Conference here in Singapore for the second time. I am confident this conference will serve 
as  an  excellent  platform,  through  the  dynamic  discussions  and  exchanges  of  views,  to 
conceive fresh ideas and to establish new business relationships. 
The landscape of the Asian bond markets has evolved rapidly over the last ten years. The 
Asian  Financial  Crisis  in  1997/98  has  highlighted  the  need  to  develop  deep  and  liquid 
domestic bond markets; to serve as an alternative source of financing and to alleviate the 
overdependence  of  short-term  or  foreign  currency  bank  borrowings  to  meet  long-term 
funding  needs.  The  over-concentration  of  credit  risks  within  the  banking  sector  in  1997, 
entailing currency and maturity mismatches, contributed to the severity and contagion of the 
crisis.  When  the  crisis  broke,  turmoil  in  the  currency  markets  quickly  spread  through  the 
stock market, the corporate and banking sectors. 
But, Asia made a remarkable recovery. 
Following the crisis, the Asian governments strengthened the macroeconomic fundamentals 
and  put  in place  structural  and  fiscal  reforms.  The  strong  economic development  in  China 
and, then, India also helped to propel the region ahead.  
Today,  the  Asian  economies  growth  rate  averages  around  8%.  Businesses  have  repaired 
their balance sheets and have started to invest again after purging out the excesses of the 
1990s.  This  is  reflected  in  the  Asia  (ex-Japan)  domestic  bond  markets,  with  a  significant 
increase  of  almost  five  times  in  size  from  US$760  billion  to  more  than  US$3.6  trillion;  far 
exceeding the global growth rate, which has doubled since 1997. 
Having said that, the global financial markets today are facing yet another crisis. Ten years 
ago,  Asia  was  at  the  centre  of  the  storm.  However,  this  time  round,  the  financial  market 
turbulence  started  in  the  US  and  Europe  and  then  spread  throughout  the  world.  The 
challenges facing the capital markets show that the banking system is intertwined with the 
capital markets more intricately than was previously believed. 
While  the  characteristics  of  the  two  financial  crises  are  different,  let  me  share  3  common 
themes that run through both crises. The first has to do with the tendency of the market to 
assume  that  current  market  conditions  can  be  extrapolated  into  the  long  term.  Before  the 
Asian financial crisis, most investors extrapolated the rapid growth in Asia and the currency 
pegs maintained by some countries without factoring in the sustainability of such trends. This 
time round, the strong credit market from 2003 to 2005 have lulled investors into placing big 
bets  in  high-yielding  structured  credit  instruments,  on  the assumption that  such  favourable 
credit conditions will continue unabated. 
The second point is on proper risk assessment. Back in 1997, lenders were providing funds 
without  executing  necessary  scrutiny  or  appropriately  balancing  the  risks  against  returns. 
Likewise,  the  recent  credit  turmoil  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  assessing  risks.  The 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
distribution of risk through leveraged structured vehicles or conduits, and complexities in the 
structures have made it extremely difficult for investors to disaggregate the risks in times of 
stress  and  volatility.  As  a  result,  over-reliance  has  been  placed  on  financial  models  and 
ratings  without  full  comprehension  of  the  risks  of  the  product  and  misunderstanding  the 
scope of the ratings that measures default risk. 
Third,  excessive  leverage  in  both  crises  has  exacerbated  the  problems  triggered  by  the 
mounting default rates. Excess liquidity led to massive domestic lending; at the same time, 
investors  geared  up  aggressively  and  bet  on  continually  rising  asset  prices  as  collateral. 
When the crisis broke, the use of leverage accentuated the losses, which led to widespread 
risk  aversion  and  uncertain  market  sentiments.  The  loss  of  confidence  along  with  the  re-
pricing of credit risk have intensified the volatility in the financial markets; and this contagion 
spread rapidly beyond the structured credit space and across markets. 
So  what  does  all  this  mean  for  Asia?  The  inter-connectedness  of  global  financial  markets 
and capital flows has been amply demonstrated. The resilience and current strong economic 
growth in Asia have therefore to battle against the strong headwinds and challenges from the 
global financial landscape. 
The sub-prime-triggered credit turbulence has, undoubtedly, created a lot of uncertainty. The 
adverse impact of the potential slowdown in the US economy is likely to be felt in Asia as the 
region’s  economies  are  generally  export-oriented.  Large  and  volatile  capital  flows  into  the 
region have also placed pressures on exchange rates. This has posed risks of inflationary 
pressures, intensified by the recent high oil and food prices, spilling over into the Asian bond 
markets. Hence, it is crucial for regulators in the region to remain vigilant and to continue to 
control the risks that accompany the surging capital inflows while managing the currency and 
monetary conditions. 
Nonetheless, amidst this financial market turmoil, Asia’s resilience has thus far demonstrated 
its ability to weather the turbulence. Apart from Asia’s relatively limited exposure to sub-prime 
mortgages and related collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), the region’s strong economic 
growth  and  large  liquidity  pool,  stimulated  by  the  significant  momentum  coming  from  the 
domestic demand of China and India, and increasingly ASEAN, have cushioned the blow. 
Some  may  suggest  that  2008  will  be  a  difficult  year  for  the  credit  markets  and  investors, 
especially  those  with  weak  credit  profiles  or  the  highly  leveraged  ones,  may  even  divert 
exposures from equity and currency markets. However, the Asian bond market prospects, in 
my opinion, are not without bright spots. 
Local  currency  bonds  are  gaining  the  attention  of  foreign  investors  both  from  the 
perspectives  of  diversification  and  return  enhancements,  coupled  with  the  optimism  of 
appreciating Asian currencies. On the other hand, Asian bond markets are also growing as 
an  increasingly  attractive  asset  class  for  domestic  borrowers  as  they  steer  clear  from  the 
international market. This indicates that the economies are increasingly relying on domestic 
demand  and  intraregional  credit  investments.  Infrastructure  financing,  for  instance,  is  also 
regaining importance in a number of Asian economies. The key is to have sufficiently deep 
and efficient markets to effectively channel the high bank liquidity and abundance of savings 
in  Asia  into  regional  investments.  With  the  robust  outlook  in  Asia,  this  will  continue  to 
underpin the need for investment opportunities to fuel the growth engine. 
Singapore,  right  in  the  heart  of  Asia,  is  poised  to  play  a  significant  role  as  a  gateway  for 
global  investors  to  access  the  Asian  bond  markets.  We  are  also  poised  to  serve  as  the 
centre for debt financing in the area of infrastructure, real estate and transportation related 
projects. Project sponsors are increasingly tapping our debt capital market in financing major 
infrastructure related projects in Asia. Since we started developing the REIT market in 2002, 
there are now 19 REITs and 1 property business trust listed on the SGX with an aggregate 
market  capitalization  of  approximately  S$27  billion.  Issuance  of  Commercial  Mortgage-
Backed Securities (CMBS) remained strong on the back of a healthy REIT market. We see a 
similar potential with infrastructure funds, business trust and project bonds. We have also put 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
in  place  a  PPP  framework  to  encourage  public  private  participation  in  Singapore 
infrastructure  projects.  With  this,  we  have  successfully  tendered  for  the  ITE  College  West 
and the Singapore Sports Hub, the first and the largest sports facilities infrastructure PPP in 
the world. We believe these initiatives will bring business opportunities for the debt capital 
market community based in Singapore. 
Singapore  prides  herself  to  have  established  the  reputation  of  a  trustworthy  and  reliable 
financial centre, build on political stability, strong legal system, and a sound regulatory and 
supervisory  framework  that  raises  disclosure  standards,  fosters  market  discipline,  and 
provides for greater transparency. 
As  a  regional  hub,  Singapore  is  also  well  connected  to  the  rest  of  the  world  through  our 
extensive network of FTAs, including Australia, India, Japan, South Korea and the US. Over 
600 local and foreign financial institutions based here are able to access the growing pool of 
investors and opportunities; fueled by the strong performance of asset management activities 
in Singapore. The diversity in the sources of funds flowing into and through Singapore has 
also broadened, with increasing financial flows coming from South Asia and the Middle East. 
We have also taken the proactive and responsive approach to changes in the marketplace; 
having constant dialogues with institutions and listening to market players, like yourselves, to 
create a conducive business environment for financial institutions to operate in Singapore. As 
part of our efforts to offer a broad range of financial products and services as an international 
financial centre, we are also constantly reviewing our policies to ensure a level playing field 
for the development of Islamic financing. 
Beyond  the  financial  industry,  Singapore  is  also  committed  to  building  a  vibrant  and 
cosmopolitan  society  that  offers  high  quality  of  life  with  world-class  facilities  for  education, 
healthcare, housing and recreation – an attractive city for global talents to work and live in. 
Let  me  conclude.  Asia  has  made  remarkable  progress  and  I  believe  the  outlook  for  the 
region remains positive. In the middle of difficulty lies great opportunity. Asia will continue to 
develop  strong  and  sustainable  fundamentals  in  order  to  enhance  the  robustness  of  our 
financial systems for the Asian bond markets to become a truly global asset class. On that 
note, I wish you a very successful and fruitful conference. Thank you. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 3
