Nicholas C Garganas: Recent financial market developments and 
implications for the euro area and the world economy 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
Meeting  of  the  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  (ICC)  Commission  on  Banking 
Technique and Practice, Athens, 16 April 2008.  
 It  is  a  pleasure  indeed  to  welcome  you  to  Athens  for  this  meeting  of  the  International 
Chamber  of  Commerce  Commission.  This  meeting  is  taking  place  at  a  time  of  turmoil  in 
global financial markets and a significant downturn in global economic growth. I am delighted 
to have this opportunity to offer some remarks about the present situation and the challenges 
ahead.  
We are living in the era of the great globalization and the ICC has been an invaluable voice 
championing  the  benefits  –  including  enhanced  economic  growth,  prosperity,  and  job 
creation  –  of  increased  economic  and  financial  integration.  While  globalization  brings 
important  benefits  it  also,  sometimes,  brings  heightened  risks  and  uncertainties,  as  recent 
financial market developments vividly illustrate.  
The last nine months have been a very challenging period for both policy makers and market 
participants.  During  this  period,  we  have  witnessed  a  major  reappraisal  of  risk  and  a 
considerable,  and  still  ongoing,  turmoil  in  key  financial  markets.  We  have  also  seen  – 
especially  in  the  US  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in  the  euro  area  and  the  rest  of  the  world  – 
downward revisions of growth prospects amid increased risks and uncertainties. In order to 
be  able  to  ensure  that  the  full  benefits  of  globalization  are  shared  by  our  citizens,  it  is 
necessary to be able to manage the risks and uncertainties associated with globalization. My 
remarks today, will deal with the origins of the ongoing financial markets turmoil, the policy 
responses  to  this  turmoil,  mainly  by  the  major  central  banks,  and  prospects  and  policy 
challenges for the euro area and the global economy in the light of this turmoil. 
Greece will, therefore, not be the focus of my  remarks this morning. Let me just note that 
Greek banks generally have a relatively comfortable capital base and strong profitability, their 
exposure  to  U.S.  sub-prime  mortgage  loans  has  been  negligible,  while  the  impact  of  the 
international financial market turmoil on the Greek banks has so far been indirect and rather 
contained.  However,  the  financial  market  turmoil  is  far  from  over  and  there  are  still  risks 
ahead  of  us.  For  this  reason,  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  urged  financial  institutions  to  be 
especially prudent in their portfolio management.  
Origins of the current financial market turmoil 
Although the financial market turmoil was triggered by problems in the sub-prime loans of the 
U.S. mortgage market, the origins of this turmoil can be traced to earlier developments. In 
the  four-year  period  to  mid-2007,  the  world  economy  had  been  characterized  by 
exceptionally benign macroeconomic and financial conditions, as indicated by strong growth 
and  low  levels  of  inflation  and  (long-term)  interest  rates.  Such  conditions  of  “low  volatility” 
fostered  a  “search  for  yield”,  a  rise  in  leverage  to  increase  returns  further,  and  an  under-
pricing of risk in some key asset markets. These developments were supported by – and, in 
turn,  they  encouraged  –  further  financial  innovation,  as  evidenced  by  the  rapid  growth  in 
securitization  of  bank  loans,  in  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  and  in  other  complex 
structured finance products.  
Rapid  financial  innovation  over  the  last  30  years  has  undoubtedly  benefited  the  world 
economy by allowing a deepening of capital markets, easier access to credit by households 
and enterprises, and a more effective utilization of resources. However, especially in recent 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 1
years,  financial  innovation  has  also  been  associated  with  structural  weaknesses  and 
complacency  in  risk  management.  For  instance,  the  low  transparency  of  these  complex 
products may have made it easier for investors to underestimate the risks they take on. In 
addition,  with  prudential  regulation  sometimes  lagging  behind  financial  innovation,  some 
institutions  may  not  have  been  sufficiently  transparent  about  their  exposures  to  complex 
structured  finance  products,  on  and  off  their  balance  sheets.  Moreover,  as  such  products 
were  often  difficult  to  value  owing  to  inadequate  information  about  the  underlying  assets, 
investors often relied too heavily on credit rating agencies. However, the methodology used 
by the credit rating agencies was not transparent, failing to identify the risk characteristics of 
the complex structured finance products, including their illiquidity. It is also well known that it 
was  the  distorted  incentives  in  the  “originate-and-distribute”  business  model  of  financial 
institutions  that  led  to  a  decline  in  credit  standards,  the  root  cause  of  the  “sub-prime” 
problem.  More  generally,  the  extent  of  leverage  taken  on  by  banks,  bond  insurers,  hedge 
funds, and other financial institutions was probably not adequately appreciated, nor were the 
risks of a disorderly unwinding.  
Eventually something was bound to happen that would trigger a widespread reappraisal of 
risk,  resulting  in  re-intermediation  and  de-leveraging.  This  turned  out  to  be  the  escalating 
losses  on  US  sub-prime  loans,  which  showed  up  in  certain  hedge  funds  and  structured 
investment vehicles (SIVs) in the US and in Europe in mid-2007. Subsequently, the market 
tensions  spread  through  the  market  for  structured  finance  products  and  asset-backed 
commercial paper to the key interbank money markets in Europe and the US, the core of the 
international financial system. 
Central bank policy reaction 
Since last August, the major central banks – including the ECB, the Bank of England and the 
U.S.  Fed  –  have  responded  to  the  liquidity  squeeze  in  the  interbank  money  markets  by 
expanding the scale and scope of their routine operations. They have injected extra liquidity, 
lengthened the maturity of their lending facilities, and (in the case of the Fed) expanded the 
list  of  counterparties  and  widened  the  range  of  acceptable  collateral  in  their  operations. 
These  actions  have  contributed  to  a  significant  improvement  in  money  market  conditions 
since late December in the euro area, the UK and the US.  
Nevertheless, there remains much uncertainty in the  market about the liquidity and capital 
adequacy positions of financial institutions, which has implied the need for continued central 
bank operations. Some large financial institutions – notably in the U.S. and in non-euro-area 
Europe – have already acknowledged large losses in their balance sheets over the past few 
months, necessitating capital injections (e.g., by Citibank and UBS) or acquisitions by other, 
financially  strong  institutions  (e.g.,  that  of  Bear  Stearns  by  JPMorgan  Chase).  Financial 
institutions  have  generally  attempted  to  acknowledge  their  losses  and  appropriately  value 
their  balance  sheets  but  there  are  difficulties  in  properly  valuing  some  complex  financial 
assets, not least because markets have often ceased to operate properly for such assets. 
There is thus a risk of potential future losses, which has maintained a climate of uncertainty 
and contributed to the weak performance of financial institutions in the equity markets. The 
IMF has recently estimated that total potential losses of the financial sector could amount to 
almost  US$1  trillion,  of  which  only  about  one  quarter  has  so  far  been  acknowledged  and 
written down.  
As  regards  the  ECB,  I  should  stress  –  in  my  capacity  as  a  member  of  ECB’s  Governing 
Council of the ECB – that the market operations since last August have not been intended to 
change, nor have they changed, the overall monetary policy stance in the euro area, which is 
set  by  the  decisions  on  interest  rates.  (As  you  may  recall,  the  ECB  policy  rates  have 
remained unchanged since June 2007.) Rather, the money market operations are intended 
to safeguard financial stability and ensure, through the orderly functioning of the interbank 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2008
money  market,  that  the  Governing  Council’s  interest  rate  decisions  are  transmitted  to  the 
financial markets and the real economy. 
The economic outlook and policy challenges 
The economic outlook for the euro area is surrounded by an unusual degree of uncertainty. 
The financial market turmoil is likely to last for some time and its impact on the real economy 
is difficult to assess at this time. Much depends on how far banks might tighten their lending 
terms  in  response  to  losses  and  the  unwelcome  transfer  onto  the  balance  sheet  of  off-
balance  sheet  items.  For  the  time  being,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market 
turmoil has influenced the dynamics of credit aggregates in the euro area.1 Meanwhile, the 
cost of funding for firms and households appears to have edged upwards, albeit only slightly, 
in the euro area in recent months.  
The latest available information, therefore, suggests that the impact of the financial market 
turmoil on euro area economic activity is not likely to be sizable. The sound fundamentals of 
the euro area economy and the absence of major macroeconomic imbalances should help 
cushion the effects of the financial market tensions. Nevertheless, caution is warranted. The 
impact  on  some  banks’  balance  sheets  has  been  considerable  and  a  number  of  financial 
institutions  may  have  to  strengthen  their  capital  positions  and  be  more  cautious  in  their 
lending policies.  
According to the March 2008 projections of the ECB staff, real GDP in the euro area will rise 
in  a  range  of  1.3%  to  2.1%  in  2008,  representing  a  deceleration  from  2.6%  in  2007. 
Meanwhile, the short-term outlook for inflation is not satisfactory. Inflation reached 3.5% in 
March,  reflecting  mainly  the  rapid  rise  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  is  likely  to 
remain  at  elevated  levels  above  2%  in  the  coming  months  and  moderate  toward  2%  very 
gradually.  
Globally, the economic expansion is loosing speed in the face of the financial crisis. Outside 
of the euro area, growth in the advanced economies of Western Europe is decelerating. The 
U.S. economy is likely to experience a more serious slowdown, with minimal – if not negative 
–  growth  in  the  first  two  quarters  of  2008,  followed  by  a  gradual  recovery  thereafter.  The 
emerging and developing economies, led by China and India, have so far been less affected 
by financial market developments, although activity is beginning to slow in some countries. In 
the light of the financial market turmoil, the balance of risks to the short term global outlook 
remains tilted to the downside.  
At  the  same  time,  inflation  has  increased  around  the  world,  boosted  by  the  continuing 
buoyancy  of  food  and  energy  prices.  In  this  environment,  the  greatest  contribution  that 
central banks can make is the firm anchoring of medium to longer term inflation expectations.  
Looking ahead, a key challenge – especially in the U.S. where most of the financial sector 
losses are concentrated – will be to ensure that systemically-important financial institutions 
expeditiously repair their balance sheets, by raising equity and medium-term funds, in order 
to boost confidence and avoid a contraction of credit. This will help avert a spiral of declining 
asset  values,  balance  sheet  losses,  reduced  lending  and  damage  to  the  real  economy. 
Policy  makers  will  need  to  address  systemic  vulnerabilities  in  ways  that  minimize  moral 
hazard and fiscal costs. Meanwhile work is being done, in international institutions and fora – 
such  the  IMF  and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  –  to  analyze  the  causes  of  the  financial 
market turmoil and propose policy directions to strengthen financial resilience.  
                                                 
1   The  growth  of  bank  loans  to  the  domestic  private  sector  has  remained  robust  in  recent  months  and, 
importantly, this has not been driven by an involuntary increase in banks’ balance sheets, according to the 
ECB staff’s preliminary analysis. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 3
In sum, the present financial market turmoil contains lessons for both market participants and 
policy makers. Risks and uncertainties are an inherent part of economic progress. Indeed, as 
the great economist Joseph Schumpeter, wrote in the first half of the twentieth century, risks 
and uncertainties are basic to the process of what he called “creative destruction” through 
which  innovations  and  economic  progress  are  made.  By  learning  to  better  manage  these 
risks  and  uncertainties  we  can  ensure  that  we  will  be  able  to  realize  the  full  benefits  of 
globalization, that is, enhance prosperity for all our citizens.  
Let me conclude by saying that the ICC has provided a valuable forum for the exchange of 
ideas  on  the  benefits  and  challenges  of  globalization.  This  meeting  is  taking  place  at  a 
particularly  challenging  time  for  global  financial  markets.  I  very  much  hope  that  the 
surroundings in Athens will provide inspiration for an especially successful meeting.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2008
