Ben S Bernanke: Liquidity provision by the Federal Reserve 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea 
Island, Georgia (via satellite), 13 May 2008. 
 Well-functioning financial markets are an essential link in the transmission of monetary policy 
to the economy and a critical foundation for economic growth and stability. However, since 
August,  severe  financial  strains  have  shaken  this  foundation.  A  sharp  housing  contraction 
has  generated  substantial  losses  on  many  mortgage-related  assets  and  a  broad-based 
tightening  in  credit  availability.  Consistent  with  its  role  as  the  nation's  central  bank,  the 
Federal Reserve has responded not only with an easing of monetary policy but also with a 
number of steps aimed at reducing funding pressures for depository institutions and primary 
securities dealers and at improving overall market liquidity and market functioning.1  
In my remarks today, I will begin by reviewing the principles that should guide central banks' 
actions to support market liquidity. Then, in light of those principles, I will discuss the liquidity 
measures  implemented  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  response  to  the  financial  turmoil.  I  will 
conclude by offering some thoughts on liquidity regulation. 
The principles behind central bank liquidity provisions  
The notion that a central bank should provide liquidity to the banking system in a crisis has a 
long intellectual lineage. Walter Bagehot's Lombard Street, published in 1873, remains one 
of the classic treatments of the role of the central bank in the management of financial crises. 
Bagehot noted that the basis of a successful credit system is confidence. In one passage, he 
writes, "Credit means that a certain confidence is given, and a certain trust reposed. Is that 
trust  justified?  and  is  that  confidence  wise?  These  are  the  cardinal  questions"  (p.  11).  He 
pointed  out  that  confidence  is  particularly  important  in  banking  and  in  other  situations  in 
which the lender's own liabilities are viewed as very liquid by its creditors. In such situations, 
as Bagehot put it, "…where the 'liabilities', or promises to pay, are so large, and the time at 
which to pay them, if exacted, is so short," borrowers must demonstrate "an instant capacity 
to meet engagements" (p. 11). 
Meeting  creditors'  demands  for  payment  requires  holding  liquidity  –  cash,  essentially,  or 
close equivalents. But neither individual institutions, nor the private sector as a whole, can 
maintain enough cash on hand to meet a demand for liquidation of all, or even a substantial 
fraction  of,  short-term  liabilities.  Doing  so  would  be  both  unprofitable  and  socially 
undesirable.  It  would  be  unprofitable  because  cash  pays  a  lower  return  than  other 
investments.  And  it  would  be  socially  undesirable,  because  an  excessive  preference  for 
liquid assets reduces society's ability to fund longer-term investments that carry a high return 
but cannot be liquidated quickly.  
However,  holding  liquid  assets  that  are  only  a  fraction  of  short-term  liabilities  presents  an 
obvious risk. If most or all creditors, for lack of confidence or some other reason, demand 
cash at the same time, a borrower that finances longer-term assets with liquid liabilities will 
not be able to meet the demand. It would be forced either to defer or suspend payments or to 
sell  some  of  its  less-liquid  assets  (presumably  at  steep  discounts)  to  make  the  payments. 
                                                 
1   Primary  securities  dealers  are  broker-dealers  that  trade  in  U.S.  government  securities  with  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades on behalf of the 
Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 1
Either option may lead to the failure of the borrower, so that the loss of confidence, even if 
not  originally  justified  by  fundamentals,  will  tend  to  be  self-confirming.  If  the  loss  of 
confidence becomes more general, a broader crisis may ensue. 
How  should  a  central  bank  respond  to  a  sharp  increase  in  the  demand  for  cash  or 
equivalents by private creditors? Before talking about Bagehot's answer, I should note that 
the  Bank  of  England  in  his  time  was  a  hybrid  institution  –  it  was  privately  owned  by 
shareholders, but it also had a public role. To fulfill its public role, the Bank of England did not 
in all cases maximize its profits; notably, it held a larger share of its assets in liquid form than 
did  other  banks,  thereby  foregoing  some  return.  Nevertheless,  in  the  context  of  the  gold 
standard,  the  Bank's  stock  of  liquid  assets  was  relatively  modest  in  size,  raising  the 
possibility that even this quasi-public institution could run out of cash should the demand for 
liquidity become high enough.2 In this context, Bagehot's advice on how the Bank of England 
should respond to a generalized liquidity shortage was somewhat counterintuitive. He wrote: 
In opposition to what might be at first sight supposed, the best [policy] . . . 
to deal with a drain arising from internal discredit, is to lend freely. The first 
instinct of everyone is the contrary. There being a large demand on a fund 
which you want to preserve, the most obvious way to preserve it is to hoard 
it – to get in as much as you can, and to let nothing go out which you can 
help. But every banker knows that this is not the way to diminish discredit. 
This discredit means, "an opinion that you have not got any money", and to 
dissipate  that  opinion,  you  must,  if  possible,  show  that  you  have  money: 
you must employ it for the public benefit in order that the public may know 
that you have it. The time for economy and for accumulation is before. A 
good banker will have accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to 
make use of in extraordinary times. (p. 24) 
And what are the terms at which the central bank should lend freely? Bagehot argues that 
"these  loans  should  only  be  made  at  a  very  high  rate  of  interest"  (p.  99).  Some  modern 
commentators have rationalized Bagehot's dictum to lend at a high or "penalty" rate as a way 
to  mitigate  moral  hazard  –  that  is,  to  help  maintain  incentives  for  private-sector  banks  to 
provide  for  adequate  liquidity  in  advance  of  any  crisis.  I  will  return  to  the  issue  of  moral 
hazard later. But it is worth pointing out briefly that, in fact, the risk of moral hazard did not 
appear to be Bagehot's principal motivation for recommending a high rate; rather, he saw it 
as a tool to dissuade unnecessary borrowing and thus to help protect the Bank of England's 
own  finite  store  of  liquid  assets.3  Today,  potential  limitations  on  the  central  bank's  lending 
capacity are not nearly so pressing an issue as in Bagehot's time, when the central bank's 
ability to provide liquidity was far more tenuous.  
Bagehot defined a financial crisis largely in terms of a banking panic – that is, a situation in 
which  depositors  rapidly  and  simultaneously  attempt  to  withdraw  funds  from  their  bank 
accounts. In the 19th century, such panics were a lethal threat for banks that were financing 
long-term loans with demand deposits that could be called at any time. In modern financial 
                                                 
2   Such a circumstance could arise in two ways: The banking reserve – that is, the liquid assets backing deposits 
at the Bank of England – could fall to a low level as a result of heavy discounting or the issue reserve – that is 
gold  bullion  backing  Bank  of  England  notes  –  could  run  short  because  of  substantial  redemptions  by  note 
holders.  Indeed,  the  Bank  of  England's  gold  reserves,  its  ultimate  store  of  liquidity,  along  with  the  gold  in 
circulation,  were  quite  small  relative  to  total  sterling  deposits  in  the  U.K.  banking  system.  This  implied,  as 
English historian Sir John Clapham (1945) noted, that there  was just a "thin film of gold" (p. 299) tying the 
pound to the gold standard. 
3   A high rate, Bagehot (1873) wrote, "will prevent the greatest number of applications by persons who do not 
require it" (p. 99) and ensure that "no one may borrow out of idle precaution without paying well for it; that the 
[Bank  of  England's]  reserve  may  be  protected  as  far  as  possible"  (p.  99).  Moreover,  as  Clapham  (1945) 
observed, higher interest rates during a period of crisis would draw in gold from abroad, easing strains on the 
Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2008
systems,  the  combination  of  effective  banking  supervision  and  deposit  insurance  has 
substantially  reduced  the  threat  of  retail  deposit  runs.  Nonetheless,  recent  events 
demonstrate  that  liquidity  risks  are  always  present  for  institutions  –  banks  and  nonbanks 
alike – that finance illiquid assets with short-term liabilities. 
For  example,  since  August,  mortgage  lenders,  commercial  and  investment  banks,  and 
structured  investment  vehicles  have  experienced  great  difficulty  in  rolling  over  commercial 
paper backed by subprime and other mortgages. More broadly, a loss of confidence in credit 
ratings led to a sharp contraction in the asset-backed commercial paper market as short-term 
investors  withdrew  their  funds.  And  remarkably,  some  financial  institutions  have  even 
experienced  pressures  in  rolling  over  maturing  repurchase  agreements  (repos).  I  say 
"remarkably" because, until recently, short-term repos had always been regarded as virtually 
risk-free  instruments  and  thus  largely  immune  to  the  type  of  rollover  or  withdrawal  risks 
associated  with  short-term  unsecured  obligations.  In  March,  rapidly  unfolding  events 
demonstrated  that  even  repo  markets  could  be  severely  disrupted  when  investors  believe 
they might need to sell the underlying collateral in illiquid markets. Such forced asset sales 
can  set  up  a  particularly  adverse  dynamic,  in  which  further  substantial  price  declines  fan 
investor  concerns  about  counterparty  credit  risk,  which  then  feed  back  in  the  form  of 
intensifying funding pressures.  
Recent  research  by  Allen  and  Gale  (2007)  confirms  that,  in  principle  at  least,  "fire  sales" 
forced by sharp increases in investors' liquidity preference can drive asset prices below their 
fundamental value, at significant cost to the financial system and the economy. Their work 
underscores the basic logic in Bagehot's prescription for crisis management: A central bank 
may  be  able  to  eliminate,  or  at  least  attenuate,  adverse  outcomes  by  making  cash  loans 
secured by borrowers' illiquid but sound assets. Thus, borrowers can avoid selling securities 
into an illiquid market, and the potential for economic damage – arising, for example, from 
the unavailability of credit for productive purposes or the inefficient liquidation of long-term 
investments – is substantially reduced. 
Liquidity powers of other central banks 
This prescription for providing liquidity in a crisis is simple in theory, but, in practice, it can be 
far  more  complicated.  For  instance,  how  should  the  central  bank  distinguish  between 
institutions  whose  liquidity  pressures  stem  primarily  from  a  breakdown  in  financial  market 
functioning and those whose problems fundamentally derive from underlying concerns about 
their  solvency?  The  answer,  at  times,  is  by  no  means  straightforward.  There  are  other 
complexities, too. Central banks provide liquidity through a variety of mechanisms, including 
open market operations and direct credit extension through standing lending facilities. The 
choice of tools in a crisis depends on the circumstances as well as on specific institutional 
factors.  
The European Central Bank (ECB), for example, routinely conducts open market operations 
with a wide range of counterparties against a broad range of collateral. In recent months, in 
light  of  intense  pressures  in  term  funding  markets,  the  ECB  has  provided  relatively  large 
quantities of reserves through longer-term open market operations. Extending this strategy, 
the ECB also introduced a new refinancing operation with a six-month maturity. The first of 
these was executed on April 2 and was well received. The Bank of England has followed a 
similar strategy, expanding their term open market operations and accepting a wider range of 
collateral.  Very  recently,  the  Bank  of  England  also  initiated  a  special  liquidity  facility  that 
allows banks to swap high-quality mortgage-backed and other securities for U.K. Treasury 
bills. 
Differences  in  legal  and  institutional  structure  have  affected  the  methods  used  by  various 
central  banks  to  inject  liquidity  in  their  markets.  In  the  United  States,  in  ordinary 
circumstances  only  depository  institutions  have  direct  access  to  the  discount  window,  and 
open  market  operations  are  conducted  with  just  a  small  set  of  primary  dealers  against  a 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 3
narrow range of highly liquid collateral. In contrast, in jurisdictions with universal banking, the 
distinction  between  depository  institutions  and  other  types  of  financial  institutions  is  much 
less relevant in defining access to central bank liquidity than is the case in the United States. 
Moreover,  some  central  banks  (such  as  the  ECB)  have  greater  flexibility  than  the  Federal 
Reserve  in  the  types  of  collateral  they  can  accept  in  open  market  operations.  As  a  result, 
some foreign central banks have been able to address the recent liquidity pressures within 
their  existing  frameworks  without  resorting  to  extraordinary  measures.  In  contrast,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  had  to  use  methods  it  does  not  usually  employ  to  address  liquidity 
pressures across a number of markets and institutions. In effect, the Federal Reserve has 
had to innovate in large part to achieve what other central banks have been able to effect 
through existing tools. 
The  financial  distress  since  August  has  also  underscored  the  importance  of  international 
cooperation  among  central  banks.  For  some  time,  central  banks  have  recognized  that 
managing crises involving large financial institutions operating across national borders and in 
multiple  currencies  can  present  difficult  challenges.  Funding  pressures  can  easily  arise  in 
more than one currency and in more than one jurisdiction. In such cases, central banks may 
find it essential to work closely together. For just this reason, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, 
and  the  Swiss  National  Bank  have  established  currency  swap  arrangements  and  have 
coordinated their provision of dollar liquidity to international financial institutions over recent 
months.  
Federal Reserve liquidity operations 
In the United States, open market operations have long been the principal tool used by the 
Federal  Reserve  to  manage  the  aggregate  level  of  reserves  in  the  banking  system  and 
thereby  control  the  federal  funds  rate.  The  discount  window  has  typically  functioned  as  a 
backstop,  serving  as  a  source  of  reserves  when  conditions  in  the  federal  funds  market 
tighten significantly or when individual depository institutions experience short-term funding 
pressures.  Throughout  much  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  history,  this  basic  structure  has 
proven adequate to address liquidity pressures, even during some periods of market turmoil. 
However, it became abundantly clear that this traditional framework for liquidity provision was 
not  up  to  addressing  the  recent  strains  in  short-term  funding  markets.  In  particular,  the 
efficacy of the discount window has been limited by the reluctance of depository institutions 
to use the window as a source of funding. The "stigma" associated with the discount window, 
which  if  anything  intensifies  during  periods  of  crisis,  arises  primarily  from  banks'  concerns 
that  market  participants  will  draw  adverse  inferences  about  their  financial  condition  if  their 
borrowing from the Federal Reserve were to become known.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  steps  to  make  discount  window  borrowing  through  the 
regular primary credit program more attractive. Most notably, we narrowed the spread of the 
primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate from 100 basis points in August to only 
25 basis points today. In addition, to address the pressures in term funding markets, we now 
permit depositories to borrow for as long as 90 days, renewable at their discretion so long as 
they remain in sound financial condition. These actions have had some success in increasing 
depository institutions' willingness to borrow. Moreover, the existence of the option to borrow 
through  the  discount  window,  even  if  not  exercised,  likely  has  improved  confidence  by 
assuring depository institutions that backstop liquidity will be available should they need it. 
Still, the continuing disruptions in short-term funding markets over recent months suggested 
that new ways of providing liquidity  were necessary. Last December, the Federal Reserve 
introduced  the  Term  Auction  Facility,  or  TAF,  through  which  predetermined  amounts  of 
discount window credit are auctioned every two weeks to eligible borrowers for terms of 28 
days. In effect, TAF auctions are very similar to open market operations, but conducted with 
depository  institutions  rather  than  primary  dealers  and  against  a  much  broader  range  of 
collateral  than  is  accepted  in  standard  open  market  operations.  The  TAF,  apparently 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2008
investors.  Consequently,  dealers' 
because  of  its  competitive  auction  format  and  the  certainty  that  a  large  amount  of  credit 
would  be  made  available,  appears  to  have  overcome  the  stigma  problem  to  a  significant 
degree.  Indeed,  a  large  number  of  banks  –  ranging  from  52  to  more  than  90  –  have 
participated  in  each  of  the  11  auctions  held  thus  far.  The  TAF  has  also  simplified  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  by  providing  greater  predictability  of  the  level  of 
borrowings  by  depository  institutions  and  consequently  of  bank  reserves.  The  size  of 
individual  TAF  auctions  has  been  raised  over  time  from  $20  billion  at  the  inception  of  the 
program to $75 billion in the auctions this month. We stand ready to increase the size of the 
auctions further if warranted by financial developments.  
The recent market turmoil has also affected the liquidity positions of financial institutions that 
do  not  ordinarily  have  access  to  the  discount  window.  In  particular,  prior  to  the  recent 
experience, it was believed that primary dealers were not especially susceptible to runs by 
their creditors. Primary dealers typically rely on short-term secured financing arrangements, 
and  the  collateralization  of  those  borrowings  was  thought  sufficient  to  maintain  the 
confidence  of 
liquidity  management  policies  and 
contingency plans were typically based on the assumption that they would not be faced with 
a sudden loss of financing. 
But these beliefs were predicated on the assumption that financial markets would always be 
reasonably  liquid.  As  I  have  already  noted,  recent  events  have  proven  that  assumption 
unwarranted,  and  the  risk  developed  that  liquidity  pressures  might  force  dealers  to  sell 
assets  into  already  illiquid  markets.  This  might  have  resulted  in  Allen  and  Gale's  fire  sale 
scenario  that  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  which  a  cascade  of  failures  and  liquidations  sharply 
depresses asset prices, with adverse financial and economic implications.  
This  heightened  risk  led  the  Federal  Reserve  to  expand  its  ability  to  supply  liquidity  to 
primary  dealers.  In  March,  to  ease  strains  that  had  developed  in  the  agency  mortgage-
backed securities market, the Federal Reserve initiated as part of its open-market operations 
a  series  of  single-tranche  repurchase  transactions  with  terms  of  roughly  28  days  and 
cumulating to up to $100 billion. For the purposes of these transactions, primary dealers can 
deliver  as  collateral  any  securities  eligible  in  conventional  open  market  operations. 
Additionally,  the  Federal  Reserve  introduced  the  Term  Securities  Lending  Facility  (TSLF), 
which  allows  primary  dealers  to  exchange  less-liquid  securities  for  Treasury  securities  for 
terms of 28 days at an auction-determined fee. Recently, the Federal Reserve expanded the 
list  of  securities  eligible  for  such  transactions  to  include  all  AAA/Aaa-rated  asset-backed 
securities. 
By  mid-March,  however,  the  pressures  in  short-term  financing  markets  intensified,  and 
market  participants  were  speculating  about  the  financial  condition  of  Bear  Stearns,  a 
prominent  investment  bank.  On  March  13,  Bear  advised  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other 
government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated, and that it would 
be  forced  to  file  for  bankruptcy  the  next  day  unless  alternative  sources  of  funds  became 
available. A bankruptcy filing would have forced Bear's secured creditors and counterparties 
to liquidate the underlying collateral and, given the illiquidity of markets, those creditors and 
counterparties  might  well  have  sustained  losses.  If  they  responded  to  losses  or  the 
unexpected  illiquidity  of  their  holdings  by  pulling  back  from  providing  secured  financing  to 
other firms, a much broader liquidity crisis would have ensued. In such circumstances, the 
Federal  Reserve  Board  judged  that  it  was  appropriate  to  use  its  emergency  lending 
authorities under the Federal Reserve Act to avoid a disorderly closure of Bear. Accordingly, 
the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide 
short-term funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase. Over the following weekend, 
JPMorgan  Chase  agreed  to  purchase  Bear  Stearns  and  assumed  the  company's  financial 
obligations. The Federal Reserve, again in close consultation with the Treasury Department, 
agreed to supply term funding, secured by $30 billion in Bear Stearns assets, to facilitate the 
purchase. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 5
In a further effort to short-circuit a possible downward spiral in financing markets, the Federal 
Reserve used its emergency authorities to create the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). 
The PDCF allows primary dealers to borrow at the same rate at which depository institutions 
can access the discount window, with the borrowings able to be secured by a broad range of 
investment-grade  securities.  In  effect,  the  PDCF  provides  primary  dealers  with  a  liquidity 
backstop  similar  to  the  discount  window  for  depository  institutions  in  generally  sound 
financial condition.  
To date, our liquidity measures appear to have contributed to some improvement in financing 
markets.  The  existence  of  the  PDCF  seems  to  have  bolstered  confidence  among  primary 
dealers' counterparties (including the clearing banks, which provide the dealers with critical 
intra-day secured credit). In addition, conditions in the Treasury repo market, which became 
very  strained  around  mid-March,  have  improved  substantially.  Liquidity  is  better  in  several 
other  markets  as  well.  For  example,  spreads  on  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  have 
dropped  in  recent  weeks  after  reaching  very  high  levels  in  mid-March,  as  have  spreads 
between  conforming  fixed-rate  mortgage  rates  and  Treasury  rates.  Spreads  on  jumbo 
mortgage loans have retraced a portion of their earlier large increases, but recent regulatory 
and  legislative  changes  make  it  difficult  to  assess  the  impact  of  liquidity  measures  in  that 
segment of the market. Corporate debt spreads have also declined somewhat from recent 
highs.  
These are welcome signs, of course, but at this stage conditions in financial markets are still 
far  from  normal.  A  number  of  securitization  markets  remain  moribund,  risk  spreads  – 
although  off  their  recent  peaks  –  generally  remain  quite  elevated,  and  pressures  in  short-
term  funding  markets  persist.  Spreads  of  term  dollar  Libor  over  comparable-maturity 
overnight  index  swap  rates  have  receded  some  from  their  recent  peaks  but  remain 
abnormally  high.4  Funding  pressures  have  also  been  evident  in  the  strong  participation  at 
recent  TAF  auctions  even  after  the  recent  expansions  in  auction  sizes,  and,  of  late, 
depository institutions have borrowed significant amounts under the primary credit program 
for terms of up to 90 days.  
Ultimately,  market  participants  themselves  must  address  the  fundamental  sources  of 
financial strains – through deleveraging, raising new capital, and improving risk management 
–  and  this  process  is  likely  to  take  some  time.  The  Federal  Reserve's  various  liquidity 
measures should help facilitate that process indirectly by boosting investor confidence and 
by  reducing  the  risks  of  severe  disruption  during  the  period  of  adjustment.  Once  financial 
conditions  become  more  normal,  the  extraordinary  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  Federal 
Reserve will no longer be needed. As Bagehot would surely advise, under normal conditions 
financial institutions should look to private counterparties and not central banks as a source 
of ongoing funding. 
Liquidity regulation and moral hazard 
The  provision  of  liquidity  by  a  central  bank  can  help  mitigate  a  financial  crisis.  However, 
central  banks  face  a  tradeoff  when  deciding  to  provide  extraordinary  liquidity  support.  A 
central bank that is too quick to act as liquidity provider of last resort risks inducing moral 
hazard; specifically, if market participants come to believe that the Federal Reserve or other 
central  banks  will  take  such  measures  whenever  financial  stress  develops,  financial 
institutions  and  their  creditors  would  have  less  incentive  to  pursue  suitable  strategies  for 
managing liquidity risk and more incentive to take such risks.  
Although  central  banks  should  give  careful  consideration  to  their  criteria  for  invoking 
extraordinary  liquidity  measures,  the  problem  of  moral  hazard  can  perhaps  be  most 
                                                 
4   Libor is the London interbank offered rate, a standard measure of the cost of funds in the interbank market. 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2008
effectively  addressed  by  prudential  supervision  and  regulation  that  ensures  that  financial 
institutions manage their liquidity risks effectively in advance of the crisis. Recall Bagehot's 
advice:  "The  time  for  economy  and  for  accumulation  is  before.  A  good  banker  will  have 
accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to make use of in extraordinary times" (p. 
24).  Indeed,  under  the  international  Basel  II  capital  accord,  supervisors  are  expected  to 
require  that  institutions  have  adequate  processes  in  place  to  measure  and  manage  risk, 
importantly  including  liquidity  risk.  In  light  of  the  recent  experience,  and  following  the 
recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), the Federal 
Reserve and other supervisors are reviewing their policies and guidance regarding liquidity 
risk management to determine what improvements can be made. In particular, future liquidity 
planning will have to take into account the possibility of a sudden loss of substantial amounts 
of secured financing. Of course, even the most carefully crafted regulations cannot ensure 
that liquidity crises will not happen again. But, if moral hazard is effectively mitigated, and if 
financial  institutions  and  investors  draw  appropriate  lessons  from  the  recent  experience 
about the need for strong liquidity risk management practices, the frequency and severity of 
future crises should be significantly reduced. 
References 
Allen,  Franklin,  and  Douglas  Gale  (2007).  Understanding  Financial  Crises,  Clarendon 
Lectures in Finance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bagehot, Walter (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London: King. 
Reprint, Gloucester, U.K.: Dodo Press, 2006. 
Clapham,  John  (1945).  The  Bank  of  England:  A  History.  Cambridge,  U.K.:  Cambridge 
University Press. 
President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008).  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial 
Market Developments“, March. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 7
