Fatos Ibrahimi: General introduction on Regulatory Impact Assessment 
and first practical application 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Fatos  Ibrahimi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the 
workshop  “General  introduction  on  Regulatory  Impact  Assessment  and  first  practical 
application”,  organized  in  cooperation  with  the  Convergence  Program  of  the  World  Bank, 
Tirana, 31 January 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  open  the  workshop  on  the  “General  introduction  on 
Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) and first practical application” as part of the RIA 
Knowledge  Transfer  Program  to  be  delivered  by  the  Convergence  Program  of  the  World 
Bank. This workshop marks the beginning of the activities of the Special Projects Initiative 
(SPI) Albania that was launched on January 19th in Bari in the presence of Governor Fullani, 
the President of the Puglia Region Nichi Vendola, the high-ranking representatives from the 
Central Bank of Montenegro and the banking associations of the respective countries as well 
as the representatives from the Convergence Program of the World Bank, which promotes 
and manages the SPI Albania project. 
The SPI Albania will build upon the positive outcomes of the similar projects carried out in 
Bulgaria  and  Romania.  Its  nature  of  a  public-private  partnership  constitutes  the  most 
important characteristic of this project which will aim at the acceleration of the financial sector 
modernization  in  Albania  by  fostering  a  close  dialogue  and  cooperation  between  the 
regulatory  authorities  and  market  participants  in  our  country.  In  this  context,  the  Bank  of 
Albania remains fully committed to contribute to the successful implementation of this project 
by continuing to engage in a fruitful and continuous cooperation with the representatives of 
the banking system in accordance with the nature of this project. 
The  development  of  the  evidence-based  policy  analysis  skills  in  compliance  with  the  EU’s 
“Better  Regulation”  approach  will  constitute  the  cornerstone  of  the  SPI  Albania  activities. 
These capacity-building activities will aim at acquainting the staff of the Albanian regulatory 
and  supervisory  institutions  with  the  necessary  expertise  that  will  enable  them  to  draft  the 
impact  assessments  of  the  regulatory  acts  proposed  by  the  respective  authorities  by 
employing  the  main  tools  and  methodologies  necessary  for  the  evaluation  of  costs  and 
benefits as well as for the preparation of the market failure analysis. It should be emphasized 
that the Albanian institutions are not quite familiar with the techniques of Regulatory Impact 
Assessment and therefore trainings such as this one are more than welcome. 
Following the adoption of the new Banking Law in December 2006 and its entry into force in 
June 2007, which represented a further alignment of the Albanian banking legislation with the 
EU  acquis,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  currently  in  the  process  of  reviewing  the  regulatory 
framework  which  will  ensure  the  appropriate  implementation  of  the  said  Law.  In  this 
framework,  the  preparation  of  the  respective  impact  assessments  for  each  proposed 
regulatory amendment in close consultations with the market participants remains one of the 
objectives of the Bank of Albania in the near future. These new analytical tools will certainly 
improve policy-making by placing a greater emphasis on the clarification of costs related to 
the enforcement and implementation of the adopted regulatory acts through the conduct of 
the  respective  cost-benefit  analyses.  At  the  same  time,  the  use  of  these  assessment 
techniques  will  enhance 
transparency  of  policy-making  by  ensuring  a  better 
communication of the regulatory and supervisory authorities with market participants. 
Let me conclude by thanking Mr. Bossone and Mr. Brogi from the Convergence Program as 
well  as  Ms.  Wesseling  from  the  Committee  of  European  Insurance  and  Occupational 
the 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 1
Pensions  Supervisors  for  being  among  us  today.  It  is  my  deep  conviction  that  their 
presentations will prove to be highly beneficial and insightful to all participants.  
I wish you a fruitful and interesting workshop. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2008
