Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Risk management at the Bank of 
Uganda 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the  Risk  Management  and  Business  Continuity  Workshop  for  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of 
Uganda, Entebbe, 19-20 February 2008.  
 On behalf of Bank of Uganda (BOU) I wish warmly to welcome you all to this workshop which 
is  focusing  on  Risk  Management.  This  workshop  has  been  organised  to  provide  an 
opportunity for Board members to enhance their understanding of Risk Management in the 
operations of the Bank.  
In  the  face  of  globalisation  and  rapid  advances  in  technology,  risk  management  is 
increasingly taking a larger share of Management's attention in Central Banks the world over.  
This  seminar  is  important  to  you  as  Board  members  for  a  number  of  reasons.  The 
Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Bank of Uganda Act 1993 vest the Authority, 
the Policies and the general management of the affairs of the BOU in the Board of Directors. 
Many of the functions of the Bank that are listed in the Statute, such as the maintenance of 
monetary  stability,  maintenance  of  external  reserve  assets,  issuing  of  currency  notes  and 
coins, carry with them considerable amounts of risk that need to be actively managed. The 
Board of Directors, therefore, has a crucial role to play in the management of the risks that 
are inherent in "the functioning of the Bank and the implementation of its functions". 
Board members are also aware that the Financial Institutions Act 2004 has a section dealing 
with  Corporate  Governance  in  supervised  Financial  Institutions.  In  order  to  ensure  good 
corporate  governance,  the  BOU  has  issued  numerous  regulations  to  facilitate  the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act. Amongst other things, these regulations provide 
for  the  setting  up  of  Risk  Management  Committees  at  Board  level  in  every  supervised 
Financial  Institution  clearly  indicating  the  Board's  role  in  providing  oversight  over  the 
management's  activities  in  managing  the  various  risks  to  which  Financial  Institutions  are 
exposed.  
Since BOU supervises these institutions the Board of the Bank of Uganda needs assurance 
that  risk  management  in  the  Financial  Institutions  is  being  carried  out  satisfactorily  all  the 
time.  A  better  understanding  of  risk  management  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  BOU  will, 
therefore, serve the Board better to discharge its responsibilities in these areas.  
In addition to briefing the Board members on the BOU's current Risk management framework 
including Business Continuity arrangements it is management's expectation that the Board 
will decide a framework that will best facilitate its oversight of the Risk Management function 
in  the  BOU  including  the  manner  in  which  risk management  issues in  the  BOU  should  be 
reported to the Board of Directors of the BOU. 
I  would  like  to  appreciate  in  a  special  way  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank  for  providing  resource  persons  for  this  workshop.  Ms.  Sue  Milton  from  the 
Centre For Central Bank Studies (CCBS) of the Bank of England and Mr. Nobert Rothe from 
the Centre for Technical Central Bank Cooperation of the German (CTCBS) Bundesbank are 
here because of the good relationship that exists between the Bank of Uganda and these two 
Central Banks.  
I am glad to report that this is not the first time that the two Central Banks have supported the 
Bank  Of  Uganda.  In  February  2007,  for  example,  CCBS  and  CTCBS  facilitated  a regional 
workshop  on  Business  continuity  and  risk  management  for  senior  managers,  which  were 
hosted by Bank of Uganda. Participants who attended that workshop were from the Central 
Banks of Kenya, Tanzania and Malawi.  
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
Also  some  staff  from  the  BOU  have  attended  seminars,  workshops  and  other  training 
arrangements organised by both these two Central Banks. Therefore, I very much welcome 
Sue Milton and Nobert Rothe, and hope that they will find time during their visit to sample a 
few tourist attractions in Entebbe, as well as Kampala and its environs.  
It is my hope and belief that the outcome of the workshop will be an invaluable contribution to 
the  ongoing  efforts  to  establish  sound  programmes  for  the  management  of  risks  and 
business continuity. I also hope that this workshop will provide an opportunity for the Board 
to  assess  better  and  to  evaluate  better  the  Bank's  performance  in  the  areas  of  business 
continuity and risk management going forward.  
I wish you all fruitful deliberations. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
