Axel A Weber: Central banks and globalisation  
Introduction by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the 10th 
Bundesbank Spring Conference (in cooperation with the IMFS), Eltville, 22 May 2008.  
 Introduction  
1  
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the 10th Bundesbank spring 
conference,  which  has  been  organised  in  cooperation  with  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Financial Stability (IMFS). And for those who have never been to our training centre before – 
welcome to our facilities here! I am sure you will like this location, not least because of its 
direct proximity to the Rhine and the picturesque town centre of Eltville.  
The  title  of  this  spring  conference  is  “Central  Banks  and  Globalisation”.  With  regard  to 
globalisation, I think it is quite justified to say that this term has been a key economic topic 
over the past ten years – and I don’t think this is going to change in the foreseeable future. 
Why is this so? Nowadays, there is almost no economic phenomenon that is not influenced – 
at  least  to  a  certain  extent  –  by  what  we  call  “globalisation”.  “Globalisation”  seems  to  be 
everywhere – a search on Google yields more than 25 million hits.  
Evidently,  the  process  of  globalisation  has  many  different  historical,  political,  social,  and 
economic facets. Some of the economic facets – in particular, those that are of interest to 
central banks – are going to be covered over the course of the next two days, as highlighted 
in the conference programme. When looking at this programme, I am very pleased to see 
that – once again – we have been able to bring together many distinguished participants who 
are  going  to  present  the  results  of  their  recent  research  on  globalisation-related  issues.  I 
hope or, more specifically, I am pretty sure that this conference will generate useful insights 
and that it will lead to a productive exchange of ideas and views among the participants.  
In  my  remarks  over  the  next  15  minutes  or  so,  I  shall  cover  some  issues  related  to 
globalisation  which  are  of  particular  importance  to  central  bank  policymakers.  Therefore, 
after  highlighting  some  basic  characteristics  with  respect  to  globalisation,  I  shall  focus  on 
globalisation and inflation, leaving aside the important and interesting issue of globalisation 
and monetary policy.  
In this context, the fundamental question is whether globalisation has altered the setting for 
central banks, in particular with a view to delivering price stability. My basic conclusion will be 
that globalisation has not changed the rules of the game for stability-oriented central banks.  
Globalisation: basic characteristics  
2  
To  start  off,  let  me  briefly  restate  some  basic  observations  with  respect  to  globalisation. 
Notwithstanding  the  widespread  use  of  the  term  “globalisation”,  there  is  neither  a  single 
definition of what globalisation actually means nor a single key figure for measuring its scale 
and evolution over time.  
In my view, a useful working definition of the term “globalisation” is that, quite fundamentally, 
it describes the ongoing process of the international division of labour. In the wake of this 
process, the domestic markets for goods and services, as well as the labour markets, are 
becoming more and more interlinked and interdependent internationally.  
The  process  of  globalisation  has  been  evolving  among  developed  countries  for  many 
decades now. Therefore, in contrast to what some observers might think, the current process 
of globalisation per se is neither new nor particularly unique. Rather, it is the logical outcome 
of efforts to further exploit the benefits of the division of labour on an international scale.  
BIS Review 65/1008 
 1
However, the pace of this process has been increasing rapidly for more than a decade now. 
Declining costs of telecommunication and transportation have been the main drivers of this 
development. There have, moreover, been considerable improvements in skill levels in many 
regions of the world as well as in the product quality of goods and services that are produced 
in  formerly  rather  underdeveloped  countries.  Additionally,  what  has  changed  the  face  of 
globalisation is the fact that globalisation nowadays extends to a larger group of countries 
than in the past.  
More  and  more  countries  which  used  to  have  rather  closed  economies  have  opened 
themselves to the world market. Thus, new players have entered on to the global stage and 
are  becoming  increasingly  relevant  economic  powers  and,  as  a  result,  competitors  to 
established developed countries.  
As a consequence, the process of globalisation is leading to a shift in weights in the global 
economy. This shift is nothing exceptional. In fact, it is a quite natural development, which 
simply reflects the continuously evolving global economic landscape. Let me now come to 
the subject of globalisation and inflation.  
2 
 BIS Review 65/2008
Globalisation and inflation  
3  
Speaking on globalisation and monetary policy at the current juncture, I feel tempted to refer 
to the famous song by Bob Dylan “The times they are a-changin’”. One verse has several 
great lines of advice for economists:  
Come writers and critics 
Who prophesize with your pen  
…………………  
And don’t speak too soon  
For the wheel’s still in spin 
 …………………….  
The loser now 
Will be later to win 
For the times they are a-changin’.  
It is only some months ago that a lot of writers and critics “prophesized” that, in an era of 
globalisation,  inflation  is,  and  should  not  be,  a  cause  for  concern  among  monetary  policy-
makers.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  though,  they  should  have  followed  Bob  Dylan’s  ad-
vice: “But don’t speak too soon, for the wheel is still in spin”, as inflation has reappeared on a 
global scale.  
Moreover, in the face of the global financial turbulence of the past months, the debate in the 
media  has  switched  from  being  about  a  “goldilocks  environment”  to  the  inherent  risks  of 
entering a period of perceived stagflation.  
Considering that “the times they are a-changin’”, as Bob Dylan put it, a medium- to longer-
term perspective is of the essence. Taking such a medium-term view, I have always been 
one of the sceptics with regard to the “globalisation = low inflation”-paradigm, notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  the  notion  of  “more  globalisation  equals  lower  inflation”  is  shared  by  many 
observers – or was, at least, shared by them until a few months ago.  
What  is  the  underlying  reason  for  this  widespread  assumption?  Evidently,  since  the 
beginning of the 1990s, the ongoing advance of globalisation has coincided with a marked 
decline  in  inflation  rates  and  inflation  volatility  worldwide.  It  is  not  surprising  that  a  causal 
interpretation  has  been  given  to  these  parallel  developments  with  increased  globalisation 
being seen as the agent that has driven down inflation rates. And, indeed, over the past ten 
years, price rises in manufacturing imports in the euro area have been rather subdued, thus 
dampening – other things being equal – the increase in the overall consumer price index.  
At first sight, this seems to support the view of “opportunistic disinflation” according to which 
globalisation has been a key factor in lowering inflation rates. However, the past few months, 
in particular, have shown that there are obvious reasons why many observers should have 
been more cautious before drawing such conclusions.  
In fact, globalisation does not necessarily only have a dampening effect on inflation. To the 
contrary,  the  opposite  might  be  the  case  as  well;  globalisation  might  be  a  major  driver  of 
inflationary pressures.  
The reason for this is as follows: Increasing international competition, which is an element of 
today’s  globalised  world  and  tends  to  dampen  inflationary  pressure,  cannot  be  separated 
from the globalisation related inflationary effect of higher energy and commodity prices. Both 
developments  are  driven  by  the  same  force,  namely  the  integration  of  more  and  more 
countries into the world economy. Hence, both developments are the two sides of the same 
“globalisation coin”. Put differently: If one thinks about the price effects of globalisation, one 
should  not  only  consider  declining  prices  of  textiles  and  electronics, but  also  bear  in  mind 
higher fuel and heating invoices.  
BIS Review 65/1008 
 3
It is difficult to estimate the net effect of these various terms-of-trade shocks on the overall 
price  level  in  industrial  countries.  But,  in  my  view,  there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  the 
overall outcome has been one of a more benign inflation outlook.  
Not  least  with  this  in  mind,  I  have  –  as  I  mentioned  earlier  –  always  been  quite  sceptical 
about  whether  the  story  of  globalisation  adequately  captures  the  aspects  that  are  most 
important  for  explaining  the  decline  in  inflation  rates.  It  is  monetary  policy  that,  over  the 
medium to long term, pins down trend inflation. Central bankers ultimately have to do their 
job to deliver price stability.  
The decline in trend inflation worldwide is therefore better explained by monetary policy in 
many  countries  being  geared  to  price  stability,  which  is  enhanced  by  the  increasing 
independence of central banks in achieving their goals.  
Let me conclude as follows: In contrast to what was a widespread notion until a few months 
ago, there are no signs that globalisation has led to a more benign inflationary environment 
for central banks. In particular, in the current setting of heightened price pressure due to food 
and  energy  price  increases,  it  is  becoming  obvious  that  globalisation  does  not  necessarily 
produce  tailwinds  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  “headwinds  induced  by 
globalisation” are a better description of the drivers of today’s inflationary pressures.  
Thus, globalisation by no means reduces the need for a stability-oriented domestic monetary 
policy  which  is  robust  enough  to  deal  with  an  ever-evolving  environment.  Generally,  it  is 
monetary policy that determines inflation in the medium to long run.  
The fact that this idea has now become accepted in more and more countries worldwide is 
the key factor in explaining the global decline in inflation rates we have been observing over 
the past decades. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2008
