Y V Reddy: Fiscal policy and economic reforms  
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National Institute of 
Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), New Delhi, 26 May 2008 (edited transcript). 
 Respected Professor Govinda Rao and distinguished scholars, 
I am honoured by my friend, Prof. Govinda Rao’s, kind invitation to me to visit the National 
Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP). I had the opportunity of working very closely 
with the NIPFP on several occasions. Apart from my personal affinity to the NIPFP, there is a 
close  relationship  between  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  and  the  NIPFP,  from  an 
institutional point of view also. For instance, Prof. Govinda Rao is a Member of the Southern 
Local Board of RBI.  
Initially, I thought of speaking on fiscal policy and economic reforms from a central banker’s 
perspective. I realised later that while I have been working as a central banker over the last 
one decade, I had worked for most parts of the three decades prior to that in the Ministry of 
Finance, in the Government of India as well as in the Government of Andhra Pradesh. So it 
was a difficult choice for me as to whether I should give a fiscal view of the monetary policy 
or a monetary view of the fiscal policy. I have worked for a short period in the World Bank, 
which gives a global governments’ view and also in the IMF, which gives a global monetary 
authority’s  view.  As  a  via-media,  I  have  opted  to  give  a  practitioner’s  perspective  of  fiscal 
policy, and economic reforms.  
India’s fiscal situation: a brief prelude 
Broadly,  during  the  first  30  years  of  independence,  between  1950  and  1980,  the  fiscal 
deficits of both the central and the state governments were not excessive. This was a period 
of revenue surplus in general. However, automatic monetisation of government deficit by the 
RBI,  which  started  as  an  exception  during  the  mid  1950s,  became  a  regular  practice 
thereafter. Simultaneously, there was also a distinct shift in the management of the financial 
sector  with  the  nationalisation  of  major  commercial  banks  in  1969  and  1980.  These  two 
developments had a significant bearing on the relationship between the monetary authority 
(RBI) and the fiscal authority (Government). 
There  was  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  situation  in  the  1980s,  accompanied  by 
large and automatic monetisation of government deficits. The process involved issue of ad-
hoc Treasury bills at rates initially on par with 91-day Treasury Bills. Since July 1974, the ad-
hoc  Treasury  bills  were  offered  at  off-market  discount  rate  of  4.6  per  cent  which was  less 
than  half  of  the  prevailing  market  rates.  There  were  two  immediate  consequences.  One, 
when  large  government  deficits  were  monetised,  there  was  excess  liquidity  in  the  system, 
which prompted the monetary authorities to increase the cash reserve ratio (CRR) for banks 
at regular intervals with a view to mop up the excess liquidity. Two, to facilitate the central 
government to borrow comfortably, the monetary authority, which is also the debt manager 
for the government, periodically increased the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) to be maintained 
by banks. This process went on to an extent that CRR and SLR, together, pre-empted more 
than 50 per cent of banking sector liabilities, for a period. In other words, more than 50 per 
cent of the resources of the banking sector were pre-empted to primarily finance the budget 
deficits of the governments. Further, the deposit and lending rates of banks were, for most 
part,  administered.  This  situation  impacted  the  health  of  the  banking  system  and  the 
consequential  adjustments  during  the  banking  sector  reform  process  were,  naturally, 
somewhat complex. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 1
The large fiscal deficit and its monetisation had some spill-over effect on the external sector, 
which  reflected  in  the  widening  current  account  deficit  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s. 
Triggered by the balance of payments crisis in the early 1990s, when our foreign currency 
assets depleted rapidly to the extent that it could barely finance just two weeks of imports, we 
started the reform process in 1991-92. A credible macroeconomic structural and stabilisation 
programme encompassing trade, industry, foreign investment, exchange rate, public finance 
and financial sector was put in place, which created an environment that was conducive for 
the  expansion  of  trade  and  investment.  Simultaneously,  several  reform  measures  towards 
the marketisation of government borrowings were initiated.  
At the instance of Dr. Rangarajan, one of my illustrious predecessors as Governor, the RBI 
entered into the first agreement with the government in 1994 to place a limit on automatic 
monetisation. The First Supplemental Agreement between the RBI and the Government of 
India was signed in 1994 setting out a system of limits for creation of ad hoc treasury bills 
during the three-year period ending 1996-97. Then in 1997, soon after I moved to the RBI, 
the second agreement with the government was signed, where Mr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia 
represented the government. In pursuance of this Second Supplemental Agreement between 
the  RBI  and  the  Government  of  India  on  March  6,  1997,  the  ad  hoc  Treasury  Bills  were 
completely  phased  out  from  April  1997,  replaced  by  a  scheme  of  Ways  and  Means 
Advances, subject to limits. In order to smoothen the transition, the Government of India was 
allowed to incur also an overdraft, but at an interest rate higher than the rate applicable for 
Ways  and  Means  Advances  (WMA).  With  effect  from  April  1,  1999  these  overdrafts  were 
allowed  only  for  a  maximum  of  ten  working  days.  These  features  placed  the  Central 
Government  on  par  with  the  State  governments  which  were  brought  under  an  “Overdraft 
Regulation Scheme” since 1985. Furthermore, it was agreed that the RBI would trigger fresh 
floatation of Government securities whenever 75 per cent of the WMA limit was reached. It 
was  also  agreed  that  the  government’s  surplus  cash  balances  with  the  RBI,  beyond  an 
agreed level, would be invested by it in government securities. While the transition to a full-
fledged  WMA  and  overdraft  mechanism  was  gradual,  non-disruptive  and  consensual,  the 
successful implementation of this mechanism made it possible to incorporate some of these 
practices into a law – the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act (FRBM Act). It is 
noteworthy that this law also practically prohibited RBI from participating in primary issues of 
all government securities.  
As a result of the concerted efforts to restore fiscal balance through tax reforms, expenditure 
management, institutional reforms and financial sector reforms in the first half of the 1990s, 
there was significant reduction in the magnitude of fiscal deficit and the proportion of debt 
relative to GDP during the period 1991 to 1997. However, during the period 1997 to 2003, 
there  was  a  reversal  in  the  trend  of  fiscal  consolidation,  and  the  cumulative  impact  of 
industrial  slowdown,  fifth  pay  commission  award,  and  a  lower  than  expected  revenue 
buoyancy  culminated  in  fiscal  deterioration.  This  deterioration  in  the  Indian  fiscal  position 
happened  at  an  inopportune  time  when  there  was  fiscal  improvement  the  world  over  and 
India was trying to globalize. It is important to remember that India’s fiscal situation has been 
significantly  divergent  from  the  global  fiscal  situation  and  continues  to  be  so  even  now.  I 
think, this is the background we have to keep in view whenever we discuss the pace and the 
content of economic reforms in India. The coming into force of the FRBM Act, 2003 on July 
5,  2004,  which  established  a  framework  for  a  rule  based  fiscal  consolidation,  should  be 
viewed in this background.  
In  the  period  subsequent  to  2003,  the  central  government’s  fiscal  position  has  been 
improving, though there are several underlying fiscal pressures that are not entirely evident 
in  the  numbers,  as  will  be  explained  later.  The  states’  fiscal  positions  have  also  improved 
significantly  during  this  period  and  their  revenue  deficits  are  close  to  being  virtually 
eliminated. However, as in the case of the Centre, there are some underlying pressures that 
are not reflected in the fiscal numbers of the States.  
2 
 BIS Review 81/2008
Despite considerable improvement in the fiscal scenario, both at the centre and in the states, 
India’s combined fiscal deficit (centre and state), as a percentage of GDP, still continues to 
be one of the highest in the world. Prof. Rao would also be able to explain to you separately 
in detail that India’s public debt, including the external debt, as a percentage of GDP, is one 
of  the  highest  in  the  world.  In  this  context,  the  U.K.  based  weekly  the  Economist  (dated 
November  17,  2007  –  Pages  75-77)  ranked  India,  along  with  Turkey  and  Hungary,  as  the 
riskiest economies among select leading emerging market economies. The Economist based 
its  conclusion  on  standard  parameters  such  as  current  account  balance,  budget  balance, 
inflation and growth in bank lending, for assessing the degree of risk. One cannot disagree 
with the relevance of these parameters in assessing risks. Yet it is noteworthy that most of 
these  risky  elements  were  present  in  the  Indian  economy  for  several  years,  almost  all 
through  the  reform  period,  and  yet  the  economy  exhibited  macro-stability  and  impressive 
growth even while withstanding some significant domestic and global shocks. In view of this 
evidence, we need to explore the reasons for such risks not de-stabilising our economy so 
far; and the measures that are needed, in future, for insulating the economy from such de-
stabilising  effects,  to  the  extent  feasible.  I  think  it  is  important  that  this  big  picture  be 
reckoned while we analyse the pace and intent of reforms, despite some agreement on the 
destination as well as direction of economic reforms. 
Role of RBI in fiscal reforms 
Now,  let  me  briefly  explain  the  role  of  RBI  in  fiscal  reforms.  As  a  central  bank,  we  are 
generally  sensitive  to  the  fiscal  situation.  It  is  not  true  that  the  RBI  was  not  aware  of  the 
implications of what was happening on the fiscal front during the first three decades (1950 to 
1980).  Given  the  institutional  arrangement,  the  RBI’s  primary  objective  is  to  maintain 
monetary stability. It was clear that the fiscal situation was something that was decided and 
determined by the sovereign. Once the fiscal situation was decided and determined by the 
sovereign,  it  was  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  monetary  stability  was 
maintained  and  the  government’s  borrowing  programme  was  managed  with  minimum 
disruptions, in terms of stability. Some argue that accommodating the fiscal pressure through 
monetary action is like, what some people call, a soft-budget constraint. 
Let  me  revert  to  the  reform  process  and  how  we  got  rid  of  the  remnants  of  automatic 
monetisation of the previous years. The stock of ad hoc Treasury bills, when we put an end 
to  issue  of  such  bills,  was  over  Rs.  1,00,000  crore.  This  stock  was  in  fact  public  debt  in 
perpetuity, held by the RBI, bearing a discount rate of 4.6 per cent though the market rates 
were far higher. In coordination with the government, it was agreed that these papers will be 
converted into dated marketable securities at market related rates, in phases, depending on 
the market conditions warranting open market operations by the RBI. Thus, the stock of the 
ad  hoc  treasury  bills  has  been  wiped-out.  This  is  an  evidence  of  the  varieties  of  ways  in 
which  the  RBI  conceives  and  implements  the  process  of  reforms,  in  a  non-disruptible 
fashion, in coordination with the government. 
Let me share a story related to the FRBM Act with you. One day, Governor Jalan said that 
the Finance Minister is making an announcement on introduction of Fiscal Responsibility Bill 
(which  was  the  then  proposed  nomenclature).  Governor  Jalan  said  that  he  had  discussed 
with  the  Minister  and  that  they  had  decided  that  I  will  be  named  the  Chairman  of  a 
Committee  that  would  draft  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Bill.  I  submitted  that  the  government 
officials should be working on the legislation relating to fiscal issues and that the RBI should 
not  be  involved,  as  the  ownership  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  Bill  should  be  with  the 
government. Governor Jalan did not relent and said “No, it has been decided that you do it”. 
So finally, we arrived at a compromise. A main formal Committee was set up in 2000 with the 
then Secretary, Economic Affairs, Dr. E.A.S. Sarma as the Chairman and Dr. Ashok Lahiri as 
one of the members; and a working group comprising of RBI officials was set-up under my 
Chairmanship to provide technical assistance to the main Committee on several aspects for 
drafting the Fiscal Responsibility Bill. The RBI  Working Group was actively involved in the 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 3
Sarma Committee to draft the Fiscal Responsibility Bill. Mr. Prem Chand of the IMF, at our 
invitation, spent some time advising us on the international best practices in this regard. At 
this  stage,  we  advised  the  Government  that  without  incorporating  transparent  budget 
management  rules  and medium  term  fiscal  framework,  the  objective  of  fiscal  responsibility 
would not be achieved. Therefore, the name of the Bill was changed to “Fiscal Responsibility 
and Budget Management Bill” incorporating additional features. In short, I am illustrating that 
the  RBI  has  been  actively  collaborating  with  the  government,  whenever  sought,  but  with 
appropriate propriety.  
Our experience shows that the FRBM Act has a positive effect of focusing attention on fiscal 
issues. At the same time, it may, sometimes, unintentionally lead to increased recourse to 
expanding  off-budget  fiscal  liabilities.  Such  a  practice  is  not  entirely  uncommon  in  many 
countries,  but  the  magnitudes  involved  and  the  persistence  in  resorting  to  off-budget 
liabilities  in  India  are  noteworthy.  The  issue  is  not  merely  one  of  transparency  in  fiscal 
operations or a de facto larger borrowing programme of the Government than admitted, but 
one with significant implications for the Government debt market and monetary management.  
Past experience clearly suggests that recourse to such off-budget items is not ad hoc or one-
time only. The repeated recourse to issue of Government bonds has been exercised not only 
for fuel, food and fertilizers for financing subsidies, but also for financing deferred liabilities in 
regard  to  bank  loan  waivers  and  contribution  to  the  capital  of  public  sector  banks.  Hence, 
unless there is a noticeable change in global prices or a change in policy towards recurrent 
subsidies and deferred liabilities, continuation of such special bonds may not be ruled out. 
The  significant  quasi-fiscal  transactions  to  finance  recurrent  revenue  expenditures  through 
de  facto  borrowings  pose  challenges  in  managing  the  links  between  fiscal,  external  and 
monetary management.  
The RBI has rendered advice on FRBM to the state governments also. A forum has been 
provided by the RBI, which brings together the Finance Secretaries of state governments, for 
exchange  of  ideas  and  sorting  out  the  issues.  The  bi-annual  conference  of  State  Finance 
Secretaries hosted by the RBI, initiated in 1996, is also attended by the Secretaries in the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Government  of  India,  representatives  from  the  Planning  Commission, 
the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  of  Accounts  (CAG)  and  the  Controller  General  of 
Accounts (CGA). The deliberations in these bi-annual conferences have proved very useful 
in  identifying  the  common  issues  and  developing  best  practices  in  regard  to  state 
government  finances.  A  number  of  important  initiatives  relating  to  ways  and  means 
advances,  approach  to  market  borrowing  programme,  investment  of  surpluses,  ceilings  on 
state  government  guarantees,  model  scheme  for  state  level  fiscal  legislations,  apart  from 
changes  in  the  content  and  format  for  reporting  budget  related  documents  to  ensure 
transparency  etc.  have  emanated  and  taken  shape  as  a  result  of  interactions  in  these 
meetings. The RBI has, through this forum, also helped the state governments prepare the 
state level FRBM legislations.  
Incidentally, the first research and policy paper on pension funds in India was prepared by 
Dr. Urjit Patel, who used to work with us. In those days, it was so hard to get any data that 
we  had  to  tap  our  informal  links  in  the  various  offices  in  Delhi,  including  some  of  my  old 
colleagues, to give him some access to relevant information. Dr. Urjit Patel did a very good 
job  and  then  he  published  an  article  in  the  Economic  &  Political  Weekly.  Thus,  the  public 
policy on pensions was, in a sense, triggered by the work done by a consultant in RBI, at our 
request. RBI also worked on a Report on Pensions for state government employees. This is 
another evidence of the collaboration between the RBI and the governments and often our 
views are accepted. Now, let me come to the fisc and monetary management issues.  
Fisc and monetary management 
Let me clarify the general approach of RBI in its relations with the government on matters 
relating  to  monetary  management.  As  illustrated  in  the  case  of  preparation  of  the  Fiscal 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2008
Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, coordination between the government and the 
RBI  is  essential  for  structural  reforms,  especially  when  legal  and  institutional  changes  are 
involved. In regard to operational issues relating to monetary policy, there is some element of 
freedom but, in view of the fiscal dominance in the economy, the overriding approach has 
been  harmonization  of  monetary  policy  with  fiscal  policy  for  ensuring  stability.  Within  this 
framework, through mutual cooperation, several reform measures have been undertaken by 
the government and the RBI and I will provide a few illustrations.  
First,  the  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  has  been  gradually  reduced  to  the  then  statutory 
minimum  of  25  per  cent,  effective  October  21,  1997.  Also,  the  CRR  has  been  reduced 
gradually, depending on the liquidity conditions, as a first step, with the objective of ultimately 
reducing it to the statutory minimum of three per cent. In the meantime, RBI’s commitment to 
the removal of the statutory prescriptions of minimum reserve and liquidity requirements was 
demonstrated by its proposal to the Government for legislative amendments to remove the 
minima.  These  legislations  have  since  been  passed.  Now,  there  is  no  minimum  statutory 
stipulation for SLR and CRR.  
The  challenge  now  is  to  reduce  the  CRR  and  the  SLR  stipulations,  as  we  go  along.  The 
reduction in CRR will be contingent upon liquidity conditions and the need for using it as an 
instrument of sterilisation along with other instruments. The reduction in SLR will primarily be 
governed  by  the  fiscal  situation  of  the  government.  The  issue  is  not  one  of  desirable 
destination  but  one  of  negotiating  the  path  in  an  optimal  way.  RBI  has  two  options  for 
proceeding in this regard. Either we accept the fiscal situation and wait for it to improve, to 
effect any further reductions in SLR or reduce prescriptions gradually consistent with fiscal 
situation  and  market  development.  So  that  is  the  type  of  choices  we  are  facing  at  this 
juncture and RBI prefers to assess the fiscal situation and proceed with the reductions in a 
cautious manner. 
Second, an issue that has come to the fore in the recent period pertains to higher volatility in 
government’s cash balances maintained with the RBI, which impacts the liquidity conditions 
in the financial markets. Volatility in Government’s cash balances is not unique to the Indian 
situation  and  is  an  issue  even  in  other  countries,  but  in  our  situation,  it  has  become 
increasingly prominent now. It so happens that, at times, government’s cash balances and 
the  external  situation  move  in  different  directions  and  they  create  very  little  net  impact  on 
liquidity  from  the  perspective  of  overall  monetary  management.  However,  there  are 
occasions when they move in the same direction, in which case the volatility in the liquidity 
conditions is much higher. This is one major current issue in monetary management which 
could  be  linked  to  cash  management  in  the  government.  The  link  becomes  critical  for 
maintaining orderly liquidity conditions in the money market and effectively using short term 
overnight interest rates for monetary operations.  
Third, the magnitude of the combined fiscal deficit of the centre and the states is close to half 
of the households’ financial savings, which is the largest component of domestic savings. If 
fifty per cent of households’ financial savings are taken away by the government sector, it 
has vital implications for ensuring stability in the financial markets because the demand for 
funds  from  the  non-government  productive  sectors  of  the  economy  has  to  be  met 
simultaneously.  
Fourth, India is still a bank-dominated system and about 70 per cent of our banks (in terms of 
business) are owned by the government. Thus, we could have a situation when the objective 
of monetary policy and the objective of broader public policy dealings with banking converge, 
in which case the monetary policy could be very effective. Sometimes, it could happen that 
the objective of monetary policy and the objective of broader public policy may not converge, 
in which case monetary policy may not be that effective. In other words, the effectiveness of 
the monetary policy depends not only on the actions of the monetary authority, but also on 
other  public  policy  postures.  This  certainly  complicates  monetary  management.  Of  course, 
the  issue  of  conflict  of  interest  in  public  sector  banking  and  government  ownership  is  yet 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 5
another issue. The issue of conflict of interest in private sector banks arises when the owner 
of  the  bank  borrows  from  his  own  bank.  The  single  largest  source  of  borrowing  for  the 
government being the government-owned banks themselves, this conflict is rather apparent.  
Fifth,  one  of  the  factors  imparting  rigidity  to  the  interest  rate  structure  in  India  is  the 
administered  interest  rates,  particularly  on  small  savings  instruments.  In  this  context, 
administered interest rates fixed by the Government on a number of small saving schemes 
and provident funds are of special relevance as they have generally offered a rate different 
from those on corresponding instruments available in the market, in some cases along with 
tax incentives. The administered interest rates significantly impact the level and allocation of 
savings.  On  the  lending  side  also,  there  are  some  administrative  prescriptions  for  banks. 
Depending  on  how  it  is  calculated,  on  both  the  savings  and  the  lending  sides,  the 
administered structure of interest rate would apply to about 25 to 40 per cent. In this context, 
it  is  pertinent  to  note  that  the  monetary  policy  mainly  operates  through  interest  rates  and 
interest  rate  signals,  and  constraints  posed  by administered  interest  rates  have  to  be  duly 
recognized while dealing with issues relating to monetary policy transmission mechanisms.  
Sixth,  theoretically  it  is  well  recognised  that  monetary  policy  is  generally  a  more  effective 
counter-cyclical  policy  instrument  than  fiscal  policy  because  interest  rate  changes  can  be 
made  and  reversed  quickly.  However,  monetary  policy  adjustments  may  take  longer  than 
fiscal policy adjustments to affect aggregate demand. It is also recognized that fiscal policy 
contributes  to  broader-based  stabilization  through  the  impact  of  taxes  and  government 
spending  on  income-sensitive  (in  addition  to  interest-sensitive)  components  of  aggregate 
demand. When monetary policy is thus constrained in responding to output variations, fiscal 
policy  should  normally  take  a  more  central  role.  Thus,  effective  co-ordination  between  the 
fiscal policy and monetary policy is important. At a more aggregate level, in the context of our 
capacity to respond to global developments, if we have a counter-cyclical policy approach, 
not only the monetary policy but also the fiscal policy should be counter-cyclical. If the fiscal 
policy continues to be uni-directional, as we have in our case, with persisting deficits, then 
the fiscal policy is not in a position to produce a reasonable counter-cyclical impact. In these 
circumstances,  the  monetary  policy  has  a  challenge  in  designing  and  implementing 
appropriate counter-cyclical policies, that has the added burden of off-setting the impact of 
the  fiscal  policy.  Well,  despite  these  challenges,  the  RBI  has  managed  the  situation 
reasonably well and we have the confidence that we would be able to continue to manage. 
However,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that,  at  times,  unorthodox  policies  have  assured  the 
stability  of  the  Indian  financial  system  despite  fiscal  stress,  which  is  a  desirable  outcome 
rather than achieving ritualistic compliance with pre-set rules.  
By and large, these are some illustrations of the links that exist between fiscal and monetary 
management. We are continuously refining the monetary policy framework and the conduct 
of the monetary policy, taking into account the progress in fiscal consolidation. The reform of 
the  monetary  policy  framework  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  have  to  recognise  the 
fiscal, and the related institutional as well as policy constraints. That is the limited point I want 
to make to those who are impatient with the current monetary management framework.  
Now let me go to fisc and the financial market. 
Fisc and financial markets 
First,  the  foremost  link  between  the  fisc  and  financial  markets  is  through  the  government 
securities  market.  As  has  already  been  explained  in  detail,  the  central  government’s 
borrowing programme was significantly monetized in earlier days. It may be of interest to all 
of you to know that since a large part of the borrowing programme has to be completed in the 
first half of the fiscal year, in view of seasonality of demand for credit on private account, the 
monthly average gross market borrowings by the centre is around three-quarters of a percent 
of  GDP  in  recent  years.  Despite  this  high  level  of  government  borrowing  programme,  the 
RBI,  as  debt  manager,  has  been  able  to  successfully  complete  the  market  borrowing 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2008
programme,  over  the  years,  while  pursuing  its  interest  rate  objectives  without  jeopardizing 
external balance, by taking recourse to several initiatives in terms of institution, instruments, 
incentives and strategies.  
Second,  an  important  issue  that  remains  is  that  we  cannot  claim  that  there  is  a  genuine 
market  for  government  securities  in  India,  when  we  have  a  statutory  liquidity  ratio 
prescription of 25 per cent. The question is that can we really proceed on the assumption 
that  there  is  a  genuine  government  securities  market,  and  hence  reinforce  more 
marketisation  by  rapidly  reducing  SLR  or  do  we  ensure  a  viable  market  borrowing 
programme and reduce SLR in tandem? Here again RBI has to assess the sensitivity of the 
fisc to interest rate burden, in case SLR is reduced rapidly? The importance of SLR status for 
bonds  issued  by  government  has  come  to  the  fore  recently  when  oil  bonds  issued  by 
Government of India turned out to be illiquid despite carrying a higher yield of 25 basis points 
over SLR-eligible bonds of similar maturity. The reform of debt markets in India, as we go 
along, should recognise these realities. 
Third,  in  the  case  of  state  governments,  when  we  tried  to  marketise  the  individual  state’s 
borrowing programme, many of the states were not comfortable. They were not sure whether 
they would be able to get subscriptions for their bonds unless RBI manages the borrowing 
programme of all the states in a coordinated fashion with uniform terms and conditions for all 
states.  Knowing  that  banks  cannot  be  compelled  to  subscribe  to  the  programme,  RBI 
provides the investors a higher yield for states’ paper over the centre’s paper of comparable 
maturity. Subsequently, we encouraged some states to go through auction route on a stand-
alone basis. Now it has become possible for the RBI to conduct the borrowing programme of 
each state without serious disruption in the markets, through the auction route. As a result, 
some states have also begun to take initiatives to improve their fiscal profile and discharge 
their liabilities promptly to banks, and, consequently, gain comparatively favourable treatment 
in the debt market. It took about six to seven years for RBI to equip the state governments 
and the markets to get used to this kind of discipline. This was perhaps possible because 
RBI  commands  the  trust  of  state  governments  as  an  apolitical  and  a  professional  public 
institution.  
Fourth,  another  aspect  worth  exploring  is  the  fiscal  implications  of  failure  of  financial 
institutions and markets. The RBI, as the central bank of the country, is also responsible for 
ensuring  financial  stability.  Broadly,  one  can  say  that  when  a  country’s  fiscal  position  is 
strong,  its  capacity  to  take  on  the  risks  arising  from  the  failure  of  financial  institutions  is 
higher. On the other hand, with a weak fiscal situation, the capacity to take care of a financial 
or banking crisis is rather limited. More important, whenever pockets of vulnerability arise in 
the  financial  sector,  the  headroom  available  in  the  fiscal  position  to  provide  succour  to 
financial entities needs to be assessed. In this context, one important source of strength as 
well as vulnerability remains the publicly owned financial institutions, which may have fiscal 
implications. They contribute heavily as a source of tax revenue. Another source of linkage is 
the cross subsidies and we have to identify the areas of maximum cross subsidies in public 
sector entities. The sources of indirect subsidies through and by financial intermediaries are 
also important. A reading of the several budget speeches of the Finance Ministers in recent 
years  would  show  the  extent  to  which  activities  of  public  sector  financial  intermediaries 
operate as instruments of fiscal policy though these entities are competing in the market with 
private sector on all fronts. These public policy oriented operations of the public enterprises 
at  the  instance  of  fisc  seriously  limit  the  efficient  price  discovery,  depth  and  vibrancy  in 
different segments of the financial markets. Thus, it is evident that while analysing the link 
between  the  fiscal  and  the  public  sector,  perhaps,  one  should  not  confine  to  public  sector 
borrowing requirements only.  
Fifth, as regards further reforms in the financial markets, it is very clear that the development 
of  insurance  and  pension  sectors  are  very  important  especially  for  the  government  debt 
market and the corporate debt market. However, there are some challenges in this regard. 
The  tax  treatment  of  investment  in  debt  and  equity  is  quite  asymmetrical  in  India  with  a 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 7
favourable  tilt  towards  investment  in  equity.  There  are  limited  incentives  for  encouraging 
contractual  savings.  Hence,  some  of  the  areas  that  have  to  be  looked  at,  as  we  move 
forward,  relate  not  only  to  the  demand  side  which  advocates  development  of  financial 
markets,  but  also  to  the  supply  side  through  policies  that  promote  contractual  savings, 
especially through pension and life insurance funds. 
Now let me move to the fisc and the external sector.  
Fisc and the external sector 
In the context of the external sector, there are certain issues from the perspective of fiscal 
policy that are of contextual relevance.  
The  first  issue  pertains  to  the  opening-up  of  government  debt  market  to  non-residents 
through,  what  we  may  call  foreign  currency  sovereign  debt.  In  fact,  about  a  decade  ago, 
several  arguments  were  put  forward  in  favour  of  issuing  foreign  currency  sovereign  debt 
when the government’s intention to take recourse to sovereign borrowings in the international 
markets  was  formally  announced  by  the  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister.  Several  academics 
argued  in  favour  of  the  proposal  since  they  felt  that  it  may  be  more  economical  for  the 
government  to  raise  funds  abroad.  However,  such  borrowings  may  entail  foreign  currency 
exposure  and  hence  the  foreign  currency  risk,  which  was  not  built  into  the  analysis  of 
benefits.  Another  line  of  argument  that  was  put  forward  in  favour  of  foreign  currency 
sovereign  borrowings  was  that  the  government’s  borrowing  abroad  would  help  develop  a 
benchmark  for  the  private  sector  foreign  currency  debt.  However,  now  weightage  for 
sovereign risk is assigned to a private sector debt even without the sovereign benchmark, 
after  taking  into  account  the  sovereign  risks.  Moreover,  the  issue  is  that  there  are  always 
political  and  economic  temptations,  as  happened  in  many  other  countries,  to  raise  foreign 
currency  sovereign  debt,  when  credit  market  sentiment  is  favourable  probably  without 
factoring-in the likely situation that may prevail when the sentiment turns unfavourable.  
The  RBI  worked  along  with  the  government  when  this  issue  came  up  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that,  at  that  point  of  time,  it  might  not  have  been  desirable  to  issue  foreign 
currency  sovereign  bonds.  One  of  the  arguments  against  approaching  the  international 
markets  for  sovereign  bonds  was  the  persistence  of  a  large  revenue  deficit  of  the 
government.  Thus,  in  the  above  context,  the  point  to  be  considered  is  that,  given  the 
magnitude  of  the  public  debt  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  and  the  magnitude  of  fiscal  deficit, 
whether  public  policy  would  have  the  same  manoeuvrability  for  maintaining  stability  if  the 
debt is denominated in foreign currency and held by the non-residents.  
In  the  above  backdrop,  it  may  be  concluded  that,  given  the  fiscal  situation,  the  health  of 
financial institutions, and the stage of development of financial markets, the scope for non-
resident  participation  in  the  government  securities  market  particularly  foreign  currency 
denominated bonds may be expanded only gradually. However, the pace of opening up of 
foreign  currency  sovereign  debt  for  non-residents  would  be  dependent  upon  the  pace  of 
progress on the fiscal, institutional, and market fronts.  
Second, another key issue basically from the practitioner’s perspective is the fiscal cost of 
market  stabilization  scheme  (MSS).  Perhaps  I  should  explain  the  background  and  story, 
since  this  is  an  academic  forum.  Around  the  end  of  2003,  when  I  joined  as  Governor,  we 
looked at the macroeconomic parameters and we anticipated large capital inflows. During the 
late 2003 to early January 2004, two Groups were constituted in the RBI, one was on the 
issue of sterilisation and the other was for review of liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) which 
was in operation since 2001 as part of the monetary policy operating framework. The draft 
reports  of  these  two  Technical  Groups  and  their  deliberations  were  placed  in  the  public 
domain  on  the  RBI  website  and  were  intensely  debated.  Anticipating  enhanced  capital 
inflows in future and the possible volatility in liquidity, while MSS was introduced as a new 
8 
 BIS Review 81/2008
instrument of sterilisation, the focus of LAF was shifted by the RBI to management of the day 
to day liquidity fluctuations.  
The related issues that surfaced were that if there is accumulation of foreign exchange due 
to  market  interventions,  whether  to  sterilise  or  not  to  sterilise  and  finally  if  we  decide  to 
sterilise, how much to sterilise and who should bear the sterilisation cost. One view was that, 
similar to the practice in some other countries, the central banks may take decisions not only 
on intervention but also on sterilisation and accordingly the central bank may issue its own 
bonds. As a prudential requirement, the RBI is prohibited from such bond issuances. As a 
result, the MSS  was introduced whereby sterilisation was through issuance of government 
securities.  
Simultaneously, given the larger public policy implications of the exchange rate in the Indian 
context, it was deliberated whether it was desirable for the central bank alone to take a view 
on the extent of sterilisation. After considerable debate between and within Government and 
RBI, it was agreed in march 2004, that the limit for Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) would 
be prescribed by the Government from time to time in the light of proposals from RBI. This 
implies that by prescribing the limits for the MSS, the Government was recognising the fiscal 
cost that it was ready to bear in the context of external sector management. 
Third, the related issue was whether the fiscal cost of sterilization should be borne by the 
central bank or by the Government. We were unique in showing it as a part of Government’s 
budget unlike the practice followed in some other countries. It would be pertinent to mention 
that  the  practice  of  taking  quasi  fiscal  cost  on  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  has  led  to 
erosion  of  capital  base  of  many  central  banks.  Although  these  central  banks  operate 
autonomously,  the  consequences  were  erosion  of  capital  and  subsequent  recourse  to  the 
government  for  infusion  of  capital.  Thus,  in  the  Indian  context,  the  major  fiscal  cost 
attributable to sterilisation in the context of external sector management is clearly shown in 
the government’s budget, through the mechanism of MSS, which adds to fiscal transparency. 
Incidentally,  the  desirability  of  MSS  was  discussed  afresh  with  the  Government  after  June 
2004, when a new Cabinet was sworn in and they reconfirmed the MSS arrangement as a 
desirable one.  
Fourth, contextually, there have been some studies by the IMF and the ICRIER on the quasi 
fiscal cost of sterilization in India. Technically, it is possible to look at total accounting returns. 
However,  to  assume  that  whenever  central  bank  accumulates  reserves  it  has  an  adverse 
impact on the balance sheet, may, however, not turn out to be universally right. For instance, 
till  the  last  year,  China’s  domestic  interest  rates  were  lower  than  the  return  on  foreign 
currency  assets.  In  that  case,  the  carrying  cost  of  reserves  was  negative  for  the  Chinese 
central bank, resulting in a quasi fiscal benefit. 
Fifth, a related issue in this regard is valuation of forex reserves on a marked-to-market basis 
on the balance sheet of RBI. An appreciation of the reserve currency translates into losses. 
But in some senses one can argue that such loss is notional. Again, every central bank has 
different  ways  of  accounting.  Most  of  the  central  banks  and,  definitely,  the  RBI,  adopt  a 
conservative accounting practice so that unrealised gains are not shown. The issue here is 
how  one  calculates  the  cost  of  holding  reserves  or  even  “excess”  reserves.  Since  this  is 
essentially an opportunity cost, the only way that it can be calculated reasonably is in terms 
of  interest  rates  on  local  currency  assets  vis-à-vis  those  for  foreign  currency  assets.  But 
interestingly,  the  question  that  arises  is  how  to  account  for  the  macroeconomic  benefits. 
Many central banks, with or without the concurrence of the government, are adding to the 
reserves or are holding on to the reserves even though they incur a quasi fiscal cost. This 
clearly suggests that there must be some benefits of such a widely adopted practice and if 
so,  what  are  these  benefits?  My  submission  is  that  these  benefits  unfortunately  are  not 
quantifiable.  But  just  because  they  are  not  quantifiable,  I  do  not  think  it  is  appropriate  to 
ignore  them.  The  list  of  benefits  can  be  summarised  as  follows.  One,  it  enhances  the 
confidence in the economy, particularly of the emerging market economies and results in a 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 9
better sovereign rating. This, in turn, translates into finer spreads at which both public and 
private sector can raise money. Two, it enhances the capacity to absorb shocks. The shocks 
can be of two types: the real sector shocks in terms of oil shocks, food grain shock or both of 
them and the financial shocks in terms of the financial flows. On both, the real sector and the 
financial sector, there is scope for smoothening volatility when there are adequate reserves. 
Apart from these, one arguably fundamental issue is whether some excess volatility can be 
moderated in order to avoid the destabilising effects on growth and employment. Therefore, 
we have to recognise not only the costs – the cost of holding reserves may be negative or 
positive – which are quantifiable but also the benefits which are not quantifiable. These have 
public policy implications as there is a fiscal policy element, namely the quasi-fiscal cost of 
reserves.  
Sixth,  there  is  another  link  between  fiscal  policy  and  reserves.  If  one  reads  the  rating 
agencies’ sovereign rating, one may find a mention of how forex reserves are perceived to 
provide a cushion against fiscal conditions. In some sense, therefore, even if there is a fiscal 
cost  of  carrying  reserves,  they  also  give  a  benefit  to  the  fisc  and  this  is  recognized  by 
analysts. Maintaining orderly conditions in forex markets can be viewed, in some senses, as 
a  public  good  and  if  the  provision  of  such  a  public  good  to  market  participants  involved 
addition  to  or  depletion  of  forex  reserves,  incurring  of  the  attendant  fiscal  costs,  if  any,  of 
holding reserves may be justifiable.  
Let me now come to the concluding section on the RBI’s approach to fiscal policy. 
RBI’s perspectives on fiscal policy 
The  RBI’s  approach  to  fiscal  reforms  is  that  while  we  agree  on  the  need  to  eliminate  the 
revenue deficit, and agree on a nominal limit for fiscal deficit, what is even more important is 
the mode of financing the fiscal deficit and the use that the resources so raised are put to. In 
addition, we focus on fiscal empowerment which was clearly articulated around 2000 in the 
Annual Report of the Board of Directors of the RBI. Exclusive focus on fiscal deficit may tend 
to reduce the role of the Government, and consequently, it will not be in a position to aid the 
process  of  growth,  in  particular,  inclusive  growth.  Re-prioritisation  of  expenditure  may  be 
achieved  through  reduction  or  elimination  of  subsidies  and  deployment  of  resources  thus 
released to the more needy sectors. Higher level of resources may also be available through 
reduction in tax exemption. 
So the whole idea is that, in an economy like ours which requires structural transformation 
and investment in social and financial infrastructure, we should strive for an appropriate level 
of fiscal activity particularly because public goods have to be provided and that would enable 
us to maintain fiscal discipline and macro-stability rather than aim for a mechanical reduction 
in fiscal and revenue deficits at a lower level of fiscal activity.  
In the light of financial turbulence across the world in the recent period, the relevance of the 
fisc in the management of the macro economy has become even more important. When we 
have not seen such financial turbulence in our country, it is important to remember that when 
all else fails, it is only the fiscal that has to take the hit and come to the rescue.  
I  would  like  to  read  out  a  sentence  from  one  of  the  rating  agencies  and  then  make  my 
comment, to conclude. It says, “India’s monetary management is conservative and prudent, 
together with its low external debt position and relative ease in local currency funding, this 
helps alleviate its fiscal weakness.” The important point here is if RBI’s policy is helping to 
alleviate fiscal weakness, how can it be conservative? It perhaps needs to be described as 
“appropriate”. 
This  address  is  dedicated  to  Mr.  S.L.N.  Simha,  at  whose instance  the  transcript  has  been 
edited  for  publication.  Mr.  Simha,  the  de  facto  author  of  Volume  One  of  the  History  of 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (1935-1951),  and  a  highly  respected  central  banker  takes  lively 
interest in theory and practice of central banking even at the age of ninety. Reserve Bank 
10 
 BIS Review 81/2008
owes a lot to distinguished employees like him for its current status as a respected public 
institution in India. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 11
