European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
7 August 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The information that has become available 
since  our  previous  meeting  has  further  underpinned  the  reasoning  behind  our  decision  to 
increase interest rates in July. It has confirmed that annual inflation rates are likely to remain 
well above levels consistent with price stability for a protracted period of time and that risks to 
price stability over the medium term remain on the upside. This assessment is underpinned 
by continued vigorous money growth, with so far no signs of significant constraints on bank 
loan supply. In such a context, it remains crucial to avoid broadly based second-round effects 
in wage and price-setting. The latest economic data point to a weakening of real GDP growth 
in  mid-2008,  which  in  part  was  expected  after  the  exceptionally  strong  growth  in  the  first 
quarter.  Against  this  background  and  in  full  accordance  with  our  mandate,  we  emphasise 
that maintaining price stability in the medium term is our primary objective and that it is our 
strong determination to keep medium and long-term inflation expectations firmly anchored in 
line with price stability. This will preserve purchasing power in the medium term and support 
sustainable growth and employment. On the basis of our assessment, the current monetary 
policy  stance  will  contribute  to  achieving  our  objective.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  very 
closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
The  information  on  economic  activity  that  has  become  available  since  the  July  press 
conference suggests that real GDP growth figures for mid-2008 will be substantially weaker 
than  for  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  As  indicated  on  previous  occasions,  this  represents 
partly  a  technical  reaction  to  the  strong  growth  seen  in  the  first  months  of  the  year.  In 
addition,  it  also  partly  reflects  a  weakening  in  GDP  growth  due  to  factors  such  as  slower 
expansion  at  the  global  level  and  dampening  effects  from  high  and  volatile  oil  and  food 
prices. In order to assess the underlying momentum of euro area economic activity and to 
avoid being misguided by highly volatile quarterly outturns, it is necessary to look through the 
volatility in quarter-on-quarter growth rates and monthly indicators.  
Taking  this  perspective,  growth  in  the  world  economy,  while  moderating,  is  expected  to 
remain  relatively  resilient,  benefiting  in  particular  from  sustained  growth  in  emerging 
economies.  This  should  support  external  demand  for  euro  area  goods  and  services.  As 
regards domestic developments, in a medium-term perspective the fundamentals of the euro 
area are sound and the euro area does not suffer from major imbalances. Investment growth 
in  the  euro  area  has  provided  ongoing,  though  moderating,  support  to  economic  activity. 
Moreover,  employment  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly,  and 
unemployment  rates  remain  low  in  historical  terms.  However,  these  developments,  which 
support household disposable income and consumption, are unlikely to fully compensate the 
loss of purchasing power caused by higher energy and food prices.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic 
activity  remains  high,  owing  to,  among  other  things,  the  very  high  and  volatile  levels  of 
commodity  prices  and  the  ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets.  Overall,  downside  risks 
prevail. In particular, risks stem from the dampening impact on consumption and investment 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 1
of  further  unanticipated  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  Moreover,  downside  risks 
continue to relate to the potential for the financial market tensions to affect the real economy 
more adversely than currently anticipated. The possibility of disorderly developments owing 
to global imbalances also implies downside risks to the outlook for economic activity, as do 
concerns about the emergence of protectionist pressures. In this respect, the failure of the 
recent  negotiations  in  the  context  of  the  World  Trade  Organization’s  Doha  round  on  trade 
liberalisation is a major setback. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has remained considerably above 
the level consistent with price stability since last autumn, reaching 4.0% in June 2008 and, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  4.1%  in  July.  This  worrying  level  of  inflation  rates 
results  largely  from  both  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  past  sharp  increases  in  energy  and 
food  prices  at  the  global  level.  At  the  same  time,  while  labour  productivity  growth  has 
decelerated,  there  are  some  indications  that  labour  cost  growth  has  been  rising  in  recent 
quarters. 
Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  commodities,  the  annual  HICP 
inflation rate is likely to remain well above a level consistent with price stability for quite some 
time, moderating only gradually in 2009.  
Risks  to  price  stability  at  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon  remain  clearly  on  the 
upside  and  have  increased  over  the  past  few  months.  These  risks  include  notably  the 
possibility of further increases in energy and food prices and of increasing indirect effects on 
consumer prices. There is a very strong concern that price and wage-setting behaviour could 
add to inflationary pressures via broadly based second-round effects. The Governing Council 
is monitoring price-setting behaviour and wage negotiations in the euro area with particular 
attention.  Furthermore,  there  are  potential  upside  risks  from  unanticipated  rises  in  indirect 
taxes and administered prices. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored at levels in line with price stability. The shift in relative 
prices and the related transfer of income from commodity-importing countries to commodity-
exporting  countries  require  a  change  in  the  behaviour  of  companies  and  households. 
Therefore, broadly based second-round effects stemming from the impact of higher energy 
and food prices on price and wage-setting behaviour must be avoided. All parties concerned, 
in both the private and the public sector, must meet their responsibilities in this regard. In this 
context, the Governing Council has repeatedly expressed its concern about the existence of 
schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to  consumer  prices.  Such  schemes  involve 
the  risk  of  upward  shocks  in  inflation  leading  to  a  wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be 
detrimental to employment and competitiveness in the countries concerned. The Governing 
Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided. 
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  In  line  with  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  we  take  the  view  that  the 
sustained  underlying  strength  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
past few years has created upside risks to price stability. Over recent quarters, these risks 
appear to have become manifest as inflation has trended upwards. 
Not  least  in  the  face  of  the  ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets,  the  monetary  analysis 
helps  to  support  the  necessary  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  by  focusing 
attention on the upside risks to price stability prevailing at medium to longer horizons. While 
the growth of broad money and credit aggregates is now showing some signs of moderation, 
also reflecting the policy measures taken since 2005 to address upside risks to price stability, 
the strong underlying pace of monetary expansion points to continued risks to price stability 
over the medium term.  
The current yield curve has led to very rapid increases in time deposits and to a substantial 
decline in annual M1 growth. Such effects and other temporary factors must be taken into 
account in assessing monetary developments. Overall, a broad-based analysis of the data, 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2008
taking the appropriate medium-term perspective, confirms the underlying strength of money 
growth. 
One of the main factors leading to this conclusion is the still high growth of MFI loans to the 
private  sector,  which  is  underpinning  the  robust  nature  of  monetary  growth.  The  pace, 
maturity  and  sectoral  composition  of  bank  borrowing  suggest  that,  at  the  level  of  the  euro 
area as a whole, the availability of bank credit has, as yet, not been significantly affected by 
the  ongoing  financial  tensions.  Higher  short-term  interest  rates  and  housing  market 
weakness  in  several  parts  of  the  euro  area  have  dampened  the  growth  of  household 
borrowing  over  the  past  few  years.  By  contrast,  and  notwithstanding  tighter  financing 
conditions  and  moderating  economic  growth,  the  expansion  of  bank  credit  to  non-financial 
corporations thus far remains very robust.  
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary  analysis  clearly  confirms  the  assessment  of  increasing  upside  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term. Annual inflation rates are likely to remain well above levels 
consistent with price stability, and monetary aggregates continue to grow vigorously, with so 
far no signs of significant constraints on bank loan supply. The latest economic data point to 
a  weakening  of  real  GDP  growth  in  mid-2008,  which  in  part  was  expected  after  the 
exceptionally strong growth in the first quarter. Against this background, it remains crucial to 
avoid broadly based second-round effects in wage and price-setting. In full accordance with 
our mandate, we emphasise that maintaining price stability in the medium term is our primary 
objective  and  that  it  is  our  strong  determination  to  keep  medium  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations firmly anchored in line with price stability, thereby preserving purchasing power 
in the medium term and supporting sustainable growth and employment in the euro area. On 
the basis of our assessment, the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving 
our  objective.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the  period 
ahead.  
Regarding  fiscal  policy,  there  are  risks  that  some  countries  will  not  achieve  their  fiscal 
targets  this  year.  In  this  situation  a  rigorous  implementation  of  budget  plans  and  the 
avoidance of expenditure slippage are of crucial importance. Budget plans for 2009, which 
are  currently  being  finalised  in  a  number  of  countries,  need  to  reflect  European 
commitments.  In  particular,  countries  with  still  large  deficits  must  provide  ambitious  and 
concrete  deficit  reduction  plans,  backed  by  clearly  specified  measures,  preferably  on  the 
expenditure side. Where budgetary scope is available, automatic stabilisers can contribute to 
the smoothing of cyclical economic fluctuations. 
As  regards  structural  policies,  measures  which  reduce  adjustment  costs  and  promote 
moderate  unit  labour  cost  growth  are  of  the  utmost  importance,  particularly  in  the  current 
climate  of  high  inflation  and  slowing  real  GDP  growth.  These  include  the  removal  of 
impediments to competition in the services sector in general, and at the various stages of the 
food supply chain in the retail and distribution sectors, as well as in the energy sector, more 
specifically.  Equally,  making  labour  markets  more  flexible  and  enhancing  investment  in 
education and training would foster productivity, thereby increasing the scope for increases 
in real incomes.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 96/2008 
 3
