 Bandid Nijathaworn: Is climate change a big deal for the financial 
system? 
Speech  by  Dr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  Bank 
Indonesia’s  Annual  International  Seminar  on  “Macroeconomic  Impact  of  Climate  Change: 
Opportunities and Challenges”, Bali, 2 August 2008. 
 Thank you Chairman, 
First, let me thank Bank Indonesia for the kind invitation. When I was asked whether I could 
speak on climate change and the financial system, I felt the suggestion was a challenging 
one, especially at this time when we need to build some momentum on this important issue. 
My  topic  today  is  “Is  climate  change  a  big  deal  for  the  financial  system?”.  Given  the 
limitations of time, I want to focus my discussion on just two issues. The first, is why climate 
change is a big deal for the financial system, and the second, is to offer some thoughts on 
how  to  engage  the  financial  system  going  forward  on  climate  change,  especially  in  the 
context of emerging market economies in Asia. Much of what I will say is still very much a 
preliminary thought, which is still evolving. 
Is climate change a big deal for the financial system? The answer is definitely yes, and there 
are a number of good reasons why this is so. First, although uncertain, the macroeconomic 
impact of climate change is thought to be large, which is likely to pose risk to the financial 
sector, as well as to financial stability. 
Second, economic transformation in response to climate change, as a result of an adaptation 
and mitigation process, will also require the financial sector to adapt, by managing risk and 
by exploring opportunities for business. Third, being a prominent sector in the economy, the 
financial system can also be an agent of change, supporting the adaptation and mitigation 
process, through its influence on financial resource allocation, through developing supportive 
financial  services,  markets,  and  products,  as  well  as  engaging  climate  change  in  its  own 
business agenda. 
Let me elaborate in more details on each of these points, starting with the macro impact and 
implications for the financial system. 
Conventional wisdom at this time is that the macroeconomic impact from climate change can 
be large, but uncertain. For example, estimates from three benchmark studies, as cited by 
the IMF, point to a mean GDP loss of about 0-3 percent of global GDP for a 3oC warming. In 
Asia, South and Southeast Asia are to be amongst the regions most likely to experience the 
most negative effects. 
Such macro-impact is tantamount to a supply  shock on the country’s long-term productive 
capacity  i.e.  capital stock  and  technology,  leading  to  a  decline  in  long-term  output  growth, 
higher production cost and inflation, shift in relative price away from carbon-based energy, 
and  a  decline  in  productivity.  Some  countries may  suffer  balance  of payments  problems  if 
they are financially unable to cope with the impact. On top of this, there is also uncertainty 
whether a larger impact could materialize because of the potential for catastrophic damages. 
Given  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  is  closely  related  to  the  macroeconomy, 
implications for the financial system could be significant through increased exposure of the 
financial system to risk, both its own and through its clients, as well as possible damages to 
its assets. 
The key risk-driver includes market risk linked to large economic disasters, and operational, 
reputational,  political,  legal  and  counterparty  risk  relating  to  defaults  after  a  disaster.  In 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 1
 risk,  developing  supportive 
addition, there is also a business risk if it fails to properly incorporate climate change into its 
portfolio risk management. 
As for threat to financial stability, this would depend on whether the impact is slow-moving, 
which can be offset by risk-management, adaptation, and financial response. Alternatively, 
the impact could take the form of a series of catastrophic events that impair the operative 
capacity of financial institutions. 
Second,  being  a  global  problem,  the  collective  response  to  climate  change  can  set  off  an 
economic  transformation,  in  terms  of  the  changing  patterns  of  demand  and  production, 
toward a low carbon economy that will require the financial system to adapt by managing risk 
and exploring related business opportunities. 
Three  triggers  will  be  key  in  driving  this  transformation:  namely,  regulations  set  by  the 
government, response by the private sector through adaptation and mitigation, and increased 
public  awareness  of  the  issue.  Such  transformation  will  result  in  a  shift  in  relative  prices 
(away from carbon-based technology), influence the patterns of consumption and production 
(towards  non-carbon,  carbon-efficient,  and  carbon-capture  technology),  and  redirect  the 
financial resources to support the process. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  being  a  service  industry,  the  financial  sector  will  need  to  adapt  by 
managing 
financial  services,  and  exploring  business 
opportunities.  Both  the  threat  and  the  opportunities  that  emerge  will  be  a  challenge  for  all 
segments  of  the  financial  system  i.e.  insurance,  banking,  and  fund  management.  In  this 
process, awareness, right incentive, and market mechanism will be key in determining the 
pace of change. 
Third, the financial sector can also be an agent of change, because of the three important 
roles it can play. Firstly, it can directly influence resource allocation by internalizing climate 
change in its core business decisions i.e. lending, investment, and fund management. 
Secondly,  it  can  indirectly  influence  resource  allocation  by  developing  supportive  financial 
services,  markets,  risk  management  and  investment  products  that  assist  the  adaptation 
process, for example, through the development of insurance products, weather derivatives, 
and “CAT”-bond, and also assist the mitigation process through trading of carbon credits and 
allowances. 
The  scope  for  business  opportunities  on  these  two  fronts  are  many,  and  are  open  for  all 
segments of the financial system, ranging from commodities services to corporate finance, to 
investment banking, and retail banking. 
And thirdly, financial institutions can also engage climate change in its business agenda as 
part of the corporate social responsibility (CSR). Increasingly, we are seeing pressure from 
stakeholders,  pushing  banks  to  become  more  engaged  with  the  issue.  And  financial 
institutions have responded by paying more attention to their own exposure to climate risk, 
developing  communication  and  business  strategy  that  incorporates  climate  change,  and 
engaging  bank  management  and  employees  on  the  issue  as  part  of  the  corporate  social 
responsibility. 
Up  to  now,  globally,  evidence  of  the  financial  system’s  response  to  climate  change  is 
positive,  but  still  very  much  in  an  early  stage.  On  lending,  for  example,  fifty-four 
internationally-based  banks  have  signed 
integrates 
environmental  considerations  into  project  finance.  Banks  like  Citi,  Merrill  Lynch,  Credit 
Agricole  and  HSBC  have  developed  specific  climate  considerations  on  lending.  But  for 
developing  and  emerging  market  economies,  evidence  on  environmental  lending  by 
domestic banks and by micro-finance institutions is more limited compared to international 
development banks and subsidiaries of international banks. 
the  Equator  Principles  which 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2008
 is 
On  market  development,  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM)  market  growth 
impressive and this has been the key driver of growth in primary and secondary trading in 
carbon market. 
On  the  issue  of  CSR,  banks  have  done  relatively  less  to  elevate  climate  change  as  a 
governance  priority.  For  example,  only  twelve  out  of  forty  of  the  world  largest  banks  have 
board-level  involvement  in  climate  change  initiatives.  But  in  terms  of  banking  operation,  a 
growing number of banks are calculating carbon risk in their loan portfolios, with twenty-four 
banks  having  set  greenhouse  gas  reduction  targets  for  their  internal  operations.  Also,  an 
increasing number of banks are recognizing climate change risk in response to investor and 
other stakeholder initiatives. 
Judging  from  this  evidence,  while  the  response  of  financial  institutions  is  positive,  it  is  still 
very much in an early stage. And in the case of Asia, the progress is even more limited. The 
main supplier of carbon credits in CDM is China, while the rest of Asia lags behind. In Asia, 
the  engagement  of  financial  institutions  on  climate  change  is  scattered  and  not  yet  a 
momentum.  The  progress  is  hampered  partly  by  inadequate  supporting  framework  that 
includes lack of clear policy and incentive as well as information. 
Let me now discuss some of the current problems in Asia and the prospects for the financial 
system in emerging markets, especially in Asia, to become more engaged with the issue. 
Given  limited  progress  so  far,  the  challenge  is  how  to  engage  the  financial  system  in 
emerging  markets  more  extensively  on  climate  change.  In  moving  this  issue  forward,  a 
critical  role  has  to  be  played  by  policy,  especially  on  the  role  of  incentive  and  the 
development of tools that can facilitate the response to climate change. 
On  incentive,  a  good  starting  point  is  to  discuss  the  principles  that  would  be  important  in 
guiding the design of policy, which in my view, four key principles stand out. 
First, the role of the states and policy are critical to ensure that the global rule of the market 
is clear and continuous beyond 2012. This is because any uncertainty about the global rule 
will only discourage future efforts and derail the momentum of the current efforts. 
Second,  policy  at  the  country  level  should  focus  on  providing  market  infrastructure  that 
assists  adaptation  and  mitigation  i.e.  legal,  tax,  regulatory  framework,  accounting,  and 
information.  But  more  importantly,  correct  incentive  structure  has  to  be  put  in  place  to 
internalize benefits from clean technology. 
Third, under the incentive structure provided, given many uncertainties surrounding climate 
change, it is important that the strategy to promote increased engagement relies on market 
mechanism to build growth and innovation. This is because the market would be in a better 
position to assess and price risk-return tradeoffs more efficiently. 
And  fourth,  financial  regulation  should  be  neutral  on  the  issue,  focusing  instead  on  risk 
management capability of financial institutions, especially the ability to handle new risk and 
new  innovation,  with  a  view  of  maintaining  soundness  and  stability  of  the  overall  financial 
system. 
Under these key principles, the actual design of incentive for specific economy would vary, 
taking  account  of  country’s  specific  circumstances  such  as  the  state  of  economic 
development, the level of financial deepening, and the strength of its policy institution. 
Turning  now  to  the  development  of  tools  for  internalizing  climate  change  in  emerging 
markets. 
At  this  time,  the  main  tools  for  internalizing  climate  change  are  provided  in  the  global 
financial  market,  but  access  of  emerging  markets  to  this  market  are  limited  by  its  own 
capacity, as well as by the market nascent development. Under the current conditions, the 
key tools for emerging markets for adaptation and mitigation are likely to be: 
BIS Review 97/2008 
 3
 First,  is  CDM,  which  presently  offers  clarity  up  to  2012.  CDM  provides  core  demand  for 
carbon  credit  that  forms  the  core  primary  market  and  allows  secondary  and  derivatives 
market to grow.  
Second,  is  the  insurance  market  that  offers  products  for  risk  mitigation.  Third,  is  the 
investment fund market that bridges carbon credit buyers (which is CDM driven) and sellers 
in emerging markets. Many countries have set up such funds, but less so in the context of 
emerging  markets’  own  funds.  And  fourth,  is  the  direct  lending  by  financial  institutions  in 
emerging markets to promote energy-efficient projects and companies. 
Response  to  climate  change  in  emerging  markets,  therefore,  can  be  judged  in  the 
deployment of these four tools. Currently, the efforts remain scattered. Promoting the use of 
these  instruments  will  be  key  for  building  momentum  in  adaptation  and  mitigation.  At  this 
time, however, there are many problems in emerging markets that remain to be tackled. 
For  example,  in  the  case  of  CDM,  existing  practical  problems  include  the  absence  of  key 
global  infrastructure  beyond  2012,  lack  of  legal  recognition  of  carbon  credits  as  tradable 
securities  or  assets,  lack  of  knowledge  and  awareness  including  the  high  search  cost  for 
identifying  sellers  and  matching  trades,  and  the  need  to  set  up  a  supportive  “Guarantee 
Fund” to help banks share risk on lending to CDM-projects. 
In the case of bank lending and pricing, uncertainty in cash flows from the projected carbon 
credit,  and  the  slow  process  of  local  approval,  is  seen  as  a  major  risk  to  banks.  Lack  of 
understanding  of  CDM  and  carbon  trading  market  by  financial  institutions  is  also  a  factor 
weighing on its progress. 
In  the  case  of  investment  fund,  this  is  an  area  that  has  the  strongest  potential  for  private 
investors’  participation  in  supporting  clean  technology  and  energy-efficient  companies. 
Again, clarity beyond 2012 is needed for evaluating the longer-term economic payoffs, and 
whether carbon credit is considered securities legally is an issue in some countries. 
What  I  have  mentioned  are  some  of  the  practical  issues  that  have  emerged  in  emerging 
markets, and need to be addressed in order to be able to speed up the process. 
To conclude, climate change is a big deal for the financial system for a number of reasons 
that  I  have  mentioned.  As  for  the  response,  the  overall  direction  of  the  financial  sector’s 
response  to  climate  change  so  far  is  positive,  but  still  very  much  in  an  early  stage.  The 
progress, however, is more limited in Asia. 
To  promote  greater  engagement  of  the  financial  system,  the  issues  of  incentive  and 
availability of tools are important. On the former, key principles guiding the policy approach 
should include clear global rule beyond 2012, the need for clear incentive structure by the 
government  at  the  country  level,  reliance  on  market  mechanism  to  innovate  and  grow  the 
response,  and  financial  regulation  that  is  neutral  on  the  issue.  Under  such  policy  setting, 
there  will  be  ample  opportunities  for  the  financial  system,  especially  in  supporting  green 
technology and carbon trading market. 
Lastly, for emerging markets that are starting up on the issue, five actions along the following 
lines could be useful. They are (1) establish the country’s overall strategy on carbon trading; 
(2)  reduce  search  cost  in  matching  buyers  and  sellers  through  a  centralized  system;  (3) 
create  awareness  and  educate  all  market  players;  (4)  provide  the  needed  tax  incentive  to 
build up the market, and (5) provide a clear legal framework. Actions in these five areas will 
go a long way in avoiding many of the problems that some countries are now encountering. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2008
