Savenaca Narube: Telecommunications’ key role in the Fijian economy 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
Launch of TransTel’s new product “Yehdo”, at the University of the South Pacific’s Oceania 
Centre, Suva, 4 June 2008. 
 The Board of TransTel 
Mr. Radrodro Tabualevu, Chief Executive Officer 
Management and Staff 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
I  thank  Mr.  Tabualevu  for  his  invitation  to  be  here  this  evening  to  launch  TransTel’s’  new 
product. A big Yehdo to everyone. 
I  wish  to  congratulate  the  company  for  this  new  initiative.  It  is  very  encouraging  to  see 
companies  take  on  new  initiatives  during  such  challenging  times.  I  commend  TransTel  for 
their innovation and confidence. We must push forward. Business must go on. 
I am pleased that such innovation is alive in a critical sector like telecommunications. This 
sector plays a key catalytic role in the economy. It determines the efficient flow of information 
across the country and to the rest of the world. And we all know that information is power. 
Business cannot survive without an efficient transfer of this information. 
Development of the telecommunication sector 
I  have  been  closely  associated  with  the  telecommunications  sector  in  Fiji  for  some  time. 
During  the  last  ten  years,  I  have  seen  significant  developments.  It  really  began  with  the 
establishment  of  Amalgamated  Telecommunications  Limited  or  ATH  in  1998  –  exactly  ten 
years ago – which partially privatized the ownership of Telecom Fiji I fully subscribe to the 
ATH  slogan  which  says  that  “Telecommunications  has  never  been  in  better  hands”. 
Then came the breaking up of Telecom Fiji into its major business streams which was really 
a push for better efficiency, productivity and customer focus. I believe that this has worked 
well for Telecom Fiji. Then the Southern Cross fiber optic submarine cable came on stream 
which  opened  up  the  capacity  to  communicate  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  Commerce 
Commission pitched in by lowering charges. Of course this year, Fiji took another giant leap 
forward when we deregulated the industry. 
I believe that we should acknowledge the development of our telecommunication sector. We, 
of course, still have a lot to do. But with a deregulated environment, we can be guaranteed 
that  the  motivation  and  incentive  to  fulfill  customer’s  demands  will  be  stronger  than  ever 
before. 
Meeting customer demands 
This is really what we are celebrating today – meeting the demands of the customers with 
new  products,  new  initiatives  and  new  businesses.  And  in  today’s  business  world,  the 
customer is king. The expectations of the customers on telecommunications are very high as 
they know what is available globally. They want to have the kind of service they want, when 
and  where  they  want  it.  It  is  not  good  enough  for  telecommunications  providers  to  simply 
meet these expectations but more importantly they need to anticipate them. I believe that is 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
what TransTel has done. They have more than met the modern expectations of customers. 
This is good for customers, good for business, good for the shareholders and definitely good 
for the economy. Again, congratulations to TransTel. 
TransTel Limited 
As you know, TransTel Limited is one of the five companies under Telecom Fiji Limited. The 
other  companies  are  Connect,  XCEED  Pasifika  Limited,  Vodafone  Fiji  Limited  and  Fiji 
Directories Limited. TransTel is a fully owned subsidiary of Telecom Limited and is also part 
of  the  ATH  Group  of  Companies.  The  company  was  set  up  in  2003  and  took  over  the 
functions previously carried out by the Card Services Unit for Telecom Fiji. 
The  company  processes  financial  transactions  over  telecommunications  networks.  It  also 
manages and maintains Fiji’s public phone service facilities. TransTel was once considered a 
phone card company, however, with new technological advancements, it has expanded into 
prepaid  internet,  prepaid  utilities,  e-banking  and  other  products  where  prepayment  can  be 
seen  as  value  added.  I  am  sure  that  you  are  aware  of  TransTel’s  two  strong  brands  – 
Telecard  which  is  Fiji’s  main  prepaid  phone  card  and  the  Drua  which  are  the  uniquely 
designed public phone booths around Fiji. 
What is Yedho? 
Yehdo is an innovative product created by Team TransTel and the result of their resolve to 
satisfy their customers. 
It is created in the realisation that the telecom industry can and does have a positive impact 
on  human  lives  by  the  use  of  new  technologies.  Advancement  in  the  telecommunication 
sector  and  in  particular  the  internet  has,  in  the  developed  world  at  least,  presented  the 
market  new  and  convenient  ways  of  interaction  between  the  customer  and  the  supplier  of 
goods and or services. 
Customers  are  now  able  to  dedicate  a  lot  more  of  their  time  and  energy  to  pursue  their 
economic goals rather than being at a queue or traveling to one, to pay for goods or services. 
Regrettably these benefits have not been readily replicated in countries such as ours for two 
main reasons. Firstly, the digital divide has resulted in those perhaps needing choices the 
most,  missing  out  because  of  their  lack  of  access  to  the  internet.  Secondly,  the  low 
penetration  of  credit  cards;  a  requisite  for  purchases  on  the  internet  has  meant  that  even 
those  who  may  access  the  internet  are  incapable  of  enjoying  the  convenience  that  is 
otherwise available to them. 
Team TransTel has found a solution to the two constraints that I have mentioned. They are 
leveraging their core competencies, technology and business relationships to present to Fiji, 
and soon, I am informed, the Pacific, a prepaid re-loadable stored value card or account for 
the payment of goods and services. This is Yehdo! 
This prepaid re-loadable card will, I am certain, be readily accepted by this market because it 
can be used not only from the internet but more importantly from the normal POT (i.e. Plain 
Old Telephone for the technical novices). 
This will particularly benefit our rural communities where the only means of communication 
with  the  rest  of  Fiji  is  often  via  the  Telecom  Fiji  phone  system.  They  can  simply  call  the 
provider to order their goods and have them delivered. There may be no need to travel all the 
way to town which is costly and time consuming. 
The fact that anyone can purchase a starter pack to establish an account from a selected 
corner shop; load the account with a prepaid voucher purchased from the same shop in the 
same way that a prepaid mobile phone is “topped up” and purchase goods and services over 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
the  telecommunication  network  presents  a  new  platform  for  the  exchange  of  goods  and 
services between a buyer and seller. With the introduction of this card, I think that we can 
say that “Shopping will never be the same again”.  
I think that this card is really like a debit card. The major difference though is that instead of 
having  to  fill  in  a  long  application  form  and  be  required  to  hold  some  deposits  to  qualify, 
anyone can have this card by visiting your corner store and purchasing one. It is as simple as 
that. 
I understand that Team TransTel plan, in this first phase of the Yehdo roll out, is to issue 
cards  for  Calling,  Internet  Access  and  Bill  Payment  services.  I  am  informed  that  other 
services will be available later. 
Yehdo translates into simple and powerful opportunities that save money and time. 
Perhaps TransTel can consider the following: 
1. 
Firstly, establish a link, through your network, between our rural producers to supply 
fruit, vegetables and staple food to our urban customers. 
Secondly, avail your infrastructure to support the informal sector and be an enabling 
platform  for  SME  and  cottage  industries  to  find  markets  in  Fiji  and  the  rest  of  the 
world. 
Thirdly, become the repository for data and information. You will be able to record 
the transaction records and other statistics to facilitate better economic planning. 
Fourthly, can Yehdo be a catalyst for self employment? For instance, given the low 
start up cost for an account, establishing a business can be easier. 
Lastly, I am encouraged by the availability of Yehdo to the far flung reaches of Fiji 
and am optimistic that it can be a platform to take trade to these remote areas and 
improve livelihoods. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Yehdo is indeed a timely contribution to economic progress and growth. 
By the way, Yehdo is a happy local expression that means we have done it and done it well! 
It also has a congratulatory connotation. We must say Yedho that TransTel has lived up to its 
vision – the world at your fingertips. 
Launch 
Once again, I thank Mr. Tabualevu for his kind invitation. I wish him and his team at TransTel 
every success with Yehdo. 
I now have much pleasure in launching Yehdo. 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 3
