Jean-Claude Trichet: A strategic vision on euro area statistics – the 
ECB’s view 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 4th ECB 
Conference on Statistics “A strategic vision for statistics – challenges for the next 10 years”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 24-25 April 2008. 
 Colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome all of you most warmly to the Fourth ECB Conference on Statistics. 
This conference continues our tradition of regular high-level dialogue between the compilers 
and  users  of  statistics,  including  policy-makers,  analysts,  academics,  the  media  and  the 
financial  industry.  At  the  same  time,  this  provides  us  with  an  excellent  opportunity  to  take 
stock of the progress achieved concerning the availability and quality of euro area statistics 
and exchange views on the strategic vision for their further development. While much has 
been  achieved  over  the  past  ten  years  and  ECB  statistics  are  widely  used,  euro  area 
statistics  should  keep  pace  with  the  rapidly  changing  economic  and  financial  landscape  in 
Europe, to meet new needs, for instance in relation to the ongoing financial turmoil, and to be 
produced  by  means  of  a  highly  efficient  production  network,  so  that  costs  and  response 
burdens are kept to a minimum. 
A particularly successful feature of the recent rapid enhancement of euro area statistics is 
the very close collaboration between the ECB, notably its Directorate-General Statistics, and 
the  European  Commission,  notably  Eurostat.  This  is  mirrored  by  the  fruitful  cooperation 
between the statistical departments of national central banks (NCBs) and national statistical 
institutes  (NSIs),  both  at  the  national  and  at  the  European  level,  for  instance  in  the 
Committee  on  Monetary,  Financial  and  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics  (CMFB).  For  this 
reason,  I  am  particularly  pleased  that  Commissioner  Almunia  has  kindly  accepted  our 
invitation to give the keynote speech at this conference and that the programme includes a 
session  organised  jointly  by  Eurostat  and  the  ECB’s  Directorate-General  Statistics  and 
chaired by Mr Carré, the Director-General of Eurostat. 
I would like briefly to consider three issues: 
1. 
recent enhancements to euro area statistics from the ECB’s perspective as a policy-
maker; 
the importance of the appropriate communication of statistics; and 
the strategy for the further development of euro area statistics. 
2. 
3. 
Recent enhancements to euro area statistics from the ECB’s perspective as a policy 
maker  
First of all, I would like to reiterate that reliable and timely euro area economic, monetary and 
financial statistics are of paramount importance for the ECB’s decision-making. This applies 
not only to the single monetary policy, but also to the other ESCB tasks, including those in 
the  areas  of  financial  stability  and  payment  systems.  Statistics  are  themselves  one  of  the 
main deliverables of the ECB, providing market participants, analysts, academics, the media 
and  the  general  public  with  the  aggregate  financial  data  they  need.  For  instance,  the 
harmonised  national  average  interest  rates  on  the  deposits  and  loans  of  households  and 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
corporations that are published every month by the ECB and the NCBs provide citizens and 
firms with very useful preliminary insights.1
Concerning the key developments in ECB statistics over the last two years, I would like to 
highlight the following2:  
1. 
Since June of last year the ECB and Eurostat have jointly compiled and published 
quarterly  euro  area  accounts.3  These  accounts  can  be  considered  the  “national 
accounts” for the euro area and provide a complete and consistent overview of its 
economic, financial and monetary developments. A fairly unique feature of the euro 
area accounts is their almost entirely consistent representation of “real” and financial 
developments,  which  greatly  facilitates  integrated  analyses  and  permits  further 
enhanced cross-checking of the economic and monetary analyses that feed into the 
overall assessment of the ECB’s monetary policy stance.  
The euro area accounts record not only the economic and financial transactions, but 
also  the  financial  balance  sheets  of  all  institutional  sectors  (i.e.  households,  non-
financial  corporations,  financial  corporations  and  general  government).  They 
integrate  and  complement  more  timely  and  frequent  statistics,  for  instance  by 
providing  a  sectoral  breakdown  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3  and  by 
providing  hitherto  unavailable  quarterly  data  on  household  and  corporate  income, 
expenditure, savings and wealth.  
Since  July  2007  the  ECB  has  estimated  daily  yield  curves  reflecting  the  implied 
market  remuneration  rates  of  euro  area  central  government  bonds  for  residual 
maturities ranging from 3 months to 30 years. These curves help to gauge market 
expectations  regarding  economic  and  financial  activity,  as  well  as  being  used  for 
monetary  policy  purposes.  The  curves  are  presented  in  a  very  user-friendly  way, 
using the latest web technologies.4  
The  available  monthly  statistics  on  outstanding  amounts  of  Short-Term  European 
Paper have been supplemented with daily statistics on yields. This has enabled the 
ECB to ensure transparency while respecting the confidentiality of individual price or 
yield data.  
The  external  statistics  of  the  ECB  now  provide  separate  data  for  Brazil,  Russia, 
India, mainland China and Hong Kong as counterparts. Moreover, they also show 
the quarterly changes in the overall external position of the euro area, broken down 
into transactions, exchange rate changes, asset price changes and other changes.5 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
                                                 
1   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/interest/interest/html/interest_rates_2007-12.en.html. 
2   An  updated  overview  of  all  available  ECB  statistics  has 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstatisticsqualityframework200804en.pdf. 
recently  been  published.  See 
3   See “The introduction of quarterly sectoral accounts statistics for the euro area” in the November 2007 issue 
of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin; “Recent developments in the household and corporate sectors: information from 
new  quarterly  euro  area  sector  accounts”  in  the  June  2007  issue  of  the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin;  and  “New 
estimates on holdings by sector for euro area M3” in the December 2007 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
4   See  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/yc/html/index.en.html#data.  The  yield  curves  and  their  use  are 
explained  in  “The  new  euro  area  yield  curves”  in  the  February  2008  issue  of  the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin. 
Previously, Eurostat compiled these curves. 
5   See “Explaining changes in the net international investment position  of the euro  area”  in the January 2007 
issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2008
6. 
7. 
Finally,  since  the  end  of  2006  the  ECB  has  published  monthly  harmonised 
competitiveness indicators for all euro area countries.6  
Payment  statistics  have  also  been  enhanced,  and  new  data  on  securities  trading, 
clearing and settlement have been made available.7  
Last but not least, Slovenia was successfully integrated into the euro area statistics 
in  2007,  with  the  same  happening  for  Cyprus  and  Malta  in  2008.  When  countries 
join the euro area, all time series need to be recalculated in order to reflect the new 
composition of the euro area. At this juncture, I would also like to compliment the 
statisticians in the various EU countries on the outstanding work that they carry out, 
in  coordination  with  the  ECB  and  Eurostat,  to  meet  the  ECB’s  statistical 
requirements.  
For its policy-making, the ECB relies not only on its own statistics, but also on euro area data 
compiled by Eurostat and the NSIs. In particular, the ECB attaches considerable importance 
to  the  reliability  and  timeliness  of  the  so-called  Principal  European  Economic  Indicators 
(PEEIs), which comprise the indicators for core consumer prices, national accounts, short-
term  business,  labour  markets  and  external  trade.  In  November  of  last  year  the  ECOFIN 
Council  recognised  that,  in  general,  the  timeliness  targets  set  in  2002  had  now  been 
achieved for the majority of the PEEIs and invited Eurostat and the ECB to review the scope, 
timeliness  and  quality  of  the  PEEIs,  also  in  the  light  of  the  evolving  needs  of  users.  This 
brings me to the important issue of the communication of statistics. 
The importance of the appropriate communication of statistics 
Communication with the general public and financial markets is crucial for any central bank 
because it helps to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. Euro area statistics play an 
important role in the ECB’s communication, and it is therefore of great importance to the ECB 
that these statistics be highly credible and very accessible. 
In total, the ECB publishes around 70 statistical press releases per year, including monthly 
monetary  statistics  and  data  on  interest  rates,  securities  and  the  balance  of  payments; 
quarterly  euro  area  accounts  and  statistics  on  investment  funds  and  the  international 
investment position; and annual payment statistics and general data on monetary financial 
institutions.  Even  more  detailed  and  more  frequent  statistics  are  made  available  on  the 
ECB’s  website.  In  other  to  enhance  the  accessibility  of  its  statistics,  the  ECB  launched  its 
online Statistical Data Warehouse in 2006.  
Maintaining  the  public’s  confidence  in  the  ECB  statistics  requires  high  quality  standards. 
Such standards were set out in a recently published framework governing the quality of ECB 
statistics.8  In  addition,  in  the  performance  of  their  statistical  tasks,  both  the  ECB  and  the 
NCBs  adhere  to  the  statistical  principles  and  ethical  and  quality  standards  set  out  in  their 
“Public  commitment  with  respect  to  the  ESCB’s  statistical  function”.9  The  independence 
granted  to  the  ESCB  by  the  Treaty  means  that  there  is  no  political  interference  in  the 
                                                 
6   See “The introduction of harmonised competitiveness indicators for euro area countries” in the February 2007 
the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin,  and  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/exchange/hci/html/hci_2008-
issue  of 
01.en.html. 
7   See “Review of statistics on payments and securities trading, clearing and settlement” in the January 2008 
issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
8   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbstatisticsqualityframework200804en.pdf. 
9   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/html/pcstats.en.html. Both this commitment and the framework governing 
the quality of ECB statistics take due account of the European Statistics Code of Practice for the national and 
Community statistical authorities, while also reflecting the specific governance structure of the ESCB. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 3
compilation  and  dissemination  of  statistical  information.  Similarly,  the  Treaty  states  that 
compilers of statistics in the NSIs and Eurostat should also act in full scientific independence.  
In addition to these essential preconditions, statistics also need to be adequately explained. 
This  applies,  in  particular,  to  one  of  the  most  important  statistics  for  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy making, namely the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP). It is a well-known 
fact that the qualitative responses to the European Commission’s monthly consumer survey 
on inflation perceptions tended to indicate an upward trend following the introduction of the 
euro banknotes and coins in 2002, while the HICP exhibited a fairly stable rate of change.10 
Perceptions of inflation then tended to moderate, with renewed increases being observed as 
of  mid-2007,  increases  which  on  that  occasion  coincided  with  a  rise  in  the  annual  HICP 
inflation  rate.  However  useful  this  perception  indicator  is,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that 
perceptions  may  be  based  on  a  partial  inflation  concept  that  places  too  much  weight  on 
frequent  and  out-of-pocket  purchases  such  as  food  and  petrol  –  for  which  above-average 
price increases have been observed – and does not take full account of other less frequent 
purchases and quality improvements. If only for that reason, the HICP inflation rate, which is 
derived  from  no  less  than  1.7  million  price  observations  in  200,000  shops  throughout  the 
euro area every month gives an objective representation of the evolution of prices. 
The strategy for the further development of euro area statistics 
The ECB’s vision for euro area statistics envisages both product and process innovations. 
The  former  include  the  closing,  in  the  near  future,  of  some  of  the  remaining  gaps  in  the 
ECB’s statistics. This will involve:  
1. 
enhancing the timeliness, completeness and consistency of the quarterly euro area 
accounts, so that they become available within 90 days of the end of the reference 
period; 
compiling  more  accurate,  frequent  and  timely  statistics  on  assets  and  liabilities  of 
investment funds from early next year (based on an ECB Regulation adopted in July 
2007); 
compiling frequent, timely and harmonised statistics on insurance corporations and 
pension funds, which will become increasingly important in our ageing society; 
compiling  comprehensive  statistics  on  the  securitisation  of  bank  loans  and  the 
financial  vehicle  corporations  which  handle  these  securitisations,  as  well  as 
improving the measurement of credit risk transfers, including credit default swaps, in 
close cooperation with bank supervisors; 
enhancing statistics on bank credit lines, bank balance sheets and interest rates on 
deposits and loans, for instance by gaining more insight into loan collateral; and 
looking at user requirements for micro-data, for example for household consumption 
and finance. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
In addition, the ECB has the following high-priority requirements concerning the euro area 
statistics compiled by Eurostat and the NSIs: 
1. 
more comprehensive and timely statistics on services, labour markets and housing 
markets; 
better use of available data through the compilation of regular euro area supply and 
use tables and the integration of labour accounts into the national accounts, which 
2. 
                                                 
10   See  “Recent  developments  in  consumers’  inflation  perceptions  and  expectations  in  the  euro  area”  in  the 
November 2007 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2008
are  needed  both  for  productivity  and  growth  analysis  and  for  updating  the  EU-
KLEMS data; and 
closer  coordination  of  national  statistics  with  regard  to  seasonal  and  working  day 
adjustments, revision policies and release calendars.  
3. 
 As regards the process innovations, the Governing Council of the ECB last year endorsed a 
long term vision for statistics produced by the Eurosystem: 
• 
• 
concerning input, the same data should be collected only once; 
concerning data processing, the Eurosystem’s statistical function should operate as 
an efficient production network; and 
concerning  output,  the  fitness  for  use  of  Eurosystem  statistics  and  statistical 
communications should be further enhanced. 
  As  regards  the  collection  of  data,  the  ESCB’s  Statistics  Committee  (STC)  and  Banking 
Supervision Committee (BSC) will, in cooperation with the Committee of European Banking 
Supervisors, look at means of better aligning supervisory and statistical concepts, definitions 
and reporting formats, with the aim of reducing the reporting burden for financial institutions 
in the case of overlapping data requirements. The STC will also investigate the feasibility of 
reusing  and  sharing  available  micro-data  for  Eurosystem  statistical  purposes  –  particularly 
data  contained  in  central  credit  registers,  central  balance  sheet  offices  and  business 
registers  –  while  maintaining  strict  confidentiality  standards.  Furthermore,  it  is  considered 
best practice for a central bank to integrate the overlapping parts of the various statistics it 
produces  and  to  concentrate  the  production  of  all  of  its  statistics  within  a  single  statistical 
organisational unit. 
As far as data processing is concerned, the feasibility of a move towards the consolidated or 
pooled collection and production of some types of Eurosystem statistics will be explored. In 
addition, NCBs are invited to exploit comparative advantages in their cooperation with other 
national  statistical  authorities,11  for  instance  by  setting  up  joint  business  registers.  In  this 
context,  it  is  generally  agreed  that  an  enhanced  exchange  of  confidential  information 
between NCBs, the ECB, NSIs and Eurostat, strictly for statistical purposes, is indispensable 
in order to keep the response burden to a minimum and ensure the quality of both European 
and national statistics. It is therefore crucial that the updates of the two statistical framework 
regulations governing the collection, compilation and dissemination of European statistics – 
which are currently in the process of being prepared – allow the exchange of such micro-data 
while retaining strict confidentiality standards.12  
Concerning its statistical output, the ECB is looking at ways of meeting the statistical needs 
resulting from the turmoil on the financial markets. First, it may be appropriate to investigate 
the  merits  and  costs  of  further  expanding  the  ECB’s  Centralised  Securities  Database 
(CSDB), which already contains reference information for several million different securities. 
In view of the ongoing financial turmoil, there may be increased merit in further investment in 
this database, adding, in the medium term, information on the holders of such securities and 
more detailed information on complex structured securities, including chains of securities and 
tranches of securities with different ratings.13  
                                                 
11   The  distribution  of  labour  between  the  ECB’s  Directorate-General  Statistics  and  Eurostat  is  laid  down  in  a 
memorandum of understanding (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_mou_with_eurostat1.pdf). 
12   Council Regulation (EC) No 2533/98 of 23 November 1998 concerning the collection of statistics by the ECB 
(O.J.  L318,  27.11.98,  p.8)  and  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  322/97  of  17  February  2997  on  Community 
Statistics (O.J. L52, 22.2.97, p. 1). 
13   The  CSDB  already  enables  the  estimation  of  aggregate  information  on  total  issuance  and  outstanding 
amounts for all kinds of securities. However, the quality management for this database, which is provided by 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 5
Secondly,  the  ECB  could  support  ongoing  market  initiatives  to  improve  transparency  by 
offering  its  expertise  in  the  international  standardisation  of  definitions  and  classifications 
(looking, for instance, at how to define a covered bond, a mortgage prepayment rate or the 
residency  of  a  bond  issuer  or  holder,  or  considering  ways  of  consistently  classifying 
counterparties). This could include dialogue with the financial industry in the context of the 
possible  enhancement  –  under  consideration  by  the  European  Commission  –  of  the 
supervisory disclosure requirements under the so-called Pillar 3 of the Capital Requirements 
Directive so that the information to be disclosed is based on clear definitions and reported in 
a standard format and with sufficient frequency and timeliness.  
Thirdly, as regards the Short-Term European Paper market, the ECB is also involved in the 
actual compilation and publication of relevant statistics, and such transparency may come at 
a premium in the current circumstances.  
In general, more statistical data may be collected by NCBs on an ad hoc basis, from selected 
key players, for instance in relation to particular types of financial innovation. I also invite the 
STC to contribute to the enhancement of the financial literacy of euro area citizens and to 
further improve the accessibility of its statistics for specific target groups.  
Conclusions 
European policy-makers need to have at their disposal a wide array  of timely, high-quality 
statistics on which to base their decisions. The availability and quality of genuine euro area 
statistics – i.e. those which are more than just the sum of the national data of the Member 
States – has improved very substantially over the last ten years. Most notably, the ECB and 
Eurostat now regularly and jointly release quarterly real and financial euro area accounts that 
are both integrated and comprehensive. And yet, I would strongly favour an improvement in 
the  timeliness  of  such  releases,  which  would  then  be  even  more  useful  for  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy-making.  
The credibility of euro area and relevant national statistics is of key importance to the ECB, 
and  this  also  requires  that  such  statistics  be  effectively  communicated.  This  applies  in 
particular to the HICP. 
In view of the importance to the ECB of euro area monetary, financial and external statistics, 
the  Governing  Council  has  endorsed  a  strategic  vision  that  should  further  increase  the 
effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  the  compilation  of  these  statistics  by  the  Eurosystem.  This 
entails  even  more  intensive  cooperation  not  only  among  the  statistics  departments  of  the 
NCBs  and  the  ECB,  but  also  between  those  departments  and  external  parties  such  as 
statistical  institutes,  supervisors  and  the  financial  industry.  I  hope  that  the  gains  resulting 
from these synergies will then be used to close some of those gaps in the ECB’s statistics 
that I mentioned earlier and to improve market transparency as regards the issues that have 
come to the fore in the ongoing financial turmoil.  
All of these issues will be looked at during this conference, with contributions by both users 
and producers of statistics. This will certainly make an important contribution to the design 
and implementation of the ECB’s strategic vision on euro area statistics. I would therefore 
like to thank you all very much in advance for your participation and attention. 
                                                                                                                                                      
ESCB central banks in cooperation  with a number of other institutions, is still in its infancy and is currently 
focused on securities needed for specific statistics. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2008
