Irma Rosenberg: Current monetary policy – a difficult balancing act  
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Nordea, 
Stockholm, 11 March 2008. 
 At the monetary policy meeting on 12 February the Riksbank decided to raise the repo rate 
by 0.25 percentage points to 4.25 per cent. I entered a reservation against the decision and 
considered  that  the  repo  rate  should  be  left  unchanged.  However,  it  was  far  from  a  clear 
stance. I would therefore like to take this opportunity to explain my reasoning more clearly 
and the considerations monetary policy has to take into account. 
I will also comment on some of the statistics received since the monetary policy meeting. In 
this  context  it  feels  natural  to  briefly  comment  on  some  of  the  criticism  we  have  received, 
namely  that  the  Riksbank  has  been  altogether  too  silent  about  how  we  view  economic 
developments. It is possible that during the autumn, at the beginning of the financial turmoil, 
we  underestimated  the  need  for  the  Executive  Board  members  to  comment  on  the 
developments we see around us. It is also possible that we more generally underestimated 
the need, even in less turbulent times, to discuss our latest assessment and to relate it to the 
new statistics received since the most recent monetary policy meeting. All this, that is, our 
published forecasts and new outcomes, is public information and this link can be made by all 
those who follow our work. However, for the sake of clarity, I also intend to now run through 
some of the important information that has been received since the monetary policy meeting 
on  12  February.  However,  I  will  not  be  saying  anything  about  what  the  new  information 
means  to  future  interest  rate  developments.  This  is  something  that  we  Executive  Board 
members will have to decide at our next monetary policy meeting. 
The material for the February decision 
In the Monetary Policy Report published in February an account is given of the way in which 
the majority of the Executive Board view the prospects for inflation and development of the 
real  economy  in  Sweden  and  abroad  during  the  coming  years.  The  monetary  policy 
considerations are also shown and the assessments are based on the forecast for the repo 
rate described in the report. The main scenario of the report forecasts continued high cost 
pressures  in  the  Swedish  economy  and  weaker  economic  growth  both  abroad  and  in 
Sweden,  albeit  still  good.  It  can  be  added  that  the  forecast  had  changed  only  marginally 
since the December Monetary Policy Update.  
Growth in the United States and the euro area is expected to be considerably lower than last 
year  and  also  lower  than  the  trend  development.  Even  in  the  world  as  a  whole  growth  is 
expected  to  slow  but  remain  good  since  emerging  markets  such  as  China  and  India  are 
expected to continue to grow at a rapid rate. In the main scenario the recovery in the United 
States and the euro area is expected to begin during the second half of this year and next 
year  growth  will  largely  be  back  at  the  trend  level.  Growth  in  Sweden  is  expected  to  be 
approximately the same this year as last year, but in reality this is a weakening if one takes 
into account the larger number of working days this year.  
Inflation in Sweden rose rapidly in the autumn and, measured by both the CPI and the CPIX, 
is expected to exceed the inflation target during a large part of the forecast period. 
The  uncertainty  over  future  economic  developments  is  still  considerable,  however,  and  to 
highlight this a number of alternative scenarios are described in the Monetary Policy Report. 
One of these involves greater financial turmoil and that growth abroad will slow down more 
sharply. In this scenario growth in the US economy will fall more than in the main scenario, at 
the same time as the borrowing costs for households and companies in the whole world will 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 1
be  higher.  This  leads  to  a  general  dampening  of  demand  and  to  lower  GDP  growth  and 
inflation both abroad and in Sweden.  
But, as we have written in previous reports, there is also a risk that inflation will be higher 
than in the main scenario if wage developments are stronger and productivity weaker than 
expected.  In  addition,  the  risk  has  grown  that  prices  abroad  may  increase  at  a  faster  rate 
than in the main scenario, which would have an impact on inflation in Sweden also. 
My international outlook in February 
We  must  look  at  the  overall  picture  when  we  make  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  The 
forecast in the report should be seen as an average forecast, which is always surrounded by 
a substantial uncertainty interval. In this case it was unusually difficult to have an idea of the 
probabilities  for  the  different  outcomes.  Even  though  the  present  situation  has  certain 
similarities with some previous episodes, the differences outweigh the similarities and there 
is, therefore, little previous experience to learn from. 
Prior to the monetary policy meeting in February I felt, and still do feel, more concern over 
international  developments  than  is  reflected  in  the  main  scenario  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Report.  My  view  of  international  developments  did  not  differ  greatly  from  that  of  the  main 
scenario  in  the  short-term  perspective.  However,  I  was  concerned  that  the  financial  crisis 
would be both deeper and more protracted than was forecast.  
The financial market turmoil continued up to the monetary policy meeting. The problems in 
the interbank market appeared to have been alleviated to some extent, although interbank 
rates were still higher than normal and risk premiums in the credit market continued to be 
high. The turmoil continued to be great and the financial crisis expressed itself in other ways.  
It will probably take a long time to gain a general view of the extent to which international 
banks and other financial institutions will be forced to write-down losses. One relatively late 
consequence  of  the  crisis  was  the  problem  for  the  so-called  monolines,  that  is,  insurance 
companies  that  insure  bond  loans.  Many  of  them  risked  being  downgraded  by  the  credit 
rating  agencies  and  this  has  since  been  the  case  for  several  of  them.  As  I  saw  it,  these 
problems could lead to a substantial credit crunch. 
Developments on the world’s stock markets were another clear expression of the financial 
turmoil.  Since  the  international  stock  market  fall  began  last  summer,  and  up  until  the 
February  monetary  policy  meeting,  prices  on  the  largest  stock  exchanges  had  fallen  by 
between 15 and 30 per cent. Just since the beginning of the year prices had fallen by 10-15 
per cent. It is difficult to predict how the existing turmoil on the financial markets will affect 
developments around the world and in the Swedish economy. The financial sector in Sweden 
is outside of the worst crisis area since it has small direct exposures to the most problematic 
areas of the securities markets, but my assessment was that the Swedish economy would be 
affected  by  a  continued  crisis  with  abnormally  high  interest  rates  and  elements  of  credit 
rationing.  
The problems in the US housing market also continued. According to real estate statistics, 
house prices had fallen in all regions. As long as the adjustment continues, there is a risk 
that  the  problems  in  the  subprime  market  will  be  aggravated  and  the  financial  turmoil  will 
intensify. 
It is difficult to assess how the financial turmoil and the problems in the housing market affect 
the  real  economy.  Growth  in  the  United  States  weakened  substantially  during  the  final 
quarter  of  last  year  and  the  fall  in  housing  investments  made  a  significantly  negative 
contribution. Nonetheless, household consumption was maintained relatively well during the 
fourth quarter. The question is how resistant household consumption, which corresponds to 
approximately 70 per cent of GDP, will be given the shocks facing the US economy. The fact 
that  house  and  share  prices  are  falling  means  that  household  wealth  is  declining,  which 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2008
could have a negative impact on demand. The upturn in oil and food prices also means that 
households’  purchasing  power  is  being  undermined.  These  negative  effects  have  been 
counteracted to some extent by the Federal Reserve’s cutting the policy rate and by various 
fiscal  policy  measures.  The  forecast  in  the  main  scenario  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report 
entails  fairly  weak  growth  in  the  US  economy  over  the  coming  quarters.  Nevertheless,  I 
considered there to be an evident risk that the problems would be more prolonged than was 
forecast in the main scenario of the Report. 
Growth in the euro area was also more subdued in the fourth quarter last year. The outcome 
had  not  been  published  at  the  time  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting,  but  it  was  largely  as 
expected.  Households  in  the  euro  area  appear  to  have  been  very  restrictive  with  their 
consumption  expenditure.  Retail  trade  turnover  fell  at  the  end  of  last  year  and  it  is  also 
possible  to  discern  from  survey  data  that  household  confidence  has  declined.  As  in  the 
United States, more prolonged problems in the financial markets can lead to developments 
being weaker than in the main scenario. 
My view in February of developments in Sweden 
Inflation has gradually risen in Sweden in recent years. On average, measured in terms of 
the  CPI,  inflation  was  2.2  per  cent  last  year,  which  is  close  to  the  inflation  target.  The 
upswing in inflation was partly due to resource utilisation in the economy having increased 
and  cost  pressures  having  risen.  Hourly  wages  increased  more  rapidly  than  before  at  the 
same  time  as  productivity  growth  slackened  considerably.  Inflation  has  been  very  low  for 
several  years,  but  in  2007  rising  cost  pressures  were  a  factor  that  contributed  to  inflation 
reaching the target. Underlying inflation, measured in terms of the CPIX, was however 1.2 
per cent as an average for 2007.  
During the autumn of last year inflation rose very quickly and, measured in terms of the CPI, 
reached 3.5 per cent in December. Underlying inflation, measured in terms of the CPIX, rose 
to 2 per cent in December. The rapid upturn in inflation last autumn was largely due to rising 
energy and food prices, a reflection of the fact that prices rose rapidly on the world market. At 
the  monetary  policy  meeting  I  pointed  out  that  it  is  not  possible  to  immediately  counteract 
such rapid price impulses from abroad with monetary policy. Quite simply, it must be allowed 
to  take  some  time.  In  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  the  rapid  price  increases  are  to  some 
extent assessed to be of a temporary nature. If world market prices do not continue to rise at 
the same rapid pace in future, inflation will fall back again. This is also what is forecast in the 
main  scenario  of  the  Report.  However,  to  some  extent,  it  also  concerns  the  effects  on 
inflation which risk becoming more permanent and which may need to be counteracted with 
monetary policy. 
When inflation rises and is above the target, as CPI inflation now is, it is important that it is 
not allowed to become entrenched and become permanently high. The risk of this increases 
if  inflation  expectations  rise,  and  that  is  exactly  what  has  occurred.  Inflation  expectations 
have  risen  not  just  one  year  ahead,  but  even  two  and  five  years  ahead,  which  is 
troublesome.  
The monetary policy decision 
The  upturn  in  inflation  and  in  inflation  expectations  in  the  slightly  longer  term  were  also 
factors  that  indicated  the  interest  rate  should  be  raised  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in 
February.  The  forecast  in  the  main  scenario  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  means  that 
growth  will  slacken  but  will  still  remain  good  during  the  forecast  period.  I  personally  was 
slightly more concerned about the problems in the financial markets and the risk of weaker 
developments abroad, which would of course also affect developments in Sweden. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 3
As the minutes of the meeting show I was, on the other hand, not quite as concerned about 
cost  pressures  as  before.  Wages  did  not  appear  to  be  rising  as  quickly  as  the  Riksbank 
assumed shortly after the new agreements were met last year. The wage forecasts were also 
adjusted  downwards  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  In  addition,  my  opinion  was  that  the 
slowdown in productivity growth last year was more comprehensible when the publication of 
National Account statistics for the third quarter showed that output growth had clearly slowed 
down as early on as at the beginning of 2007. Growth in the number of hours worked did not 
slacken as output growth. This is the normal pattern when growth slackens in that the labour 
market  typically  lags  behind  somewhat  in  the  economic  cycle.  I  therefore  assessed  that 
weaker  productivity  growth  indicates  that  companies  will  be  more  restrictive  in  recruiting 
labour rather than that we will see rapid price increases in the future. 
When I weighed together the great uncertainty about developments in the financial markets 
and the risk for a weaker development abroad with the Swedish economic outlook and the 
risk of inflation in Sweden remaining high, my conclusion was that the interest rate should be 
left unchanged. I would like to emphasise that it should not be regarded as though I wished 
to attach less weight to the inflation target. It was and is more a question of how much time it 
will take to bring inflation back on target. I also pointed out that the Riksbank has raised the 
interest rate in a number of stages since January 2006 and that these increases have not yet 
had a full impact on the economy. 
What has happened since the monetary policy meeting? 
So far my assessment is that outcome data and indicators in the euro area are largely in line 
with the assessment in the main scenario of the Monetary Policy Report. My opinion is also 
that  the  indications  of  weak  US  growth  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  and  the  continued 
problems on the housing and property markets are in line with the assessment in the main 
scenario. In the short-term perspective the assessment does not differ from my own. I am 
however more concerned that it will take longer before the recovery gathers pace. 
Swedish  GDP  growth  during  the  fourth  quarter  last  year  was  somewhat  stronger  than 
expected  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Employment,  measured  as  the  number  of  hours 
worked, increased at an unexpectedly high rate and productivity growth last year was weaker 
than expected in the Report.  
The National Institute of Economic Research’s business tendency survey for February shows 
a  clear  slowdown  in  economic  activity  in  the  business  sector  as  a  whole.  The  business 
tendency survey suggests that employment has continued to increase, but at a slower rate. 
Companies have adjusted their recruitment plans downwards ahead of the coming months. 
In contrast, the purchasing managers index displays a more positive view in February. The 
total  index  rose  somewhat  and  during  several  months  fluctuated  around  the  level  of  55, 
which is close to the average since 2001. However, at the same time, the survey shows that 
growth in employment has slackened and that companies have become less optimistic about 
output growth in the future. 
In  January  inflation  in  Sweden  was  somewhat  lower  compared  with  the  forecast  in  the 
Monetary Policy Report. However, this was largely connected with the fact that the weights in 
the CPI basket, as at the end of each year, had changed. The effects of this change were 
unusually large this time. This could be interpreted as though consumers, to a greater extent 
than  normal,  have  replaced  goods  and  services  that  increased  rapidly  in  price  in  their 
consumption. The so-called substitution effect was then greater than the Riksbank and most 
other analysts had assumed.  
All in all, activity in the Swedish economy during the final quarter last year appears to have 
been slightly higher than we expected in February. Productivity on the other hand showed 
weaker  development  than  in  the  assessment  in  the  Report.  Survey  data  clearly  suggests 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2008
however  that  a  slowdown  is  occurring  in  most  parts  of  the  business  sector  and  that  the 
increase in the demand for labour is on the point of slowing.  
The  turmoil  has  once  again  increased  in  the  financial  markets  around  the  world.  This 
suggests that these are complicated processes that can be protracted. The so-called TED 
spreads, which is the spread between interbank rates and T-bill rates, have risen once more, 
above all in the United States but even in Sweden and the United Kingdom. Credit spreads 
are still high. In recent days the spreads on the mortgage market in Sweden have increased. 
This  is  linked  to  the  unrest  on  the  mortgage  markets  in  a  few  other  European  countries. 
Credit insurance premiums have risen recently both in the United States and Europe. New 
reports about losses related to the US subprime sector are being received. Share prices in 
Europe and the United States have fluctuated somewhat, but are at present somewhat lower 
than  at  the  time  of  the  monetary  policy  meeting.  The  krona  has  strengthened  somewhat, 
especially against the US dollar. 
Conclusion 
As  I  mentioned  initially,  I  have  in  this  speech  referred  to  some  of  the  new  information 
received and compared it with the forecasts made in connection with the February Monetary 
Policy Report. It is important to point out that a lot of important new statistics will be received 
prior  to  the  next  monetary  policy  meeting  in  April,  and  it  is  not  until  then  that  an  overall 
assessment can be made of the monetary policy consequences.  
When I look at what has happened since out monetary policy meeting on 12 February I think 
that events so far support the general outline given in the Monetary Policy Report. Neither 
does  the  difference  between  my  own  assessment  and  the  main  scenario  apply  to 
developments in so short a term as a month or two. My slightly more pessimistic view applies 
to what the consequences might be of the turmoil in the financial markets. It is a question of 
the  risk  of  a  weaker  development  abroad  and  the  consequences  this  may  have  on 
developments in the real economy and inflation in the Swedish economy. My assessment in 
February  was  that,  given  the  considerable  prevailing  uncertainty,  we  should  wait  before 
raising  the  repo  rate.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  all  we  Executive 
Board members, regardless of our stance at the most recent meeting, look seriously upon 
both the risk of aggravated financial turmoil and weaker development abroad as well as the 
risk of inflation in Sweden becoming entrenched at a high level. It is not easy to weigh these 
risks  against  each  other  and  I  therefore  believe  that  it  was  not  so  remarkable  that  we 
Executive Board members reached slightly different conclusions in our deliberations at the 
meeting in February. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 5
