Randall S Kroszner: The United States in the international financial 
system – a separate reality? Resolving two puzzles in the international 
accounts 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina  2008  Money  and  Banking  Conference 
“Financial  turbulence  –  impact  on  developed  and  emerging  economies”,  Buenos  Aires, 
1 September 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 I would like to thank the organizers here at the Bank for inviting me to this year's conference 
and  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  join  Madam  Hu  and  Bill  White  in  this  session  on 
“Different  Tools,  Different  Realities.  Differences  in  “tools”  have  been  much  discussed 
recently,  in  both  the  abstract  (such  as  how  the  goals  of  monetary  policy  are  set  and 
communicated)  and  the  operational  (such  as  the  structure  of  facilities  used  to  provide 
liquidity to the financial system). Rather than continue this discussion, I would like to focus on 
the second part of the session title and ask whether the United States can be said to face a 
different economic “reality” than that faced by the rest of the world. The term reality can, of 
course,  be  interpreted  in  a  number  of  ways;  today,  I  am  going  to  use  it  to  refer  to 
international  trade  and  financial  linkages  that  transmit  disturbances,  or  “shocks,”  from  one 
economy to another. 
In asking whether the United States faces a different reality, I am, in effect, asking whether 
the United States has become decoupled from the global economy. After arguing against the 
decoupling  hypothesis,  I  will  address  two  apparent  puzzles  in  the  international  financial 
accounts that might suggest that the United States faces different financial constraints than 
other  countries.  However,  I  will  show  that  a  careful  analysis  of  the  data  reveals  that  the 
United States, in fact, faces a “reality” very similar to that of other countries. 
Are the United States and the rest of the world decoupled? 
Some commentators suggested last year that the rest of the world would remain relatively 
unaffected by the housing slowdown in the United States. However, as turmoil emerged in 
financial systems around the world in the late summer of 2007, it became clear that this was 
not the case. Concerns about financial securities backed by U.S. mortgages spread to asset-
backed  securities  more  generally,  which  led  to  funding  difficulties  in  European  money 
markets at anything but the shortest maturities. 
Moving  into  2008,  concerns  about  potential  spillovers  from  slower  U.S.  growth  and 
weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  weighed  increasingly  on  advanced  economy  equity 
markets.  As  the  step-down  in  growth  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  in  a  number  of 
advanced  economies  became  apparent,  we  also  began  to  see  reduced  growth  and 
prospects for growth in many emerging market economies, and stock markets in emerging 
economies  declined  sharply.  Throughout  the  world,  the  challenges  posed  by  weakening 
economic activity were further complicated by mounting inflationary pressures as food and 
energy prices soared. By now I believe it has become clear that the initial assessment that 
the United States had decoupled from the rest of the world was incorrect, and that, in fact, 
the global economy remains closely connected by both trade and financial linkages.  
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
Global trade linkages 
Trade  linkages  among  countries  are,  broadly  speaking,  relatively  well  understood:  One 
country's  imports  are  another's  exports.  That  is,  of  course,  an  oversimplification,  but  it 
captures a key element of global trade linkages, that exports to other countries can provide a 
direct and powerful stimulus to the domestic economy. The importance and benefits of free 
trade  are  widely  accepted,  although  agreement  on  how  to  allocate  these  benefits  is  not 
always  easy  to  come  by.  When  domestic  markets  for  goods  and  services  are  unrestricted 
and  open  to  sellers  worldwide  and  when  supply  adjusts  efficiently  to  meet  changes  in 
demand, costs to consumers are minimized. The recent sharp increases in global food prices 
have  underscored  the  importance  of  reducing  barriers  to  trade  in  agricultural  products. 
Reducing  such  barriers  was  one  of  the  key  subjects  of  the  latest  set  of  talks  in  the  Doha 
round,  and  I  am  disheartened  that this  round  of  talks collapsed.  Given  the  urgent need  to 
expand  the  global  food  supply  to  meet  burgeoning  world  demand,  it  is  particularly 
unfortunate that these negotiations were unable to make progress. 
Global financial linkages  
Today's  global  financial  linkages  are  quite  complex  and  subtle.  The  nature  and  extent  of 
these financial linkages are reflected in a range of characteristics, which include not only the 
net  international  investment  positions  but  also  the  sizes  of  gross  cross-border  claims  and 
liabilities positions, the composition of these positions by asset type, and the returns on the 
underlying assets. A quick review of these characteristics of U. S. financial linkages to the 
world  will  help  resolve  some  puzzles  in  international  finance  that  might  otherwise  suggest 
that the United States faces a different “reality” than other countries. 
First, investments made by U.S. residents abroad and by foreigners in the United States are 
enormous,  both  in  absolute  terms  and  as  shares  of  GDP.  (See  figure  1.)  Last  year,  for 
example, U.S. liabilities to foreigners totaled more than $20 trillion, exceeding 140 percent of 
U.S.  GDP.  At  the  same  time,  U.S.  claims  on  foreigners  totaled  $17.5  trillion,  roughly  130 
percent  of  U.S.  GDP.  Even  the  net  liability  position  of  the  United  States  is  sizeable,  $2.5 
trillion or more than 17 percent of GDP. This net position as a share of GDP has remained 
fairly  constant  in  recent  years,  while  gross  claims  and  liabilities  have  both  been  growing 
steadily. 
Second,  within  these  enormous  gross  positions  is  a  great  variety  of  types  of  claims  and 
liabilities, including many forms of direct investment, equity securities, and debt instruments.1 
(See  figure  2.)  The  composition  of  U.S.  liabilities  is  quite  different  than  the  composition  of 
U.S. claims on the rest of the world. For example, more than two-thirds of U.S. liabilities are 
in  the  form of  debt  instruments,  while  over  half of  U.S.  claims  are  in  equity  securities  and 
direct investment. Some call this the “venture capitalist” nature of the U.S. external position: 
U.S. investments abroad tend to be concentrated in relatively risky equity instruments, but 
liabilities of the United States tend to be in low-volatility debt instruments. 
Third, the different asset classes tend to have different rates of return for both capital gains 
and income. (See figure 3.) The return on equity securities (both claims and liabilities), for 
instance,  is  mainly  from  capital  gains,  while  the  return  on  debt  instruments  and  direct 
investment is primarily from income. For debt and equity securities, the income return and 
the rate of capital gain on U.S. claims are roughly the same as those on U.S. liabilities. This 
is  not  true,  however,  for  direct  investment:  The  income  return  on  direct  investment  by  the 
United States in other countries is more than twice as high as the income return foreigners 
receive on their direct investment in the United States. Taking into account the differences in 
returns and the differences in the composition of assets, the total return on U.S. claims turns 
                                                 
1   We include bonds, loans, and deposits with debt instruments. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
out to be about 2 percentage points per year higher than the return that the United States 
pays on its liabilities to the rest of the world.  
Puzzles in the U.S. international accounts 
Some apparently puzzling features of the U.S. cross-border investment positions have given 
rise  to  a  number  of  hypotheses,  several  of  which  spring  from  the  notion  that  the  United 
States is unique in important respects. For example, in two cases that I will discuss today, 
some  observers  have  concluded,  first,  that  the  United  States  is  able  to  borrow  on  highly 
advantageous  terms  to  finance  its  external  deficits  and,  second,  that  the  United  States 
receives a much higher return on its foreign investments than other countries receive on their 
investments  in  the  United  States.  Some  novel  theories  have  been  developed  to  support 
these interpretations. Recent work by Federal Reserve staff, however, has shown that one 
need not resort to such exotic explanations to understand the behavior of the international 
accounts. Instead, a careful look at the published data reveals that differences in the three 
characteristics of U.S. claims and liabilities that I just discussed – returns, composition, and 
size –contain the key to understanding these apparently anomalous results and, hence, that 
the United States faces a “reality” similar to that of other countries. 
Puzzle 1: Do foreigners pay to lend to the United States? 
The first puzzle is longstanding and is well known within the international finance community: 
Why does it appear that foreigners pay to lend to the United States? For more than 20 years, 
the U.S. net international investment position has been negative. As I just mentioned, in 2007 
the  net  liability  position  of  the  United  States  was  17  percent  of  GDP.  (See  figure  4.) 
Nonetheless,  and  somewhat  surprisingly,  the  income  received  by  U.S.  residents  on  their 
foreign investments has consistently exceeded that received by foreigners on their holdings 
in  the  United  States.  This  difference  totaled  $90  billion  in  2007.  So,  at  first  blush,  it  might 
appear that the rest of the world pays the United States for the privilege of lending to it. Put 
differently, imagine a credit card that paid you interest to carry a debt balance, instead of the 
other way around. Sign me up! 
This U.S. investment income puzzle has piqued the interest of some well-known economists. 
For example, in 1987, Milton Friedman wrote: 
Clearly, if our investments abroad are yielding a positive return, their capital 
value must be positive not negative. Is this a defect of the figures on current 
flows, or is it a defect of the balance-sheet figures?2
Friedman's  question  suggests  that  the  reported  data  must  either  be  wrong  or  be  missing 
some  important  component.  Following  this  reasoning,  some  researchers  have  inferred  the 
existence  of  unrecorded  U.S.  claims  based  on  the  observation  of  positive  net  investment 
income. Such unrecorded claims are sometimes called “dark matter”. The term is borrowed 
from physics; dark matter cannot be seen, but its presence can be inferred from its effects on 
visible  matter.  These  researchers  suggest  that  unobserved  assets,  particularly  intellectual 
property,  are  so  large  that  the  true  claims  position  substantially  exceeds  the  $20  trillion  in 
U.S. liabilities to foreigners. 
A careful look at the data, however, reveals that while unrecorded intellectual property may 
make  a  modest  contribution 
large-scale 
mismeasurement  on  the  order  of  magnitude  claimed  by  proponents  of  the  “dark  matter” 
theory.  In  fact,  Federal  Reserve  staff  research  suggests  just  the  opposite  –  that  is,  if 
is  no  evidence  of 
to  U.S.  claims, 
there 
                                                 
2   Letter to Charles Thomas of the Federal Reserve Board staff. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
anything, the true U.S. net investment position is slightly more negative than the published 
data show. 
How then can we resolve this puzzle? The answer lies in the returns, composition, and size 
of U.S. claims and liabilities. As I mentioned earlier, for most cross-border assets, including 
debt and equity, the income component of the return paid on U.S. liabilities is roughly equal 
to that received on claims. The return received on U.S. direct investment claims on the rest 
of  the  world,  however,  is  much  larger  than  that  paid  by  the  United  States  on  its  direct 
investment  liabilities  to  the  rest  of  the  world  or  on  any  other  asset.  Additionally,  direct 
investment is a greater share of U.S. claims than it is of U.S. liabilities. With this combination 
of return and compositional differences, U.S. claims in total earn about one percentage point 
per year more than the United States pays on its liabilities.  
This rate of return differential does not, by itself, lead to positive net income on a negative net 
position: If the U.S. net liability position of $2.5 trillion were the result of more modest gross 
positions, then U.S. net income might not be positive. The enormous gross positions magnify 
the  impact  of  the  different  rates  of  returns  on  claims  and  liabilities,  so,  on  net,  income 
receipts  are  positive.  Because  of  this  leverage  effect,  it  is  not  particularly  informative  to 
compare the net position to net income or to compute a rate of return on the net position. 
Ultimately, this is why the “dark matter” argument fails, because it relies on the negative net 
position to infer the existence of missing assets. 
The United States is not unique in this regard. In several other countries, including the United 
Kingdom, net investment income is positive despite a large net liability position. And, as in 
the United States, a difference in the rate of return on direct investment claims and liabilities 
is largely responsible.  
Taken  together,  these  observations  go  a  long  way  toward  resolving  the  apparent  puzzle: 
Positive net investment income receipts in the face of a net liability in the investment position 
can be explained by differences between the composition of U.S. claims and liabilities and 
between the corresponding rates of return, magnified by the leverage effect of the enormous 
gross positions.  
The  remaining  question  is,  what  accounts  for  the  high  return  on  U.S.  direct  investment 
claims? This high return may in part reflect a risk premium associated with investments in 
emerging economies. Tax policy may also play a role – some analysts have suggested that 
multinational entities are shifting intangible assets such as intellectual property to countries 
with more-favorable tax laws in order to reduce their overall tax burden. However, given the 
magnitudes involved, it seems unlikely that unrecorded intangible assets could account for a 
substantial part of the return differential. The topic remains the subject of ongoing research.  
Puzzle 2: Can the United States borrow without increasing its debt? 
The second puzzle has emerged more recently: Why does it seem that the United States can 
borrow without a corresponding increase in its debt? As is well known, the United States has 
been  running  large  current  account  deficits  for  many  years.  Financing  these  deficits  has 
required substantial borrowing from abroad. However, the net increase in U.S. liabilities has 
been quite small relative to the cumulated current account deficits.  
To  be  more  specific,  over  the  past  six  years,  the  United  States  has  run  current  account 
deficits  that  add  up  to  over  $3.8  trillion,  and  these  deficits  have  required  an  equivalent 
amount of financing from the foreign sector. One might have expected this borrowing to have 
led  to  equally  sizable  increases  in  the  U.S.  external  debt,  but  this  has  not  been  the  case. 
Over the same period, U.S. net liabilities increased by only $600 billion, which is $3.2 trillion 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
less than the cumulated current account deficits.3 (See figure 4.) So it might seem that the 
United States has been able to borrow large amounts from abroad while accumulating few 
additional  liabilities.  Returning  to  the  credit  card  analogy,  imagine  a  charge  card  with  a 
balance that increases by only a small fraction of your charges. No bank would issue such a 
card; how could a country do effectively the same thing? 
Unlike a credit card balance, however, changes in the U.S. net external debt balance reflect 
more than just net transactions. There are also changes to the net position owing to capital 
gains and other adjustments to the values of claims and liabilities. As I mentioned, over the 
past six years, the net position has diverged from the cumulated current account by about 
$3.2 trillion, which represents capital gains and other adjustments. About $2.4 trillion of this 
divergence  is  due  to  valuation  adjustments  (capital  gains)  favoring  U.S.  claims;  these 
adjustments  arise  from  observed  movements  in  asset  prices  and  the  dollar.  An  additional 
$800 billion is labeled “other adjustments” by the agency that maintains and publishes the 
international  transactions  accounts  in  the  United  States,  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis 
(BEA). 
Some  researchers  have  interpreted  these  “other  adjustments”  as  additional  capital  gains. 
These  adjustments  significantly  favor  U.S.  claims,  and  including  them  in  capital  gains 
doubles  the  total  return  advantage  in  favor  of  U.S.  claims  from  the  published  estimate  of 
about  2  percentage  points  per  year  to  4  percentage  points  per  year.  Borrowing  a  phrase 
popularized  by  Charles  de  Gaulle,  these  researchers  suggest  that  this  return  differential 
constitutes an “exorbitant privilege” enjoyed by the United States. However, Federal Reserve 
staff  have  used  survey  data  for  the  underlying  cross-border  positions  to  show  that  these 
“other  adjustments”  are  not  hidden  capital  gains  but  instead  arise  from  imprecision  in  the 
measurement  of  a  number  of  balance  of  payments  flows  and  cross-border  positions.  As 
such, the returns advantage in favor of U.S. investments is, in fact, half the size claimed by 
proponents of “exorbitant privilege” and is well in line with the BEA's published data. 
As with the first, the key to resolving the second puzzle lies in differences in portfolio returns, 
composition,  and  size.  Most  U.S.  liabilities  are  debt  securities,  which  realize  small  capital 
gains,  while  a  large  fraction  of  U.S.  claims  on  the  rest  of  the  world  are  equity  securities, 
which realize much larger capital gains. The result is a net difference in the capital gains rate 
slightly in favor of U.S. investors. When this rate differential is applied to the enormous gross 
claims  and  liabilities  positions,  however,  it  generates  a  sizable  adjustment  to  the  net 
investment position.  
As also was the case with the first puzzle, the United States is not unique in regard to this 
second puzzle. For several other countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, 
and New Zealand, the international investment positions have for extended periods diverged 
from the value suggested by historical current account balances, in a manner similar to that 
of the United States. The divergence can go the other way as well – Switzerland and Japan 
currently report net investment positions substantially less positive than those suggested by 
their persistent current account surpluses. 
Conclusions  
Our experience since the beginning of the recent financial turmoil strongly suggests that the 
global economy is bound together by strong trade and financial linkages, and through them 
the  United  States  remains  closely  coupled  to  the  global  economy.  The  United  States  thus 
faces economic “realities” similar to those of the advanced and emerging market economies. 
                                                 
3   U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Current accounts for 2002 to 2007, inclusive. Positions compare year-end 
2001 to year-end 2007. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 5
These  linkages  provide  powerful  connections  or  “couplings”  among  economies  and  can 
contribute importantly to the efficient operation of global markets.  
The  nature  and  extent  of  financial  linkages  between  economies  both  depend  on  several 
characteristics  of  cross-border  investment,  including  the  size  and  composition  of  the 
underlying  gross  positions,  as  well  as  the  performance  of  the  underlying  assets.  Two 
apparent  puzzles  concerning  these  international  linkages  –  the  apparent  willingness  of 
foreigners to pay to lend to the United States and the apparent ability of the United States to 
borrow without a corresponding increase in its debt – can be explained by careful analyses of 
these data, without resorting to theories such as “dark matter” or “exorbitant privilege. In the 
end, the economic realities faced by the United States are not so different from those faced 
by the rest of the world. 
References 
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock (forthcoming). “Cross-Border 
Returns Differentials”, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock (forthcoming). “Current 
Account  Sustainability  and  Relative  Reliability”,  NBER 
International  Seminar  on 
Macroeconomics. 
Hausmann,  Ricardo,  and  Federico  Sturzenegger  (2007).  “The  Missing  Dark  Matter  in  the 
Wealth of Nations, and Its Implications for Global Imbalances”, Economic Policy, vol. 22, pp. 
469-518. 
Gourinchas,  Pierre-Olivier,  and  Helene  Rey  (2007).  “From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture 
Capitalist: The U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege”, in R. Clarida (ed.), G7 
Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, pp. 11-55. 
6 
  BIS Review 109/2008
 BIS Review 109/2008 
   7
 8 
 BIS Review 109/2008
