Mark Carney: Capitalizing on the commodity boom – the role of monetary 
policy 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Haskayne School of 
Business, Calgary, Alberta, 19 June 2008. 
 Everyone here remembers the bumper sticker. For two decades, Albertans promised not to 
waste the next boom if one were granted. With US$130 oil, US$10 natural gas, US$200 coal, 
and US$8 wheat, the next one has clearly arrived. The question now is how to make good on 
that promise. This evening, I will concentrate on one aspect of the answer: how monetary 
policy can help to create the conditions that will allow all Canadians to benefit from sustained 
high  commodity  prices.  I  am  grateful  for  this  opportunity  because  monetary  policy  is  more 
effective when it is well understood. Seldom is this understanding more important than when 
our economy faces the types of supply and demand shocks engendered by a series of sharp 
increases in commodity prices. 
Outlook for commodity prices 
We are experiencing a commodity super cycle. Throughout the current boom, the scale of 
price  increases  has  been  higher,  and  the  range  of  affected  commodities  broader,  than  in 
previous upturns. Since 2002, grain and oilseed prices have more than doubled, base metals 
prices have tripled, and oil prices have quadrupled. Beyond the breadth and magnitude of 
these price increases, the current boom is also unusual in that it began earlier in the global 
economic  cycle  and  has  lasted  longer.  While  booms  usually  herald  a  downturn,  this  one 
appears to be evidence of unusually robust momentum in global growth.1
These  dynamics  suggest  that  a  combination  of  very  favourable  and  mutually  reinforcing 
factors  are  at  work.  These  include  burgeoning  demand,  a  subdued  supply  response, 
important  links  among  commodity  markets,  and  supportive  financial  conditions.  An 
environment for a secular increase in commodity prices has been building since the middle of 
the 1990s. That said, we can expect considerable volatility around this longer-term trend and 
must remember that while supply and demand may be inelastic in the short term, they are 
decidedly more flexible over longer periods.  
Current  commodity-price  dynamics  are  intimately  linked  to  the  globalization  process.  In 
particular,  rapid  growth  in  emerging-market  demand  is  driving  most  prices.  Positive 
underlying demand fundamentals in emerging markets include sustained growth in per capita 
income,  rapid  industrialization,  and  a  more  intensive  use  of  commodities  in  production. 
Research at the Bank of Canada and elsewhere suggests that while oil and metals prices 
have historically moved with the business cycle in the developed world, this relationship has 
broken  down  over  the  past  decade.  For  example,  industrial  activity  in  emerging  Asia  now 
appears to be the dominant driver of oil-price movements,2 and China alone is expected to 
become the world's largest consumer of energy by 2010.3 Emerging markets and developing 
economies  have  accounted  for  nearly  95  per  cent  of  the  increased  demand  for  oil  since 
                                                 
1   See International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (Washington: IMF, April 2008) p. 198-99. 
2   C. Cheung and S. Morin, "The Impact of Emerging Asia on Commodity Prices" (Working Paper No. 2007-55, 
Bank of Canada, 2007). 
International  Monetary  Fund,  "Global  Energy:  Increasingly  Unstable,"  Finance  &  Development  45,  no.  1 
(March 2008). 
3  
BIS Review 80/2008 
 1
2003.4  As  recently  as  the  1990s,  marginal  demand  was  roughly  split  between  OECD  and 
non-OECD countries. 
In  the  face  of  this  demand,  the  supply  response  has  been  disappointing.  Consider  oil. 
OPEC's annual production has declined by 2 per cent since 2005 and, with a few exceptions, 
non-OPEC supply has failed to meet expectations. Among OECD countries, oil output has 
fallen by 8 per cent since 2002. As a consequence, inventories remain very tight at 31 days, 
and spare capacity is limited. With inelastic demand in the short term, actual or perceived 
supply disruptions can lead to sharp price spikes and continued volatility.  
There are many reasons why the supply response has been limited thus far. First, access to 
many of the world's most promising regions is often tightly controlled or wholly restricted to 
state-owned enterprises. Second, while nominal investment has surged, so too have costs.5 
Many in this room know from direct experience how hard it is to find skilled workers, drilling 
rigs, and pipeline capacity. Exploration and development costs for conventional crude have 
doubled,  and  oil  sands  costs  have  tripled.  Across  the  global  industry,  surging  investment 
costs have meant that real investment has remained flat. The net result is that a 70 per cent 
nominal increase in non-OPEC capital expenditure since 2003 has barely replaced declining 
production from existing fields.6  
Over  the  medium  term,  high  prices  will  encourage  the  development  of  new  supplies  and 
energy alternatives. Canada will be one of the most important marginal suppliers of oil. With 
more than $150 billion of new investment in the oil sands proposed or under way,7 output 
from  the  oil  sands  is  expected  to  grow  by  3  million  barrels  per  day  by  2020,  representing 
about 15 per cent of expected marginal global demand.8 Other supplies can be expected to 
come on stream, and alternative energy sources should be developed. Although there will be 
lags, it would be a mistake to assume that the market has ceased to function. 
Demand will also be more responsive over time. SUV sales in the United States have fallen 
by  nearly  one-third  so  far  this  year  –  an  important  early  indicator.  Oil  demand  in  OECD 
countries has been essentially flat since 2003, and the International Energy Agency projects 
it  to  remain  weak  for  the  next  few  years.9  As  a  result,  the  extent  of  continued  upward 
demand  pressure  will  depend  almost  exclusively  on  emerging  markets.  There  are  several 
considerations. First, we are about to find out the extent to which slowing domestic demand 
growth in the G-7 will affect growth in emerging Asia. Second, the stance of monetary policy 
in emerging markets will be an important determinant of prices in the short term. Monetary 
policy remains highly accommodative in a number of fast-growing economies that are major 
marginal  consumers  of  commodities.  The  combination  of  accommodative  monetary  policy 
and  overheating  economies  will  eventually  be  reversed,  either  through  policy  action  or 
generalized inflation. In either case, aggregate demand in emerging markets will likely slow 
relative to current trends. 
A  third  consideration  is  that  the  demand  response  in  many  economies  is  currently  being 
muted by the prevalence of administered food and energy prices. These efforts to protect the 
most vulnerable are usually poorly targeted and, as a consequence, highly distortionary. By 
keeping  domestic  commodity  prices  artificially  low,  the  authorities  are  simultaneously 
                                                 
4   Data supplied by the Energy Information Administration (EIA). See http://www.eia.doe.gov/ipm/. 
5   According to the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP), a 100,000-barrel-per-day integrated 
in  2001  now  costs  over  $10  billion.  See 
that  cost  $3.3  billion 
to  build 
oil  sands  project 
http://www.capp.ca/raw.asp?x=1&dt=PDF&dn=134739. 
6   Data provided by IMF. 
7   Data provided by Alberta Finance and Enterprise. 
8   Production estimate from CAPP. Demand estimate from the EIA. 
9   Data from the Energy Information Administration. See http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/steo/pub/3atab.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2008
encouraging  consumption,  which  leads  to  higher  prices  elsewhere,  and  discouraging  the 
internal supply response that would normally occur. In addition, by interfering with the price 
signals,  these  policies  delay  necessary  economic  adjustment  and  increase  the  risk  of  a 
dramatic and difficult reversal in the future. Encouragingly, in recent weeks, several countries 
have taken important steps to ease such controls. Demand can be expected to follow.  
As  in  the  wake  of  previous  commodity-price  spikes,  this  demand  response  will  ultimately 
include the adoption of new technologies. Indeed, commodity-intensive economies will likely 
replace energy-inefficient capital more rapidly than their peers did three decades ago. With 
today's major marginal commodity consumers operating at levels well below peak efficiency, 
the  question  is  how  quickly  they  will  adopt  more  efficient,  existing  technologies  once  they 
have determined that the relative price adjustment will be sustained. 
There has been much discussion about the contribution of financial factors to the commodity 
boom. It does appear that low long-term interest rates and past weakness in the U.S. dollar 
may  have  played  minor  supportive  roles.  The  impact  of  outright  speculation  and  index 
investment  is  less  clear  cut.10  If  speculation  were  keeping  the  spot  price  of  a  commodity 
substantially higher than the level where supply and demand naturally intersect, inventories 
should build as the incentive to increase supply outstrips the desire to increase consumption. 
However,  there  is  little  evidence  of  this  in  commodities  as  diverse  as  crude  oil,  wheat,  or 
aluminum.  
At this point, the bulk of the evidence suggests that the increase in most commodity prices is 
due to the fundamentals of strong demand and weak supply. This appears to be a durable 
relative price shift. That does not necessarily imply persistent price increases. Demand and 
supply will adjust, particularly as prices are passed through. In the short term, low inventories 
suggest continued price volatility, which may be amplified by trend-following speculation. 
What the current boom means for Canada 
Although natural resources as a whole represent only 6 per cent of direct employment and 
12  per  cent  of  GDP,  the  sector  has  an important  influence  on  Canadian  economic  activity 
through  a  number  of  channels.  Resources  account  for  roughly  one-third  of  all  business 
investment  and  about  45  per  cent  of  our  exports.  As  such,  the  benefits  of  the  current 
commodity  boom  can  be  felt  across  Canada  –  not  just  in  resource-heavy  sectors  and 
regions. 
Above  all,  rising  commodity  prices  have  made  Canada  wealthier  as  a  nation.  Since  2002, 
rising commodity prices have fuelled a 25 per cent improvement in our terms of trade, which 
alone has been responsible for roughly two-thirds of the 15 per cent gain in real per capita 
disposable  income  recorded  over  that  period.  These  income  gains  have  helped  reduce 
corporate  leverage  to  its  lowest  level  in  a  quarter  of  a  century  and  have  helped  our 
governments to record consistent fiscal surpluses. Higher commodity prices bring increased 
investment, which entails direct and indirect benefits not only for the sectors in question, but 
also for the service sectors that support them. As well, many individual Canadians – and their 
pension funds – have benefited greatly from the gains in the value of their own investments 
in commodity-producing firms.11 Finally, the rise in our terms of trade has brought with it an 
associated appreciation of our currency that has benefited everyone by lowering the cost of 
imported  goods  and  services.  With  this  downward  pressure  on  import  prices,  productivity-
                                                 
10   For  example,  the  prices  of  many  non-indexed  commodities  have  risen  more  rapidly  than  those  of  indexed 
ones. 
11   The TSX energy sector has risen roughly 18 per cent per year since the beginning of 2002, while the metals 
and mining sector is up 11 per cent annually and the fertilizers and agricultural chemicals sector is up 44 per 
cent annually. These sectors have a combined weighting of 50.3 per cent of the TSX composite index. 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 3
enhancing  machinery  and  equipment  –  much  of  which  is  imported  –  has  become  less 
expensive for all firms, not just commodity producers. 
These  benefits  are  important.  However,  it  is  unavoidable  that  large,  sustained  changes  in 
terms  of  trade  –  whether  favourable  or  unfavourable  –  will  cause  stress  and  dislocation 
because  of  significant  shifts  in  production  and  employment  among  economic  sectors.  In 
macroeconomic  terms,  terms-of-trade  shocks  trigger  a  shift  of  resources  to  activities 
generating  higher  income.  From  that  perspective,  postponing  adjustment  would  mean 
forgoing the potential income gains that the reallocation of resources can bring. Adjustment 
is always difficult, but it is vital to our long-term economic prosperity. 
Despite the difficulties involved, the adjustment process of the past few years has gone more 
smoothly  than  in  previous  periods.  Canada's  labour  force  participation  rate  has  risen  to  a 
record high, and the jobless rate has fallen to a 33-year low. While the manufacturing sector 
has  lost  about  one  in  seven  jobs  since  2002  –  a  total  of  about  335,000  jobs  –  total 
employment  in  Canada  has  risen  by  1.6  million  jobs  over  the  same  period.  Equally 
encouraging is the quality of the jobs being created. More than 80 per cent of new jobs are in 
sectors where the average hourly wage is higher than in manufacturing. 
Canada's ability to capitalize on higher commodity prices (or to mitigate the impact of lower 
ones)  depends  crucially  on  the  continued  ability  of  our  economy  to  adjust.  Product  and 
labour market flexibility is essential. The Trade, Investment, and Labour Mobility Agreement 
(TILMA) between Alberta and British Columbia is a good example of the type of response 
needed. It is encouraging that other governments are contemplating similar liberalizations. 
Lessons from the previous boom 
Before turning to monetary policy considerations, I would like to recall some lessons from the 
last sustained upturn in commodity prices. During the 1970s, a number of commodity prices 
spiked  –  including  oil  prices,  which  rose  five-fold  during  the  decade.  Like  today,  common 
drivers  included  low  real  interest  rates  globally  and  supply  factors,  in  particular,  the 
emergence  of  OPEC.  The  decline  of  the  newly  floating  U.S.  dollar  also  pushed  oil  prices 
higher,  along  with  the  persistence  of  inflation  in  G-7  countries  once  inflation  expectations 
began to rise. 
Authorities in many oil-producing countries acted as if higher prices would persist indefinitely. 
They increased spending rapidly, which would prove calamitous when prices reversed and 
large  structural  deficits  were  revealed.  In  Canada,  total  program  spending  by  the  federal 
government rose from 17 per cent of GDP in the early 1970s to 21 per cent only a decade 
later.  In  1985,  the  general  government  structural  deficit  peaked  at  8  per  cent  of  potential 
GDP. We should keep fresh in our minds the memory of the Herculean efforts required to 
eliminate this drain on future generations. 
The management of monetary policy, in hindsight, was not much better. Authorities in many 
countries  mistakenly  assumed  that  the  productivity  gains  experienced  over  the  previous 
quarter century would continue. Rising unemployment was taken, falsely, as a sign of rising 
excess capacity. This ignored the fact that much of our industrial activity, indeed much of our 
society, was based on an assumption of perpetually cheap energy.  
The  monetary  authorities  of  the  day  reacted  to  the  oil-price  shock  by  accommodating  the 
price increase. Viewing the higher prices as contractionary, they loosened monetary policy to 
avoid a slowdown. The absence of an explicit nominal anchor for policy made this decision 
easier and its consequences far worse. As we know now, the assumed excess supply was 
illusory.  
The fallout from these errors in monetary and fiscal policy was severe. The global recession 
of 1981-82 was, in large measure, the end result. In Canada, both consumer price inflation 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2008
and  the  unemployment  rate  reached  double  digits  by  the  early  1980s.  The  damage  to 
inflation expectations meant that inflation would remain a real and present danger for years.  
the 
importance  of  well-anchored 
the  commodity  boom  underscores 
Implications for monetary policy in the current situation 
This  experience  is  relevant  to  the  current  situation.  At  a  fundamental  level,  it  underscores 
that  the  primary  goal  of  monetary  policy  should  be  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable.  While  commodity-price  shocks  raise  complex  issues,  a  relentless  focus  on 
inflation  clarifies  policy  decisions,  makes  communications  easier,  and  maximizes  the 
likelihood  that  expectations  will  remain  well  anchored.  A  credible  inflation  target  helps  to 
keep  the  cost  of  capital  down  and  highlights  relative  price  movements,  thus  allowing 
individuals and firms to make better investment decisions. 
In  Canada,  we  have  developed  a  well-functioning  monetary  policy  framework  based  on 
inflation  targeting  and  supported  by  a  flexible  exchange  rate.  Inflation  targeting  naturally 
leads the monetary authorities to take a disciplined and rigorous approach to understanding 
the drivers of inflation. However, even with the best framework, execution is everything. In 
the  face  of  the  largest  commodity-price  shock  in  our  lifetimes,  we  cannot  be  complacent. 
Indeed, the current period of exceptional volatility in commodity prices raises several issues 
for the conduct of monetary policy. 
First, 
inflation 
expectations.  People's  expectations  for  future  inflation  do  influence  actual  future  inflation 
rates.  Thus,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  high  visibility  of  energy  prices  could  lead  to  increased 
inflation  expectations  and  to  more  general  inflationary  pressures.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
people recognize that a one-time increase in commodity prices has a temporary impact on 
total CPI, other prices and wages will be unaffected. The demand and supply fundamentals 
that I discussed at the start give reasons to expect firm commodity prices, but not necessarily 
persistent  –  let  alone  accelerating  –  commodity-price  increases.  Quite  simply,  high 
commodity  prices  do  not  necessarily  mean  rising  commodity  prices.  In  fact,  high  prices 
themselves  make  further  commodity-price  inflation  less  likely  because  of  the  demand  and 
supply responses they provoke.  
The Bank of Canada's clear commitment to its inflation target and its consistent past success 
in  achieving  it,  have  kept  inflation  expectations  well  anchored.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
monitor  movements  in  inflation  expectations  using  a  wide  range  of  survey  and  market 
indicators.  
Second, and relatedly, the Bank needs to be mindful of the possibility that rising commodity 
prices may affect the relationship between total and core CPI. The experience in Canada has 
been that total CPI persistently moves towards the core measure over time.12 Moreover, our 
experience  has  been  that  commodity-price  inflation  has  been  one  of  the  least  persistent 
forms of inflation. As a consequence, in the pursuit of our 2 per cent target for total CPI, we 
use our core measure as an operational guide. This is because, over the years, core CPI has 
been  a  good  gauge  of  the  underlying  trend  of  inflation  and  has  been  a  better  predictor  of 
future  changes  in  the  total  index  than  has  total  CPI  itself.  In  practice,  targeting  total  CPI 
inflation requires a high degree of confidence about the future path of commodity prices. 
The  relationship  between  core  and  total  CPI  is  more  marked  in  Canada  than  in  other 
countries, reflecting both the success in anchoring inflation expectations around 2 per cent 
and the fact that, as a  major commodity exporter, movements in our dollar in response to 
commodity-price changes generally provide an offset that reduces the Canadian-dollar prices 
                                                 
12   See J. Armour, "An Evaluation of Core Inflation Measures" (Working Paper 2006-10, Bank of Canada, 2006) 
and  J.  Hoddenbagh,  M.  Johnson,  and  E.  Santor,  "Total  and  Core  Inflation:  Recent  International  Evidence" 
(Bank of Canada Working Paper, forthcoming). 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 5
of  all  imports,  including  commodities.  For  example,  the  past  appreciation  of  the  Canadian 
dollar is one reason why food-price inflation has been markedly lower in Canada than in the 
rest of the developed world.13 Overall, the Bank of Canada's commodity-price index (BCPI) 
has  risen  only  half  as  much  in  Canadian-dollar  terms  as  it  has  in  U.S.-dollar  terms,  since 
2002.  
The Bank will continue to monitor the stability of the relationship between core and total CPI. 
The Bank will also continue to look at a range of measures to assess the underlying trend of 
inflation.  Considerable  judgment  must  always  be  applied,  and  no  one  measure  should  be 
relied on exclusively. 
Third,  we  need  to  consider  the  possible  impact  of  higher  commodity  prices  on  Canada's 
potential growth. The Bank spends a great deal of effort trying to understand the factors that 
shape potential output and its components. This focus on potential should mean that we are 
less  likely  to  misread  the  outlook  for  productivity  and  potential  growth  in  the  face  of  large 
relative price shifts, and thus avoid a key policy mistake of the 1970s. In particular, we need 
to consider the possibility that the combination of Canada's relatively high energy intensity,14 
the  exploitation  of  more  marginal  resource  deposits  that  high  prices  encourage,  and  the 
significant shifts in productive resources across our economy could temporarily lead to lower 
productivity and potential growth. There are, of course, countervailing forces that could raise 
potential  growth,  including  the  strong  capital  investment  incentives  arising  from  a  stronger 
dollar and the tightness of the labour market. We will make such determinations carefully and 
will provide our updated views in the October Monetary Policy Report. 
Fourth,  the  pace  and  nature  of  recent  commodity-price  moves  has  important  positive 
demand implications. As I mentioned earlier, large improvements in our terms of trade mean 
large increases in Canadian real income and wealth. This fuels domestic demand, especially 
for non-traded goods and services, and provides a timely offset to weaker external demand 
from our largest trading partner, the United States.  
Finally, a central lesson from past commodity booms (and busts) is the value of  a flexible 
exchange rate as shock absorber. A floating exchange rate is a key element of our monetary 
policy framework that allows Canada to pursue an independent monetary policy appropriate 
to  our  own  economic  circumstances.  To  be  absolutely  clear,  irrespective  of  the  path  of 
commodity  prices  specifically,  or  global  price  movements  more  generally,  a  floating 
exchange rate means that we can continue to achieve our inflation target.  
Exchange rate movements act as a signal to shift resources into sectors where demand is 
strongest.  During  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  late  1990s,  commodity  prices  fell  sharply.  The 
resulting  depreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  helped  with  the  significant  but  necessary 
reallocation  of  resources  out  of  the  resource  sector  and  into  other  sectors,  such  as 
manufacturing, whose competitive positions had improved. In recent years, the process has 
worked  in  reverse.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  with  changes  in  terms  of  trade, 
adjustment  will  follow.  It  is  only  a  question  of  how.  Our  floating  exchange  rate  helps  to 
achieve the appropriate adjustments without forcing very difficult changes in the overall level 
of wages, output, and prices. 
                                                 
13   Canadian food-price inflation has averaged 1.4 per cent over the past year, versus the OECD average of 4.3 
per cent. Reasons include the past appreciation  of the Canadian dollar, increased competition among food 
retailers,  and  some  special  factors  such  as  the  excess  supply  of  meat.  Although  these  factors  can  be 
considered temporary, the same may well apply to the future path of food-price increases. 
14   For  instance,  there  is  evidence  from  the  United  States  that  the  productivity  slowdown  of  the  1970s  was 
concentrated  in  sectors  that  were  most  energy  intensive  and  were  therefore  the  hardest  hit  by  the  energy 
shock. See W. Nordhaus, "Retrospective on the 1970s Productivity Slowdown" (Working Paper No. 10950, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2004). 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2008
Conclusion: the current environment  
Let  me  close  with  a  few  words  about  the  current  stance of  monetary  policy.  In  addition  to 
sharply improved terms of trade driven by commodity prices, the Canadian economy is being 
hit by two major and related shocks: a marked and prolonged slowdown in the U.S. economy 
and  severe  dislocations  in  financial  markets.  The  challenge  for  the  Bank  is  to  assess  the 
combined implications of these three forces and other factors for the balance of aggregate 
supply  and  demand  in  the  Canadian  economy  and  the  prospects  for  inflation  in  Canada. 
Reflecting  the  severity  and  persistence  of  the  downside  shocks,  the  Bank  reduced  its  key 
policy rate by a cumulative 150 basis points since December. In our April Monetary Policy 
Report,  we  reviewed  these  forces  at  length  and  laid  out  a  base-case  projection  for  the 
economy that contained upside and downside risks to inflation. Those risks were judged to 
be  balanced.  We  said  at  the  time  that  "some  further  monetary  stimulus  will  likely  be 
required,"  but  noted  that  the  timing  of  "any  further  monetary  stimulus  will  depend  on  the 
evolution  of  the  global  economy  and  domestic  demand,  and  their  impact  on  inflation  in 
Canada." 
Since  then,  there  have  been  developments  in  the  global  economy  relative  to  our 
expectations  in  April  that  led  the  Bank  to  decide  on  10  June  to  maintain  its  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 3 per cent. Commodity prices, as measured by the BCPI, rose 10 per cent 
over the period between decisions, and the futures curve for oil moved sharply higher. This 
will  support  domestic  demand.  Other  considerations  included  stronger  global  growth  than 
previously  expected  and  higher  global  inflation,  which  increases  the  risk  of  higher-than-
projected  costs  for  Canadian  imports.  In  addition,  many  of  the  downside  risks  to  inflation 
have eased. For instance, the price discounting on cars and books, which followed the move 
of  the  Canadian  dollar  to  parity  with  the  U.S.  dollar,  does  not  appear  to  be  spreading 
materially  to  other  products.  In  addition,  as  I  noted  a  moment  ago,  the  risk  remains  that 
potential growth will be weaker than currently assumed. Although global financial conditions 
remain  strained,  their  evolution  has  been  in  line  with  expectations.  Credit  conditions  in 
Canada are better than elsewhere, as evidenced by the Bank's decision in May to become 
the  first  G-7  central  bank  to  begin  withdrawing  its  extraordinary  provision  of  liquidity  to 
markets. 
Thus, developments since April shifted the balance of risks to the inflation projection in the 
April MPR slightly to the upside. This evolution of the global economy and domestic demand 
was sufficient to alter the view that "some further monetary stimulus will likely be required." 
As a result, the Bank now judges that the current accommodative stance of monetary policy 
is appropriate to bring aggregate demand and supply back into balance and to achieve the 
2 per cent inflation target. Going forward, there remain important downside and upside risks 
to inflation, but these risks are now judged to be evenly balanced.  
The Bank will continue to monitor closely the evolution of developments in the Canadian and 
global economies in order to assess their implications for aggregate supply and demand and 
the  outlook  for  inflation.  One  thing  is  certain:  over  time,  the  balance  of  risks  will  change 
again. Monetary policy will adjust accordingly, while always remaining focused on achieving 
our  inflation  target.  In  this  manner,  the  Bank  of  Canada  can  make  its  best  contribution  to 
helping  Canadians  capitalize  on  the  current  commodity  boom,  and  that  famous  bumper 
sticker can remain a relic. 
BIS Review 80/2008 
 7
