Shamshad Akhtar: Financial inclusion 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
Expanding Access to Finance USAID and SHOREBANK INTERNATIONAL WHAM Project 
2005-08, Islamabad, 28 March 2008. 
 Asia  is  home  to  nearly  650  million  of  poor  (defined  as  1  dollar  a  day1)  representing 
1. 
65% world poor. Population growth and economic cyclical factors however add annually to 
the ranks of poor. Notwithstanding there has been a reduction in poverty incidence in Asia 
from 27% in 1990 to 20% by 2006, though East Asia managed to achieve steeper and swifter 
reduction in poverty relative to South Asia.2 East Asia lifted around 630 million people from 
extreme  poverty  in  under  a  quarter  of  a  century  and  the  region’s  share  in  total  poverty 
declined from 58% in 1981 to just 9% in 2004. In South Asia poverty fell from 52% in 1981 to 
32% in 2004, but absolute number of poor has been high close to 470 million. Along with 
poverty reduction, there has been a gradual move to attainment of Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs). 
2. 
Several  factors  have  contributed  to  improvements  in  these  indicators  ranging  from 
higher economic growth and liberalization to concrete affirmative and  targeted anti-poverty 
programs.  Among  these,  Global  microfinance  campaign  and  domestic  initiatives  helped  in 
changing  lives  of  poor  and  extended  them  finance  that  contributed  to  their  economic 
empowerment.  In  Asia,  the  number  of  microfinance  beneficiaries  has  now  reached  113 
million: 74% of who were poor and 65% women. Including families of the beneficiary clients, 
microfinance services reached close to 465 million across the world  –  almost 85% of these 
are  Asian  clients.  Dealing  with  “poverty”  is  complex  given  its  dimensions  and  multiple 
causative  factors.  Global  and  regional  challenges  of  reducing  poverty  and  MDGs  are 
daunting  but  attainable  provided  there  is  accelerated,  aggressive,  brutal  and  frontal  attack 
through well coordinated and cohesive economic and social policies.  
3. 
Recognizing this dilemma, the evolution of financial inclusion that aims to broaden and 
deepen access to development finance for all, of which microfinance is a subset, is timely. 
Ultimately it is a well functioning and efficient financial market which can deal holistically with 
provision  of  financial  services  to  the  economy  and  population.  Building  financial  inclusive 
system  is,  however,  an  integral  and  core  pillar  of  financial  sector  reforms.  As  growth  and 
development of finance alone does not address question of “access.” Direct intervention to 
build  financially  inclusive  system  is  critical  as  one  recognizes  fully  (i)  financial  markets 
failures and imperfections such as information asymmetries, lack of sensitivity to gender and 
redistributive  dimensions  of  resources  and  wealth  and  high  transaction  costs  etc.;  (ii)  high 
price and non-price barriers such as lack of credit history and collateral and connection; and 
(iii) other constraints such as lack of literacy and entrepreneurial skills, etc. 
4.  Over  the  years,  there  has  been  substantive  development  in  the  architecture  and 
thinking on financial inclusion. While there is no “one-size fits all” financial inclusion strategy 
or approach but it is important to recognize few core or necessary and sufficient conditions 
that are needed to maximize the benefits derived from such strategy.  
5. 
At the outset, it is critical to understand the size and dimension of financial exclusion. 
Despite complexities of estimation, a recent study3 concluded that average level of financial 
                                                 
1   An  alternative  definition  of  poverty  ($2  a  day)  gives  an  estimate  of  2  billion  poor  in  Asia.  However,  for 
monitoring progress of MDGs, World Bank uses the $1/day definition as it reflects extreme poverty.  
2   The World Bank, Global Monitoring Report, 2007. 
3   Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgç-Kunt, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria (2007) "Reaching Out: Access to and 
Use of Banking Services across Countries." Journal of Financial Economics 85 (1). 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 1
 Conceptually, financial inclusion should focus on  
exclusion, as measured by the percentage of the adult population with access to an account 
with a financial intermediary, in poor developing countries is as high as the level of financial 
inclusion  in  advanced  industrialized  countries  where  it  is  rare  not  to  have  at  least  some 
access to basic financial services in remote parts. In developing countries, level of financial 
exclusion  is  steepest  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (a  reflection  of  extreme  poverty  and  difficult 
economic condition). Situation in Asia, present a mixed picture. South Asia (average access 
rate being 31 percent) lags behind in expanding financial access relative to South East Asia 
(average access rate being 47 percent). Advanced transition economies of Central Europe 
have progressed well in rebuilding access. There has been relatively little progress made in 
Central  and  South  America  despite  a  relatively  robust  economic  base,  particularly  among 
larger countries. 
6. 
To design strategy and policies, there is further need to understand what the reasons 
for exclusion are? Is it voluntary or pure denial of services and what the barriers of access to 
finance  are?  General  evidence  does  suggest  that  in  developing  countries  financial 
penetration  is  quite  low  because  of  (i)  geographical  exclusion  since  physically  banks 
coverage of population is low (18,000 persons per bank branch in South Asia and 12,000 in 
South  East  Asia),  the  limited  reach  in  rural  areas  where  larger  proportion  of  population 
resides,  (ii)  cash  based  economy  given  issues  surrounding  disclosure,  identification,  and 
taxation etc., (iii) low financial literacy, and (iv) lack of collateral and credit history of micro 
borrowers and micro-entrepreneurs. 
7. 
• 
Provision of full range of financial services i.e. going beyond credit to deposit and 
payment services; 
Meet  requirements  of  individuals  ranging  from  consumption  to  basic  education, 
health and other services,  
Cater to the requirements of small and new firms, and  
Markets excluded by gender or remoteness  
• 
• 
8. 
Evidence  confirms  that  degree  of  financial  inclusiveness  is  high  where  there  is  high 
degree  of  competition  in  the  financial  system  that  encourages  financial  institutions  to  go 
beyond the saturated and right in the corner markets to the excluded and far flung markets 
and offers appropriate products to clients with different requirements.  
9. 
Commercialization of microfinance business has a massive impact on enhancing scale 
of  outreach.  For  instance,  in  Latin  America,  the  Non-Governmental  Organizations  (NGOs) 
opted  to  transform  themselves  into  licensed  financial  institutions,  together  with  specially 
licensed financial institutions that they were able to provide almost 45% of the microfinance 
services. 
10.  Donor  support  can  be  useful  provided  it  paves  the  way  for  commercialization  and 
private  sector  involvement  in  microfinance,  either  alone  or  as  part  of  private-public  sector 
consortiums, by brokering new banking relationships, by offering incentives for the entry of 
commercial institutions, by taking equity positions in MFIs, by providing credit enhancement 
on capital market transactions and by promoting international investment funds.  
11.  Financial  inclusion  based  on  private  sector  involvement  and  solutions  for  extending 
reach  to  poor  yields  better  and  sustainable  results.  In  the  UK,  South  Africa  and  other 
Commonwealth countries, private sector with supportive government environment, played an 
instrumental  role  in  promoting  financial  inclusion.  Government  or  donor  sponsored 
subsidized  or  directed  lending  programs  have  now  proven  to  limit  growth  and  encourage 
dependency since they induce price distortions that deter effective competition.  
12.  Subsidies  can  work 
in  certain 
institutions 
circumstances.  For  example,  subsidies  may  be  necessary  during  the  start-up  stage  of  an 
for  microfinance  borrowers  and 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2008
MFI,  but  they  are  best  used  to  cover  operating  costs  and  to  build  MFI  systems  and  staff 
capacity. It can take some years for an MFI to reach the scale and efficiency needed to cover 
its costs from interest income. During this period donors can support to build the capital base 
of  efficient  MFIs,  enabling  them  to  grow  more  quickly,  increase  their  leverage,  and  serve 
larger  numbers  of  clients  on  a  sustainable  basis.  Subsidies  may  well  be  used  to  correct 
market  failures;  such  as,  to  increase  efficiency,  transparency  in  financial  reporting,  and 
supporting industry infrastructure.  
13.  Within  South  Asia,  Pakistan  is  actively  pursuing  a  broad  based  financial  inclusion 
strategy in conformity with the best practices through a public-private partnership model. In 
order  to  speed-up  the  process  of  financial  inclusion,  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  has 
developed  an  ambitious  plan  to  scale  up  outreach  of  microfinance  services  to  3.0  million 
users  by  the  end  of  2010,  scale  number  of  small  agriculture  borrowers  to  2.0  million  and 
SME borrowers 300,000 by 2010. The DFID, and other donors, will be providing substantial 
financial and technical support to Pakistan’s financial inclusion programs. 
14.  Based  on  experience  and  research,  critical  conditions  for  financial  sustainability  of 
financial inclusion programs are:  
(i) 
Economies  of  scale:  Given  direct  relationship  between  profitability  and  scale  of 
operations,  larger  banks/MFIs  are  able  to  evolve  business  models  and  growth 
strategies to reach out to poor clients on a sustainable basis. Such institutions have 
inherent ability to spread fixed cost over more transactions, promote multiple sales 
points, adopt innovation and technology which together offer ease and efficiency in 
service delivery. These factors enhance ability of firms to expand and compete to 
stay in power. 
Proper Funding Mechanism: Sustainability requires that MFIs largely rely on deposit 
mobilization  to  finance  their  businesses.  In  initial  stages  of  development  however 
MFIs end up developing alliances with the commercial financial institutions. These 
arrangements  offer  opportunities  for  foreign  and/or  local  currency  funds.  Setting 
aside moral hazard of generating protracted dependency, foreign exchange risks in 
absence  of  the  natural  hedge  raises  the  end  pricing  to  clients  that  inadvertently 
results in dampening demand or magnifies probability of defaults. It is usually easier 
for  MFIs  to  successfully  borrow  from  a  bank  than  to  sell  a  bond  which  involves 
disclosure of information to produce adequate confidence in the borrower. However, 
profitable MFI have successfully issued bonds sparking interest in financial markets 
such as Compartamos bond issue in Mexico. Alternatively, a number of instruments 
and relationships can enhance the ability of MFIs to access financial markets. For 
example,  use  of  guarantee  funds  and  other  guarantee  mechanisms  can  correct 
“market  failure,”  such  as  inaccurate  market  evaluation  of  risk,  as  a  means  of 
bolstering  access  of  MFIs  to  capital  markets.  Proper  structuring  of  guarantee 
schemes,  however,  require  minimizing  misperceived  risks  in  lending  without 
undermining the risk management of the lending institutions. 
Transformation of NGOs into MFIs: NGOs need to be encouraged to restructure into 
themselves into legally established companies, licensed preferably by central bank, 
so that they can operate under effective and transparent ownership with adequate 
capital  base.  Backing  such  MFIs  by  supportive  prudential  regulatory  framework 
helps  in  proper  leveraging  funding,  while  providing  comfort  to  depositors  and 
borrowers. To encourage transformation of NGOs into MFI, Pakistan in June 2007 
allowed a five year income tax holiday to such institutions and now few large NGOs 
(such as Kashf Foundation and the National Rural Support Program) are in process 
of structuring their transformation.  
Strategic  Alliances  of  MFIs  with  financial  markets:  Developing  strategic  alliances 
and  other  partnerships  are  increasingly  becoming  the  ways  in  which  MFIs  can 
engage with a wide variety of financial market participants. As these arrangements 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 3
capitalize  on  the  comparative  advantages  of  vastly  different  institutions,  they  can 
take many different forms. Where MFI cannot achieve organic growth they have two 
options:  (i)  these  include  “strategic  alliances,”  mergers  and  acquisitions,  joint 
ventures and contractual arrangements, or (ii) alliance with commercial banks to set 
up and launch MF operations. 
Developing supportive infrastructure for nurturing financially healthy MFIs/MFBs: It is 
critical  that  countries  work  towards  developing  proper  rating  agencies  and  credit 
information  bureaus  to  assess  risks  associated  with  microfinance  operations  and 
their clients.  
Greater diversification and sales volume: The economics of retail financial services 
drives managers to evolve a set of standardized products and services to expand 
the volume of sales and lower average costs. 
Governance of financial institutions: Proper governance of banks/MFIs is essential 
to  safeguard  stakeholder  interest  in  particular  depositor  funds.  The  functions  of  a 
board  of  directors  and  senior  management  with  regard  to  setting  policies, 
implementing  policies  and  monitoring  compliance  are  key  elements  in  the  control 
function of a financial institution. In addition, governing bodies play a critical role in 
establishing  the  values  and  “culture”  of  an  institution,  including  its  ability  to  make 
sound  technical  decisions  on  products  and  pricing,  manage  risk,  innovate,  adapt, 
change and grow. 
Role of small, locally-oriented financial service providers: The importance of small 
organizations should not be minimized; they are often the most significant, if not the 
only,  financial  service  providers  in  many  communities.  Small  financial  service 
providers can be expected to penetrate their markets, seeking alliances with others 
and through networks to offer a greater range of products and services.  
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
15.  Though financial sustainability is essential for massive and swift expansion of services, 
to  maximize  client-level  benefits  it  is  essential  to  ensure  social  sustainability  of  financial 
inclusion  programs.  While  intertwined  with  financial  sustainability,  social  sustainability 
demands that:  
(i) 
Effective  community  and  social  mobilization  is  critical  to  success  of  financial 
inclusion  strategy.  It  involves  using  participatory  process  to  raise  awareness, 
mobilize  and  involve  local  leadership,  institutions  and communities  to organize  for 
collective  action  for  common  goals  and  objectives  to  reach  poor,  women  and  the 
disadvantaged.  Community  Investment  Fund  (CIF)  provides  a  useful  tool  to  reach 
the  poorest  decile  of  population.  The  experience  of  successful  CIFs  demonstrate 
that savings-based and Self Help Groups (SHG) based CIFs are some of the most 
successful  models  for  achieving  better  social  outcomes  on  sustainable  basis. 
Externally funded CIFs have lower odds of success as they have to swim against 
the stream of natural incentives of group members. It is prudent for external funders 
to provide support services to CIF instead of injecting loan capital.  
Targeted support programs. Most pertinent in this context would be the Community 
and  Rural  Support  programs  which  catalyze  employment  opportunities.  Whether 
they are by way of subsidized lending program MFIs (or those who support them) 
should be able to report on how (or whether) the stated goals they have promised 
(i.e.,  improved  earnings,  reduced  vulnerability,  increased  empowerment,  etc.)  are 
being realized.  
Properly structured credit enhancements: Design credit enhancement in a way that 
MFIs  use  of  the  facility  is  subject  to  fulfilling  social  sustainability  criteria  to  yield 
better social outcomes.  
Social  performance  demands  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the  financial  bottom  line 
through  better  retention  of  clients  and  reduction  of  costs,  quality  of  services, 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2008
improvements in client lives through proper economic empowerment which could be 
through  business  opportunities,  education,  health,  or  agricultural  extension,  with 
additional appropriate funding.  
16. 
In  a  nutshell,  evidence  suggests  that  poverty  reduction  strategies  are  successful  if 
countries  adopt  inclusive  policies.  Building  inclusive  financial  systems  that  are  both 
financially  and  socially  sustainable  is  a  fundamental  requirement  of  any  poverty  reduction 
strategy. 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 5
