Svein Gjedrem: Globalisation and monetary policy 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway),  at  the  Norges  Bank  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  “Jarle  Bergo  Colloquium: 
Globalisation and Monetary Policy”, Oslo, 7 March 2008.  
 It is a great pleasure to welcome you all to Norges Bank’s conference on monetary policy. 
The bi-annual conference on evaluation and assessment of monetary policy is a tradition at 
Norges  Bank.  This  year  the  conference  is  being  held  in  honour  of  my  dear  friend  and 
colleague,  Jarle  Bergo,  who  is  approaching  the  end  of  his  twelve-year  term  as  Deputy 
Governor  of  Norges  Bank.  He  is  now  resigning  office  to  take  the  position  of  Alternate 
Executive Director of the Nordic-Baltic Constituency at the IMF.  
Jarle Bergo started his career as an economist in Norges Bank in the late sixties. Over the 
years he has made crucial contributions both to the work of the Bank and to its organisation. 
I am sure that I speak for all of us who have had the pleasure of working closely with him 
when I say that he has also made a vital contribution to the atmosphere in the Bank through 
his pleasant manner and good humour.  
We have titled this conference “Jarle Bergo colloquium: Globalisation and Monetary Policy”. 
Both  globalisation  and  monetary  policy  are  themes  wide  enough  to  fill  up  numerous 
conferences by themselves, and only a few questions will be addressed here today.  
During  Jarle  Bergo’s  40-year  long  professional  career,  views  on  monetary  policy  have 
changed.  The  general  economic  environment  has  also  changed  dramatically.  The  global 
economy has become increasingly integrated. When I speak of the term globalisation, I refer 
to the growing interdependence of national economies as reflected in greater and freer flows 
of  goods,  services,  capital  and  labour  across  national  borders.  The  number  of  countries 
taking part in the global exchange of goods and capital has soared. China, India, Russia and 
many other emerging markets have opened their borders and embraced capitalist reforms. 
The globalisation process has accelerated over the last two decades through increased trade 
liberalisation, political changes, technological advances, and a sharp reduction in transaction 
costs. This new, globalised world economy presents us with new possibilities, but also with 
challenges. 
We are very proud to be hosting this conference and we are especially glad that we have 
been fortunate enough to attract such a distinguished group of speakers.  
We are honoured to have President Axel A. Weber of the Deutsche Bundesbank here as 
our first speaker of the day. He will be taking a closer look at globalisation, monetary policy 
and  the  euro.  In  terms  of  age,  the  euro  is  still  in  its  youth,  in  terms  of  global  economic 
importance  a  mature  adult.  Since  the  euro  was  introduced  almost  ten  years  ago,  it  has 
gained importance as a global reserve currency.  
Globalisation  changes  the  environment  in  which  we  live.  Increased  trade  and  economic 
integration are bringing opportunities for raising living standards to ever larger groups. But 
growth has a price. This is particularly reflected in increased emissions of greenhouse gases 
as a result of increased human activity.  
It  is  still  uncertain  how  serious  the  impact  of  gas  emissions  will  be.  But  once  the  impact 
comes into full evidence, it may be too late to take corrective action. There is also the risk 
that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere reaches such a high level that 
it exceeds critical values that cannot be reversed.  
We are very pleased to have Dr John Llewellyn, Senior Economic Policy Advisor at Lehman 
Brothers, here today to enlighten us on how globalisation affects the environment. Changes 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 1
in  our  environment  affect  the  way  we  are  able  to  interact:  it  is  important  to  combine 
knowledge about nature with knowledge about the functioning of the economy. 
The  last  decade  or  so,  we  have  witnessed  increased  financial  integration  and  competition 
across national borders. This is a positive development. Deeper and more mature markets 
tend  to  be  better  equipped  to  deal  with  uncertainty  and  distress.  But  increased  financial 
integration also raises the potential for more widespread contagion if something goes wrong, 
as witnessed by the current financial turmoil. Professor Philip Lane, Director of the Institute 
for International Integration studies at Trinity College Dublin, is one of the foremost experts 
on financial globalisation, and we are very much looking forward to hearing what he has to 
say on this subject. 
The entrance of new, large emerging economies into the world trading system has strongly 
influenced  economic  developments.  For  some  years  now,  the  short-run  trade-off  between 
inflation  and  economic  growth  has  been  extraordinarily  favourable.  Inflation  has  been  low 
and  economic  growth  high.  We  have  been  hit  by  massive  and  long-lasting  positive  supply 
shocks thanks to globalisation. To accommodate a higher growth potential and to maintain 
the nominal anchor, central banks worldwide for a long period held short-term interest rates 
well below what can be regarded as a normal level. 
History has shown us that low and stable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy 
can make to growth and macroeconomic stability. A new, globalised world does not change 
this  paradigm.  Today,  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability  is  the  norm,  and  in  most 
countries  monetary  policy  has  been  delegated  to  independent  central  banks.  Frederic 
Mishkin from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System will be joining us this 
afternoon to speak on advances in monetary policy.  
We are privileged to have such a prominent group of speakers here today. I am also happy 
to  see  that our  conference  has  attracted  such a  large  number  of  participants  from various 
institutions both in Norway and abroad. 
This conference is Norges Bank’s gift to Jarle Bergo, as a thank you for all his contributions 
to the Bank over the past four decades. I hope that both Jarle and the rest of you will enjoy it.  
I now give the floor to Director Jannecke Ebbesen, who will chair the morning session. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2008
