Irma Rosenberg: Rising commodity prices 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank, at  SEB, 
Stockholm, 9 May 2008. 
 A challenge for the central banks 
What have we been able to read in the news in recent months? Let me give some examples. 
Mining companies have begun prospecting for ore in many parts of Sweden, particularly in 
the Norrland region. Municipalities which have long experienced problems with emigration, 
such as Pajala, are now facing a more positive situation. Optimism has increased. 
Increased  trade  barriers  are  being  reported  in  some  parts  of  the  world.  But  this  is  not  a 
question of what has been the usual case, where countries protect domestic industries by 
limiting  certain  exports.  Instead  they  have  introduced  high  charges  to  prevent  exports  of 
foods such as grain and rice.  
We have also been able to read about demonstrations and food riots in poor countries such 
as Haiti, Cameroon and Burkina Faso. The UN food organisation FAO has also warned of 
social and political unrest in several countries. 
Why  am  I  taking  up  these  examples?  What  have  they  got  in  common?  Well,  they  are  the 
result of one and the same phenomenon – that world market commodity prices have almost 
exploded in recent years. The high metal prices have made it profitable to search for ore and 
extract metals that earlier would have been left in the ground. High food prices have led to a 
reduction in purchasing power and social unrest in many areas. By limiting exports of foods 
and thereby keeping the supply in their own country many countries are hoping to be able to 
keep down domestic prices. The fact that this in turn risks pushing up world market prices 
even further and making the situation worse for some countries does not seem to carry any 
weight.  
Commodity  price  rises  of  course  have  consequences  for  monetary  policy.  How  will 
commodity prices develop, and what contagion effects will there be for other prices? These 
are questions that every central bank has to take into account when making decisions. It was 
also  something  we  discussed  at  the  Riksbank’s  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  just 
over two weeks ago. I shall return to this shortly. 
Why have commodity prices risen so much? 
What is this sharp rise in commodity prices due to? As is often the case, it is difficult to point 
to any individual factor that will provide a complete explanation. Many factors have played a 
role. A product such as rice is, when one looks at it, rather different to a product such as oil. 
This would indicate that the driving forces have not been identical. But at the same time, the 
price increase has been so similar for so many different types of commodities that one can 
suspect there must be some common denominator. 
Demand from emerging markets 
One factor that has definitely been important is that emerging markets with a large population 
such as China and India have been increasingly integrated into the world economy. This was 
something that dampened inflation for a long period. Industrial nations were able to import 
cheap  goods  from  emerging  markets.  At  the  same  time,  the  increased  international 
competition held back price rises on many domestic products. In this way the central banks 
were helped in keeping inflation at bay. For some central banks, including the Riksbank, the 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 1
problem  was  rather  how  to  get  inflation  up  to  target  level.  But  now  there  appears  to  have 
been  a  turnaround.  The  emerging  markets’  demand  for  energy  and  metals,  but  also  food 
commodities,  has  grown  and  global  inflation  is  beginning  to  be  pushed  up  instead.  This 
development is reinforced by some of these countries having price regulation that prevents 
the high world market prices from having an impact on the domestic market.  
Supply effects and alternative use of agricultural products 
But there are more explanations as to why prices have risen. Supply has not managed to 
keep up with demand. There were probably few who predicted the very rapid growth in the 
new  economies.  In  addition  there  are  natural  rigidities  regarding  increasing  supply.  Quite 
simply,  it  takes  time  to  progress  from  prospecting  to  mining.  It  is  also  possible  to  point  to 
specific supply shocks. Poor harvests in many areas, such as Australia, have affected food 
prices. Here there is a possibility that climate effects have played a role. Political uncertainty 
in, for instance, Venezuela and Nigeria has had an effect on the oil price, to mention a couple 
of examples. 
Food prices have also been pushed up as a result of alternative areas of use competing for 
the supply. Agricultural products are being used increasingly in the production of ethanol and 
other biofuels – and this development is also driven by the higher oil price. 
Weak dollar, low interest rates and greater interest in commodities as an investment 
Another factor that has certainly also been significant in the price rise is that the dollar has 
weakened.  Commodities  are  usually  priced  in  dollars  and  when  the  dollar  depreciates 
commodities exporters want compensation. As demand has been strong, they have largely 
been able to do so, which has pushed up prices. 
It is also possible that the low real interest rates have contributed to the rise in commodity 
prices. Commodities then appear to be a more interesting investment than interest-bearing 
assets.  When  the  interest  rate  falls,  it  is  also  cheaper  to  keep  stocks  of  commodities. 
However, it is doubtful whether the stocks have really increased recently.  
The links that may exist between interest rates and commodity prices imply that there may 
be a link between monetary policy and pricing in the commodities markets, in addition to the 
influence via demand in the economy. There are also analysts who say that the interest rate 
cuts made by the US central bank, the Federal Reserve, have contributed to the price rises.1  
In recent years, portfolio investment in commodities appears to have become an increasingly 
common  means  of  diversifying  and  spreading  risks.  The  expected  return  on  many  other 
types  of  asset  has  declined  and  inflation  has  begun  to  rise  in  many  areas.  As  this  has 
occurred, real assets such as commodities have appeared to be a good and safe investment 
– a “safe haven”. This has reinforced the price rises. 
Demand from emerging markets – a more long-term driving force 
There are a number of interacting explanations as to why commodity prices have risen so 
sharply. It is hardly possible to say exactly how important each of them has been. However, 
one  can  say  with  some  certainty  that  the  persistence  of  the  different  driving  forces  differs 
somewhat.  
                                                 
1   See, for instance, Feldstein, M. “Enough With the Interest Rate Cuts”, the Wall Street Journal, 15 April, 2008 
and Frankel, J. “The Effect of Monetary Policy on Real Commodity Prices”, NBER Working Paper No. 12713, 
2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2008
What I mean more specifically is that demand for commodities from emerging markets may 
well  have  pushed  up  and  may  also  continue  to  push  up  prices  more  persistently  than  the 
other  explanatory  factors.  After  all,  the  emerging  economies  are  undergoing  a  structural 
transformation,  which  will  probably  be  under  way  for  a  long  time.  This  could  mean  that 
demand  for  commodities  will  remain  high  in  the  future.  One  force  that  could  hold  back 
demand is if the price regulation applied by some of these countries begins to be perceived 
as  too  costly  and  is  therefore  abolished.  If  this  happens,  world  market  prices  will  have  a 
greater impact on the domestic market. If this happens, it should dampen demand. The other 
explanatory  factors  –  the  weak  dollar,  the  low  interest  rate,  the  increased  interest  in 
commodities as a form of investment and to some extent also the supply side restrictions – 
are reasonably of a more short-term, or cyclical, nature. 
In the shorter term, it is of course possible that commodity prices will slow down as a result of 
weaker 
for 
commodities will probably remain as an underlying, long-term driving force that pushes up 
inflation.  It  is  perhaps  this  international  pressure  on  commodity  prices  and  the  risk  of 
contagion effects on other prices and on wages that will be the first major test for the low-
inflation policy. 
international  economic  activity.  But 
the  emerging  economies’  demand 
How should monetary policy react in general? 
What consequences will this have for monetary policy? One thing it is important to remember 
is that the rising commodity prices are examples of changes in relative prices. A relative price 
is the price of a particular product or group of products in relation to other prices. What has 
happened  in  recent  years  could  be  described  as  a  global  increase  in  the  relative  price  of 
energy and commodities, such as food, in relation to manufactured products. 
Inflation is due to long-term monetary policy, not relative prices 
Changes in relative prices play an important role for how resources are allocated in a market 
economy. An increase in a relative price is a signal that resources have become scarce in a 
particular area in relation to other areas. It is therefore often profitable to invest there. It is 
exactly this type of market mechanism that appears when interest in mining increases and 
optimism  rises  in  the  parts  of  Sweden  suffering  from  depopulation.  In  a  corresponding 
manner,  high  food  prices  provide  an  incentive  to  begin  cultivating  previously  unused  land 
around the world.  
There is thus reason to believe that the higher relative price will in the long term increase the 
supply  of  commodities,  which  will  then  better  match  the  demand  for  them.  However,  the 
adjustment may take time. It remains to be seen whether supply will increase sufficiently to 
keep  an  even  pace  with  world  market  demand.  It  is  therefore  difficult  to  predict  how  long 
relative commodity prices will continue rising. 
But what is fundamental from a monetary policy perspective is that changes in relative prices 
do  not  in  themselves  constitute  inflation.  Inflation  refers  to  general  price  levels,  or  the 
average of all prices, rising over time. The general price level is measured with some broader 
measure of prices, such as the consumer price index, CPI.  
Monetary  policy  cannot  and  should  not  counteract  changes  in  relative  prices.  But  what 
central banks can govern in the long term is the way inflation develops. A change in relative 
prices can occur when there is low inflation as the price increases on the goods that become 
relatively more expensive are compensated for by low price increases or even falling prices 
on other goods. The same relative price change can occur with high inflation, when all prices 
rise  rapidly  but  some  more  than  others.  But  if  commodity  prices  soar,  this  means  that 
companies' costs will rise and inflation will be pushed up. For a central bank with an inflation 
target the task is then to use monetary policy to avoid secondary effects on wages and other 
prices  and  to  counteract  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations.  If  prices  rise more  quickly  abroad 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 3
then  a  credible  monetary  policy  should  also  lead  to  a  stronger  domestic  currency,  which 
contributes  to  limiting  the  impact  on  domestic  prices.  Managing  price  increases  in  a  long-
term  perspective  is  actually  a  question  of  making  well-balanced  interest  rate  decisions  at 
each individual monetary policy meeting. 
The principles are simple… 
So  how  should  a  policymaker  reason  at  each  monetary  policy  meeting  when  rising 
commodity  prices are pushing up inflation? Describing what should be done in principle is 
fairly  simple.  Given  the  monetary  policy  system  we  currently  have  in  Sweden,  it  involves 
trying to find a path for the policy rate that ensures inflation is reasonably close to the target 
while  the  real  economy  is  in  balance.  This  is  how  one  should  reason  regardless  of  what 
shocks affect the economy. In this sense an upswing in commodity prices is nothing special. 
…but their practical implementation is difficult 
However,  the  practical  implementation  of  the  principles  is  far  from  simple.  This  is  partly 
because it is no simple task to capture in the forecast all of the effects that rising commodity 
prices  might  have  on  the  economy.  It  is  also  because  monetary  policy  works  with  a  lag. 
Rapid price impulses cannot be immediately counteracted. A further complication is that the 
effects on inflation and the real economy move in different directions. Inflation rises while the 
real  economy,  for  instance,  production  and  employment,  slows  down.  It  is  not  self-evident 
how these effects should be weighed against one another, but this is something that must be 
achieved in monetary policy. 
The commodity price rises in recent years have caused inflation to rise in many countries. At 
the  same  time,  growth  in  production  and  employment  is  slowing  down.  The  slowdown  is 
partly  due  to  weaker  international  economic  activity  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  market 
turmoil  and  the  downswing  in  the  United  States.  But  it  is  probably  also  partly  due  to  the 
upturn in commodity prices. For example, higher commodity and food prices function roughly 
in the same way as a tax increase for households and dampen domestic demand. Price rises 
on  energy  and  commodities  also  mean  that companies'  costs  increase.  This  also  tends  to 
dampen production and growth.  
In  such  a  situation  it  is  important  to  try  to  find  a  policy  that  is  sufficiently  tight  to  prevent 
inflationary  impulses  gaining  a  lasting  grip.  This  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  they  do  not 
spread to inflation expectations, wages and other prices. At the same time, the policy must 
be sufficiently loose to avoid unnecessary negative effects on production and employment. It 
is  a  difficult  balancing  act.  To  manage  this  in  a  way  that  provides  a  good  growth  in  the 
economy that is sustainable in the long term requires that the credibility of the inflation target 
remains intact. This is the premise for formulating monetary policy. 
If the expectations of inflation are pushed up and remain above the inflation target, there is a 
risk  that  they  will  become  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  And  dealing  with  high  and  fluctuating 
inflation rates is often a very difficult and expensive process – for individual households and 
the economy as a whole. The oil price shocks in the 1970s are examples of how external 
inflationary  impulses  were  allowed  to  gain  a  firm  foothold  and  spread  throughout  the 
economy  at  the  same  time  as  economic  activity  was  weak.  The  cost  of  dealing  with  this 
adjustment was high, not least because our competitiveness was undermined. 
The consequences for Swedish monetary policy right now 
What do the rising commodity prices mean for the interest rate decision we made a couple of 
weeks ago? What will it entail for future monetary policy if these price rises continue? Well, it 
is  of  course  largely  the  balancing  act  I  recently  described.  We  Executive  Board  members 
must  currently  take  into  account  in  our  deliberations  the  forces  pulling  the  economy  in 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2008
different directions. In Sweden economic activity is still fairly strong, but there are signs of a 
slowdown. We are also seeing weaker international developments and financial turmoil. In 
contrast, inflation and inflation expectations remain high. One can thus say that commodity 
prices are in a way in both scales of the balance. They are to some extent both behind the 
slowdown in economic activity and behind the high inflation and inflation expectations. 
The way my Executive Board colleagues and I weighed together the various factors at the 
most recent monetary policy meeting resulted in our holding the repo rate unchanged at 4.25 
per cent. We are also currently assuming that the interest rate will need to be held at this 
level in 2008 to manage the inflation target a couple of years ahead. Of course, commodity 
prices were important in our assessments. So let me therefore conclude by describing how I 
myself reasoned in connection with the interest rate decision.  
Rising prices 
All in all, inflation has largely developed in line with the forecast in the February Monetary 
Policy Report. The consumer price index, CPI, increased by 3.4 per cent in March. This is an 
inflation rate well in excess of the target of 2 per cent. A large part of the upturn in the CPI – 
close to one percentage point – is linked to an increase in mortgage interest expenditure for 
home-owners and thus to the interest rate increases made by the Riksbank over the past two 
years.  
However, the upturn is also due to the rapidly rising commodity prices in the world market. 
This  became  clear  in  autumn  2007  in  particular.  CPI  inflation  then  rose  by  just  over  1.5 
percentage points in just a few months. The primary reason was higher commodity prices. 
When such rapid price impulses from abroad have an effect on inflation, monetary policy is 
unable to counteract them immediately. Moreover, it may be very difficult, if at all possible, to 
predict this type of fluctuation. This is why one cannot expect to avoid effects on inflation like 
those we have seen recently.  
A balancing act 
Now, as I have said, both we and other central banks have to manage the balancing act I 
described. The Riksbank’s statutory target is price stability, and we must conduct monetary 
policy so that inflation attains the target of 2 per cent within a couple of years. If we manage 
this,  we  can  also  try  to  influence  cyclical  fluctuations  in,  for  instance,  production  and 
employment.  As  I  said,  this  sounds  simple  but  we  now  have  to  manage  the  fact  that  the 
commodity  price  rises  are  on  the  one  hand  pushing  up  inflation  and  on  the  other  hand 
dampening  growth.  A  tight  monetary  policy  could  contribute  to  dampening  inflation.  At  the 
same time, it would restrain real activity in the economy in a situation when economic activity 
is slowing down. 
The decision is not made easier by the fact that it is difficult to capture and predict all of the 
effects of an increase in commodity prices on the economy and – not least – how persistent 
the price impulses will be. If it is a question of temporary effects on inflation, these need not 
be counteracted by monetary policy.  
Sometimes  one  hears  the  argument  that  the  Riksbank  should  not  try  to  counteract  price 
increases that are impossible to stop. One such example is the rising world market price for 
oil.  But  even  prices  we  have  little  possibility  to  affect,  other  than  to  the  extent  that  the 
exchange  rate  is  affected  by  monetary  policy,  are  included  in  the  basket  of  goods  that 
measures  consumer  prices.  This  is  of  course  because  they  affect  households’  purchasing 
power.  A  price  impulse  can  gain  a  foothold  and  have  long-lasting  effects  on  inflation 
regardless  of  where  it  originates.  And  the  central  bank  must  parry  long-lasting  effects, 
whether the impulses come from wages, food prices, oil or something else. 
BIS Review 57/2008 
 5
The outlook is far from certain… 
In the forecast we published just over two weeks ago we assume that the rapid commodity 
price  rises  are  partly  temporary  and  that  they  will  subside  in  the  future.  We  are  also 
expecting the krona to be strong. This will contribute to inflation falling. But of course this is 
uncertain, not least for the reasons I took up earlier this morning. If the international price 
impulses  were  to  become  stronger  and  longer  lasting  than  expected,  inflation  would  of 
course  be  higher.  But  as  I  see  it,  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  international  price  rises  will 
instead be lower than expected. This would push down inflation more quickly. One possible 
reason  for  this  would  be  if  international  economic  activity  slows  down  more  quickly  than 
anticipated. We have highlighted these risks in earlier reports.  
A further factor, which in my opinion contributes to the uncertainty in the assessment, is the 
increased interest in portfolio investment in commodities. If the expectations of future return 
on such investments alter, it could contribute to a more sudden slowdown. And this would 
gradually affect consumer price inflation. 
It is also possible that such an effect – that capital is withdrawn and invested in other assets 
–  has  contributed  to  the  price  of  wheat  falling  more  rapidly  recently.  With  regard  to 
movements  in  the  commodity  markets  since  the  previous  forecast,  prices  have  moved  in 
slightly  different  directions.  Pricing  in  different  forward  markets  currently  gives  a  slightly 
divided picture of what direction prices will take. The oil price has risen more than expected 
and  forward  rates  imply  that  it  may  remain  at  a  higher  level.  At  the  same  time,  the  world 
market price for certain foods and metals has fallen in recent weeks, for instance, the price of 
wheat, meat and aluminium. However, the price of some other foods, such as rice, has risen 
recently. 
…but we must nevertheless take a stance 
But  regardless  of  whether  the  international  price  impulses  are  temporary  or  more  lasting, 
they must not be allowed to push up inflation permanently! In my opinion, the risk of this has 
increased  in  that  inflation  expectations  have  risen  during  the  autumn.  According  to 
Prospera’s survey in April, however, expectations have fallen slightly. The National Institute 
of  Economic  Research’s  Consumer  Tendency  Survey  also  indicates  that  households’ 
inflation expectations have been adjusted downwards since the February report.  
But expectations are still a little too high, particularly in the longer term. And this was one 
reason  why  I  voted  to  hold  the  repo  rate  unchanged  at  4.25  per  cent  at  our  most  recent 
meeting.  Other  important  factors  behind  my  stance  were  that,  according  to  our  forecast, 
inflation  will  overshoot  the  target  for  a  good  while  to  come,  at  the  same  time  as  growth 
remains  fairly  robust.  Weighing  together  these  factors  also  indicated  that  the  interest  rate 
may  need  to  remain  at  its  current  level  for  some  time  to  come.  But  at  our  meeting  I  also 
emphasised  the  risks  of  a  weaker  outcome  in  the  long  run,  particularly  as  a  result  of  the 
financial  turmoil  and  the  slackening  in  international  growth.  For  me  these  factors  weighed 
slightly heavier than the risks of a higher inflation rate in the future. I therefore did not rule out 
the possibility that the interest rate may need to be cut later in the forecast period. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2008
