Hu Xiaolian: Recent economic and financial developments in China 
Remarks by Ms Hu Xiaolian, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Central 
Bank of Argentina 2008 Money and Banking Conference “Financial turbulence – impact on 
developed and emerging economies”, Buenos Aires, 1 September 2008. 
 Respected Governor Martín Redrado, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  feel  deeply  honored  to  be  invited  to  come  to  this  beautiful  city  of  Buenos  Aires  for  the 
seminar. As you know, recent developments in the global economy has been charcterized by 
a  broad-based  slowdown,  heightened  financial  market  turbulences  and  rising  inflation 
pressure. I’m very pleased to be able to have frank and in-depth exchange of views with all 
of you about the challenges China has been facing and measures that have been taken in 
this context. 
Recent economic and financial developments in China 
I.  
Since the beginning of 2008, the Chinese economy has maintained a stable and rapid growth 
momentum in the process of combating against the challenges resulting from historically rare 
and severe natural disasters and turmoil both in the international and domestic economic and 
financial  conditions.  Investment,  consumption  and  export  grew  in  a  balanced  manner; 
domestic  demand  especially  consumer  demand  became  a  stronger  driving  force  for 
economic growth; investment grew steadily and investment structure improved; the national 
economy developed in the desired direction. 
Urban  and  rural  household  income  continued  to  rise,  and  domestic  consumer  demand 
remained  strong.  In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  the  per  capita  disposable  income  of  urban 
residents registered 8065 yuan, a year-on-year growth of 14.4 percent or 6.3 percent in real 
terms; the per capita cash income of farmers was 2528 yuan, a year-on-year growth of 19.8 
percent or 10.3 percent in real terms. The steady income increase in both urban and rural 
areas  supported  the  continued  growth  of  consumption.  In  the  first  half  of  2008,  the  gross 
volume of retail sales reached 5.1 trillion yuan, representing nominal growth of 21.4 percent 
or real growth of 12.9 percent, 0.2 percentage points higher than that in the same period of 
the  last  year.  Among  the  total,  retail  sales  in  urban  China grew  22.1  percent  to  3.5  trillion 
yuan,  and  retail  sales  in  counties, townships, and  villages  grew  20.0  percent  to  1.6  trillion 
yuan.  The  growth  gap  between  the  urban  and  rural  areas  was  2.1  percentage  points,  0.4 
percentage points wider than the same period of last year. 
Fixed-asset investment grew steadily with an improved investment structure. In the first half 
of  the  year,  fixed-asset  investment  totaled  6.8  trillion  yuan,  representing  a  year-on-year 
growth  of  26.3  percent  and  an  acceleration  of  0.4  percentage  points.  Urban  fixed-asset 
investment  reached  5.8  trillion  yuan,  up  26.8  percent  year  on  year,  while  rural  fixed-asset 
investment  posted  996.6  billion  yuan,  up  23.2  percent,  an  acceleration  of  0.1  and  1.7 
percentage  points  respectively  from  the  same  period  of  the  last  year.  In  terms  of 
geographical distribution, fixed-asset investment in eastern, central and western China grew 
22.4  percent,  35.3  percent  and  28.6  percent  respectively,  with  central  and  western  China 
growing  much  faster  than  eastern  China.  In  terms  of  the  sectoral  distribution,  fixed-asset 
investment  growth  in  the  three  industries  registered  69.5  percent,  26.6  percent,  and  26.2 
percent  respectively,  with  the  primary  industry  representing  an  acceleration  of  32.0 
percentage  points,  much  higher  than  that  of  the  second  and  the  tertiary  industries,  whose 
growth was relatively stable. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  GDP  grew  10.4  percent  year  on  year  to  13.1  trillion  yuan,  a 
deceleration of 1.8 percentage points from the previous year; the consumer price index was 
up  7.9  percent,  an  acceleration  of  4.7  percentage  points;  the  trade  surplus  posted  US$99 
billion,  a  decline  of  13.2  billion  from  that  in  the  same  period  of  the  last  year;  the  actually 
utilization  of  foreign  direct  investment  totaled  US$52.4  billion,  an  acceleration  of  33.4 
percentage points from the previous year. 
II.  
Issues and challenges facing China’s economy 
Inflation has become the primary concern in China’s economy. 
1.  
China is currently facing excessively increasing pressures on prices. Since Q4 2006, driven 
by large increases in food prices, the CPI has grown at a relatively rapid pace. In the first half 
of 2008, the year-on-year CPI grew at a historically high rate of 7.9 percent. The formation of 
China’s  current  inflation  is  complicated,  and  is  a  result  of  various  factors.  First,  external 
factors  have  impact  on  domestic  prices,  such  as  large  widespread  rise  in  prices  of  global 
commodities, foods and assets, and inflation imported from developed and other emerging 
market  economies.  Even  though  the  appreciation  of  the  RMB  has  somewhat  offset  the 
impact, the driving force of the imported inflation remains strong. Second, due to the limited 
supply,  prices  of  important  commodities  such  as  pork  have  risen  rather  quickly.  Third,  the 
rising cost of labor and price adjustment of resources exerted upward pressures on prices. 
The  cost  of  labor  and  the  imported  inflation  are  reinforcing  with  each  other  resulting  in 
spiraling prices. 
2.  
The impact of sub-prime mortgage crisis on China’s economy cannot be 
ignored. 
Although the sub-prime mortgage crisis has a limited direct impact on China’s economy, it 
can never be ignored. First, the U.S. economic growth of and the growth of China’s export 
are strongly and positively related, and the lower growth of the U.S. economy will most likely 
affect  China’s  export  and  its  economic  growth.  Second,  uncertainties  in  capital  flows  have 
risen and a large amount of international capital flew into China, as a result of successive 
cuts in policy rates by the Federal Reserve, the continuing depreciation of the U.S. dollar and 
the turmoil in the international financial markets. Third, the continuing deprecation of the U.S. 
dollar  increased  the  prices  of  global  commodities  denominated  in  the  U.S.  dollar,  putting 
comparatively  huge  imported  inflationary  pressures  on  China.  Fourth,  China’s  foreign 
exchange reserve management faces big challenges after the sub-prime crisis. Changes in 
major international reserve currencies, such as the Euro and the U.S. dollar are becoming 
more  and  more  unpredictable,  thus  complicating  the  management  of  China’s  foreign 
exchange reserves. Fifth, the inflationary pressure and the sub-prime crisis has heightened 
the moderation risk of China’s economic growth. External shocks constitute the greatest risk 
this  year  for  China’s  economy  ,  which  has  become  a  major  pare  of  the  global  economy  . 
Although the inflationary pressure  and the sub-prime crisis have negative impact,  they will 
not change the fundamentals of China’s economy, which will maintain a rather rapid growth 
rate. 
China’s recent monetary policy 
III.  
The Chinese government has placed anti-inflation as its top priority for a long time. In light of 
the  apparent  movements  in  the  price  level,  at  end-2007  China  made  it  a  top  priority  to 
“prevent rapid growth from turning into overheating and to prevent structural price rises from 
becoming generalized inflation” in macro adjustment policies. Recently, China stressed once 
again to put maintaining stable and rapid economic growth and curbing excessive price hikes 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
as  the  top  priority  of  macroeconomic  management,  and  put  reining  in  inflation  high  on  its 
agenda. 
In the first half of 2008, the PBC took the following measures to implement monetary policy: 
The first was to raise reserve requirement ratio to absorb excess liquidity.  The  PBC 
raised the reserve requirement ratio on many occasions. After the reserve requirement ratio 
was raised by one percentage point on June 7, except for certain financial institutions and 
quake-hit areas, the reserve requirement ratio of most financial institutions was 17.5 percent. 
The  rise  of  reserve  requirement  ratio  absorbed  a  lot  of  liquidity,  eased  the  inflationary 
pressure, avoided the rapid increase of interest rate, and contained hot-money inflows. The 
second was to flexibly conduct the open market operations. In light of short-term liquidity 
demand of the banking system and changes of fund demands of financial institutions in the 
first  half  of  2008,  the  PBC  flexibly  used  a  mix  of  instruments,  rationalized  their  maturity 
structures, kept interest rate stable in the course of open market operations, guided market 
expectation, and conducted cash management of the state treasury when appropriate. The 
third was to strengthen “window guidance” and credit guidance. Efforts were made to 
guide financial institutions to strengthen credit regulation and extend loans in a sound and 
balanced manner during the year, so as to prevent volatile movements of lending activities. 
Measures were taken to encourage growth in some sectors while discouraging it in others 
and  rationalize  the  credit  structure.  Efforts  were  made  to  restrict  loans  extended  to  highly 
energy-consuming  and  highly  polluting  industries  and  industries  with  overcapacity.  Credit 
support was increased to some key areas, such as agriculture, rural areas and farmers, post-
disaster reconstruction, small enterprises, the services industry and independent innovation, 
energy-conservation  and  environment  protection  projects,  and  credit  line  to  small-  and 
medium-sized enterprises was raised. The fourth was to improve the RMB exchange rate 
formation mechanism reform, and speed up the reform of foreign exchange system. 
Efforts were made to deepen the reform of the foreign exchange system, appropriately guide 
the market expectation of RMB exchange rate, strengthen the monitoring over, analysis of 
and  management  of  cross-border  capital  flows,  and  strengthen  monitoring  over  abnormal 
cross-border capital flows in the trade sector and other areas; to reform the foreign exchange 
system in trade in service on a pilot basis in some regions; to allow more market participants 
on the foreign exchange market, and to promote the equilibrium of the balance of payments. 
The fifth was to steadily promote the reform of financial institutions. For the time being, 
the  stock-holding  reform  of  state-owned  banks  is  further  deepened.  The  corporate 
governance,  business  transformation  and  operation  performance  of  the  Industrial  and 
Commercial Bank of China, the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank and the Bank of 
Communications has been upgraded on a continuous basis. The fundamental work for the 
reform  of 
the  Agricultural  Bank  of  China  has  made  significant  progress.  The 
commercialization  of  the  China  Development  Bank  was  steadily  pushed  ahead,  and  the 
reform of rural credit cooperatives has made big progress and achieved phased results. 
The  aforesaid  measures  have  achieved  remarkable  results.  As  the  food  price  decelerates 
with increased supply and the prices of oil and other commodities on the international market 
slid recently, China’s CPI declined from 8.7 percent in February to 6.3 percent in July, and 
future inflationary pressure is expected to further moderate. In the meantime, the monetary 
and financial situation remained stable. At end-June, broad money M2 stood at RMB 44.3 
trillion yuan, representing an increase of 17.4 percent year-on-year, lower than that at end-
2007. Deposits and loans of financial institutions increased in a stable manner. In the first 
half of 2008, outstanding deposits of financial institutions stood at RMB 45.0 trillion yuan, an 
increase  of 17.8  percent  year-on-year;  outstanding  loans  of  financial  institutions  registered 
RMB 30.5 trillion yuan, an increase of 15.2 percent year-on-year. The exchange rate of RMB 
displayed  an  overall  appreciating  trend.  The  flexibility  of  the  RMB  exchange  rate  was 
improved,  and  the  connection  between  RMB  and  other  major  currencies  became  more 
apparent. As of end-June, the exchange rate of the RMB versus the U.S. Dollar rose by 6.50 
percent  from  the  end  of  last  year,  and  the  RMB  depreciated  by  1.51  percent  and  0.63 
percent against the Japanese Yen and the Euro respectively from the end of last year. From 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
the foreign exchange rate system reform to the end of June 2008, the RMB appreciated by 
20.66  percent  accumulatively  against  the  U.S.  Dollar,  depreciated  by  7.54  percent  against 
the  Euro,  and  appreciated  by  13.33  percent  against  the  Japanese  Yen.  In  the  first  half  of 
2008, the daily fluctuation of the RMB central parity averaged 79 basis points, larger than the 
62 basis points of that in 2007. The growth of foreign reserves began to decelerate, and is 
expected to decelerate further. 
China’s policy stance to be adopted in the next stage 
IV.  
An old Chinese saying goes “ruling a country is like cooking seafood delicacy”, which follows 
that ruling a country requires the same meticulous efforts as cooking palatable seafood. At 
present, there are more destabilizing factors in the international economic environment, and 
problems  in  China’s  economy  are  becoming  more  apparent;  therefore,  we  need  more 
patience and wisdom in order to maintain stable and rapid economic development. 
In  the  next  stage,  China  will  put  maintaining  stable  and  rapid  economic  growth  and 
curbing excessive price hikes as the top priority of macroeconomic management, and 
put reining in inflation high on its agenda. Efforts will be made to maintain the continuity 
and stability of monetary policy, increase the foresightedness, pertinence and flexibility of the 
adjustment  policy,  adopt  fine-tuning  measures  when  appropriate  according  to  changing 
situation  both  at  home  and  abroad,  manage  the  priorities,  pace  and  intensity  of 
macroeconomic  adjustment,  encourage  growth  of  some  sectors  while  discouraging  it  of 
others, strengthen financial support to key areas and weak aspects of the economy so as to 
balance the relationship between containing inflation and maintaining rapid economic growth 
and promote the economy to grow in a sound and rapid manner. 
The year 2008 marks the 30th anniversary of China’s reform and opening-up. In the past 30 
years,  China  successfully  transformed  itself  from  a  command  economy  to  a  market 
economy, from a closed and semi-closed economy to a fully opened-up economy, making 
outstanding  economic  and  social  advancements.  China’s  GDP  has  been  growing  at  an 
average annual rate of 9.7 percent, and foreign trade 17.4 percent, ranking the fourth and the 
third respectively in the world. People’s living conditions have achieved overall well off. But 
China is and will stay in the primary stage of socialism for a long time. There are still a lot of 
poor people in urban and rural areas; urbanization is inadequate; the per capita GDP ranks 
behind the 100th in the world. Constrained by such a reality, the solution to many problems is 
a long-term and systemic project. When  making policies, consideration should be given to 
China’s national situation, development stage and affordability. 
We have recognized that with increasing economic globalization, financial integration driven 
by financial innovation and diversification of transfer modes of financial risks, more regional 
and global problems will emerge, and the coordination of macroeconomic policies, monetary 
policy  in  particular,  among  different  nations  is  becoming  more  and  more  important.  Going 
forward,  to  address  various  problems,  China  will  rely  on  itself  and  accelerate  reform  and 
development  on  the  one  hand,  and  pay  attention  to  exchange  and  cooperation  with  other 
countries  on  the  other  hand.  China  is  willing  to  continue  to  increase  understanding,  share 
experiences  and  strengthen  cooperation  with  the  rest  of  the  world  to  create  a  favorable 
international environment that is conducive to the development of all countries. 
Finally, I wish a complete success of the seminar. Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
