Lars Nyberg: Cash and payments – what lies ahead?  
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting 
arranged by Sparbanksakademin och Handelns tvecklingsrad, Stockholm, 5 February 2008. 
 To most people the Riksbank is associated with money. This is not so surprising. We supply 
the  country  with  banknotes  and  coins  and  on  each  note  one  can  see  the  signature  of  the 
Governor of the Riksbank. 
But  we  are  not  just  concerned  about  banknotes  and  coins,  which  are  tools  to  manage 
payments.  We  are  also  concerned  about  payments  in  a  much  broader  sense.  This  is 
because the Riksdag, the Swedish parliament, has decided that we shall promote a safe and 
efficient payment system, as one of our tasks. Quite simply, this means that we shall ensure 
the financial system in Sweden is constructed in such a way that people (and companies) 
can manage their payments in a safe manner – and, moreover, at a reasonable cost. When 
we speak of ”financial stability”, which we do frequently, it is essentially the means to make 
payments safe and efficient we are referring to. 
It is, of course, no coincidence that the Riksdag has given us this task: If people were unable 
to receive their salaries and if banks and companies were unable to make their payments 
this would rapidly have a major impact on society. This is why financial stability is about the 
way  in  which  banks  and  financial  markets  function  and  how  safe  and  efficient  various 
technical payment systems are – on a daily basis, but also in crisis situations. 
Money is an excellent means of payment – as long as we believe that it has some value. 
Should we lose that belief then it only remains for us to begin to exchange goods with each 
other  and  there  are  many  accounts  as  to  how  clumsy  and  costly  this  is,  even  in  modern 
times.  This  is  why  the  Riksdag  has  given  the  Riksbank  the  task  to  maintain  price  stability 
However, I do not intend to talk about the inflation target and its background today. Today I 
will talk about cash and other means of making payments. And this is where, just like in so 
many other areas, technical developments have to a great extent changed reality. 
Do  you  remember  the  pay  packet?  When  holding  wage  negotiations,  there  are  still 
discussions  about  “how  much  money  will  there  be  in  the  pay  packet”.  However,  the  pay 
packet is now a metaphor. Those of us who have seen them in reality are becoming fewer. I 
shall never forget when I worked at a sawmill in Ångermanland and “the chief clerk” from the 
office  came  down  with  the  pay  packets  on  Fridays.  When  one  received  the  pay  packet  in 
one’s hand it felt as though one had truly accomplished something during the week. Today 
we  all  have  our  salaries  deposited  in  our  bank  accounts,  directly  transferred  from  the 
employer’s account. This is, of course, far more efficient. At the sawmill the “chief clerk” went 
to the bank in Härnösand in order to collect the money and then to count it out at the office 
before he could walk down to us and distribute the pay packets. It took all day for him. But I 
cannot deny that there was a different feeling to opening the pay packet than to opening a 
bank statement. 
The increased use of bank accounts came to revolutionise payments in Sweden. With the 
bank  accounts  as  a  base,  a  number  of  new  instruments  of  payment  developed.  Cheques 
were based on bank accounts as were the post and bank giro transfer systems. The same is 
true of today’s card payments and online payments. 
So what are the present payment trends? And what do we believe will happen in the future? 
Are  we,  as  some  have  claimed  and  others  have  advocated,  moving  towards  a  cashless 
society? Just under a year ago the headline on the front page of The Economist was “The 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 1
end of the cash era”.1 Is this scenario reasonable? I shall begin by looking more closely at 
what  has  happened  in  recent  decades  in  order  to  reach  some  kind  of  answer  to  these 
questions, or at least a qualified guess. 
Cash payments have declined in significance 
I will begin with cash. Cash payments still account for a large proportion of the number of 
transactions in the Swedish economy. But it comes as no surprise to anyone if I say that they 
have declined in significance in recent decades. As a per cent of GDP, the share of Swedish 
banknotes and coins in circulation (M0) has more than halved since the 1950s, from around 
10 per cent to just around 3.5 per cent.2
In  the  past  fifteen  years,  however,  the  trend  has  levelled  off.  The  use  of  cash  has  not 
declined in the same way as before. M0 in nominal terms has actually increased. If we look 
at the statistics for ATM withdrawals, we find that the total transaction value has remained 
fairly constant at around SEK 275 billion a year during the entire 2000s. The number of cash 
withdrawals has been around SEK 320 million. 
Does  this  mean  that  we  have  reached  a  lower  limit  for  how  much  the  use  of  cash  can 
decline? Has the heyday of the account-based payments ended? I do not believe we should 
be so sure of that. Cash is still expensive to transport and manage and a heightened risk of 
robbery  in  recent  years  has  not  made  cash  management  cheaper.  In  the  end,  it  is  we 
consumers who pay the costs in different ways. However, we must probably point out that we 
Swedes like our cash more than most analysts believed a few years ago. 
How then have the account-based payment instruments developed?  
The use of cards has increased rapidly 
Card payments have increased rapidly in Sweden in recent years. In ten years the value of 
card payments has almost quadrupled and the number of payments by card has increased 
sevenfold. Six years ago, in 2002, for the first time ever more card payments were made in 
payment terminals than ATM cash withdrawals. In the most recent statistics available, from 
2006, card payments in payment terminals were three times more common than ATM cash 
withdrawals.  
If  one  calculates  in  terms  of  the  number  of  transactions,  cards  are  now  the  most  used 
account-based payment instrument. Like cash, card payments are mainly used for payments 
that are made at the actual time of the transaction. According to a 2006 Temo survey, 45 per 
cent of those questioned used cards as legal tender in at least four of five purchases.3 (3) 
The value of an average card payment has almost halved in the past ten years, from around 
SEK 730 to around SEK 380. We are then using cards to a greater degree to pay smaller 
amounts.  In  this  way  cards  increasingly  appear  to  act  as  a  substitute  to  cash.  This  is 
particularly so in the case of younger people, which is indicated in a study recently published 
by the Riksbank.4  
                                                 
1   The Economist, 17-23 February 2007. 
2   The stock of banknotes and coins totalled SEK 114 billion on 31 December 2007. Sveriges Riksbank. 
3   “Allmänhetens  syn  på  bankerna”  (The  Swedish  public’s  opinion  of  banks),  Temo  survey,  March  2006,  The 
Swedish Bankers’ Association. 
4   Bergman,  Guibourg  and  Segendorf,  “The  costs  of  paying  –  private  and  social  costs  of  cash  and  card”, 
Working Paper Series, (No. 212), Sveriges Riksbank, September 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2008
Moreover,  the  increased  use  of  cards  is  an  international  trend.  For  instance,  if  we  look  at 
developments among our Nordic neighbours, we can see that card payments have enjoyed 
rapid growth in these countries also.  
As  regards  the  choice  between  debit  cards  and  credit  cards,  it  is  clear  that  Swedish  card 
users favour debit cards. In 2006, the number of debit card payments accounted for around 
80 per cent of all card payments. Charge cards and combined charge cards or credit cards 
dominate the remaining share of card payments. 
Cheques have disappeared 
As I said, card payments have begun to replace cash payments of smaller amounts. They 
have also replaced a large number of cheque payments in Sweden. In 1990 every seventh 
transaction was paid for by cheque. Cheque payments accounted for just over one-tenth of 
the value of non-cash payments. Today cheque payments account for just some tenths of a 
per cent of both the value of the payments as well as the number of transactions. 
The death of the cheque in Sweden is of interest, for it was quick and unexpectedly painless. 
The story is as follows: Over time cheque handling became increasingly unprofitable for the 
banks.  The  costs  increased,  but  none  of  the  banks  dared  take  the  initiative  to  debit 
customers for these costs. There were concerns that Swedes regarded payments by cheque 
as an inherited right and would, therefore, vocally protest. But this was not the case. When, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  one  of  the  banks  decided  to  charge  a  fee  of  SEK  15  per 
cheque (and the others followed suit) the majority of cheque payments disappeared over just 
a few years – and moreover without political convulsions. The reason for this was that there 
were excellent substitutes that were free of charge and which were marketed by the banks, 
primarily  cards  and  credit  transfers.  When  consumers  discovered  this,  their  grief  over  the 
death of the cheque abated.  
The  United  States  has  always  been  the  promised  land  of  the  cheque.  By  tradition,  US 
consumers have sent cheques in the post when they pay their electricity or telephone bills, 
for instance. The company receiving the cheque has then forwarded it to the bank, which has 
then transferred the money and returned the cheque to the consumer. In this manner, tons of 
cheques have crossed the American continent daily. But even in the United States cheque 
usage has begun to fall. 
Giro transfers, other credit transfers and direct debit are used for the larger payment 
flows. 
Giro  transfers  and  direct  debit  are  used  for  recurring  and,  in  this  context,  relatively  large 
payments such as, for instance, monthly bills, and often with someone with whom one has a 
contractual relationship, for example, the electricity company and the telephone company. In 
terms of value, giro transfers, other credit transfers and direct debit account for a very large 
proportion of the payment flow between private individuals, companies and the public sector. 
Previously,  they  also  accounted  for  a  large  proportion  of  the  number  of  non-cash 
transactions,  but  over  the  past  few  years  more  card  payments  have  been  made  than  giro 
transfers, other credit transfers and direct debit.  
In Sweden today, approximately 80 per cent of households have Internet access. This has 
meant  that  an  increasing  number  of  people  use  the  banks’  Internet  banks.  The  traditional 
account-based  payment  instruments  have  been  adapted  to  this  new  payment  channel.  In 
some  banks,  more  than  half  of  the  credit  transfers  are  now  Internet-based  and  this 
percentage is increasing rapidly. Increasingly, customers can also receive their bills directly 
via the Internet service, the so-called e-invoicing.  
Do you remember how one used to queue at the bank or in the post office in order to pay 
one’s bills once a month? Some still pay this way, but they are an ever-declining number. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 3
Most  people  who  are  able  prefer  to  sit  in  front  of  their  computers  to  hanging  around  in  a 
queue.  But  it  has  not  just  become  more  convenient  to  pay,  it  has  also  become  cheaper. 
Payments over the counter, cheques, cash withdrawals and paper-based giro transfers are 
expensive to produce. Electronic payments, such as direct debit, transfers via Internet banks 
and card payments are far cheaper to produce. It is not so surprising that in the past twenty 
years we have to a great extent switched from paper-based to electronic payments.5 This is 
surely a trend that will continue. 
New developments in the market 
Everything I have spoken of here is essentially to do with what we can describe as traditional 
forms  of  legal  tender.  Even  Internet  payments  are  essentially  traditional  in  the  sense  that 
money is transferred between accounts. 
During the 1990s there were many, not least within the central bank world, who believed that 
electronic  money  (e-money)  would  replace  if  not  all,  at  least  a  large  part  of  the  smaller 
payments that are made with banknotes and coins. In somewhat simplified terms, one could 
say that e-money is money that has been transferred, for instance, from an account in a bank 
to  some  form  of  computerised  medium,  where  it  is  stored  and  can  then  be  used  for 
payments.  The storage space may be a microprocessor embedded in a plastic card – so-
called smart card – but it may also be in the hard drive of a computer or a central server – 
so-called network money. 
In Sweden at present e-money is not issued nationwide. However, it has existed. In 1998 a 
few of the banks launched the so-called Cash card, which was a prepaid cash card designed 
to replace banknotes and coins for transactions entailing small amounts made at small points 
of sale. Afterwards, one can say that it was a flop. Consumers never liked it. Maybe there 
were  too  few  places  where  one  could  recharge  the  card,  perhaps  the  normal  debit  cards 
were too similar, maybe one believed that the banks should have paid some interest on the 
money when it was transferred to the Cash card? Anyway, it was not a success. At most in 
an individual year the number of transactions amounted to 4.2 million. The Cash card was 
finally discontinued in the autumn of 2004.  
However, it is not just in Sweden where developments have been sluggish. Developments 
have  been  slower  than  expected  in  the  rest  of  Europe  also.  There  are  countries  where 
prepaid cash cards – similar to our Cash card – are used to a relatively large extent, and 
here I am thinking in particular of Belgium and the Netherlands. All in all, however the use of 
prepaid cash cards is modest. 
What  has  grown  in  recent  years  is  the  use  of  so-called  server-based  network  money. 
Companies that manage prepaid payments on the Internet, so-called e-payment companies, 
have  become  increasingly  common.  Neither  buyers  nor  sellers  need  give  sensitive 
information – such as card numbers or account numbers – on the Internet by using these 
companies.  The  most  well-known  e-payment  company  is  PayPal,  which  is  registered  in 
Luxembourg, but which is active around the world. 
Almost exactly ten years ago Stefan Ingves, the current Governor of the Riksbank, held a 
speech on the theme “Electronic money from a central bank perspective”. He then said that 
“the situation today on the e-money front can, put briefly, be described as there being a lot 
                                                 
5  
In 2006, 85 per cent of all giro transfers and other credit transfers were made electronically, the remainder 
were  paper-based.  In  terms  of  value,  96  per  cent  of  these  transactions  were  made  electronically.  Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2008
happening at different places in the world, although a breakthrough on a broad front is still in 
the future”. This summary can probably said to still hold today.6  
But  not  all  development  is  tied  to  e-money.  Mobile  phones  are  now  also  used  to  make 
payments. For example, we can pay our bus and underground journeys by sending a text 
message. A few seconds later we receive a text message back from the operator, confirming 
that a ticket has been purchased and that it can be shown to the driver or conductor. If one 
has a prepaid card the cost is drawn directly, otherwise it will be put on the telephone bill. 
There are shops that have begun to use smart cards. At a coffee shop chain in Stockholm 
one  can  buy  a  plastic  card  for  SEK  20  and  then  charge  it  with  cash  in  any  of  the  chain’s 
shops. If one uses the card one receives a discount when buying coffee and sandwiches. 
There is also a discount on buns and other items. It is evidently rational management at the 
sales outlets and, moreover, is appreciated by the consumers. 
We  Stockholmers  can  also  take  pleasure  in  the  congestion  charges,  where  the  fee  is 
automatically  drawn  from  our  bank  accounts  when  our  cars  are  automatically  registered 
when passing the control points. There are many technical innovations, even with respect to 
account-based payments. 
And how about the future…? 
An important task for us who work at the Riksbank is to assess how the Swedish economy 
will develop in the future. The art of making accurate forecasts fills us with respect. I shall 
therefore  refrain  from  all  categoric  statements  about  what  will  happen  with  payments. 
Developments are steered by technology and I am no engineer. However, allow me to make 
a few reflections and guesses. 
• 
I believe the “cashless society” is as far away as the “paperless society” was when 
one once began to speak of it. There will always be a need for banknotes and coins, 
although  cash  transactions  continue  to  decline  as  a  share  of  GDP.  Cash  is  an 
efficient form of legal tender for certain purposes and will continue to be so.  
The  next  generation  will  use  cards  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  we  do  at  present, 
even for smaller transactions. There are banks today which will, with the permission 
of the parents, issue simple debit cards to children who are 13-years-old and above. 
In addition, payments via text messaging will grow in importance. Mobile phones are 
here to stay.  
Cards  will  develop  technically.  They  will  become  safer  with  chips  instead  of 
magnetic strips and they will have several different functions – identity cards, driving 
licences, passports? Technology appears to have no limits here. The opportunities 
with wireless communication further expand the areas of use.  
Use of e-money will grow. Not cash cards, where there are good substitutes, but the 
server-based  network  money.  As  e-trading  increases  so  too  does  the  need  for 
secure e-payments.  
Finally, I believe that paper-based payments will die a natural death, just as cheques 
once did. They are expensive for the banks and impractical for consumers. In a few 
years  we  will  see  them  on  display  at  the  National  Museum  of  Science  and 
Technology.  
    Thank you! 
                                                 
6   “Electronic money from a central bank perspective”, speech by Stefan Ingves, Sveriges Riksbank, 4 March 
1998. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 5
