Frederic S Mishkin: Monetary policy flexibility, risk management, and 
financial disruptions 
Testimony by Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, 11 January 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 In my remarks today, I would like to consider the rationale for greater flexibility in monetary 
policy during periods of financial disruptions. Before doing so, however, I would like to make 
not just one, but two important disclaimers. First, as usual, my remarks reflect only my own 
views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 
or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System. And second, my comments 
today should not be viewed as suggesting what policy actions I would be likely to advocate at 
the next FOMC meeting; rather, my purpose here is to discuss at a general level what can be 
said about the appropriate framework for monetary policy when we face a financial disruption 
of the sort that we have seen recently.  
I  have  two  reasons  for  making  the  second  disclaimer.  First,  in  some  circumstances,  the 
appropriate near-term path for policy rates can be highly uncertain and may well evolve right 
up until the time of the meeting, depending on the implications of the incoming data. Second, 
as I noted in a speech in late November, I think there is too much focus on what decision will 
be  made  about  the  federal  funds  rate  target  at  the  next  FOMC  meeting  (Mishkin,  2007e). 
What  is  important  for  pricing  most  financial  assets  is  the  path  of  monetary  policy,  not  the 
particular  action  taken  at  a  single  meeting.  For  these  reasons,  I  hope  the  recent 
enhancements  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  communication  strategy  –  especially  the  greater 
prominence of the macroeconomic projections of FOMC participants – will help shift attention 
toward our medium-term objectives and our approach in meeting these objectives.1  
In particular, the Congress has given the Federal Reserve a specific mandate (often referred 
to  as  the  dual  mandate)  of  fostering  the  objectives  of  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment. Therefore, when the economy faces a disruption in financial markets, monetary 
policy  must  aim  at  balancing  the  risks  to  both  economic  growth  and  inflation.  In  the 
remainder of this speech, I will elaborate a bit further about why financial market disruptions 
can  pose  significant  risks  to  the  macroeconomy.  Then  I  will  explain  how  the  science  of 
monetary  policy  can  help  provide  a  conceptual  framework  for  a  systematic  approach  to 
managing  these  risks,  and  I  will  briefly  discuss  how  that  framework  can  be  useful  for 
understanding the course of Federal Reserve policy over the past few months. 
Financial disruptions and macroeconomic risk 
Before  considering  the  appropriate  policy  response  to  strains  in  financial  markets,  it  is 
essential  to  consider  the  sources  of  these  strains  and  the  potential  consequences  for  the 
macroeconomy.  In  general,  the  U.S.  financial  system  is  an  efficient  mechanism  for 
channeling  funds  to  individuals  or  corporations  with  worthy  investment  opportunities, 
because  the  financial  markets  are  highly  competitive  and  provide  strong  incentives  for 
collecting and processing information.  
                                                 
1  
I appreciate the comments and assistance of William English, Andrew Levin, Brian Madigan, Roberto Perli, 
David Reifschneider, and David Wilcox. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 1
Although financial markets and institutions deal with large volumes of information, some of 
this information is by nature asymmetric; that is, one party to a financial contract (typically the 
lender) has less accurate information about the likely distribution of outcomes than does the 
other  party  (typically  the  borrower).2  Historically,  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries 
have  played  a  major  role  in  reducing  the  asymmetry  of  information,  partly  because  these 
firms tend to have long-term relationships with their clients. Recent years have witnessed the 
development  of  new  types  of  financial  institutions  and  of  new  markets  for  trading  financial 
products, and these innovations have had the potential (not always realized) to contribute to 
the efficient flow of information.  
The continuity of this information flow is crucial to the process of price discovery – that is, the 
ability of market participants to assess the fundamental worth of each financial asset. During 
periods  of  financial  distress,  however,  information  flows  may  be  disrupted  and  price 
discovery may be impaired. As a result, such episodes tend to generate greater uncertainty, 
which  contributes  to  higher  credit  spreads  and  greater  reluctance  to  engage  in  market 
transactions.  
As  I  noted  in  another  recent  speech,  financial  disruptions  are  associated  with  two  distinct 
types of risk: valuation risk and macroeconomic risk (Mishkin, 2007d). Valuation risk refers to 
the extent that market participants become more uncertain about the returns on a specific 
asset,  especially  in  cases  where  the  security  is  highly  complex  and  its  underlying 
creditworthiness  is  relatively  opaque.  In  recent  months,  for  example,  this  type  of  risk  has 
been central to the repricing of many structured credit products, as investors have struggled 
to  understand  how  potential  losses  in  subprime  mortgages  might  filter  through  the  various 
layers of securities linked to these loans. 
While valuation risk is relevant for individual investors, monetary policymakers are concerned 
with  macroeconomic  risk.  In  particular,  strains  in  financial  markets  can  spill  over  to  the 
broader economy and have adverse consequences on output and employment. Furthermore, 
an economic downturn tends to generate even greater uncertainty about asset values, which 
could initiate an adverse feedback loop in which the financial disruption restrains economic 
activity; such a situation could lead to greater uncertainty and increased financial disruption, 
causing  a  further  deterioration  in  macroeconomic  activity,  and  so  on.  In  the  academic 
literature,  this  phenomenon  is  generally  referred  to  as  the  financial  accelerator  (Bernanke 
and Gertler, 1989; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1996, 1999). 
The  quality  of  balance  sheets  of  households  and  firms  comprise  a  key  element  of  the 
financial accelerator mechanism, because some of the assets of each borrower may serve 
as collateral for its liabilities. The use of collateral helps mitigate the problem of asymmetric 
information,  because  the  borrower’s  incentive  not  to  engage  in  excessive  risk-taking  is 
strengthened by the threat of losing the collateral: If a default does occur, the lender can take 
title  to  the  borrower’s  collateral  and  thereby  recover  some  or  all  of  the  value  of  the  loan. 
However, a macroeconomic downturn tends to diminish the value of many forms of collateral, 
thereby exacerbating the impact of frictions in credit markets and reinforcing the propagation 
of the adverse feedback loop. 
                                                 
2   Such  asymmetry  leads  to  two  prominent  difficulties  for  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system:  adverse 
selection  and  moral  hazard.  Adverse  selection  arises  when  investments  that  are  most  likely  to  produce  an 
undesirable  (adverse)  outcome  are  the  most  likely  to  be  financed  (selected).  For  example,  investors  who 
intend to take on large amounts of risk are the most likely to be willing to seek out loans because they know 
that they are unlikely to pay them back. Moral hazard arises because a borrower has incentives to invest in 
high-risk projects, in which the borrower does well if the project succeeds but the lender bears a substantial 
loss if the project fails. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Risk management and the science of monetary policy 
Given that a financial market disruption can pose significant risks to the macroeconomy, risk 
management  is  crucial  in  formulating  the  appropriate  response  of  monetary  policy. 
Unfortunately, most existing studies of optimal monetary policy have completely abstracted 
from considerations of macroeconomic risk, because these studies use specific formulations 
or  approximations  which  imply  that  the  design  of  the  optimal  monetary  policy  does  not 
depend  on  the  magnitude  or  direction  of  uncertainty  facing  the  economy  –  an  implication 
referred to as certainty equivalence.  
To elaborate on these issues, it’s necessary for me to proceed at a somewhat more technical 
level, but I promise to use plain English again later in the speech. In particular, the standard 
textbook  approach  to  analyzing  optimal  monetary  policy  utilizes  a  linear-quadratic  (LQ) 
framework,  in  which  the  equations  describing  the  dynamic  behavior  of  the  economy  are 
linear and the objective function specifying the goals of policy is quadratic. For example, in 
light of the dual mandate, monetary policy is often characterized as seeking to minimize a 
loss function comprising the squared value of the inflation gap (that is, actual inflation minus 
desired  inflation)  and  the  squared  value  of  the  output  gap  (that  is,  actual  output  minus 
potential output).  
Under  these  assumptions,  the  optimal  policy  is  certainty  equivalent:  This  policy  can  be 
characterized by a linear time-invariant response to each shock, and the magnitude of these 
responses  does  not  depend  on  the  variances  or  any  other  aspect  of  the  probability 
distribution of the shocks. In such an environment, optimal monetary policy does not focus on 
risk  management.  Furthermore,  when  financial  market  participants  and  wage  and  price 
setters are relatively forward-looking, the optimal policy under commitment is characterized 
by considerable inertia.3
Indeed, the actual course of monetary policy over the past quarter-century has typically been 
very  smooth  in  the  United  States  as  well  as  in  many  other  industrial  economies.  For 
example, the Federal Reserve has usually adjusted the federal funds rate in increments of 25 
or 50 basis points (that is, 1/4 or 1/2 percentage point) and sharp reversals in the funds rate 
path have been rare. Numerous empirical studies have characterized monetary policy using 
Taylor-style rules in which the policy rate responds to the inflation gap and the output gap; 
these  studies  have  generally  found  that  the  fit  of  the  regression  equation  is  improved  by 
including  a  lagged  interest  rate  that  reflects  the  smoothness  of  the  typical  adjustment 
pattern.4
While  an  LQ  framework  may  provide  a  reasonable  approximation  to  how  monetary  policy 
should operate under fairly normal circumstances, this approach is less likely to be adequate 
for thinking about monetary policy when the risk of poor economic performance is unusually 
high. First, the dynamic behavior of the economy may well exhibit nonlinearities, at least in 
response  to  some  shocks  (Hamilton,  1989;  Kim  and  Nelson,  1999;  and  Kim,  Morley,  and 
Piger,  2005).  Furthermore,  the  use  of  a  quadratic  objective  function  does  not  reflect  the 
extent  to  which  most  individuals  have  strong  preferences  for  minimizing  the  incidence  of 
worst-case  scenarios.  Therefore,  given  that  the  central  bank’s  ultimate  goal  should  be  to 
maximize the public welfare, I believe that the design of monetary policy ought to reflect the 
public’s  preferences,  especially  with  respect  to  avoiding  particularly  adverse  economic 
outcomes.  
                                                 
3   The  now-classic  textbook  on  this  topic  is  Woodford  (2003);  refer  also  to  Goodfriend  and  King  (1997); 
Rotemberg  and  Woodford  (1997);  Clarida,  Gali,  and  Gertler  (1999);  King  and  Wolman  (1999);  Erceg, 
Henderson,  and  Levin  (2000);  Benigno  and  Woodford  (2003);  Giannoni  and  Woodford  (2005);  Levin  and 
others (2005); and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2005). 
4   Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, 2000); Sack (2000); English, Nelson, and Sack (2003); Smets and Wouters 
(2003); Levin and others (2005); further discussion is in Bernanke (2004). 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 3
the  degree  of  skewness  and 
Most  of  the  quantitative  studies  of  optimal  monetary  policy  have  also  assumed  that  the 
shocks hitting the economy have a time-invariant Gaussian distribution, that is, a classical 
bell  curve  with  symmetric  and  well-behaved  tails.  In  reality,  however,  the  distribution  of 
shocks hitting the economy is more complex. In some instances, the uncertainty facing the 
economy is clearly skewed in one direction or another; again, this is likely when there are 
significant  financial  disruptions.  The  Federal  Reserve  often  reports  on  our  judgments 
regarding 
the  associated  economic  costs  by  giving 
assessments of the “Balance of Risks” in the press releases that are issued following FOMC 
meetings.  
In  addition,  at  least  in  some  circumstances,  the  shocks  hitting  the  economy  may  exhibit 
excess kurtosis, commonly referred to as tail risk because the probability of relatively large 
disturbances  is  higher  than  would  be  implied  by  a  Gaussian  distribution.  In  that  light,  one 
element of the recent enhancements to the Federal Reserve’s communication strategy is that 
FOMC  participants  now  provide  assessments  of  the  relative  degree  of  uncertainty.  For 
example,  in  the  “Summary  of  Economic  Projections”  issued  in  late  November,  FOMC 
participants indicated that the degree of uncertainty regarding the economic growth outlook 
was  relatively  high  compared  to  the  average  degree  of  uncertainty  over  the  past  two 
decades. This account could be interpreted as a statement that the Committee perceived the 
tail risk as unusually large. 
With a nonquadratic objective function (consistent with the importance of uncertainty for the 
course of monetary policy) as well as nonlinear dynamics and non-Gaussian shocks, optimal 
monetary policy will also be nonlinear and will tend to focus on risk management. Policy in 
this  setting  tends  to  respond  aggressively  when  a  large  shock  becomes  evident;  for  this 
reason,  the  degree  of  inertia  in  such  cases  may  be  markedly  lower  than  in  more  routine 
circumstances. Indeed, as I will argue, I believe that financial disruptions of the sort that have 
been experienced in recent months tend to have highly nonlinear effects on the economy. 
Thus,  compared  with  the  standard case,  optimal  policy  may  well  involve  much  more  rapid 
adjustment – a pattern that I will refer to as policy flexibility. 
Formal  models  of  how  monetary  policy  should  respond  to  financial  disruptions  are 
unfortunately  not  yet  available,  and  this  is  an  area  of  research  that  I  plan  to  pursue  with 
Board staff. However, I do have some thoughts about what a systematic framework should 
look  like,  and  I  would  like  to  share  them  with  you  without  going  into  any  further  technical 
details.  
A risk-management framework for dealing with financial disruptions 
Although  the  assumptions  behind  the  LQ  framework  might  be  reasonable  during  normal 
times,  financial  disruptions  are  likely  to  produce  large  deviations  from  these  assumptions, 
making it especially important to adopt a more flexible framework for analyzing the behavior 
of a central bank that practices risk management. What factors come into play with special 
vigor  during  financial  disruptions?  First,  financial  disruptions  are  likely  to  lead  to  highly 
nonlinear  behavior  because  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit  can  shift  suddenly. 
Furthermore, even though linear approximations of the financial accelerator mechanism have 
typically been used in recent quantitative studies, this mechanism is, in fact, highly nonlinear 
(Levin,  Natalucci,  and  Zakrajšek,  2004).  Finally,  because  financial  disruptions,  if  severe 
enough,  raise  the  probability  of  particularly  adverse  outcomes,  the  standard  approach  of 
employing  a  quadratic  approximation  of  the  objective  function  may  not  be  sufficiently 
accurate  to  convey  the  extent  to  which  policymakers  seek  to  avoid  such  outcomes  in 
maximizing the public’s welfare.  
In  light  of  these  risk-management  considerations,  how  should  monetary  policy  respond  to 
financial disruptions? 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Periods  of  financial  instability  are  characterized  by  valuation  risk  and  macroeconomic  risk. 
Monetary policy cannot – and should not – aim at minimizing valuation risk, but policy should 
aim at reducing macroeconomic risk. By cutting interest rates to offset the negative effects of 
financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity, monetary policy can reduce the likelihood 
that a financial disruption might set off an adverse feedback loop. The resulting reduction in 
uncertainty can then make it easier for the markets to collect the information that facilitates 
price discovery, thus hastening the return of normal market functioning. 
To  achieve  this  result  most  effectively,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  timely,  decisive,  and 
flexible.  First,  timely  action  is  crucial  when  an  episode  of  financial  instability  becomes 
sufficiently  severe  to  threaten  the  core  macroeconomic  objectives  of  the  central  bank.  In 
such circumstances, waiting too long to ease policy could result in further deterioration of the 
macroeconomy and might well increase the overall amount of easing that would eventually 
be  needed.  Therefore,  monetary  policy  must  be  at  least  as  preemptive  in  responding  to 
financial  shocks  as  in  responding  to  other  types  of  disturbances  to  the  economy.  When 
financial  markets  are  working  well,  monetary  policy  can  respond  primarily  to  the  incoming 
flow  of  economic  data  about  production,  employment,  and  inflation.  When  a  financial 
disruption occurs, however, greater consideration needs to be given to indicators of market 
liquidity,  credit  spreads,  and  other  financial  market  measures  that  can  provide  information 
about sharp changes in the magnitude of tail risk to the macroeconomy.  
Second,  policymakers  should  be  prepared  for  decisive  action  in  response  to  financial 
disruptions.  In  such  circumstances,  the  most  likely  outcome  –  referred  to  as  the  modal 
forecast – for the economy may be fairly benign, but there may be a significant risk of more 
severe adverse outcomes. In such circumstances, the central bank may prefer to take out 
insurance by easing the stance of policy further than if the distribution of probable outcomes 
were  perceived  as  fairly  symmetric  around  the  modal  forecast.  Moreover,  in  such 
circumstances,  these  policy  actions  should  not  be  interpreted  by  the  public  or  market 
participants as implying a deterioration in the central bank’s assessment of the most likely 
outcome  for  the  economy,  but  rather  as  an  appropriate  form  of  risk  management  that 
reduces the risk of particularly adverse outcomes.  
Third,  policy  flexibility  is  crucial  throughout  the  evolution  of  a  financial  market  disruption. 
During the onset of the episode, this flexibility may be evident from the decisive easing of 
policy  that  is  intended  to  forestall  the  contractionary  effects  of  the  disruption  and  provide 
insurance  against  the  downside  risks  to  the  macroeconomy.  However,  it  is  important  to 
recognize that financial markets can also turn around quickly, thereby reducing the drag on 
the economy as well as the degree of tail risk. Therefore, the central bank needs to monitor 
credit  spreads  and  other  incoming  data  for  signs  of  financial  market  recovery  and,  if 
necessary,  take  back  some  of  the  insurance;  thus,  at  each  stage  of  the  episode,  the 
appropriate monetary policy may exhibit much less smoothing than would be typical in other 
circumstances.  
Of course, while policymakers may need to react aggressively to financial market information 
that  indicates  a  significant  shift  in  macroeconomic  risks,  monetary  policy  would  typically 
move back toward a more incremental approach once the risks to the macroeconomy have 
returned to more usual levels. 
Risk management and the anchoring of inflation expectations 
An important proviso to my discussion thus far involves the other part of the dual mandate, 
price stability. A central bank must always be concerned with inflation as well as growth. As I 
have emphasized in an earlier speech about inflation dynamics, the behavior of inflation is 
significantly influenced by the public’s expectations about where inflation is likely to head in 
the  long  run  (Mishkin,  2007a).  Therefore,  preemptive  actions  of  the  sort  I  have  described 
here would be counterproductive if these actions caused an increase in inflation expectations 
and the underlying rate of inflation; in other words, the flexibility to act preemptively against a 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 5
financial  disruption  presumes  that  inflation  expectations  are  well  anchored  and  unlikely  to 
rise during a period of temporary monetary easing. Indeed, as I have argued elsewhere, a 
commitment to a strong nominal anchor is crucial for both aspects of the dual mandate, that 
is,  for  achieving  maximum  employment  as  well  as  for  keeping  inflation  under  control 
(Mishkin, 2007b).  
How  can  a  central  bank  keep  inflation  expectations  solidly  anchored  so  it  can  respond 
preemptively  to  financial  disruptions?  The  central  bank  has  to  have  earned  credibility  with 
financial  markets  and  the  public  through  a  record  of  previous  actions  to  maintain  low  and 
stable inflation. Furthermore, the central bank needs to clearly indicate the rationale for its 
policy actions. Policymakers also need to monitor information about underlying inflation and 
longer-run  inflation  expectations,  and  if  the  evidence  indicates  that  these  inflation 
expectations  have  begun  rising  significantly,  the  central  bank  should  be  prepared  to  hold 
steady or even raise the policy rate.  
The Federal Reserve’s recent monetary policy decisions 
The  framework  I  have  outlined  here  can  be  useful  in  understanding  the  rationale  for  the 
recent decisions of the Federal Reserve and our policy approach going forward. Yesterday, 
Chairman Bernanke provided a detailed discussion of economic and financial developments 
and of the Federal Reserve’s policy strategy, so here I will just relate some key points of his 
discussion to the major themes that I have emphasized today.  
First,  we  are  proceeding  in  a  timely  manner  in  countering  any  developments  that  might 
threaten economic or financial stability. The FOMC has not been basing its decisions solely 
on the incoming flow of economic data; for example, the sequence of interest rate cuts was 
initiated last fall even though growth in the gross domestic product had been quite strong in 
the third quarter. Rather, our policy approach has reflected the rapid deterioration of financial 
market  conditions,  which  has  contributed  to  a  worsening  of  the  economic  outlook  and  the 
emergence of pronounced downside risks to economic growth and employment. 
Second, in my view, the Federal Reserve has been acting and will continue to act decisively, 
in  the  sense  that  our  policy  strategy  reflects  the  evolution  of  the  balance  of  risks  and  not 
simply  a  change  in  the  modal  outlook  for  the  macroeconomy.  The  disruption  in  financial 
markets poses a substantial downside risk to the outlook for economic growth, and adverse 
economic or financial news has the potential to cause further strains. In that light, the Federal 
Reserve’s  policy  strategy  is  aimed  at  providing  insurance  to  help  avoid  more  severe 
macroeconomic outcomes.  
Third, because we recognize that financial and economic conditions can change quickly, the 
Federal  Reserve  is  prepared  to  respond  flexibly  to  incoming  information.  Of  course,  in 
making its decisions, the Federal Reserve also gives careful consideration to the outlook and 
risks  associated  with  the  second  aspect  of  our  dual  mandate,  namely,  price  stability. 
Because  longer-run  inflation  expectations  appear  to  have  remained  reasonably  well 
anchored, in my view, the easing of the stance of policy in response to deteriorating financial 
conditions  seems  unlikely  to  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  outlook  for  inflation. 
Nonetheless,  we  will  continue 
inflation  and  inflation 
expectations, especially given the potential risks to price stability that are associated with the 
rapid  increase  in  energy  prices  and  the  depreciation  of  the  dollar.  In short,  the  FOMC  will 
determine the future course of monetary policy in light of the evolution of the macroeconomic 
outlook  and  the  balance  of  risks  to  our  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  price 
stability.  
incoming  data  on 
to  monitor 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Conclusions 
The monetary policy that is appropriate during an episode of financial market disruption is 
likely to be quite different than in times of normal market functioning. When financial markets 
experience  a  significant  disruption,  a  systematic  approach  to  risk  management  requires 
policymakers to be preemptive in responding to the macroeconomic implications of incoming 
financial market information, and decisive actions may be required to reduce the likelihood of 
an  adverse  feedback  loop.  The  central  bank  also  needs  to  exhibit  flexibility  –  that  is,  less 
inertia than would otherwise be typical – not only in moving decisively to reduce downside 
risks arising from a financial market disruption, but also in being prepared to take back some 
of that insurance in response to a recovery in financial markets or an upward shift in inflation 
risks. 
Finally,  while  I  have  argued  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  decisive  and  timely  in 
responding  to  a  financial  market  disruption,  a  lot  of  art  as  well  as  science  is  involved  in 
determining the severity and duration of the disruption and the associated implications for the 
macroeconomy (Mishkin, 2007c). Indeed, assessing the macroeconomic risks to output and 
inflation  in  such  circumstances  remains  among  the  most  difficult  challenges  faced  by 
monetary  policymakers.  Furthermore,  a  central  bank  may  well  be  able  to  employ  non-
monetary  tools  –  such  as  liquidity  provision  –  to  help  alleviate  the  adverse  impact  from 
financial disruptions. All of these considerations must be taken into account in determining 
the most appropriate course of monetary policy.  
References 
Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford (2003). “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A 
Linear-Quadratic  Approach,” 
in  Mark  Gertler  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2003. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 271-332. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2004).  “Gradualism,”  speech  delivered  at  an  economics  luncheon  co-
sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  (Seattle  Branch)  and  the 
University of Washington, held in Seattle, May 20. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  and  Mark  Gertler  (1989).  “Agency  Costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. 
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1996). “The Financial Accelerator and 
the Flight to Quality”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 78 (February), pp. 1-15. 
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a 
Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework”,  in  John  B.  Taylor  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds., 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1341-93. 
Clarida,  Richard,  Jordi  Galí,  and  Mark  Gertler  (1998).  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  in  Practice: 
Some International Evidence”, European Economic Review, vol. 42 (June), pp. 1033-67. 
Clarida,  Richard,  Jordi  Galí,  and  Mark  Gertler  (1999).  “The  Science  of  Monetary  Policy:  A 
New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-
707. 
Clarida,  Richard,  Jordi  Galí,  and  Mark  Gertler  (2000).  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  and 
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 
115 (February), pp. 147-80. 
English,  William  B.,  William  R.  Nelson,  and  Brian  P.  Sack  (2003).  “Interpreting  the 
Significance of the Lagged Interest Rate in Estimated Monetary Policy Rules”, Contributions 
to Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (no. 1), article 5. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 7
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). “Optimal Monetary 
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46 
(October), pp. 281-313. 
Giannoni,  Marc  P.  ,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2005).  “Optimal  Inflation-Targeting  Rules”,  in 
Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Inflation  Targeting.  Chicago:  University  of 
Chicago Press, pp. 93-172. 
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King (1997). “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role 
of  Monetary  Policy”, 
in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Julio  J.  Rotemberg,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83. 
Hamilton,  James  D.  (1989).  “A  New  Approach  to  the  Economic  Analysis  of  Nonstationary 
Time Series and the Business Cycle”, Econometrica, vol. 57 (March), pp. 357-84. 
Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles Nelson (1999). “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable? 
A Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle”, Review 
of Economics and Statistics, vol. 81 (November), pp. 608-16. 
Kim, Chang-Jin, James Morley, and Jeremy Piger (2005). “Nonlinearity and the Permanent 
Effects of Recessions”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 20 (no. 2), pp. 291-309.  
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1999). “What Should the Monetary Authority Do 
When Prices Are Sticky?” in John Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, pp. 349-98. 
Levin,  Andrew  T.,  Fabio  M.  Natalucci,  and  Egon  Zakrajšek  (2004).  “The  Magnitude  and 
Cyclical Behavior of Financial Market Frictions”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2004-70. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. 
Levin,  Andrew,  Alexei  Onatski,  John  C.  Williams,  and  Noah  Williams  (2005).  “Monetary 
Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models”, in Mark Gertler and 
Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
pp. 229-88. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007a).  “Inflation  Dynamics”,  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual  Macro 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23.  
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007b). “Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate”, speech delivered at 
Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.  
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007c).  “Will  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  of  a  Science?”  Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, September.  
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007d). “Financial Instability and Monetary Policy”, speech delivered at 
the Risk USA 2007 Conference, New York, November 5.  
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007e).  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Enhanced  Communication  Strategy 
and  the  Science  of  Monetary  Policy”,  speech  delivered  to  the  Undergraduate  Economics 
Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29.  
Rotemberg,  Julio,  and  Michael  Woodford  (1997).  “An  Optimization-Based  Econometric 
Framework  for  the  Evaluation  of  Monetary  Policy”,  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Julio  J. 
Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 
297-346. 
Sack,  Brian  (2000).  “Does  the  Fed  Act  Gradually?  A  VAR  Analysis”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, vol. 46 (August), pp. 229-56. 
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2005). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a 
Medium-Scale  Macroeconomic  Model”,  in  Mark  Gertler  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  eds.,  NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 383-425. 
8 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Smets,  Frank,  and  Raf  Wouters  (2003).  “An  Estimated  Dynamic  Stochastic  General 
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 
(September), pp. 1123-75. 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 9
