Stanley Fischer: Remarks about financial supervision authorities 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, to “TheMarker” Capital 
Markets Conference, Tel Aviv, 21 May 2008. 
 The Capital Markets Conference is taking place this year during one of the most fascinating 
periods as far as the situation in the global financial markets is concerned. I am referring of 
course  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  Although  the  crisis  is  not  yet  over,  it  has  already 
confronted the authorities, particularly the supervisory authorities, with important questions.  
I  would  like  to  exploit  this  platform  to  make  some  remarks  about  the  financial  supervision 
authorities.  It  is  important,  right  at  the  outset,  to  distinguish  between  two  main  aspects  of 
financial supervision: 
A) 
The  first  aspect  relates  to  the  difference  between  sectorial  supervision  and 
functional  supervision.  The  traditional  approach  is  the  sectorial  one.  In  this 
approach  separate  authorities  supervise  different  sectors:  the  banks,  insurance 
companies, provident and pension funds, and also a securities authority. That is the 
current approach in Israel, with banking supervision on one side, and supervision of 
insurance and provident funds and pension funds on another. 
The main drawback of this approach is the existence of separate, and sometimes 
dissimilar,  supervision  of  different  financial  institutions  that  may  in  fact  engage  in 
similar activities, such as giving credit. A clear example of this in Israel is the fact 
that  both  banks,  supervised  by  the  Supervisor  of  Banks,  and  also  insurance 
companies, supervised by the Capital Markets, Insurance and Savings Division of 
the  Ministry  of  Finance,  offer  credit  to  businesses.  Clearly,  risk  management  in 
these entities should be subject to the same standards of supervision. 
This  problem  can  be  solved  simply,  by  merging,  partially  or  totally,  the  various 
supervisory  authorities.  The  best  known  example  of  such  unification  is  that  of  the 
Financial Services Authority (FSA) established in the UK, which regulates the entire 
financial system in the UK. 
Other models exist, too, in different countries, such as partial mergers of financial 
supervision.  In  Israel’s  case,  the  solution  to  the  problem  of  lack  of  uniformity  in 
supervision  of  financial  institutions  that  engage  in  similar  activities  is  to  unify  the 
supervision of banks with the supervision of insurance, provident funds and pension 
funds, with the Securities Authority continuing as a separate entity. 
This  solution  can  be  implemented  relatively  simply,  and  requires  fewer  resources 
and changes than would full unification, which is why this model is more appropriate 
for small, open economies such as Israel’s. 
The second aspect of financial supervision is the location of the financial supervision 
authority. In this context, a key question is the relationship between the supervisory 
authority or authorities and the central bank. 
First,  it  is  important  that  the  financial  supervision  authority  operate  as  an 
independent entity free from political considerations. Second, an important lesson to 
be learned from the current financial crisis is that it is essential for the central bank 
to be very closely involved in the supervision of the financial institutions. This is the 
present  situation  in  nearly  all  countries,  with  the  central  banks  bearing  the 
responsibility for the economy’s financial stability, and having the unique capacity of 
being  able  to  inject  liquidity  into  the  financial  markets  as  necessary,  and  of  being 
able to act as the “lender of last resort” in a financial crisis. 
B) 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 1
It is thus essential that the central bank be able to make decisions quickly in, and 
before, a financial crisis, based on comprehensive and detailed information, and in 
real time. This is of special importance due to the risks to which financial institutions 
are exposed, against the background of the development of new, sophisticated, and 
sometimes  unfamiliar,  financial  instruments.  The  implications  of  these  risks  are 
evident in the current crisis. 
The need for a very close connection between the central bank and the supervision 
of  banks  features  in  an  important  report  issued  in  April  this  year  by  the  Financial 
Stability Forum (FSF) entitled “Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”. 
The conclusion in the report – stressing the need for central bank involvement in the 
supervision of banks and other financial institutions with similar impact on financial 
stability – receives strong support from the current crisis. Thus, for example, the US 
Department of the Treasury has proposed that the Fed should be granted greater 
responsibility  for  financial  stability,  including  the  authority  to  supervise  important 
financial institutions not currently subject to its supervision. 
In the UK too the current strict separation of the FSA from the central bank is being 
reconsidered in light of the Northern Rock episode. 
To  summarize:  the  conclusion drawn  from  the  current  financial  crisis by  nearly  all 
those who have analyzed the situation is that the involvement of the central bank in 
the supervision of financial institutions should be extended and enhanced. 
In Israel’s case, the conclusion is that supervision of financial institutions, i.e., the 
banks, and insurance, provident and pension funds should be brought together in 
the Bank of Israel. 
I  return  now  to  the  distinction  between  sectorial  and  functional  supervision.  A  notable 
example  of  the  functional  approach  to  financial  supervision  is  the  model  adopted  in  the 
Netherlands,  known  as  the  twin  peaks  model.  This  model  separates  the  two  functions  of 
financial supervision: 
i. 
ii. 
Supervision of financial institutions’ risk management (prudential supervision); 
Supervision of conduct of business, covering such subjects as transparency and full 
disclosure  by  institutions,  fair  relations  between  them  and  their  customers,  and 
consumer protection. 
In  the  Netherlands,  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions’  risk  management  is  the 
responsibility of the central bank, while supervision of business conduct is performed by a 
separate authority. Another model is the Irish one, where the central bank supervises both 
financial institutions’ risk management and their business conduct. In Australia, in contrast, 
the  central  bank  is  not  responsible  for  either  supervision  of  risk  management  by  financial 
institutions or their business conduct. 
If the Bank of Israel is given the responsibility for the supervision of financial institutions, it 
would be advisable to adopt the functional supervision approach, in other words, to separate 
the two supervisory functions – the supervision of financial institutions’ risk management and 
the supervision of their business conduct. 
Later,  after  some  years’  experience,  the  situation  can  be  reviewed,  and  the  question 
considered of whether supervision of business conduct should be transferred from the Bank 
of Israel to a new authority that would be established specifically for that purpose. 
To  conclude:  financial  supervision  is  one  of  the  most  important  issues  affecting  the 
functioning and development of the financial markets and the economy as a whole. In Israel 
the issue assumed even greater import with the implementation of the recommendations of 
the  Bachar  Committee,  and  at  this  time  it  has  come  to  the  fore  again  in  light  of  the 
implications of the global financial crisis.  
2 
 BIS Review 66/2008
After  examining  the  question  very  closely,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  conclusions 
being  drawn  in  the  major  financial  institutions  around  the  world,  we  recommend  that  the 
supervision  of  banks  be  merged  with  the  supervision  of  insurance,  provident  funds  and 
pension  funds,  within  the  Bank  of  Israel.  It  is  advisable  to  switch  then  to  the  functional 
supervision  approach,  i.e.,  to  distinguish  between  the  supervision  of  risk  management  in 
financial institutions and supervision of their business conduct. At a later stage, after some 
years, we can examine the question of whether the supervision of business conduct should 
be transferred from the Bank of Israel to another authority. 
BIS Review 66/2008 
 3
