Jean-Claude Trichet: The current state of the euro area and its future 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  “The  euro’s  10th  anniversary:  history  and  presence  of  the  euro”,  Munich, 
10 July 2008. 
 Meine Damen und Herren, 
es ist mir eine große Ehre und Freude, hier am heutigen Tag über den Euroraum in seiner 
derzeitigen  Form  und  in  der  Zukunft  sprechen  zu  dürfen.  Noch  vor  wenigen  Jahrzehnten 
wäre  eine  einheitliche  Währung  in  Europa  für  viele  Beobachter  undenkbar  gewesen.  Und 
doch feierten wir, wie Sie wissen, vor Kurzem das zehnjährige Bestehen der EZB und somit 
auch  des  ESZB,  des  Europäischen  Systems  der  Zentralbanken.  Seit  der  Einführung  des 
Euro im Januar 1999 konzentriert sich die EZB auf die Gewährleistung der Preisstabilität im 
Euroraum, ihr vorrangiges Ziel. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and a pleasure to be invited here today to speak about the current state 
of the euro area and its future. Not many decades ago, a single currency in Europe would 
have been unthinkable for many observers. And yet, as you know, we have just celebrated 
the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  creation  of  the  ECB  and,  for  that  matter,  the  ESCB –  the 
European System of Central Banks. Since the launch of the euro in January 1999, the ECB 
has focused on preserving price stability in the euro area, its primary objective.  
You  all  know  very  well  that  inflation  rates  have  continued  to  rise  since  the  autumn  of  last 
year. Inflation is expected to remain above the level consistent with price stability for longer 
than we previously thought. Last week we had to act to discourage second-round effects and 
to counteract the increasing upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Our decision 
will  contribute  to  delivering  price stability  over  the  medium  term.  As  I will  argue  in  my  talk 
today, a lot depends on the solidly anchoring of inflation expectations. 
Over the last ten years, the ECB has gained a great deal of respect and credibility. Since the 
launch of the euro, the average inflation rate has been just slightly above 2%. And this has 
been  achieved,  despite  various  shocks  that  have  hit  the  euro  area  over  these  years, 
including the ongoing strong global increase in commodity prices that is affecting Europe and 
the rest of the world. In the decades before the launch of the euro, average annual inflation 
rates in many EU Member States were very significantly higher. This is a remarkable result. 
It shows that we have inherited the credibility that was the privilege of the most successful 
currencies before the euro. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  of  our  achievements  over  these  past  ten 
momentous years. They call for celebration. But over and beyond our performance in terms 
of price stability, I would also like to share with you reflections on the economic performance 
of the euro area and some of the remaining challenges that the ECB and the euro area as a 
whole face as they enter their second decade. I will then make a few remarks on the sound 
economic management of our Monetary Union.  
On the achievements of the euro area 
1.  
The new monetary policy framework – with the ECB setting the monetary policy for the entire 
euro  area  –  was  quickly  understood  and  trusted  from  the  very  first  days.  The  ECB  has  a 
clear mandate – to safeguard price stability in the euro area – and is independent. In 2003, 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
the ECB clarified that price stability meant maintaining inflation rates close to and below 2% 
over the medium term. This is a clear yardstick against which the public can judge us. While 
being custodian of the trust of the citizens of the euro area, we are also fully accountable to 
them,  and  endeavour  to  explain  our  actions.  Over  these  ten  years,  this  framework  has 
contributed to anchoring longer-term inflation expectations.  
We all know that price stability is essential for the success of a large economic and monetary 
union. It protects the incomes of all of us, and particularly those of the most vulnerable and 
poorest  of  our  fellow  citizens.  An  aspect  that  is  often  neglected  is  that,  thanks  to  price 
stability, diverse other benefits follow. Price stability is a precondition for sustainable growth 
and job creation and, ultimately, social cohesion.1 It is also a major contribution for financial 
stability. 
The euro also promotes the functioning of our vast continental market and, therefore, helps 
bring about a true single market for goods, services, capital and labour. During the first nine 
years  of  the  euro,  15.7  million  new  jobs  were  created  in  the  euro  area,  and  the 
unemployment rate is now at the lowest level since the early 1980s. Our common currency 
has  also  helped  to  protect  the  euro  area  economy  from  diverse  global  shocks,  as  well  as 
from the considerable turbulence of the last few years. Let me offer you two examples of the 
credibility of the ECB and the benefits that this brings.  
• 
Over recent months, we have seen that actual inflation may temporarily diverge from 
our medium-term objective. The first example of the credibility of the ECB is that 
long-term inflation expectations have remained solidly anchored. In fact, they have 
remained  well  anchored  over  the  entire  ten  years.  This  is  remarkable  considering 
the series of adverse economic disturbances that have hit the euro area since its 
inception.  
The  second  example  of  the  credibility  of  the  ECB  is  that  medium  and  long-term 
market rates of the euro are at the same low levels in terms of embedded inflation 
expectations  and  risk  premia  as  those  experienced  by  the  most  stable  national 
currencies  prior  to  it.  In  other  words,  we  have  been  instrumental  in  securing  the 
lowest market interest rates on a 5, 10 up to 50-year basis. Most euro area countries 
have  benefited  from  significantly  better  financing  conditions  than  in  the  1990s,  a 
situation which has also supported fiscal consolidation.2 
 The euro has also helped strengthen trade and financial linkages across euro area countries. 
There  is  clear  evidence  that  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  and  the  associated 
increase in price and cost transparency have fostered both intra and extra-euro area trade in 
goods and services. In fact, the sum of intra-euro area exports and imports increased from 
about  31%  of  GDP  in  1998  to  around  40%  in  2007  –  approximately  9  percentage  points. 
During the same period, extra-euro area trade growth even exceeded that in intra-euro area 
trade,  rising  13  percentage  points  from  31%  to  44%  of  GDP  in  2007.  Hence,  there  is  no 
“fortress Europe”.  
                                                 
1   Several studies have shown how harmful inflation (and inflation volatility) can be. Let me also remind you that 
empirical  evidence  shows  there  is  a  negative  relationship  between  inflation  and  output  growth,  with  a  100-
basis  point  permanent  increase  in  inflation  being  associated  with  a  10  to  30-basis  point  decrease  in  trend 
output growth (see the May 2008 issue of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin). 
2   After the transition to the euro, the yield curve was fully in line with the benchmark set by the most credible 
currencies before EMU. As a result, in some euro area countries, medium and long-term market interest rates 
fell  to  unprecedented  levels  when  the  euro  was  introduced  and  have  remained  there  since.  This  is  a 
phenomenal  benefit.  In  fact,  most  euro  area  countries  have  benefited  from  significantly  better  financing 
conditions than in the 1990s, a situation that has supported fiscal consolidation. For instance, in the run-up to 
Stage Three of EMU, fiscal deficits were reduced considerably, mainly on account of falling interest payments, 
from an average of 5.2% of GDP between 1990 and 1998 to 3.4% between 1999 and 2007 (see ECB, “10th 
Anniversary of the ECB”, Special Edition of the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, June 2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
Let  me  also  mention  that,  when  I  travel  around  Europe,  I  feel  that  a  shift  in  mindset  is 
gradually  taking  place.  In  fact,  firms  are  becoming  more  conscious  of  the  euro  area 
dimension  of  their  actions  and  decisions.  Households  are  increasingly  conscious  of  the 
opportunities offered by an expanded economic and financial area.  
The  launch  of  the  euro  has  also  coincided  with  a  remarkable  deepening  of  financial 
integration.  The  financial  landscape  has  already  changed  a  great  deal  in  most  market 
segments, and is continuing to change. The euro is acting as a catalyst for a gradual portfolio 
reallocation  away  from  holdings  of  domestic  financial  instruments  towards  holdings  of 
financial instruments issued elsewhere within the euro area. For instance, euro area cross-
border  holdings  of  long-term  debt  securities  have  increased  strongly  –  from  about  10%  of 
total stocks at the end of the 1990s to nearly 60% in 2006. Furthermore, euro area residents 
almost doubled the amount of cross-border holdings of equity issued by euro area residents, 
from 15% to 29%, between 1997 and 2006, in particular on account of institutional investors. 
As  for  capital  flows,  the  euro  has  boosted  foreign  direct  investment  –  particularly  cross-
border  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  manufacturing  –  and  portfolio  flows  across  euro  area 
countries. 
Well-integrated  financial  markets  and  diversified  portfolios  reduce  the  extent  to  which  the 
saving  and  spending  decisions  of  firms  and  households  are  dependent  on  economic  and 
financial  developments  in  a  specific  country,  region  or  sector.  As  a  result,  credit  and  risk-
sharing channels are increasingly helping to attenuate the impact of shocks in a specific euro 
area country or sector. 
Let me mention also one important aspect. We live in an era of rapid technological progress. 
Competitive  forces  are  reshaping  global  manufacturing,  the  financial  landscape  and  the 
sharing  of  wealth.  Large  demographic  changes  are  also  under  way.  The  impact  of  these 
“mega-trends” is very substantial, although it is difficult to quantify them precisely.  
In my view, the euro area as a whole has exhibited resilience to such external developments. 
It  is,  as  a  whole,  significantly  more  resilient  than  many  of  its  individual  member  countries 
were before the launch of the euro.3 The euro area has been a source of stability.  
In short, the current state of the euro area is one of increasing interdependence and ongoing 
integration.  Over  these  ten  years,  we  have  observed  greater  price  stability,  greater 
macroeconomic stability, as well as increasing economic and financial integration. However, 
despite these achievements, there is no room for complacency, and a great deal still needs 
to be accomplished. 
I  now  want  to  put  forward  the  argument  that  several  changes  in  this  second  decade  and 
beyond  will  have  to  come  from  the  “E”  in  EMU:  namely  that  there  is  a  need  for  further 
substantial efforts and reforms on the economic side. In other words, I argue that there is a 
need for a sound economic management. This has two facets. The first is that the overall 
level of economic performance in the euro area needs to improve. Think, for example, of the 
question as to how the euro area as a whole might raise its potential growth…and actually 
grow at such a higher level. The second facet is that we need to understand and address 
diversity of economic performance across the euro area. Think, for example, of the question 
as to the extent to which euro area countries differ in terms of economic performance. I will 
deal with these aspects in turn.  
                                                 
3   Not so long ago, the impact of movements of the Deutsche Mark against the US dollar was often aggravated 
by similar movements between the currencies that have now been replaced by the euro. This can no longer 
happen. This increasing resilience is illustrated by the fact that the major shocks of the last ten years have not 
played an important role in the dispersion of output growth. In other words, they have not contributed to the 
economic diversity that I will now go on to discuss. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
On the economic performance of the euro area 
2.  
The  achievements  I  have  just  described  have  accompanied  an  impressive  performance  in 
terms  of  job  creation.  From  the  start  of  EMU  to  the  end  of  last  year,  as  I  have  already 
mentioned,  the  number  of  people  in  employment  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  by  15.7 
million, compared with an increase of only some 5 million in the previous nine years, and the 
euro area unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level since the early 1980s. Of course, 
the  surge  in  employment  cannot  be  attributed  solely  to  the  euro.  It  also  reflects  corporate 
restructuring, the progress made on structural reforms and overall wage moderation in most 
countries.  
However,  Europe  is  far  from  having  exhausted  its  potential  for  further  increases  in  labour 
participation rates and employment. Let me flag just a few facts. The overall employment rate 
in  the  euro  area  remains  modest  by  international  standards  –  65.7%  in  the  euro  area, 
compared with 72% in the United States – and the unemployment rate is still clearly too high 
– over 7% in the euro area. More specifically, while the employment rate of prime-age men in 
the euro area is comparable with that in the United States, considerable disparities remain 
when  we  look  at  employment  rates  among  the  young,  among  women  and  among  older 
workers.4 
Labour  market  reforms  appear  to  be  even  more  appropriate  if  we  consider  that  growth 
performance  will  increasingly  be  constrained  by  relatively  low  population  growth  rates  and 
population ageing. Since the early 1990s, the population of the euro area has been growing 
at a yearly rate of only 0.4%, compared with 1.1% in the United States. 
Europe has room to develop its growth potential. Since the early 1990s, real GDP has 
grown,  on  average,  by  2.1%  in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  2.8%  in  the  United  States. 
Since  the  start  of  EMU,  the  annual  growth  rate  for  the  euro  area  has  averaged  2.2%  per 
year, compared with 2.7% in the United States. Even if one has to recognise that the euro 
area did slightly better than the US in terms of GDP growth per capita, it remains that the 
euro area’s potential output growth has moved to the lower bound of its previously estimated 
range of 2-2.5%. A low trend growth in labour productivity explains, in large part, the modest 
growth performance. During the 1980s, hourly labour productivity in the euro area grew, on 
average,  by  2.3%,  while  it  declined  to  1.8%  in  the  1990s  and  decreased  further  to  1.2% 
between 1999 and 2007. By contrast, hourly labour productivity growth in the United States 
accelerated from 1.2% to 1.6% and then to 2.1% over the same periods.5 
What can be done to enhance labour productivity? In recent years, we have seen rising 
levels  of  employment,  particularly  in  the  unskilled  segment  of  the  labour  market.  This  has 
certainly  contributed  to  the  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth.  However,  to  a  large 
extent, there has also been a significant slowdown in total factor productivity (TFP) growth. 
TFP growth is generally taken as a measure of technological progress and improvement in 
the organisation and overall efficiency of production.6 There are many factors behind the low 
                                                 
4  
In  2007,  for  instance,  the  female  employment  rate  was  58%  in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  66%  in  the 
United States in 2006; among older workers, it was 43.3%, compared with 61.7% in the United States in 2006, 
while the youth employment rate was 38%, compared with 54.2% in the United States in 2006. In the case of 
the  euro  area,  these  features  appear  to  be  consistent  with  an  “insider-outsider”  characterisation  of  the 
European labour market, where structural impediments resulting from the legal and regulatory environment, 
high taxes on labour and rigidities associated with wage regulations may prevent those groups “at the margin” 
from actively participating in the labour market. 
5   Euro area data on hours worked per worker in 2007 are assumed to be constant. US data on hours worked 
per  worker  are  estimated  using  OECD  data  for  2006  and  2007.  The  source  of  the  data  is  the  AMECO 
database. 
6   According  to  the  European  Commission,  total  factor  productivity  grew,  on  average,  by  1.6%  in  the  1980s, 
before falling to 1.1% in the 1990s and to 0.7% between 1999 and 2007. The countries that have managed to 
exploit  the  efficiency  gains  resulting,  in  particular,  from  new  technology  have  enjoyed  stronger  labour 
productivity  growth.  For  instance,  in  the  last  ten  years,  investment  in  information  and  communication 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2008
growth  in  TFP.  Unfortunately,  most  European  economies  do  not  incorporate  appropriate 
incentives  to  invest  in  real  and  human  capital,  to  innovate  and  raise  the  flexibility  and 
adaptability of firms when their environment changes.7 
To sum up, the remarkable labour market performance observed in the euro area since its 
creation could even be improved upon. Rising productivity must also contribute to enhancing 
the overall economic performance of the euro area as a whole. While the ECB sets monetary 
policy  by  looking  at  the  performance  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  the  ECB  also  follows 
closely what happens in all euro area countries. In other words, we also look at diversity of 
economic performance across the euro area. 
Diversity in EMU 
3.  
Some diversity – in economic and financial developments – is a natural phenomenon in any 
vast  currency  area.8  Rates  of  economic  growth,  inflation  and  changes  in  labour  costs  can 
differ  across  countries  for  various  reasons.  Some  of  these  reasons  may  have  no  link 
whatsoever with monetary policy or a single currency. For instance, diversity might originate 
from  country-specific  demographic  trends  or  from  their  catching-up  in  terms  of  living 
standards. There could also be national differences in areas such as industry characteristics, 
investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D),  and  innovation.  Differences  in  the  timing 
and extent of past structural reforms in euro area countries are also a source of diversity.9 
Differences  in  fiscal  policies  and  other  national  policies  can  also  give  rise  to  diverse 
economic  situations.  There  is  an  additional  source  of  diversity  due  to  the  one-off  shock 
constituted  by  the  launch  of  the  euro  that  may  currently  be  working  its  way  through  the 
system. Some countries suddenly benefited from lower short and long-term interest rates, as 
well  as  from  easier  access  to  more  competitive  credit  markets.  This  encouraged  the 
purchase of durable and non-durable goods, as well as housing, albeit to differing extents, in 
the various euro area countries.  
But  let’s  put  diversity  in  perspective.  Over  these  ten  years,  the  degree  of  diversity 
observed in the euro area at each point in time did not appear to be substantially different 
from that seen in the United States. Nor is it substantially different from that seen within the 
national borders of some large economies (such as Germany, Italy and Spain). However, a 
distinct feature of diversity in the euro area is its persistence over long periods of time. In 
other words, diversity in most euro area countries displays significant inertia. Let me briefly 
look at three types of diversity.  
a) 
Inflation  dispersion  in  the  euro  area  declined  considerably  in  the  1980s  and 
1990s and is now on a par with inflation dispersion in the United States. To give you 
an example, the unweighted standard deviation of annual HICP inflation rates still 
stood at around 6 percentage points in late 1990, but – since the launch of the euro 
                                                                                                                                                      
technology in the United States was double that of the euro area. According to the EUKLEMS database, the 
average contribution from ICT capital to total economic growth in the euro area was 0.4 percentage point over 
the period 1995-2005, while in the United States it averaged 0.8 percentage point over this same period. 
It  appears  that  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  best-performing  industrialised  economies,  namely  more 
flexible labour markets, greater competition in product markets and lower barriers to entry for new firms have 
been more receptive to the opportunities provided by new technologies. 
7  
8   Diversity  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  heterogeneity  or  divergences:  in  my  view,  diversity  might  be  more 
appropriate in most cases because a significant degree of dispersion looks like not a defect but a fundamental 
feature of any vast continental economy like the US or the euro area. 
9   An example of this is the Netherlands, which undertook labour market reforms far earlier than the largest euro 
area  countries.  This  enhanced  the  country’s  flexibility  and  increased  its  ability  to  adjust  to  a  wide  range  of 
shocks.  In  other  countries,  short-term  shocks  may  have  had  more  persistent  effects  on  growth  differentials 
owing to slow adjustment processes caused by the presence of structural rigidities. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 5
– this rate has broadly stabilised at around 1 percentage point. This dispersion level 
is similar to that of the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas, but is somewhat higher 
than  that  of  the  four  US  census  regions.  Hence,  impressive  progress  has  been 
made, and I would argue that, prima facie, inflation dispersion in the euro area is not 
high by international standards. 
However, inflation differentials in the euro area are very persistent; in this respect, 
the euro area does indeed differ from the United States. Most euro area countries 
that have exhibited higher than average inflation rates in recent years have been in 
this  position  for  at  least  a  decade.  These  include  Spain  and  Greece.  Similar 
persistence – but on the opposite side – is observed in low-inflation countries such 
as  Germany.  Only  in  some  euro  area  countries,  such  as  Portugal  and  the 
Netherlands, have differentials moved from being relatively high to being in line with 
– or even below – the euro area average. Such corrections are welcome, but the 
point is that they are slow to materialise. 
If we look at the cost side, the factors generating inflation differentials are, in most 
countries, primarily domestic rather than external. In particular, we have witnessed 
sustained  divergence  in  wage  developments  across  the  euro  area  and  smaller 
differences in labour productivity growth. These differences in the growth of labour 
costs  have  been  the  main  sources  of  persistence  in  inflation  differentials.  Various 
reasons can be suggested for this. Varying levels of wage rigidity across the euro 
area, changes in profit margins, imperfect competition and associated price rigidities 
across countries all affect labour costs and contribute to inflation differentials. 
If  we  look  at  product  groups,  price  dispersion  has  been  greater  in  the  field  of 
services,  mostly  owing  to  the  dispersion  observed  in  wage  developments  across 
countries. By contrast, inflation dispersion has been relatively low for tradable non-
energy industrial goods, with greater competition in tradable goods being the main 
reason  for  this.  Products  with  relatively  volatile  prices  (such  as  energy  and  food) 
have, on the other hand, shown high levels of dispersion across countries in terms 
of price changes. 
Output growth differentials in the euro area have remained broadly stable since 
the early 1970s. No signs of increased annual divergence were observed between 
1999 and 2007. The average dispersion of annual real GDP growth over this period 
(measured as the unweighted standard deviation) was around 2 percentage points. 
This  figure  is  very  close  to  the  average  dispersion  of  real  growth  rates  since  the 
1980s.  By  comparison,  if  we  look  across  all  50  US  States,  the  dispersion  of  real 
growth  has  averaged  approximately  2.5  percentage  points  over  the  last  15  years. 
When  the  United  States  is  divided  into  the  eight  statistical  regions,  the  average 
dispersion shrinks to around 1.5 percentage points. 
One issue of concern, however, is the fact that within the euro area there is also a 
relatively  high  degree  of  persistence  regarding  output  growth  differentials.  This  is 
less  the  case  in  the  United  States.  However,  taking  the  United  States  as  a 
benchmark only helps up to a point. On the one hand, the US economy is known to 
be  more  flexible  than  the  euro  area,  which  means  that  the  effects  of  asymmetric 
shocks  can  be  absorbed  more  easily  and  more  quickly.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
United States exhibits stronger regional specialisation than the euro area, making its 
regions more susceptible to specific asymmetric shocks. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  two  main  drivers  of  growth  differentials  in  the  euro  area: 
differentials  in  cycles  and  differentials  in  trends.  Differentials  in  cycles  have 
declined  steadily  since  the  early  1990s.  There  is  also  evidence  of  a  stronger 
common  euro  area  cycle  accounting  for  a  large  part  of  the  business  cycle 
fluctuations across euro area countries. Since 1999, several shocks have spread in 
similar  ways  across  euro  area  countries.  For  example,  the  euro  area  has 
BIS Review 89/2008
b) 
6 
 c) 
successfully weathered several shocks, including the bursting of the dotcom bubble, 
the  ripple  effects  of  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  the  surge  in  global 
commodity  prices  –  particularly  energy  prices  –  and  the  persistence  of  sizeable 
global  imbalances.  The  high  degree  of  synchronisation  in  the  business  cycles  of 
euro  area  countries  is  a  feature  unique  to  the  euro  area.  This  suggests  that  EU 
integration and, more recently, the launch of the euro – rather than global forces – 
have led to smaller differences in output gaps among euro area countries. 
The picture for the second driver of dispersion – namely differentials in trends – 
shows  more  lasting  differences  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  with  a  gradual 
increase  in  trend  growth  dispersion.  This  picture  also  differs  across  euro  area 
countries,  some  of  which  persistently  exhibit  trend  output  growth  either  above  or 
below the euro area average. It is here that the various sources of diversity that I 
have mentioned play a role. 
Changes in cost and price competitiveness mainly reflect changes in relative unit 
labour  costs  and  persistent  inflation  differentials.  These  demonstrate  that  there  is 
significant leeway for influencing competitiveness, even in the absence of nominal 
exchange rate adjustments. To give you an idea of the magnitude of this leeway, if 
we consider the cumulative growth of unit labour costs for the economy as a whole 
between  1999  and  2007,  the  difference  between  the  countries  with  the  largest 
increases and those with the smallest increases was around 20 to 30%. This is an 
important phenomenon, and a close examination of the driving factors is therefore 
required. 
Germany,  for  example,  has  seen  moderate  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  over  an 
extended period, leading to a correction of the losses in competitiveness that arose 
in  the  aftermath  of  German  reunification.  This  correction  –  and  the  corresponding 
sustained  period  of  relatively  low  inflation  –  is,  of  course,  fully  justified  and  most 
welcome. It also shows that adjustment mechanisms in the euro area work. A higher 
degree  of  wage  flexibility  would  help  to  accelerate  such  desirable  adjustment 
processes.  
At  the  other  extreme,  some  countries  may,  to  some  extent,  be  catching  up  with 
others’ higher living standards. These countries are, therefore, possibly experiencing 
some temporary differences in competitiveness, reflecting movement towards a new 
equilibrium. Some other sources of persistent inflation differentials, however, might 
not be justifiable – for example, differentials attributable to insufficient flexibility. In 
some economies, weak labour productivity growth and strong increases in nominal 
wages  and  salaries  over  a  sustained  period  inevitably  result  in  a  loss  of 
competitiveness. 
To sum up, diversity in terms of inflation and cost developments is undesirable when 
it reflects structural rigidities or a lack of competition. While we see evidence of a 
stronger  common  euro  area  cycle,  we  also  see  diversity  in  national  trend  growth. 
Monetary  policy  has  a  limited  role  in  addressing  such  diversity.  Changes  in 
competitiveness  are  unfolding  faster  than  was  foreseen  prior  to  the  launch  of  the 
euro, which is good in some respect because it means that necessary adjustments 
in  relative  competitiveness  can  be  more  rapid.  But  it  also  suggests  that  a  lucid 
monitoring of competitive indicators is of the essence to avoid possible rapid losses 
of relative competitiveness inside the euro area.  
There is thus a clear need for sound economic management in EMU 
4.  
The future of the euro area will rely as much on consolidating its achievement as in meeting 
some  future  challenges.  I  will  argue  now  that  the  increasing  interdependence  among  euro 
area economies, combined with the need to raise the level of economic performance while 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 7
addressing  excessive  differentials  in  inflation,  growth  and  competitiveness,  requires  sound 
economic management. Let me now stress the importance of four guiding principles in this 
respect. 
a) 
The  first  principle  is  the  rigorous  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact  as  a  prerequisite  for  sound  fiscal  policies  .  There  are  several  reasons  for 
supporting sound fiscal policies. They are needed, for instance, to reduce the risk of 
fiscal  policy  spillover,  both  into  monetary  policy  and,  more  generally,  across 
countries. They are also needed to enhance flexibility and adaptability. Sound fiscal 
policies create the necessary conditions for flexibility, which cushions the effects of 
the  economic  cycle  through  the  functioning  of  automatic  stabilisers.  Sound  fiscal 
policies  also  ensure  proper  incentives.  The  tax  and  benefit  system  should  avoid 
major distortions that affect incentives to work, save, invest and innovate, thereby 
making fiscal policy more efficient and growth-friendly. Moreover, the public sector 
also  functions  as  a  role  model  as  regards,  for  example,  wages  or  administrative 
prices.10 Importantly, sound fiscal policies must also make provisions for the effects 
of population ageing. 
The  second  principle  for  a  sound  economic  management  pertains  to  the  full 
completion  of  the  Single  Market.  This  will  enhance  not  only  competition  and 
efficiency, but also adjustment mechanisms in the event of adverse shocks. We still 
have  significant  progress  to  make  in  this  domain,  despite  the  fact  that  the  Single 
Market was the goal of the founding fathers of the European Union, as set out in the 
Treaty of Rome, and despite the fact that this 50-year endeavour was very strongly 
reaffirmed with the Single European Act 20 years ago. 
According  to  the  OECD,  product  market  regulation  remains  high  in  several  euro 
area  countries,  and  the  level  of  such  regulation  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is 
considered significantly higher than in the United States. Let me also mention the 
fact that the services sector, which represents 70% of euro area GDP, is far from 
being fully integrated as an effective single market. We attach enormous importance 
to the full integration of financial markets, particularly because these play a decisive 
role in shock absorption and adjustment dynamics in a large single currency area. 
As  far  as  cross-border  labour  mobility  is  concerned,  empirical  evidence  suggests 
that it is still low in the euro area – both across countries and within countries – on 
account of several formal barriers across the euro area. This is in clear contrast to 
the situation in the United States, where labour mobility is considerable and greatly 
contributes to the adjustment process. Hence, more needs to be done to enhance 
labour mobility in Europe. 
The  third  principle  for  a  sound  economic  management  is  the  need  to  closely 
monitor  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  Earlier  I  referred  to  some 
structural factors commonly contributing to inflation and growth differentials, as well 
as  to  disappointing  growth  in  productivity.  These  detrimental  factors  include 
pervasive  price  and  wage  rigidities,  excessive  labour  market  regulation  and  the 
imperfect competition observed in several important sectors.  
This  has  been  recognised  for  quite  some  time.  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that 
reforms  are  essential  in  order  to  raise  factor  productivity  and  potential  output,  to 
create new jobs, to achieve lower prices and higher real incomes, and to increase 
the  resilience  and  flexibility  of  the  economy.  Yet,  experience  to  date  has  clearly 
b) 
c) 
                                                 
10   The  behaviour  of  the  public  sector  can,  for  instance,  make  social  partners  more  aware  of  the  trade-off 
between higher salaries and job creation. Furthermore, population ageing in most industrialised economies – 
and  a  significant  increase  in  the  old-age  dependency  ratio  and  higher  healthcare  and  long-term  care 
expenditures will exert growing pressure on public finances. 
8 
 BIS Review 89/2008
shown how difficult it is to undertake reforms in practice.11 We have to persist and I 
shall flag some specific initiatives for reform in three main areas, namely:12 
(1) 
Getting more people into work: Despite impressive achievements in job 
creation  thus  far,  the  still  relatively  high  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro 
area  (as  well  as  the  low  participation  rates  in  some  countries)  clearly 
suggest there is a need to stimulate not only labour supply but also labour 
demand.  As  regards  labour  demand,  there  is  a  need  to  reduce  labour 
market rigidities as they restrict wage differentiation and flexibility, and thus 
tend  to  discourage  the  hiring  of  younger  and  older  workers,  in  particular. 
Progress towards greater contractual flexibility must continue to improve in 
several euro area countries. Moreover, in those European countries where 
competitiveness  has  declined,  or  where  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
high,  it  is  important  that  wage  increases  do  not  fully  exhaust  productivity 
gains.  This  in  order  to  provide  incentives  for  firms  to  create  additional 
jobs.13 Finally, as regards labour supply, further reforms in income tax and 
benefit systems would help to increase people’s incentives to work.  
Increasing competition: Establishing efficient and well-functioning product 
and  service  markets  can  boost  productivity  trends  by  enhancing  the 
incentive  to  invest  and  innovate,  supports  further  employment  creation, 
reduces inflation persistence and keeps upward price pressures contained, 
thereby  improving  the  adjustment  capacity  of  countries.  “Little  else  than 
productivity growth matters in the long-run” – as Bob Solow14 once put it. It 
is  undeniable  that,  over  the  past  two  decades,  significant  progress  has 
already  been  made  in  the  context  of  the  Single  Market  Programme.  This 
has  already  yielded  major  benefits  for  European  economies.15  However, 
the  extension  and  deepening  of  the  Single  Market  still  remains  a  high 
priority  as  regards  further  financial  market  integration,  the  pursuit  of 
(2) 
                                                 
11   The  need  for  structural  reforms  was  highlighted  by  the  Lisbon  agenda  of  2000,  which  represents  a 
fundamental  and  ambitious  programme  to  draw  Europe’s  attention  to  the  major  areas  where  changes  are 
required. More recently, the Lisbon agenda has been refocused in the direction of growth and employment. 
Various  attainable  objectives  have  been  set  in  order  to  enhance  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  labour 
markets,  to  raise  competition  in  markets  for  goods  and  services,  to  increase  employment,  to  promote 
innovation and to strengthen growth and employment rates in all participating countries. 
12   These topics are clearly reflected in the Integrated Guidelines for the new phase of the Lisbon Strategy and 
the  recommendations  for  the  euro  area.  We  appreciate  the  renewed  impetus  toward  reforms  by  some 
governments,  which  has  now  resulted  in  the  more  focused  “Partnership  for  Growth  and  Jobs”  and  in  the 
structural  reform  commitments  of  the  national  reform  programmes.  We  also  need  to  reinforce  the 
benchmarking  of  good  performance  in  order  to  identify  with  greater  accuracy  the  areas  where  reform 
challenges are most urgent. 
13   In  this  context,  the  Governing  Council  considers  that  features  that  enforce  wage  rigidity  and  lead  to  non-
optimal wage-setting, in particular, and the indexation of nominal wages to the consumer price index, should 
be avoided. This is especially relevant today, with the risk of second-round effects stemming from the impact 
of higher energy and food prices on wages. Avoiding these practices is essential to preserve price stability in 
the medium term and, in turn, the purchasing power of all euro area citizens. 
14   See  the  introductory  article  of  the  special  issue  on  the  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  in  The  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 2, No 4, 1988,. 
15   The European Commission recently estimated that the Single Market had created 2.75 million jobs and had 
brought about an increase in welfare of €518 per head in 2006, corresponding to a 2.15% increase in EU GDP 
over  the  period  1992-2006  (see  European  Commission,  “The  single  market:  review  of  achievements”, 
November 2007). 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 9
(3) 
d) 
effective  competition  in  the  energy  market  and  the  implementation  of  the 
Services Directive.16 
Supporting  an  innovative  environment:  The  reforms  that  I  have 
mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  measures  supporting  innovation 
through  higher  investment  in  research  and  development  and  policies 
geared  towards  improving  human  capital.  Europe  needs  many  new  and 
dynamic firms that are willing to reap the benefits of opening markets and 
to  pursue  creative  or  innovative  ventures.  Notably,  it  is  new  and  smaller 
firms – rather than large ones – that are the job creators. This requires an 
entrepreneur-friendly  environment  with  less  “red  tape”,  and  easier  access 
to  the  finance  these  firms  need.  Europe  is  lagging  significantly  behind  in 
this field; its venture capital financing, for instance, remains only a fraction 
of that in the United States, relative to the size of its economy. 
We know that research and development, as well as human capital, make 
valuable contributions to TFP growth. In 2006, R&D investment relative to 
GDP  was  only  1.9%  in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  2.7%  in  the  United 
States.17 Cooperation between universities, public sector research institutes 
and  industry  must  also  intensify  to  raise  the  efficiency  of  public  R&D 
spending.  Unfortunately,  in  several  euro  area  countries,  investment  in 
human capital is still too low for a “knowledge-intensive” economy. Instead, 
the employability and flexibility of the labour force requires human capital to 
be  continuously  adjusted  to  labour market  needs.  This  investment  should 
start  “early”  by  enhancing  the  quality  and  efficiency  of  our  schools  and 
universities, and be continued through lifelong training and learning. 
The  fourth  principle  for  a  sound  economic  management  is  the  need  to 
monitor unit labour costs and national competitiveness indicators so 
as  to  prevent  or  correct  abnormal  deviations.  We  would  expect  some 
dispersion and differentials among euro area countries. As I have already 
mentioned, in such a vast area, there will always be some diversity, as in 
the United States. Countries catching up in terms of  GDP  per capita and 
price  levels  are  always  likely  to  have  stronger  output  growth  and  higher 
inflation. Diversity may also extend to correcting past excesses in terms of 
overall  cost  and  price  competitiveness,  particularly  in  the  markets  for 
tradable goods and services. In such situations, national governments and 
social  partners  need 
to  address  excessive  wage 
developments  and  to  strengthen  productivity  growth,  so  that  unit  labour 
costs in those economies increase less rapidly than the euro area average. 
To sum up, this sound economic management can foster economic stability 
and  growth,  as  well  as  reduce  the  impact  of  adverse  shocks,  or  facilitate 
the  adjustment  thereafter.  The  attentive  monitoring  of  economic  and 
financial  developments,  and  of  changes  in  competitiveness  in  particular, 
take  action 
to 
                                                 
16   Understandably,  for  the  ECB,  further  European  financial  integration  is  essential  given  its  relevance  to  the 
conduct of the single monetary policy. Considerable progress has already been made across various market 
segments. Financial integration is generally more advanced in those market segments that are closer to the 
single  monetary  policy.  While  the  euro  area  banking  markets  for  wholesale  and  capital  market-related 
activities have shown clear signs of increasing integration since the introduction of the euro, the retail banking 
segment  has  remained  more  fragmented,  leaving  European  firms  and  consumers  unable  to  take  full 
advantage of EMU and the Single Market. 
17   While many Member States expect to increase their spending in this area, the EU will fall short of its overall 
target  of  3%  of  GDP  by  2010.  Increasing  investment  in  research  and  development  is  not,  of  course,  an 
objective in itself. If we want to see an impact on growth, it is also the return on that R&D that matters. 
10 
 BIS Review 89/2008
must  be  an  integral  part  of  this  economic  management.  The  public’s 
understanding  and  acceptance  of  these  elements  is  also  crucial.  That  is 
why we always strive to explain what actions we are undertaking, and why. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, let me now conclude. 
The past ten momentous years have been rich in achievements. The introduction of the euro 
has  been  recognised  as  a  remarkable  success.  Since  1999,  the  single  currency  has  fully 
inherited the degree of credibility and confidence that was the privilege of the most credible 
national currencies prior to the euro. Inflation expectations are well anchored, and medium 
and long-term interest rates in the euro area are at the same low level as the levels observed 
for the most credible of these former national currencies. We also see a remarkable degree 
of resilience in a complex international environment. 
These  achievements  are  a  solid  foundation  for  our  future.  But  we  also  know  that  the 
challenges lying ahead for the euro area are still demanding. What do we need to do, over 
the  next  ten  years  and  beyond,  to  consolidate  the  remarkable  success  of  the  euro  and 
improve  the  performance  of  euro  area  economies?  We,  at  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem, 
must preserve the quality of our monetary policy. This will safeguard all the benefits expected 
of price stability in terms of low current and expected inflation and interest rates. 
To strengthen the “E” in EMU, we need to focus on a sound economic management and we 
need to secure a broad base of acceptance for it. This entails: a rigorous implementation of 
the Stability and Growth Pact; the completion of the Single Market; the implementation of the 
structural reforms envisaged in the Lisbon agenda; and a careful monitoring of national unit 
labour costs and competitiveness indicators. 
The  achievements  that  I  have  described  and  the  visible  benefits  of  the  euro  support  this 
sound economic management. These achievements and benefits help national governments 
to adapt and further liberalise their economies. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Selected references 
Anderton,  R.,  F.  di  Mauro  and  F.  Moneta,  “Understanding  the  impact  of  the  external 
dimension  of  the  euro  area:  trade,  capital  flows  and  other  macroeconomic  linkages,”  ECB 
Occasional Paper No 12, April 2004. 
Asdrubali,  F.,  B.  Sorensen  and  O.  Yosha,  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  United 
States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, November 1996, pp. 1081-1110. 
Baele,  L.,  A.  Ferrando,  P.  Hördahl,  E.  Krylova  and  C.  Monnet,  “Measuring  financial 
integration in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No 14, April 2004. 
Baldwin, R., “The euro’s trade effects,” ECB Working Paper No 594, 2006. 
Benalal,  N.,  J.  L.  Diaz  del  Hoyo,  B.  Pierluigi  and  N.  Vidalis,  “Output  growth  differentials 
across  the  euro  area  countries:  some  stylised  facts”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  No 45,  May 
2006.  
Blanchard,  O.,  and  F.  Giavazzi,  “Macroeconomic  effects  of  regulation  and  deregulation  in 
goods and labor markets”,  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), August 2003, pp. 879-
907. 
Cappiello, L., P. Hördahl, A. Kadareja and S. Manganelli, “The impact of the euro on financial 
markets”, ECB Working Paper No 598, 2006. 
De Grauwe, P., and F. P. Mongelli, “Endogeneities of optimum currency areas: What brings 
countries sharing a single currency closer together?”, ECB Working Paper No 468, 2005. 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 11
De  Santis,  R.,  and  B.  Gérard,  “Financial  integration,  international  portfolio  choice  and  the 
European Monetary Union”, ECB Working Paper No 626, 2006. 
Dhyne,  E.,  and  L.J.  Alvarez,  H.  Le  Bihan,  G.  Veronese,  J.  Hoffmann,  N.  Jonker,  P. 
Lunnemann,  F.  Rumler  and  J.Vilmunen,  (2006)  “Price  changes  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
United  States:  some  facts  from  individual  consumer  price  data”,  American  Economic 
Association, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 20(2), Spring, pp 171-192. 
Duisenberg, W., “Jean Monnet Memorial Lecture”, 2000. 
Duval, R., and J. Elmeskov, “The effects of EMU on structural reforms in labour and product 
markets”, ECB Working Paper No 596, 2006. 
ECB, “Inflation differentials in the euro area: potential causes and policy implications”, ECB 
report released on 16 September 2003.  
ECB,  “Sectoral  specialisation  in  the  EU:  a  macroeconomic  perspective”,  ECB  Occasional 
Paper No 19, July 2004. 
ECB, “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, article in 
the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, May 2005. 
ECB, “Output growth differentials in the euro area: sources and implications”, article in the 
ECB’s Monthly Bulletin, April 2007. 
ECB,  “10th  Anniversary  of  the  ECB”,  Special  Edition  of  the  ECB’s  Monthly  Bulletin,  June 
2008. 
ECB, “Financial Integration in Europe”, April 2008. 
European Commission, “The EU Economy 2006 Review. Adjustment Dynamics in the Euro 
Area: Experiences and Challenges”, 22 November 2006. 
European Commission, “EMU@10: Success and challenges after 10 years of Economic and 
Monetary Union”. 
Giannone, D., and L. Reichlin, “Trends and cycles in the euro area: how much heterogeneity 
and should we worry about it?”, ECB Working Paper No 595, 2006. 
Heinz,  F.F.,  and  M.  Ward-Warmedinger,  “Cross-border  labour  mobility  within  an  enlarged 
EU”, ECB Occasional Paper No 52, October 2006. 
Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,  B.  Sorensen  and  O.  Yosha,  “Asymmetric  shocks  and  risk  sharing  in  a 
monetary union: Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, Hary Huizinga and 
Lars Yonung (eds.), Who will Own Europe? The Internationalization of Asset Ownership in 
the EU Today and in the Future, Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
McKinnon, R., “Optimum Currency Areas Revisited”, Stanford University, mimeo, 2001. 
Mongelli, F. P., “European Economic and Monetary Integration and the Optimum Currency 
Area Theory”, European Economy, Economic Papers No 302, February 2008. 
Mundell,  R.,  “Uncommon  Arguments  for  Common  Currencies”,  H.G.  Johnson  and  A.K. 
Swoboda (eds.), The Economics of Common Currencies, Allen and Unwin, 1973, pp. 114-
132. 
Obstfeld,  M.,  and  G.  Peri,  “Regional  Non-Adjustment  and  Fiscal  Policy”,  Economic  Policy, 
Vol. 26, 1998 pp. 205-260.  
Rose, A., “Currency Unions and Trade: The Effect Is Large”, Economic Policy, Vol. 33, 2001, 
pp. 449-461. 
 
12 
 BIS Review 89/2008
Trichet,  J.-C.,  “Further  integrating  euro  area  economies:  some  reflections”,  speech  at  the 
“57. Jahresversammlung  des  Ifo  Instituts  für  Wirtschaftsforschung  an  der  Universität 
München”, Munich, 29 June 2006. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060629.en.html. 
Trichet, J.-C., “How to elevate the potential growth rate of Europe”, Ludwig Erhard Lecture, 
Berlin, 16 October 2006. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp061016.en.html. 
Trichet, J.-C., “The euro area and its monetary policy”, speech delivered at the conference 
“The 
2007. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907.en.html. 
Trichet,  J.-C.,  “The  monetary  policy  implications  of  ageing”,  speech  delivered  at  the  ABP 
Conference on Pension Diversity and Solidarity in Europe, Maastricht, 26 September 2007. 
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070926.en.html. 
September 
Frankfurt, 
watchers 
ECB 
and 
IX”, 
its 
7 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 13
