Ben S Bernanke: Fostering sustainable homeownership 
Speech  of  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Community  Reinvestment  Coalition  Annual  Meeting, 
Washington DC, 14 March 2008. 
 This  audience,  the  National  Community  Reinvestment  Coalition,  is  certainly  aware  that 
mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates have increased substantially over the past year 
and a half. This increase reflects significantly, though not exclusively, a sharp deterioration in 
the performance of subprime mortgages, particularly those with adjustable-rate features. At 
the end of last year, more than one in five of the roughly 3.6 million outstanding subprime 
adjustable-rate  mortgages  (ARMs)  were  seriously  delinquent,  meaning  they  were  either  in 
foreclosure or ninety days or more past due.1 That rate is about four times higher than it was 
in  mid-2005.  Lenders  initiated  roughly  1-1/2  million  foreclosures  last  year,  up  from  an 
average of 950,000 in the preceding two years. More than one-half of the foreclosure starts 
in 2007 were on subprime mortgages. Behind these disturbing statistics are families facing 
personal and financial hardship and neighborhoods that may be destabilized by clusters of 
foreclosures. These realities challenge us to find ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures. 
And,  looking  toward  the  future,  they  challenge  us  to  ensure  a  regulatory  environment  that 
promotes responsible lending and sustainable homeownership.  
I would like to briefly discuss how we arrived at where we are today. Then I would like to 
share with you what the Federal Reserve is doing to reduce foreclosures, to protect aspiring 
homeowners from unfair and deceptive practices, and to equip them to choose wisely from 
among the often confusing array of mortgage options. In particular, I would like to highlight 
the new regulations we have proposed under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act 
(HOEPA). 
Origins of the subprime mortgage turmoil 
Over  the  past  quarter  century,  advances  in  information  technology,  the  development  of 
credit-scoring  techniques,  and  the  emergence  of  a  large  secondary  market,  among  other 
factors, have significantly increased access to mortgage credit. From 1994 to 2006, subprime 
lending  increased  from  an  estimated  $35  billion,  or  4.5  percent  of  all  one-to-four  family 
mortgage originations, to $600 billion, or 20 percent of originations (Inside Mortgage Finance, 
2007). Responsible subprime lending expanded credit to borrowers with imperfect or limited 
credit histories. More renters became homeowners than would have otherwise. Though few 
subprime  mortgages  are  being  written  today,  I  believe  responsible  subprime  lending  has 
been helpful, and at some point will be again, in fostering sustainable homeownership. 
However, far too much of the lending in recent years was neither responsible nor prudent. 
The  terms  of  some  subprime  mortgages  permitted  homebuyers  and  investors  to  purchase 
properties beyond their means, often with little or no equity. In addition, abusive, unfair, or 
deceptive  lending  practices  led  some  borrowers  into  mortgages  that  they  would  not  have 
chosen knowingly.  
                                                 
1   Based on servicer data from First American LoanPerformance. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 1
The  current  crisis  has  many  roots.  The  drop  in  home  prices  in  many  once-hot  markets  is 
among the most significant. In a recent survey, nearly 30 percent of homeowners reported 
that their houses decreased in value over the past year.2 The decline in home equity makes 
it more difficult for struggling homeowners to refinance and reduces the financial incentive of 
stressed  borrowers  to  remain  in  their  homes.  Mortgage  performance  data  show  a  strong 
correlation  between  adverse  house  price  changes  and  subsequent  increases  in  mortgage 
delinquency  and  foreclosure  (Avery,  Brevoort,  and  Canner,  2007;  Gerardi,  Shapiro,  and 
Willen,  2007).  Investors  who  purchased  homes  in  the  hope  of  price  appreciation  seem 
particularly likely to walk away from "underwater" mortgages. Indeed, the role of investors in 
the housing market has increased markedly over time. According to data collected under the 
Home  Mortgage  Disclosure  Act  (HMDA),  lending  to  non-owner-occupants  has  risen  from 
about  5  percent  of  the  home-purchase  loans  in  the  mid-1990s  to  about  17  percent  of  all 
purchases in 2005 and 2006 (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2007). Mortgage delinquencies 
are also tied to local economic conditions; notably, several midwestern states struggling with 
job losses and slow income growth have seen increased delinquencies. 
The  deterioration  in  underwriting  standards  that  appears  to  have  begun  in  late  2005  is 
another important factor underlying the current crisis. A large share of subprime loans that 
were  originated  during  this  time  featured  high  combined  loan-to-value  ratios  and,  in  some 
cases,  layers  of  additional  risk  factors,  such  as  a  lack  of  full  documentation  or  the 
acceptance of very high debt-to-income ratios. In 2006, for example, the HMDA data suggest 
that nearly 40 percent of higher-priced home-purchase loans involved a piggy-back loan or 
second  mortgage.3  Indeed,  many  defaults  are  occurring  within  the  first  few  months  of 
origination, well before payment resets occur on subprime ARM products.  
Much  of  the  weakening  in  underwriting  standards  appears  to  have  happened  outside  of 
institutions regulated by the federal banking agencies. The HMDA data for 2006 show that 
more than 45 percent of high-cost first mortgages were originated by independent mortgage 
companies, which are institutions that are not regulated by the federal banking agencies and 
that sell almost all of the mortgages they originate. In this instance, this originate-to-distribute 
model appears to have contributed to the breakdown in underwriting standards, as lenders 
often  found  themselves  able  to  pass  on  the  credit  risk  without  much  resistance  from  the 
ultimate  investors.  For  a  number  of  years,  rapid  increases  in  house  prices  effectively 
insulated  lenders  and  investors  from  the  effects  of  weaker  underwriting,  providing  false 
comfort.  
Another concern is the substantial number of borrowers with subprime ARMs whose interest 
rates  are  scheduled  to  reset  upward--about  1.5  million  in  2008.4  The  problem  posed  by 
resets is serious, but it may be mitigated somewhat by lower short-term interest rates and by 
the efforts of servicers, including those working with the Hope Now Alliance, to find solutions 
for  borrowers  facing  resets,  including  interest-rate  freezes  (Hope  Now  Alliance  Servicers, 
2008).  In  addition,  the  FHASecure  plan,  which  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA) 
announced late last summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an 
interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance into an 
FHA-insured mortgage. Recently, the Congress and Administration temporarily increased the 
maximum loan value eligible for FHA insurance, which will allow more borrowers access to 
this program. 
                                                 
2   Analysis  based  on  Reuters/University  of  Michigan  Surveys  of  Consumers  data  provided  to  the  Federal 
Reserve Board.  
3   The Federal Reserve Board staff estimates are based on 2006 HMDA data.  Additional information is available 
on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council website or in the December 2007 Federal Reserve 
Bulletin. 
4   The Federal Reserve Board's staff calculations are based on data from First American LoanPerformance and 
the Mortgage Bankers Association. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2008
The  current  high  rate  of  delinquencies  and  foreclosures  is  not  confined  to  the  subprime 
market. In 2007, about 45 percent of foreclosures were on prime, near-prime, or government-
backed mortgages. Across market segments, delinquencies are rising fastest on the more-
complex loans originated over the past few years. In part, that trend seems to be due to the 
fact that such loans were made to borrowers in weaker financial condition. In some cases, 
borrowers may not have fully understood the details of their loans, including the potential for 
large payment increases. 
Federal Reserve responses 
Effective  responses  need  to  build  on  an  informed  understanding  of  this  complex  picture. 
Thus, as these problems in housing emerged and deepened, the Federal Reserve System 
engaged  with  a  wide  array  of  market  participants--including  lenders,  community  groups, 
servicers,  consumer  advocates,  public  officials,  and  other  regulators--to  properly  diagnose 
the problems and work toward sustainable solutions. The Federal Reserve System alone, of 
course, cannot resolve all of the problems in the marketplace, but we have responded thus 
far through our regulatory, supervisory, research, and community affairs functions. 
Regulation and supervision 
As part of a periodic review of our regulations under HOEPA, the Federal Reserve Board in 
2006 began a systematic look at changes in the mortgage industry. Four public hearings held 
around the country confirmed evidence that we were gathering from other sources that the 
mortgage market was undergoing the significant changes with which we are all now familiar. 
Our concerns led us in 2006 and 2007 to issue, along with other federal and state regulators, 
a series of guidances to the institutions we supervise that covered nontraditional mortgage 
loans,  subprime  lending,  and  servicing  practices.  Those  were  good  steps,  but  we  also 
recognized that many of the problems we were beginning to see were a result of actions by 
companies and individuals not subject to our supervisory oversight. Thus, we conducted an 
additional HOEPA hearing, focusing on four specific areas: assessment of repayment ability; 
low-  and  no-documentation  lending;  escrowing  for  taxes  and  insurance;  and  prepayment 
penalties. As a result of a careful review of available data and information, we proposed new 
rules under our HOEPA authority in December, banning practices that we found to be unfair 
or deceptive. Significantly, bans on such unfair or deceptive acts and practices would apply 
to the entire mortgage industry, not just to institutions directly regulated by the Board.  
Our  goal  was  to  produce  clear  and  comprehensive  rules to  protect  consumers  from  unfair 
practices  while  maintaining  the  viability  of  a  market  for  responsible  mortgage  lending.  The 
rules  would  apply  stricter  regulations  to  higher-priced  mortgage  loans,  which  we  have 
defined  broadly  so  as  to  cover  substantially  all  of  the  subprime  market.5  The  regulations 
would be enforceable by state and federal supervisory and enforcement agencies as well as 
by  consumers  themselves,  who  could  recover  statutory  damages  for  violations  above  and 
beyond actual damages. 
The proposed rules cover a range of practices. First, the rules would prohibit a lender from 
engaging  in  a  pattern  or  practice  of  making  higher-priced  loans  that  the  borrower  cannot 
reasonably  be  expected  to  repay  from  income  or  from  assets  other  than  the  house.  Of 
course,  appropriate  attention  to  the  borrower's  ability  to  repay  is  a  fundamental  feature  of 
good underwriting.  
                                                 
5   Under the proposal, a "higher-priced mortgage loan" would have an annual percentage rate that exceeds the 
yield on comparable Treasury securities by 3 percentage points or more for first-lien loans or 5 percentage 
points or more for subordinate-lien loans. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 3
Second,  we  found  that  the  prevalence  of  "stated-income"  lending  led  to  many  borrowers 
receiving mortgages that they could not afford. Consequently, we would require lenders to 
verify  the  income  or  assets  they  rely  on  to  make  credit  decisions  for  higher-priced  loans--
standard industry practice, in fact, for most lending until quite recently. 
Third,  our  proposal  would  require  higher-priced  loans  to  have  an  escrow  account  for  real-
estate  taxes  and  hazard  insurance. This  rule  would  help  ensure  that  borrowers  can  afford 
their payments and avoid the cases in which borrowers, especially first-time borrowers, did 
not  understand  that  the  monthly  principal  and  interest  payment  was  not  the  only  financial 
obligation associated with homeownership. Escrowing has become standard practice in the 
prime market, and our proposal would make it standard practice for this part of the market, 
as well.  
Fourth,  the  proposed  rules  would  ban  prepayment  penalties  in  situations  in  which  the 
borrower  may  be  especially  vulnerable.  For  example,  prepayment  penalties  would  be 
prohibited  where  the  borrower's  debt-to-income  ratio  exceeds  50  percent  and,  when 
permitted, would be required to expire at least sixty days before a scheduled increase in the 
loan  payment.  The  rule  would  also  ban  prepayment  penalties  that  could  enable  a  "loan 
flipping" scheme, in which a lender or its affiliate refinances the lender's own loan at adverse 
terms for the borrower. 
In  seeking  information  and  opinion  about  these  four  issues,  the  Board  determined  that 
additional problems needed to be addressed as well, and for all loans, not just higher-priced 
loans. Among the practices addressed by our proposal is the use of yield spread premiums 
(YSPs).6 Many consumers use mortgage brokers to guide them through a complex process 
and  shop  for  the  best  deal.  Unfortunately,  consumers  may  believe  that  the  broker  has  a 
responsibility to get them that best deal, which is not necessarily the case. In fact, the design 
of  YSPs  may  provide  the  broker  a  financial  incentive  to  offer  a  loan  with  a  higher  rate. 
Consumers  who  do  not  understand  this  point  may  not  shop  to  their  best  advantage. 
Therefore,  we  would  prohibit  a  lender,  for  both  prime  and  subprime  loans,  from  paying  a 
broker an amount greater than the consumer agrees to in advance. Brokers would also have 
to disclose their potential conflict of interest. The combination of stricter regulation and better 
disclosure will not solve all the problems. We do believe, however, that this proposal will give 
consumers much better information and raise their awareness of brokers' potential conflict of 
interest while reducing a broker's incentive to steer a consumer to a higher rate. 
To protect consumers and promote competition, our proposal would also ban seven specific 
advertising  practices  deemed  unfair  or  deceptive.  Under  our  rules,  for  example,  mortgage 
originators would not be allowed to advertise a mortgage as having a "fixed" rate unless the 
advertisement also states clearly how long the rate or payment is fixed, and they could not 
advertise loans in one language but have important consumer disclosures in another. The 
proposal  would  also  require  that  consumers  receive  loan-specific  Truth  in  Lending  Act 
disclosures early in the application process, when they can use the information to shop more 
effectively.  The proposal also addresses certain practices in loan servicing that can cause 
problems for consumers, such as delays in posting payments to a consumer's account, and it 
acts to prohibit coercion of appraisers by lenders or brokers. 
We  believe  these  proposed  rules  will  help  protect  mortgage  borrowers  from  unfair  and 
deceptive practices. At the same time, we did not want to create rules that were so open-
ended or costly to administer that responsible lenders would pull out of the subprime market. 
So, our proposal is designed to protect consumers without shutting off access to responsible 
                                                 
6   A  YSP  is  the  present  dollar  value  of  the  difference  between  the  lowest  interest  rate  the  wholesale  lenders 
would  have  accepted  on  a  particular  transaction  and  the  interest  rate  the  broker  actually  obtained  for  the 
lender.  This dollar amount is usually paid to the mortgage broker.  It may also be applied to other loan-related 
costs, but the Board's proposal concerns only the amount paid to the broker.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2008
credit. We anticipate vigorous discussion through the public comment process that ends on 
April 8, and we will, as always, carefully consider this input before issuing final rules. 
In addition to regulations, strong uniform oversight of different types of mortgage lenders is 
critical  to  avoiding  future  problems.  Regulatory  oversight  of  mortgage  lending  has become 
more challenging as the breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade. 
Other  changes,  such  as  the  increased  role  of  nonbank  mortgage  lenders,  have  added 
complexity.  
To  achieve  more  uniformly  effective  supervision,  the  Federal  Reserve,  together  with  other 
federal  and  state  agencies,  launched  a  pilot  program  last  summer  to  conduct  reviews  of 
selected  nondepository  lenders  with  significant  subprime  mortgage  operations.  These 
reviews will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards as well as senior management 
oversight of compliance with state and federal consumer protection regulations and laws. We 
will take corrective or enforcement action as warranted. We plan to use this joint project as a 
vehicle for strengthening cooperation and coordination among federal and state agencies.  
Research and community affairs 
The Federal Reserve is addressing the foreclosure crisis in capacities other than that of a 
regulator, leveraging our strengths in research and data analysis, our regional presence, and 
the many contacts we have developed with local community groups, lenders, policymakers, 
and other stakeholders in this issue. Community affairs officers at the Board and the twelve 
Reserve  Banks  work  with  Federal  Reserve  research  economists  to  anticipate  and,  where 
possible,  mitigate  foreclosure  problems.  They  share  detailed  reports  and  information  that 
help  community  organizations,  nonprofits,  state  regulators,  and  others  identify  regions  and 
neighborhoods  most  vulnerable  to  foreclosure  and  respond  accordingly.  For  instance, 
NeighborWorks  America  recently  used  the  Board's  analyses  to  help  identify  geographic 
areas and neighborhoods in most critical need of $130 million in emergency funds provided 
by the Congress to increase mortgage counselor capacity. 
Solid analysis of available information is critical to crafting appropriate policy remedies, and 
the Federal Reserve has invested considerable resources into such studies. For example, a 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  working  paper  has  analyzed  the  factors  that  predict 
foreclosure, finding a particularly important role for declining house prices (Gerardi, Shapiro, 
and Willen, 2007). The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is conducting a five-year study 
of pre-purchase homeownership counseling. That study will provide important information on 
the  benefits  of  counseling  services  in  fostering  sustainable  homeownership  and  help  us 
understand the long-term effects of financial-management skills on the credit worthiness of 
low- and moderate-income homebuyers. 
In  addition  to  this  ongoing  research,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  supporting  efforts  to  reach 
troubled  borrowers  and  to  raise  awareness  in  communities  about  ways  to  prevent 
foreclosures. Since July, the community affairs offices across the Federal Reserve System 
have  sponsored  or  cosponsored  more  than  fifty  events  related  to  foreclosures,  reaching 
more 
than  4,000  attendees 
lenders,  counselors,  community  development 
specialists, and policymakers.  
There  is  also  work  to  be  done  in  mitigating  the  impact  of  unavoidable  foreclosures  on 
consumers and communities. Families who cannot sustain homeownership will need to find 
new places to live, highlighting the critical need for an adequate supply of affordable rental 
housing.  Consumers  going  through  foreclosure  typically  will  see  their  credit  scores  drop, 
raising longer-term questions about their ability to rebound financially and perhaps pursue a 
more sustainable home purchase at some later point. High numbers of foreclosed homes in 
some  communities  also  raise  challenges,  and  perhaps  opportunities.  Because  vacant 
homes, in particular, impose real costs on neighborhood and communities, forward-looking 
strategies  to  keep  these  homes  occupied  are  important  (Apgar  and  Duda,  2005).  Some 
efforts are underway to prevent vacancies, as well as return vacant properties to active use; 
including 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 5
some of these efforts may also help preserve the supply of affordable housing in areas that 
have  experienced  shortages.7  The  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  undertaken  a  joint  effort 
with  NeighborWorks  America  to  help  communities  develop  strategies  for  neighborhood 
stabilization. 
Conclusion 
It  is  clear  that  rising  home  foreclosures  and  delinquencies  significantly  challenge  many 
consumers and communities, and I hope I have conveyed today that the Federal Reserve is 
strongly committed to fully employing our authority, expertise, and resources to help alleviate 
their distress. We will continue to collaborate at the national, regional, and local levels with 
other stakeholders in the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to help to avoid preventable 
foreclosures and to address the consequences of the foreclosures that occur. In the longer 
term, through our regulations and oversight, we seek to promote responsible and sustainable 
lending that will allow more Americans to achieve their goal of homeownership. 
References 
Apgar,  William  C.,  and  Mark  Duda  (2005).   "Collateral  Damage:   The  Municipal  Impact  of 
Today's  Mortgage  Foreclosure  Boom  (246  KB  PDF)."   Minneapolis:   Homeownership 
Preservation Foundation, May. 
Avery,  Robert  B.,  Kenneth  P.  Brevoort,  and  Glenn  B.  Canner  (2007).   "The  2006  HMDA 
Data," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 93, December, pp. A73-A109. 
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen (2007).  "Subprime Outcomes: 
Risky  Mortgages,  Homeownership Experiences,  and  Foreclosures,"  Federal  Reserve  Bank 
of Boston Working Paper 07-15.  Boston:  Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December. 
Hope  Now  Alliance  Servicers  (2008).   "Prime  and  Subprime  Residential  Mortgages:   2007 
Loss  Mitigation  Activity  (7.8  MB  PDF)."   Washington:   Financial  Services  Roundtable, 
February. 
Inside  Mortgage  Finance  (2007).   Mortgage  Market  Statistical  Annual.   Bethesda,  Md.:  
Inside Mortgage Finance Publications. 
                                                 
7   Some promising examples of programs to address vacancies already exist.  For example, the Neighborhood 
Housing  Services  Redevelopment  Corporation  in  Chicago  has  acquired  hundreds  of  abandoned  properties 
from  such  sources  as  the  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development,  the  City  of  Chicago,  bank 
foreclosures (that is, real estate owned), and private owners. The properties are then rehabilitated and sold to 
owner-occupants.   In  highly  depressed  housing  markets,  the  worst-quality  units  are  often  demolished  to 
mitigate safety hazards and reduce supply.  For example, in Flint, Michigan, the Genesee County Land Bank 
acquires vacant properties through tax liens (see www.thelandbank.org). 
6 
 BIS Review 31/2008
