Tarisa Watanagase: Bank of Thailand’s perspective on the retail banking 
industry 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Excellence in Retail Financial Services Convention 2008, Bangkok, 15-16 May 2008. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  be  invited  to  give  the  keynote  address  for  this  prestigious  convention 
organized  by  the  Asian  Banker.  It gives  me  the  opportunity  to  share with  you  the  Bank  of 
Thailand’s perspective on the retail banking industry, which I hope would help both service 
providers and consumers alike to better understand our regulatory objectives and priorities. 
Retail banking business in Thailand has enjoyed rapid growth since after the Asian financial 
crisis,  as  banks  –  having  learned  the  lesson  of  risk  concentration  –  began  to  shift  their 
strategies to diversify their portfolios and revenues by making inroads into the retail market 
segments. Over the past five years, bank consumer loans have grown at an average annual 
rate  of  20  percent,  outpacing  the  corporate  loans  which  have  increased  three  percent 
annually. As a result, consumer loans now constitute almost a quarter of total loan portfolio of 
the banking system in Thailand, compared with 16 percent in 2003. Housing loans continue 
to  account  for  the  largest  share,  followed  by  personal  loans  and  credit  card  loans. 
Competition  in  the  retail  banking  business  has  been  intense,  with  more  variety  of  product 
offerings and new delivery channels introduced to satisfy customer needs. Non-bank players 
have also been aggressively competing for market share in the personal loan and credit card 
market, although with focus on people in the lower range of income groups.  
Considerable  amount  of  investment  has  been  made  to  revolutionize  network  channel, 
operational  process,  and  risk  management  system  in  order  to  reduce  the  operational  cost 
and service delivery time, and to manage risks more effectively. Functionalities of traditional 
delivery channel such as ATM have been greatly expanded, while new e-banking tools such 
as  internet  banking,  mobile  banking,  and  electronic  money  service  have  been  introduced. 
Use  of  ATM,  debit  and  credit  cards  continues  to  grow  steadily,  whilst  internet  banking 
transactions  and  use  of  electronic  money  services  increase  markedly  both  in  terms  of  the 
number  of  users  and  the  value  of  usage.  Modernization  of  operational  process  and  risk 
management system includes automating application process, credit approval process, and 
increasing use of credit scoring models and credit information system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We view increased competition and innovation in the retail banking business as beneficial to 
consumers and the financial system as a whole. Banks’ loan portfolios have become more 
diversified, while a greater number of people have been given access to financial services. 
Many  of  you  will  recall  that  one  of  the  primary  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  first 
Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  was  to  broaden  access  to  financial  services  for  the 
underserved segments of our society, including people in the lower income group, in the rural 
areas, and small and medium-sized companies. Let me reaffirm that this is still one of our 
primary goals.  
To be sure, broadening access to financial services does not mean ready availability of loans 
for unscrupulous spending. It does not mean consumers can more easily borrow to finance 
extravagant  consumption  and  lifestyle  that  they  cannot  really  afford  and  are  unlikely  to  be 
able to repay their debt. Broadening access to financial services must come hand in hand 
with responsible lending on the part of service providers and responsible borrowing on the 
part of consumers. Failure to observe these fundamental principles can lead to very painful 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 1
consequences and adjustments for lenders, consumers, and the economy as a whole. It is 
essentially this kind of failure that lies at the heart of current global market turmoil which, as 
we  all  know,  originated from  loose  or  non-existent  credit  underwriting  standards  in  the  US 
subprime  mortgage  market.  And  this  is  exactly  the  kind  of  problems  that  we  sought  to 
prevent a few years ago when we introduced a package of prudential measures related to 
unsecured personal and credit card loans. 
These measures – such as pre-requisite minimum income, cap on credit lines in multiples of 
income,  and  minimum  monthly  installments  –  were  aimed  at  pre-empting  excessive 
household debt, especially by people in the lower income group, who could otherwise have 
faced  severe  financial  distress  and  led  eventually  to  social  problems  at  large.  A  minimum 
loan-to-valuation  ratio  was  also  introduced  to  stem  the  incipient  growth  of  high-priced 
residential loans that, if left unchecked, could have led to speculative property bubbles and 
threat  to  financial  and  economic  stability  down  the  road.  Maintaining  financial  stability  is 
another all-important policy objective for us as the central bank. In fulfilling that objective, it is 
imperative that we remain vigilant on developments which might lead to financial imbalances 
–  such  as  excessive  household  debt  and  asset  price  inflation  –  and  take  timely  action, 
including  prudential  measures,  to  prevent  them  from  becoming  a  threat  to  the  financial 
system and the economy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Another  dimension  of  our  policy  towards  the  retail  banking  business  is  to  ensure  that 
customers are treated fairly, that they are provided with clear and complete information about 
the product and price before and after the sale, and that they are given sound advice which 
takes into account their needs and circumstances. In this connection, we have put a ceiling 
on  interest  rates  on  personal  and  credit  card  loans.  We  also  require  transparency  and 
disclosure of interest rate calculation and fees that banks charge their customers. We have 
provided guidance to banks regarding appropriate procedures to handle customer complaints 
as  well  as  fair  debt-collection  practices.  We  have  also  been  working  to  improve  the 
information available to the general public on our new website that we hope would help to 
facilitate consumer education and raise the level of financial literacy.  
I would like to strongly urge banks and service providers to do your part in helping to raise 
the  level  of  financial  literacy  of  your  customers,  so  that  they  are  capable  of  making  well-
informed decisions on the financial products they really need that will not inadvertently lead 
to problems for themselves or for the service providers later on. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to spend the next few minutes sharing with you what I see as some of the key 
challenges that the retail banking industry face, going forward.  
First,  competition  is  likely  to  intensify  further,  both  between  banks  themselves  and  with 
nonbanks. Banks will continue to diversify their sources of revenue by continuing to increase 
the  share  of  consumer  loans  in  their  portfolios.  An  increasing  number  of  middle-class 
customers – both wealthier and more financially educated – will be more demanding about 
the  kind  of  financial  products  and  services  that  they  require.  Higher  competition  and  more 
demanding customers will drive service providers to become more customer-oriented in their 
product  offerings  in  order  to  create  some  product  differentiation  and  brand  loyalty  in  the 
largely commoditized market. Competition will also likely drive service providers to seek new 
untapped  opportunities  which  will  increase  the  size  of  overall  market.  By  virtually  all 
international  benchmarks  –  whether  they  be  debt  service  or  debt  to  income  ratios  –  the 
average Thai household still has a relatively strong financial position. Thus, the challenge for 
service  providers  is  to  selectively  target  viable  customer  groups  among  the  previously 
underserved segment.  
The  second  challenge  is  maintaining  high  standards  of  credit  underwriting  and  risk 
management  in  the  face  of  more  intense  competition.  It  may  be  tempting  for  service 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2008
providers to lower underwriting standards in order to compete for market share in the face of 
greater  competitive  pressures.  In  view  of  the  severe  consequences  of  the  current  global 
market turmoil that originated from poor underwriting standards in the US subprime market; 
this temptation should be resisted at all costs. Let me assure you that the Bank of Thailand, 
as prudential supervisor of banks, will remain vigilant to ensure that similar problems will not 
happen here. 
The third challenge is managing security risks associated with the use of new technology. 
Advances  in  IT  and  communications  technology  have  enabled  banks  to  provide  faster, 
cheaper, and safer electronic banking services to an increasingly larger group of customers. 
However, proliferation of internet banking, mobile banking, and e-payment also increases the 
risks  of  IT  fraud,  network  security  breach,  and  identity  theft,  etc.  If  these  risks  are  not 
properly managed, they could have severe financial and reputational consequences for the 
banks. In this regard, I urge banks to pay close attention to the best-practice guidance on IT 
and e-banking security risk management that we issued some time ago. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  fully  welcomes  and  supports 
healthy  competition  that  will  lead  to  efficiency  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  retail banking 
industry, which will certainly benefit the consumers at large. Our challenge as supervisor is to 
provide an appropriately balanced prudential framework that, on the one hand, fosters sound 
risk management practices on the part of both service providers and consumers, and on the 
other  hand,  does  not  stifle  competition  and  innovation  in  the  industry.  And  as  the  central 
bank, we will continue to be vigilant on any incipient financial imbalances, and take timely 
action to deal with them should they become potential threats to financial stability and the 
broader macro-economy.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I wish the convention every success and that you all 
have fruitful discussions over the next two days. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 3
