Durmuş Yılmaz: Food prices and inflation  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Central Bank of Argentina 2008 Money and Banking Conference “Financial turbulence – 
impact on developed and emerging economies”, Buenos Aires, 1 September 2008. 
  Dear Guests, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honor  for  me  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience  on  the 
issue of “Food Prices and Inflation”. The current level of food prices constitutes a major risk 
to households, in particular those living in developing countries. I’d like to thank the Central 
Bank of Argentina to organize this conference and dedicate a special session on this issue at 
this juncture. 
Dear Guests, 
The second half of 2007 was not an easy period for central bankers – and so far 2008 has 
been even more challenging.  
We are currently facing significant inflationary pressures on a global scale due to record high 
increases in commodity prices. The surge in inflation rates has become a major challenge 
that  threatens  price  stability  in  many  countries.  Average  inflation  throughout  the  world  has 
been rising rapidly. Inflation in developed countries has reached its highest level of the last 
eighteen years. For the first time in many years, inflation figures of the developing countries 
are in two digit levels.  
Moreover,  the  financial  turbulence  that  has  started  in  the  second  half  of  2007  and  the 
subsequent  credit  crunch  are  adversely  affecting  economic  activities.  Growth  rates  have 
been slowed in many countries. Some advanced economies are on the brink of recession. 
Dear Guests, 
This is not the first time the world had experienced supply shocks in commodities. But, these 
shocks  were  usually  in  energy  prices  and  consequently,  they  had  affected  advanced 
economies  more  severely  than  the  developing  ones.  The  rise  in  food  prices,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  led  to  different  repercussions.  In  comparison  to  the  industrialized  world,  food 
expenditures  in  developing  countries  constitute  a  larger  share  in  the  basket  of  consumer 
prices. That is why increases in food prices typically lead to higher increases in the inflation 
rates of developing countries. 
Food  prices  have  been  rising  dramatically,  particularly  since  mid-2007.  At  one  point,  the 
inflation of wheat prices reached triple digits. Similar levels were observed in corn, soybean, 
and  rice  prices.  According  to  estimates  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  food  inflation 
accounted for 44 percent of global inflation in 2007 – up from 27 percent in 2006. In Asian 
countries, this figure reaches to 68 percent. Food inflation is expected to contribute almost 
two thirds of increase in inflation rates in Brazil, Chile and Argentina. Despite some relief in 
the most recent period, they are expected to stay elevated in the near future. 
There are both supply and demand pressures behind this dramatic surge in food prices. On 
the  supply  side  the  amount  of  resources  allocated  for  agricultural  production  has  been 
stagnant for a while due to rapid urbanization and industrialization. A shift in labor force from 
agricultural to non-agricultural sectors has been experienced in many developing countries. 
Rapid productivity gains observed throughout the post-war period, have been slowed in the 
last decade. Moreover, the recent drought that hit most parts of the world created a supply 
crisis, aggravating the upward trend in food prices. 
On the demand side the huge jump in energy prices and rising environmental and political 
concerns force developed countries to seek alternative energy sources. The production and 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
consumption  of  bio-fuels  increased  rapidly,  particularly  after  the  European  Parliament 
adopted  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy  reform  in  2003  and  the  US  Senate  approved  the 
Energy  Policy  Act  of  2005.  As  a  result,  prices  for  commonly  used  bio-fuel  crops,  such  as 
corn, wheat, sugar cane and canola, started to climb. During the 2004-2005 period, only 7 
percent of total corn production was used to produce bio-fuel, but this share is expected to 
increase  to  17  in  2008  and  31  percent  in  and  2011.  The  increase  in  purchasing  power  of 
households in fast growing and emerging economies with large populations also put strong 
demand pressure on international food prices.  
What is the contribution of these factors in food price inflation, especially exogenous ones 
such as the adverse weather conditions? What is the extent of the role played by factors? Is 
it possible to control domestic food prices through monetary policies?  
It is difficult to give an exact answer to these questions, but recent research conducted by the 
staff at the Central Bank of Turkey may give us some ideas. Empirical analysis of food prices 
in Turkey showed that external factors are quite dominant in food inflation. It was estimated 
that severe drought in Turkey and skyrocketing world food prices were responsible for almost 
70 percent of annual inflation in processed food prices in 2007. It was less than 10 percent in 
2006.  It  was  also  found  that  aggregate  demand  conditions,  which  are  mostly  within  the 
domain of monetary policy, had a negligible contribution in processed food inflation. These 
findings show, on balance, that the recent climb in processed food prices was mainly fueled 
by supply shocks and external factors. 
Dear Guests, 
In  recent  months  there  are  signs  of  some  relief  in  food  inflation.  Inflationary  pressures 
triggered by severe drought and related crop losses have been waning for some time around 
the world, including Turkey. Early forecasts for 2008 suggest that the weather will be more 
accommodating  than  2007.  As  measured  by  current  indicators,  grain  production  will 
particularly rebound from its year-ago levels. The rate of increase in food prices is likely to 
decelerate during the second half of 2008.  
Yet, despite better prospects on the supply side, food prices are expected to stay elevated in 
the  near  future  in  the  medium  term  as  long  as  the  demand  pressure  from  rapidly-growing 
developing countries continues. Let me give you a few numbers and explain my reasoning. 
As I mentioned before, food expenditures in developing countries constitute a larger share in 
the basket of consumer prices than those on developed countries. It is as low as 15 percent 
in  the  U.S.,  as  high  as  60  percent  in  India.  Moreover,  income  elasticity  of  food  is  also 
significantly  higher  in  less  developed  countries.  In  Bangladesh,  one  percent  increase  in 
household income leads to 0.73 percent increase in food demand. In the U.S., however, a 
typical household who receives one extra dollar spends only 10 cents more on food.  
What does it mean? 
It  means  that  as  long  as  rapid  growth  rates  in  developing  countries  continue,  the  food 
demand  is  also  likely  to  rise  rapidly.  In  the  post  war  period,  we  did  not  observe  a  similar 
surge  in  food  demand,  because  the  engine  of  world  economy  at  that  time  was  mainly 
advanced  economies.  Today,  we  face  a  different  picture.  Emerging  market  countries  are 
growing fast. Their share in world consumption is three times higher than what it was in early 
80s.  More  importantly,  these  countries,  like  China,  India,  and  Indonesia  have  huge 
populations.  According  to  our  estimates  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey,  the  contribution  of 
only two countries (China and India) on food demand growth in the world reached almost 50 
percent  in  2007  –  up  from  10  percent  in  1980.  The  growth  in  global  food  demand  is 
estimated to exceed the growth in global food supply since early 2000s and it is likely to stay 
that way in the near future.  
In other words, we are facing a gap between food demand and food supply. Prices have to 
adjust to restore equilibrium. Since the price elasticity of food demand is low as compared to, 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
say,  durable  goods,  there  needs  to  be  a  drastic  rise  in  food  prices,  which  is  what  we  are 
facing today.  
Dear Guests, 
Until  recently,  the  common  view  among  central  banks  of  developed  countries  was  to  give 
priority  to  problems  in  financial  markets,  ignoring  the  signs  of  inflationary  pressures. 
Certainly, there are structural reasons behind the recent run-up in food and energy prices, as 
I  have  just  briefly  discussed.  However,  it  is  also  undeniable  that  there  are  significant 
demand-driven pressures over commodities. Loose monetary policies adopted at the turn of 
the century certainly played a key role, together with excess liquidity in the financial system. 
Fast-forwarding to the recent period, the central banks of developed countries still keep real 
interest rates negative in the face of financial risks may hamper a correction in commodity 
prices.  
The commonly accepted practice in inflation targeting regime is that monetary policy should 
not react to supply-driven shocks that are temporary in nature and should allow temporary 
increases  in  inflation  in  the  short-term,  unless  they  create  deterioration  in  inflation 
expectations. Otherwise, undesired fluctuations might arise in economic activity and relative 
prices.  The  increase  in  commodity  prices  would  trigger  a  self-correcting  mechanism.  By 
changing the relative prices, it would provide valuable information on how the resources of 
the economy should be distributed. While high food and energy prices curb consumption on 
these products, they would also encourage investment and increase supply in the long-term. 
In short, the common view is that central banks have nothing to do but wait for the supply-
driven shocks to work out their natural course.  
However,  in  the  current  environment  where  persistent  and  rapid  increases  in  food  and 
energy prices have been observed for a considerable period, the prevalence of this view has 
become questionable – especially in the light of current projections that foresee even higher 
prices in the near future. As a matter of fact, many countries under inflation targeting regime 
now  project  that  inflation  will  converge  to  the  target  at  the  end  of  2009  or  in  2010,  at  the 
earliest.  
Going  through  a  long  period  of  high  inflation  is  a  serious  risk  for  price  stability.  First,  the 
general  price  level  may  shift  upwards  at  a  faster  rate,  as  producers  and  workers  in  other 
sectors  ask  for  higher  prices  and  wages  in  response  to  the  loss  of  their  real  purchasing 
power. The fall in real interest rates due to deterioration in inflation expectations is another 
risk, since lower real rates will lead to a faster pace of credit expansion. The common factor 
of these two risks is that persistent supply shocks may turn into demand shocks after a while.  
Thus, at some point, central banks have to decide to what extent they can tolerate the rise in 
inflation. Advocators of a “wait-and-see” approach in the face of supply shocks are not clear 
on  the  question  of  when  the  supply  shock  ends  and  when  demand-driven  price  increases 
take its place, in an environment where inflation keeps rising. If this issue is not clarified, any 
above-target  inflation  figure  or  any  upward  revision  in  inflation  forecasts  can  easily  be 
attributed  to  supply-side  factors.  Clear  lines  should  be  drawn  as  to  which  economic  data 
would refute this discourse and what would constitute a limit to supply shocks from a central 
banker’s point of view. 
Dear Guests, 
In  the  last  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  discuss  recent  developments  in  the  Turkish 
economy and the monetary policy implemented in this period.  
In early 2008 the supply side shocks in food and energy prices started to exert significant 
inflationary  pressures,  as 
levels  above  and  beyond 
expectations. For instance, October 2007 Inflation Report, based on forecasts of international 
agencies, had foreseen oil prices around USD 70 per barrel in 2008 and a gradual correction 
in food prices. In other words, it was assumed that supply side shocks would be temporary 
and  that  they  would  lose  impact  after  a  while.  These  forecasts  were  in  line  with  pricing  in 
they  reached  unprecedented 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
forward and futures markets. However, these expectations did not materialize. Both crude oil 
prices  and  agricultural commodity  prices  continued  to  rise.  The  adverse  impacts  of  supply 
shocks reached unprecedented levels during the first half of 2008.  
Under  normal  circumstances,  supply  shocks  are  expected  to  have  a  temporary  impact  on 
relative  prices,  not  changing  the  course  of  medium-term  inflation.  Nevertheless,  the 
emergence  of  multiple  shocks  at  the  same  time  and  their  persistence  for  a  considerable 
period  aggravated  the  risks  on  pricing  behavior.  In  fact,  the  research  conducted  by  the 
Central Bank staff indicates that economic agents increasingly focus on past inflation while 
forming their inflation expectations.  
After  evaluating  the  said  developments,  the  Central  Bank  concluded  that  the  increases  in 
food and energy prices in recent years reflect a structural change stemming from the global 
economic environment. In other words, these shocks are likely to prevail for a longer time 
period, contrary to previous forecasts. There is no clear evidence at this point that this trend 
will reverse in the short term. Moreover, our revised projections suggest that even with the 
maintenance of a cautious monetary policy stance for the foreseeable future, reaching the 4 
percent target is going to take an extended period of time. 
Dear Guests, 
In  light  of  these  evaluations,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  announced  the  framework  of  its 
monetary policy for the upcoming period in the April 2008 Inflation Report and in the letter on 
inflation targets that was sent to the Government on June 3, 2008.  
The first pillar of the monetary policy framework is the target revision. The main purpose of 
the target revision is to create an achievable disinflation path that can be taken as reference 
by  economic  agents  and  that  would  take  us  to  our  price  stability  objective  in  the  medium 
term, which is inflation rate of 4 percent. As you may know, Turkey has not witnessed low 
single-digit  inflation  figures  for  nearly  half  a  century.  This  has  adversely  affected  the 
expectations  for  attaining  the  4  percent  inflation  target.  Furthermore,  overshooting  the 
inflation  targets  in  2006  and  2007,  and  recent  supply  shocks  have  elevated  expectations 
even further. Hence, the new targets announced on June 3, 2008 aim to create a new anchor 
for economic agents, that is attainable. 
At this point, I would like to emphasize that the nature of these new targets differ remarkably 
from  those  set  for  the  2006-2008  period.  The  Central  Bank  will  treat  the  revised  targets 
asymmetrically.  In  this  framework,  in  the  upcoming  period,  the  Central  Bank  will  prefer  an 
inflation  that  stays  below  targets.  Accordingly,  better  than  expected  outcomes  in  food  and 
energy  prices  or  in  other  global  factors  will  be  perceived  as  an  opportunity  to  bring  down 
inflation  faster  than  that  is  implied  by  the  revised  target  path.  Should  the  upside  risks 
materialize;  monetary  policy  will  be  conducted  so  as  to  minimize  any  upside  deviation  of 
inflation from the revised targets. 
Target revision is the solution that is provided by our Bank to the “problem of demarcation”, 
which  is  faced  by  almost  all  central  banks  today.  However,  the  revision  will  work  only  if 
necessary  policy  stance  is  adopted.  For  this  reason,  the  second  pillar  of  monetary  policy 
comprises  the  implementation  of  a  monetary  tightening  that  is  consistent  with  the  new 
inflation  targets.  Newly  set  targets  are  references  that  would  help  decision  makers  in  the 
economy understand the reasoning behind the policy stance, i.e. the factors that have led to 
monetary tightening and the extent of monetary tightening if and when necessary. In other 
words, the Central Bank has announced, via the target revision, the limits of its tolerance to 
the first round impacts of supply side shocks.  
While  concluding  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  thanks  to  the  Central  Bank  of 
Argentina, and all other institutions and individuals who contributed to the organization of this 
significant event.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
