Njuguna Ndung’u: Combating money laundering and the financing of 
terrorism 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the cocktail to 
usher  in  the  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  Anti-Money  Laundering  Group  (ESAAMLG) 
16th Taskforce meeting of senior officials, Mombasa, 18 August 2008. 
 Mr. Serwalo Tumelo, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, 
Botswana and Chairman of the Task Force of Senior Officials; 
Permanent Secretaries here present; 
Dr. Eliawony Kisanga, Executive Secretary, ESAAMLG; 
Representatives of Co-operating Nations and Organisations; 
Members of the ESAAMLG Taskforce of Senior Officials; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my joy and pleasure to be here this evening on the occasion of the official opening of the 
16th ESAAMLG Taskforce of Senior Officials Meeting. I must start by extending a very warm 
welcome to all the delegates here present. It is indeed an honour for Kenya to be hosting this 
important meeting. We appreciate the hosting of the ESAAMLG Meeting in Kenya even after 
the period of turbulence that we underwent at the beginning of the year. However, this is now 
behind us and we are back in business. As the Swahili say, “kuteleza sio kuanguka” (To slip 
is not to fall). 
Anti Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism are indeed current buzz 
words in the global financial circles. Forums such as this therefore serve as useful avenues 
of  sharing  various  country  experiences.  For  the  case  of  Kenya,  the  timing  of  this  meeting 
could not be more opportune. The Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2008 
is currently under consideration by our Parliament. We remain cognisant that Kenya’s vision 
of  being  a  regional  trade  and  financial  services  hub  is  founded  on  the  enactment  of  an 
enabling  legal  and  regulatory  framework.  A  sound  Anti-Money  Laundering  legal  and 
regulatory regime is therefore a critical plank to this aspiration. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The region is vulnerable  to money laundering particularly given its 
mainly  cash  based  economies.  This  is  further  aggravated  by  porous  borders  and  weak 
institutions  for  enforcements.  Though  much  has  been  done  in  the  recent  past  by 
organizations such as ESAAMLG, more remains to be done. 
The challenges we face are multifaceted, but as the region has demonstrated through the 
support  member  countries  have  given  to  ESAAMLG,  we  remain  resolutely  committed  to 
fighting the double evils of money laundering and financing of terrorism. 
Allow  me  for  the  next  few  minutes  to  wear  my  Central  Bankers’  hat  as  a  regulator  of  the 
banking sector. From where I sit, I am acutely aware, that money laundering is a threat to 
both the integrity and stability of the banking sector and even the forex bureaus themselves. 
Further,  with  increased  globalisation,  our  banking  systems  are  increasingly  under  close 
scrutiny by our international trading partners particularly with regard to anti money laundering 
legal and regulatory frameworks. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  Kenya,  as  I  have  alluded,  we  are  in  the  process  of  enacting  a 
comprehensive Anti Money Laundering legislation. However, this is not to say that there are 
no measures in place at the moment to deter money laundering. The Central Bank, as both 
regulator  and  supervisor  of  banking  institutions,  has  played  a  key  role  in  ensuring  that 
systems to combat abuse of the banking sector by criminal elements are in place. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
In 2000, the Central Bank of Kenya issued guidelines to all commercial banks pursuant to the 
Banking  Act  on  “Know  Your  Customer”  and  “Customer  Due  Diligence”  procedures.  The 
guidelines  vest  responsibility  on  the  Board  of  Directors  and  Management  of  banking 
institutions to: 
• 
Establish  appropriate  policies  and  procedures  to  ensure  the  effective  prevention, 
detection  and  control  of  possible  money  laundering  activities  and  terrorism 
financing. 
Train  staff  in  the  prevention,  detection  and  control  of  possible  money  laundering 
activities and terrorism financing. 
Ensure adequate identification of customers, their source of funds and the use of the 
said funds. 
  The guidelines were reissued in 2006 following a review that took into account international 
developments and experiences of financial institutions in implementing the 2000 guidelines. 
Key changes included: 
• 
• 
Strengthening of customer due diligence procedures. 
Providing  additional  guidance  on  identification  of  suspicious  transactions  by 
commercial banks. 
Introduction of guidance on customer due diligence procedures for non face to face 
transactions that have gained increased prominence with the growth in internet and 
telephone banking. 
 We  know  that  the  rapidly  changing  technologies  and  the  introduction  of  new  financial 
products  remains  a  major  challenge  which  requires  financial  institutions  and  regulatory 
bodies  to  constantly  remain  vigilant  of  possible  abuse  of  new  products  by  criminals.  The 
Central  Bank  continues  to  monitor  adherence  to  the  existing  guidelines  through  its 
surveillance mechanisms and adopting them to the changing environment. 
Kenyan  banks  have  faced  a  number  of  challenges  in  implementing  these  guidelines.  I  am 
sure  that  these  are  challenges  also  shared  in  some  of  the  countries  represented  here.  In 
particular,  some  customer  due  diligence  requirements  have  been  difficult  to  implement 
particularly  in  rural  and  even  peri-urban  areas.  For  instance,  the  requirement  to  verify  the 
physical  address  of  a  customer  has  been  a  challenge  in  some  instances.  As  you  will 
appreciate, documents such as utility bills required to prove physical address are nonexistent 
in  areas  where  electricity,  telephone,  water  and  other  services  are  yet  to  be  installed.  We 
might  call  it  an  urban  bias  in  physical  address.  This  is  further  complicated  in  some  of  our 
nomadic  communities  whose  physical  address  is  determined  by  availability  of  pasture  and 
water. 
Given our experience, we would greatly welcome an opportunity for this Group to engage in 
a  discussion  of  these  peculiar  challenges.  In  particular,  it  would  benefit  our  financial 
institutions  dealing  with  less  sophisticated  customers  to  apply  simplified  customer  due 
diligence 
the  existing  circumstances  without  necessarily 
compromising the “Know Your Customer” obligations as required under the Financial Action 
Task  Force  (FATF)  recommendations.  I  would  therefore  urge  this  Group  to  look  at  how  a 
Risk  Based  Approach  reflecting  the  circumstances  in  this  region  can  be  rolled  out.  This 
would benefit financial reach in the country. 
The cost of staff training for financial institutions and putting in place the requisite systems for 
transaction  monitoring  is  also  enormous.  I  am,  however,  pleased  to  note  that  the  Kenyan 
Banking  sector  has  embraced  the  necessary  policies  and  procedures  to  deter  and  detect 
money laundering. 
We  are  jointly  addressing  the  challenges  I  have  alluded  to  with  the  banks,  as  we  seek 
customised  solutions  that  will  not  dilute  the  overarching  imperative  that  banks  “know  their 
into  account 
takes 
that 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2008
customers”. We also hope that lessons from ongoing ESAAMLG research studies on trends 
and typologies of Money Laundering in the region will serve as useful inputs in addressing 
some of these challenges. 
From  a  regional  perspective,  as  Central  Banks,  we  continue  to  engage  and  share 
experiences  on  how  we  can  strengthen  our  regulatory  mechanisms  on  anti-money 
laundering  and  combating  the  financing  of  terrorism.  Beyond  ESAAMLG,  this  agenda  is 
discussed at regional economic forums that our countries are members of, including the East 
African Community (EAC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) 
and the Southern Africa Development and Co-ordination Committee (SADC). We would also, 
in  this  regard,  welcome  assistance  to  Central  Banks  as  well  as  other  regulatory  bodies  to 
enhance their regulatory capacity in anti money laundering and combating the financing of 
terrorism. 
It  is  my  hope  that  ESAAMLG  will  expand  its  co-operation  with  the  regional  organizations 
involved in this area of work so that the work of these organizations can complement each 
other for the benefit of all countries in the region. I understand that this co-operation already 
exists and I would like to take this opportunity to encourage its expansion. 
It  is  also  important  to  continue  having  dialogue  between  the  regions’  private  and  public 
sectors  as  we  continue  driving  this  common  agenda.  This  will  ensure  that  both  the  public 
sector  policy  makers  and  private  sector 
tandem.  Without 
overemphasising the point, capacity building should be a key pillar of this dialogue. I hope 
that ESAAMLG will be able to initiate such dialogue at an appropriate time. Those of us in 
the financial sector stand ready to participate in such an initiative. 
At this juncture, it would be important to recognise the ESAAMLG’s cooperating nations and 
organisations  for  their  supportive  role  in  capacity  building  in  the  region.  I  would  like  in 
particular to acknowledge Governments of the United States and United Kingdom, the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Bank and the IMF. It is my expectation that 
they  shall  remain  engaged  as  ESAAMLG  continues  to  spearhead  the  development  of  an 
enabling AML/CFT legal and regulatory framework in the region. 
As I wind down my comments, I urge you to take some time to enjoy the beautiful beaches 
and warm hospitality that Mombasa offers. There is indeed a Swahili saying that translates 
as “Getting into Mombasa is easy, the hard part is getting out”. So if you find yourself wanting 
to extend your stay here, do not be surprised. Kenya, of course, offers much more including 
the  acclaimed  “seventh  wonder”  of  the  world,  the  Maasai  Mara  which  is  currently 
experiencing the spectacular annual migration of wildebeest from the Serengeti in Tanzania. 
As you embark on your meeting over the next few days, I wish you very fruitful deliberations. 
Do enjoy the evening and, indeed, your entire stay in Mombasa. 
It  is  now  my  pleasant  and  honourable  duty  to  declare  the  16th  ESAAMLG  Task  Force  of 
Senior Officials Officially Open. 
implementers  move 
in 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 3
