Svein Gjedrem: Ethics and the Government Pension Fund – global  
Dinner speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the conference “Investing for the future”, Oslo, 16 January 2008. 
 Minister, ladies and gentlemen, 
We are gathered here for a conference – and a dinner – centred on ethics. At this venue, it is 
obvious that no one will be cheated, and each will get his or her due. Clearly, no one should 
need to leave this place hungry, or unfairly treated.  
For that we are truly grateful. 
Norges Bank is proud, and fortunate, to be the manager of the global part of the Government 
Pension Fund. And we are proud that Norway has been one of the frontrunners in promoting 
the idea of ethical investment.  
Although  the  debate  has  broadened  over  the  past  few  years,  some  criteria  for  the 
management of the Fund have been in place since the beginning: We must have leaders and 
employees  who  do  their  job  in  a  morally  impeccable  way.  We  must  also  make  sure  that 
environmental sustainability and social issues are factored in, since they are crucial to future 
returns,  and  to  the  Fund’s  legitimacy.  And  there  should  indeed  be  barriers  against  certain 
acts and investments, no matter how profitable, basically because ethical behaviour is a goal 
in itself. 
In addition to our job of managing the investments, we have been given the task of being 
active  and  engaged  owners  of  our  global  stock  portfolio.  Being  engaged  internationally  is, 
fortunately, a trait by which Norwegians are known. Maybe we do not always succeed in our 
endeavours. But the idea of not being engaged, of not using our influence, of not taking the 
long-term perspective, and instead just standing on the sidelines, is foreign to us. This Fund 
is global in the truest sense of the word, and it does have a say through its equity holdings, 
even  if  this  influence  is  subject  to  clear  limits.  The  authority  to  do  so  is  laid  down  in  the 
mandate  and  guidelines.  It  is  a  task  that  we  have  taken  on  with  great  commitment  and  a 
strong sense of purpose. 
The  management  of  the  Fund  is  of  course  subject  to  certain  requirements.  But  when 
considering what these requirements should or should not comprise, it is important to tread 
carefully. Even though globalisation has reduced the emphasis on national borders, we must 
show caution when we invest in foreign markets – because when we do so, we are entering 
our neighbour’s house. 
For one thing, the distinction between ethics and politics may be different in other countries.  
For  another,  when  we  say  that  a  company’s  activities  are  in  conflict  with  the  ethical 
guidelines, we are not only pointing a finger at the company. We are also pointing a finger, 
albeit  indirectly,  at  the  laws  and  regulations  in  the  country  that  permits  those  activities  to 
continue – and we are pointing that finger as a representative of another state.  
Consequently, the guidelines for the exercise of ownership rights must be based, not on a 
specifically Norwegian world view, but on internationally recognised norms. And we are open 
about  our  principles  and  practices  without  losing  sight  of  the  limits  of  transparency. 
Declarations and resolutions may have their place, but in our day-to-day work we aim for real 
dialogue and results. 
The list of global issues that require urgent attention seems never-ending, and there have 
been calls for the Fund to address many of these. But priorities always have to be made to 
avoid the risk of spreading resources too thinly. Norway has chosen its goals for the Pension 
BIS Review 6/2008 
 1
Fund based on a long-term perspective, and we do not want to be ruled by the tyranny of the 
impulsive and changing priorities that beleaguer many public programmes and sectors. 
There is another important ethical principle behind the Fund, which should not be forgotten: 
namely, our obligation to future generations. For the prosperity we are enjoying now, incurs 
obligations.  Our  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  limited.  Justice  would  not  be  served  if  all  our 
petroleum wealth was allocated only to the generation lucky enough to experience our “oil 
age”. We perceive it as an ethical obligation to invest our wealth also for the benefit of future 
generations.  International  capital  markets  play  a  crucial  role  in  allowing  us  to  fulfil  this 
obligation. 
Allow me the pleasure for a moment to look back on our less illustrious history as a borrower. 
Twice in the past 40 years we have succumbed to the temptation of living above our means. 
The first time was in the late 1970s, when the Norwegian state borrowed substantial amounts 
abroad. Our current account deficit in 1977, at 15 per cent of GDP, set an OECD record and 
we  were  probably  on  the  brink  of  having  to  ask  for  an  IMF  program.  We  were  investing 
heavily  in  the  welfare  state  and  in  North  Sea  projects  at  the  same  time,  and  these 
investments could not be fully financed on the basis of economic growth.  
The  second  time  was  during  the  years  of  economic  crisis  before  and  around  1990,  when 
levels of domestic spending, private and public, far exceeded our economic limits. 
It was not until 30 years after oil had been discovered off our shores that Norway was in a 
position to put some money aside. We are nonetheless frequently reminded that petroleum 
production has reached a plateau and will begin to decline in a few years’ time. Our welfare 
system, including old-age pensions, is basically financed by current income. It is not fund-
based,  as  pensions  are  in  a  number  of  other  countries.  Even  though  it  is  likely  that  the 
Pension Fund will grow considerably in the years ahead, estimates show that the capital in 
the  Fund  will  only  cover  some  60  per  cent  of  public  pension  expenditure  in  the  future.  It 
cannot therefore be argued that the government’s savings are large relative to its obligations.  
The  Fund  and  its  investments  in  international  capital  markets  greatly  enhance  our  welfare 
and  they  do  it  in  two  ways:  First,  they  give  us  the  freedom  to  consume  and  invest  oil 
revenues independently of the actual time profile of oil production. Second, they give us the 
freedom  to  diversify  by  converting  oil  in  the  ground  into  ownership  stakes  in  businesses 
around the world, increasing expected returns and reducing risk. 
I hope those of us gathered here tonight – guests from far away and close by, and many who 
work with this Fund every day – will see a growing consensus around standards and norms 
for ethical investment. As a representative of Norges Bank, I am happy that you wish to be 
part of the process. As I’m confident our owner the Ministry of Finance, and our colleagues at 
the Council on Ethics would agree, we welcome input, ideas, and challenges.  
I wish you every success with your discussions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2008
