Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Supervision and central banking – improving the 
exchange of information 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Workshop  “Financial  turmoil  and  missing  risks:  new  challenges  for 
bankers and regulators”, Milan, 12 June 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction1
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to speak today at this event. As the title of the session 
indicates,  this  is  a  time  when  both  bankers  and  authorities  need  to  think  hard  about  the 
lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  financial  market  turmoil,  and  even  challenge  conventional 
wisdom if necessary. 
In the last few years, the relationship between supervision and central banking has evolved. 
Following the example of the UK, supervisory responsibilities have been allocated in some 
countries to independent authorities, separate from the central bank. In other countries, such 
as the Netherlands, prudential supervision of all financial institutions has been fully integrated 
in  the  central  bank.  I  do  not  want  to  repeat  here  all  the  arguments  for  or  against  the 
separation  of  supervision  from  central  banking  (they  have  been  thoughtfully  analysed  by 
Charles Goodhart and Donato Masciandaro, among others). But I do recall that the ECB took 
a  position  in  2001  on  the  fundamental  role  of  central  banks  in  prudential  supervision, 
stressing  the  importance  of  confidential  supervisory  information  in  the  conduct  of  central 
banking functions.2  
The recent financial market turmoil has confirmed the importance of a smooth and efficient 
relationship  between  the  central  banking  and  supervisory  functions;  it  has  also  led  to  a 
debate about a reform of the current supervisory structure in some countries such as the UK 
and  the  US.  The  report  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  entitled  “Enhancing  Market 
and  Institutional  Resilience”  presented  to  the  G7  last  April  includes  a  number  of  policy 
recommendations  to  help  prevent  any  recurrence  of  financial  stresses  similar  to  the  ones 
experienced during the current turmoil. Among its many recommendations, the FSF refers to 
the  need  for  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  to  improve  cooperation  and  their 
exchanges of information. It calls in particular for such exchanges to be rapid during periods 
of market strain.  
Today, I will focus my remarks on why supervisory information is relevant for central banks in 
general,  and  for  the  ECB  in  particular,  in  three  core  central  banking  functions:  monetary 
policy, liquidity policy and financial stability assessment. I will consider each of these in turn. 
Monetary policy 
2.  
Let  me  start  by  considering  the  usefulness  of  supervisory  information  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. I will analyse, in particular, two points. First, the possible role of supervisory 
information  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  behaviour  of  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates.  Second,  the  potential  usefulness  of  such  information  in  understanding  banks’ 
                                                 
1   The views expressed are those of the author. I thank C. Kok Sørensen, C. Beuve, C. Ohlerich, S. Kerjean, N. 
Valckx and F. Recine for their input into the preparation of these remarks. 
2   See ECB, “Recent developments in supervisory structures in the EU and acceding countries”, October 2006, 
available on the ECB's website. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
lending  behaviour,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  through  the  banking  system  and 
financing conditions for households and firms. 
Since its inception, the European Central Bank has regularly utilised a wide array of banking 
data  in its monetary  analysis.  The  data  are  mainly  based  on  the  aggregate  balance  sheet 
statistics of euro area monetary and financial institutions (MFI) collected and compiled by the 
ECB/Eurosystem. Another important source of information on the situation of the euro area 
banking  sector  compiled  by  the  Eurosystem  is  the  quarterly  Bank  Lending  Survey,  which 
provides qualitative information about changes in banks’ credit standards and loan demand, 
and describes the factors contributing to these changes.  
Supervisory information is used to a limited extent. Let me make four general points about 
the usefulness of supervisory information in monetary policy decision-making. First, the ECB 
strongly  encourages  the  ongoing  efforts  conducted  under  the  aegis  of  the  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS)  to  achieve  greater  convergence  in  supervisory 
reporting by banks across the EU; second, supervisory data, by providing information about 
the distribution of key balance sheet and profit ratios across different groups of banks, can 
point  to  developments  in  specific  areas  of  the  economy  not  detectable  by  aggregate 
statistics;  third,  access  to  bank  level-based  supervisory  data  would  allow  central  banks  to 
more clearly identify empirical regularities and to better understand the interrelation between 
the various factors affecting and driving banks’ activities; fourth, and finally, I would like to 
stress  the  mutual  benefits  arising  from  an  enhanced  dialogue  between  banks,  supervisors 
and central banks. From a monetary policy perspective, a more direct interaction with banks 
and supervisors would clearly enhance the scope of analysis and decision-making by giving 
the  central  banks  a  better  feeling  (in  real  time)  for  the  underlying  drivers  of  monetary  and 
credit developments.  
As  you  will  surely  know,  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  consists  of  extracting  information 
about  the  risks  to  price  stability  from  the  analysis  of  developments  in  the  monetary 
aggregates and their counterparts, in particular credit to the private sector, and it does so by 
exploiting the long-run link between money and prices. The Eurosystem MFI balance sheet 
statistics  were  designed  with  the  monetary  analysis  in  mind,  and  hence  fulfil  most  of  the 
requirements  for  conducting  such  an  analysis.  However,  in  some  cases,  supervisory 
information,  such  as  that  embedded  in  the  so-called  COREP  (“Common  Solvency  Ratio 
Reporting”) and FINREP (“Financial Reporting”) templates, which bring together harmonised 
information about solvency ratios and other financial statement data of EU banks, could add 
substantial  value  to  the  analysis.  In  particular,  supervisory-based  information  provides  a 
more  detailed  breakdown  of  bank  asset  and  liabilities  than  in  the  MFI  balance  sheet 
statistics,  thus  making  it  easier  to  interpret  monetary  and  credit  aggregates.  For  example, 
supervisory information on banks’ securitisation activities can help to improve the analysis of 
credit  developments  by  avoiding  the  bias  that  would  be  incurred  by  not  including  assets 
transferred  from  the  banks’  balance  sheets.  In  addition,  having  access  to  supervisory 
information  about  the  distribution  across  banks  of  key  bank  ratios,  such  as  the  capital 
position  or  write-downs  and  losses,  would  help  to  detect  whether  certain  groups  of  banks 
(catering to specific types of borrowers) are more or less likely to cut back (or increase) their 
lending, in particular following changes in policy rates. The need to understand the reasons 
for the recent strong corporate loan growth is a clear example of how a regular dialogue with 
banks and their supervisors might contribute to improving the monetary analysis of the ECB. 
Indeed,  supervisory  information  might  lead  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  relative 
importance  of  pre-committed  credit  lines  and  the  precautionary  nature  of  recent  corporate 
lending. Hence, in certain cases supervisory information can help to improve the analysis of 
“special factors” influencing money and credit demand.  
The value of supervisory data on the euro area banking sector can arguably be even greater 
with respect to the ECB’s economic analysis. Consider the various channels through which 
banks may affect the way in which monetary policy actions are transmitted to the real side of 
the  economy.  In  the  euro  area,  banks  are  the  major  source  of  financing  for  firms  and 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
households.  The  extent  to  which  banks  adjust  their  lending  and  the  pricing  of  loans  in 
response to monetary policy actions influences the various channels through which monetary 
policy affects the economy.  
One transmission channel affected by bank behaviour is the degree and speed with which 
banks  pass  on  changes  in  policy  rates.  Banks  tend  to  adjust  their  lending  rates  only 
sluggishly  in  response  to  changes  in  monetary  policy  rates.3  The  stickiness  of  bank  rates 
hinges among other things on financial structures and competition within the banking sector 
as well as on competition from market-based sources, including securitisation.4 Supervisory 
information  on  banking  activities,  such  as  the  use  of  credit  transfer  instruments  and  the 
relative importance of assets and liabilities held for trading, can be useful in enhancing this 
analysis. 
Another  transmission  channel  often  cited  in  the  literature  which  has  received  increasing 
attention  over  the  past  two  decades  is  the  credit  channel.  Owing  to  informational 
asymmetries  and  principal-agent  problems  between  banks  and  their  borrowers,  monetary 
policy  may  impact  on  the  supply  of  loans.  This  can  happen  through  the  narrow  or  broad 
credit  channel.5  In  the narrow  credit  channel, a  monetary  policy  tightening  may  mean  that 
some banks face balance sheet constraints, such as lower liquidity or capital holdings, and 
hence they may choose to restrain lending. Supervisory information about the health of the 
banking  system  can  provide  valuable  input  to  any  assessment  of  potential  loan  supply 
constraints.  This  analysis  would  be  based  on  data  on  solvency  and  liquidity  ratios,  capital 
buffers,  securitisation  and  credit  risk  transfer  instruments.  Whereas,  for  example,  the 
Eurosystem Bank Lending Survey provides input into disentangling loan supply and demand 
effects, and thus helps to identify relevant supply-side effects, the survey remains qualitative 
in  nature.  Supervisory  information  based  on  a  direct  dialogue  between  the  banks  and 
supervisors  can  provide  more  enlightening  evidence  on  these  issues.  This  type  of 
information may prove particularly relevant in times of turbulence. 
In  the  broad  credit  channel,  monetary  policy  influences  the  creditworthiness  of  bank 
borrowers, for example, through changes in asset and hence collateral values, leading to a 
change  in  their  external  financing  premium.  This,  in  turn,  may  induce  banks  to  alter  their 
supply  of  loans  to  these  borrowers.  Supervisory  information  that  could  bear  on  these 
questions  and  that  cannot  be  derived  from  either  MFI  balance  sheet  statistics  or  market-
based sources are the extent to which banks hold collateralised exposures and the size of 
their exposures to the small and medium sized enterprises.  
All in all, while stressing that information currently available to the ECB/Eurosystem provides 
a very good basis for the economic and monetary analyses, the quality of the assessment of 
economic  and  monetary  developments  could  in  certain  areas  be  further  improved  by 
accessing  supervisory  information.  This  would  be  particularly  beneficial  in  times  of  bank 
distress.  In  particular,  access  to  euro  area-wide  bank-level  data  is  a  key  element  in 
understanding empirical regularities and in projecting developments in monetary and credit 
aggregates. Research in the US has shown that bank supervisory information can help the 
central  bank  in  forecasting  macroeconomic  variables  and  in  guiding  monetary  policy.6 
                                                 
3   For the US, see e.g. Hannan and Berger (1991), Berger and Udell (1992), Mester and Saunders (1995), Berlin 
and  Mester  (1999).  For  more  recent  studies  on  the  euro  area,  see  e.g.  Mojon  (2001),  de  Bondt  (2005), 
Gambacorta (2004), Sander and Kleimeier (2004) and Kok Sørensen and Werner (2006). 
4   See  e.g.  Cottarelli  and  Kourelis  (1995),  Mojon  (2001),  Estrella  (2002),  Gropp  et  al.  (2006)  and  Van 
Leuvensteijn et al. (2007). 
5   See  Bernanke  and  Blinder  (1988),  Bernanke  and  Gertler  (1989,  1995),  Bernanke  and  Gertler  and  Gilchrist 
(1999)  and  Kashyap  and  Stein  (2000)  for  some  of  the  seminal  contributions  to  this  line  of  the  literature. 
Empirical findings for the euro area can be found  in Ehrmann et al. (2001), Angeloni and Ehrmann (2003), 
Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2004), Altunbas et al. (2007). 
6   See Peek, Rosengren and Tootell (1999). 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
Likewise, research based on euro area banks has illustrated the usefulness of supervisory 
information  in  exploring  the  links  between  macroeconomic  developments,  monetary  policy 
and the banking sector.7 For example, drawing on individual bank data on variables such as 
the  risk  characteristics  of  loans,  non-performing  loan  ratios,  solvency  ratios  and  other 
measures of bank distress, many studies find a relationship between monetary policy actions 
and banks’ risk-taking and lending behaviour. Importantly, bank-level supervisory data would 
also  make  it  possible  to  detect  whether  such  relationships  differ  across  banks  of  different 
type and size.  
Liquidity policy  
3. 
I will now examine why supervisory information is important in assessing the credit risk (e.g. 
quality of collateral) that the central bank faces, especially in times of financial turbulence. 
Let me start by stating a general principle: to be effective, monetary policy implementation 
has to lie on sound financial institutions. If financial institutions are not sound, it will be harder 
to evaluate not only their demand for central bank money, but also the risks in supplying it to 
them.  In  the  euro  area,  the  main  demand  for  central  bank  money  is  imposed  by  the 
Eurosystem  on  banks  via  reserve  requirements,  which  need  to  be  fulfilled  by  commercial 
banks on average over a so-called maintenance period, i.e. on a monthly basis. The ECB 
supplies the amount of central bank money that enables banks to smoothly fulfil their reserve 
requirements. 
Through its operations, the Eurosystem provides liquidity to a large group of banks, which 
then redistribute the liquidity to other institutions across the euro area. This is why, according 
to  our  procedures,8  counterparties  for  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations  must  fulfil 
certain  eligibility  criteria.  First  and  foremost,  counterparties  must  be  financially  sound. 
Therefore,  up-to-date  and  constant  supervisory  information  is  absolutely  critical  in order  to 
identify any distortion in the smooth functioning of the money markets, which then may impair 
monetary policy implementation. Indeed, the eligibility of our counterparties is under constant 
review. 
Such information has been crucial especially since the start of the financial turmoil. It allows 
us  to  identify  the  root  causes  of  the  tensions  in  money  markets  and  to  choose  the 
appropriate  remedies.  As  you  know,  substantial  changes  have  affected  the  size,  the 
composition and the funding of the asset side of banks’ balance sheets since August 2007. 
The size of banks’ balance sheets has increased because banks have had to retain assets 
initially  intended  for  securitisation  or  sale  and  because  they  have  had  to  transfer  the 
underlying assets from their off-balance sheet vehicles back into their balance sheets. The 
sources of funding have also changed since securitisation has stopped and the repo market 
for non-government bonds has dried up. As a result, banks have raised their liquidity buffers 
by  reducing  their  funding  maturity  gaps  and  by  applying  larger  liquidity  shocks  as  stress 
scenarios. As a result, banks have hoarded cash and cut back on their lending activities by 
reducing  their  counterparty  limits  and  the  range  of  collateral  accepted  for  their  repo 
operations. This type of behaviour is based on information asymmetry, namely the fact that 
one  counterpart  (the  borrower)  has  more  or  better  information  on  its  own  creditworthiness 
than  the  other  counterpart  (the  lender)  owing  to  the  lack  of  transparency  about  the  true 
valuation of its own assets. In a way, banks try to protect themselves against the dangers of 
increased adverse selection, i.e. a high probability of selecting the most risky counterpart.  
                                                 
7   For  a  few  examples,  see  e.g.  Quagliariello  (2006,  2007);  Jimenez,  Ongena,  Peydro  and  Saurina  (2007); 
Jimenez and Saurina (2005); and De Graeve, Kick and Koetter (2008). 
8   See  General  Documentation  attached  to  the  Guideline  of  the  ECB  on  monetary  policy  instruments  and 
procedures of the Eurosystem (available at www.ecb.europa.eu). 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2008
On top of that, the traditional group of investors, suppliers of liquidity for the banking sector, 
have altered their investment strategies. There is some evidence that money market funds 
and  central  banks  (in  the  management  of  their  foreign  reserves)  have  shifted  their 
investments  from  the  banking  system  to  safe-haven  assets  like  Treasury  bills  or  overnight 
repo transactions. These developments and frictions have inhibited a smooth distribution of 
liquidity  through  the  inter-bank  market,  leading  to  a  segmentation  of  the  euro  cash money 
market.  This  segmentation  has  led  to  a  dramatic  widening  of  the  spreads  between  the 
unsecured (Euribor) and secured (OIS) markets. Against this background, a number of banks 
feel that they must secure their bids at the Eurosystem’s tender operations in order to get the 
liquidity they need from the Eurosystem, whom they see as the (almost) unique provider of 
euro liquidity. They are thus ready to bid very aggressively, in particular if they are “excluded” 
from  the  inter-bank  and  repo  markets.  In  addition,  banks  have  been  very  eager  to  pledge 
assets as collateral with us for which the private repo market continues to be at a standstill.  
The ECB normally collects this type of information through its Money Market Contact Group 
and in bilateral contacts with bank treasurers. Supervisory information could provide useful 
additional  information,  particularly  on  any  change  in  banks’  funding  conditions.  Since  mid-
March,  banks  have  shown  their  ability  to  enhance  their  balance  sheets  by  raising  capital, 
issuing long-term debt and selling portfolios of leveraged loans. At the end of May, USD 276 
billion of capital had been raised by banks, which may be compared with the approximately 
USD 387 billion of write-downs and losses that had already been announced. This type of 
news,  combined  with  the  various  actions  taken  by  central  banks,  has  contributed  to  a 
recovery in the prices of risky assets.  
Overall,  supervisory  information  would  be  an  important  input  into  the  ECB’s  efforts  to 
ensuring  an  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  It  has  proven  to  be  particularly 
crucial  during  the  turmoil.  Looking  ahead,  cooperation  between  supervisors  and  bodies 
responsible for monetary policy implementation could be enhanced through a more frequent 
transmission of information related to the composition and the funding of the balance sheets 
of financial institutions (like the change in the so-called funding gaps). 
Financial stability assessment  
4.  
I turn now to assess to what extent supervisory information may help the financial stability 
monitoring and assessment conducted by central banks, including the ECB. The ECB has in 
fact  developed  this  activity  in  line  with  the  Treaty,  which  stipulates  that  the  ESCB  “shall 
contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to 
the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system” (Art. 
105.5).9
With respect to financial stability, I will address two questions. First, what precise information 
do we need for carrying out our financial stability assessment function? Second, what would 
we do with this information, if we had it? 
The  ECB  regularly  monitors  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  –  comprising  financial 
intermediaries,  markets  and  market  infrastructures  –  in  the  euro  area  and  has  published 
since December 2004 its assessment every six months in its Financial Stability Review. The 
Review draws attention to the main sources of risk and vulnerabilities, and assesses whether 
the euro area financial system is capable of withstanding shocks and disruptions which are 
severe enough to significantly impair its intermediation function.  
This periodic assessment is based on information stemming from manifold sources, including 
of  supervisory  nature.  In  particular,  regular  aggregate  information  on  the  solvency  and 
                                                 
9   This provision is replicated in Art. 3.3. of the Protocol on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 5
profitability of the banking sector as well as ad hoc information on specific exposures of the 
banking  sector  are  collected  by  the  ECB  in  cooperation  with  the  Banking  Supervision 
Committee. There is certainly room for enhancing the access to supervisory information for 
the ECB’s financial stability assessment. In normal times, a wider access – in terms of the 
timeliness and frequency of information on banks’ exposures and risk concentrations – would 
improve the identification of potential risks to the stability of the euro area financial system as 
well as the assessment of the potential impact on the system of the possible materialisation 
of  the  identified  risks.  As  Fed  Chairman  Bernanke  recently  said:  “For  risks  to  financial 
stability  to  be  successfully  managed,  they  must  first  be  identified  and  measured.  Recent 
developments have revealed deficiencies in this respect”. 
Before the outbreak of the market turmoil in mid-2007, conventional wisdom held that banks 
had  successfully  removed  credit  risk  from  their  balance  sheets,  thanks  to  financial 
innovations such as mortgage-backed securities, collateralised debt obligations and the use 
of  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs).  Relatively  little  was  known  about  the  role  and 
activities of SIVs and the exact nature of their relationship with banks. One could argue that, 
if more in-depth supervisory information had been available on these aspects, central banks, 
including the ECB, could have seen that banks’ credit risk transfer to SIVs and investors was 
in many cases incomplete and that banks remained liable for SIVs’ liabilities. Of course, it’s 
easy to say this with hindsight but we should now learn from this experience.  
In a situation of financial stress, supervisory information remains essential is the central bank 
financial stability assessment is to be effective. However, the nature of each financial stress 
is  likely  to  differ  from  the  previous  ones.  Therefore,  the  information  needs  have  to  be 
identified on a case-by-case basis. In the context of the current turmoil, a key supervisory 
information  is  that  on  bank  direct  exposures  to  the  US  sub-prime  sector  and  to  structured 
financial products as well as to the effects of write-downs on banks’ capital position.  
Overall, a wide access by central banks, including the ECB, to supervisory information would 
render  their  financial  stability  assessment  more  effective  both  to  monitor  and  prevent 
financial  stresses.  At  the  same  time,  the  outcome  of  the  central  banks’  financial  stability 
assessment  can  be  of  use  to  supervisory  authorities,  for  instance,  by  helping  them  focus 
their monitoring activity on certain categories of risk. This is the rationale behind the specific 
FSF recommendation which I mentioned at the beginning, namely, to enhance the interplay 
between central banks and supervisory authorities.  
Legal and institutional aspects 
5.  
Coming closer to the end of my remarks, let me now turn to institutional arrangements.  
The  task  of  contributing  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  supervisory  policies,  mentioned  in 
Art. 105.5 of the EU Treaty, was given to the ESCB on several grounds. Central banks have 
a large body of inside knowledge which may help in the exercise of prudential supervision, 
and measures to counter financial market fragility may, on the other hand, have  monetary 
aspects  which  should  be  discussed  by  central  banks.10  Moreover,  information  held  by  the 
ESCB, for instance, in the context of its role in the oversight of payment systems may be of 
great use for supervisory authorities. Payment systems oversight and prudential supervision 
focus on avoiding systemic risks and safeguarding the soundness of financial institutions. At 
the  same  time,  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  flow  of  information  from  (instead  of  to)  the 
supervisory  authorities  and  a  mutually  fruitful  cooperation  between  supervisory  authorities 
and central banks are crucial, with the latter being entrusted with a contributory task in the 
field  of  macro-prudential  supervision.11  The  ECB  has  pointed  out  in  various  opinions  that 
                                                 
10   See R. Smits, The European Central Bank, Institutional aspects (Kluwer International, 2000), p.340. 
11   R. Smits (Ibid), p.342. 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2008
“central bank access to prudential information and cooperation between financial supervisory 
authorities and  central banks  are  essential  for the  conduct  of  macro-prudential  monitoring, 
the  oversight  of  payment  systems  and  the  safeguarding  of  other  market  infrastructures, 
which are in turn essential for the smooth conduct of monetary policy”. 
If  we  examine  closely  the  current  EU  legal  framework  applicable  to  the  exchange  of 
information between central banks and supervisory authorities, we note that the EU Treaty is 
“asymmetric”  since  it  does  not  contain  any  provisions  requiring  the  banking  supervisory 
authorities to contribute to the performance of the tasks under the responsibility of the ECB 
or  the  ESCB,  in  the  same  way  that  the  ECB  and  the  ESCB  contribute  to  the  smooth 
functioning of supervisory policies. This may have historical roots: the national supervisory 
authorities, unlike the ECB or the ESCB, are not Community law bodies and do not have a 
European  mandate  enshrined  in  the  Treaty.  However,  this  entails  some  limitation  in  the 
ability of the ECB and the ESCB to perform their tasks. 
One  has  to  take  into  account  a  series  of  facts  that  make  this  problem  less  acute.  First,  a 
number of central banks in the euro area perform supervisory functions and therefore have 
easy access to supervisory information. Second, European secondary legislation, namely a 
number  of  Community  directives  applicable  to  the  financial  sector  –  and,  for  instance,  the 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD)  –  addresses  the  issue  of  the  cooperation  and 
exchange  of  information  at  EU  level  between  supervisory  authorities  themselves  but  also 
between banking supervisory authorities and central banks. The CRD identifies a number of 
exceptions  or  “gateways”  through  which  Member  States  may  authorise  confidential 
information to be disclosed, in most cases subject to conditions of professional secrecy. This 
Directive provides in particular that exchange of information should be authorised between 
supervisory authorities and central banks in their capacity as monetary authorities. Third, in 
previous  Opinions  on  draft  national  laws,  the  ECB  has  observed  that  virtually  all  Member 
States that have adopted supervisory models based on an independent financial supervisory 
authority  have  included  provisions  stipulating  a  duty  of  cooperation  and  authorising  the 
exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities.12
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  essential  to  eliminate  all  legislative  obstacles  that  prevent 
supervisory authorities from providing information to the ECB and Eurosystem central banks 
on specific banking and financial institutions as well as to guarantee more generally a duty of 
cooperation between central banks and supervisory authorities, whose ultimate purpose is to 
put  in  place  effective  and  practical  arrangements  for  cooperation  and  information-sharing. 
This should be a priority in the European Union. 
The European Commission has recently launched a public consultation on possible targeted 
amendments to the CRD13 which includes aspects relating to cooperation and exchange of 
information between banking supervisory authorities and central banks. More specifically, the 
proposed  amendments  to  the  CRD  include  two  new  provisions.  First,  “  in  an  emergency 
situation,  Member  States  shall  allow  competent  authorities  to  communicate  information  to 
central banks in the EU when this information is relevant for the exercise of their respective 
statutory  tasks,  including  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  oversight  of  payments  and 
securities  settlement  systems,  and  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability”.  Second,  the 
consolidating supervisor should alert the relevant central banks and communicate to them all 
information that is essential for the pursuance of their tasks should an emergency situation, 
                                                 
12   See,  for  instance,  the  Opinion  of  the  ECB  of  5  November  2007  at  the  request  of  the  Austrian  Ministry  of 
Finance on a draft law amending the Law on banking, the Law on savings banks, the Law on the Financial 
Market Supervisory Authority and the Law on the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (CON/2007/33), paragraph 
2.4.1 or the Opinion of the ECB of 9 March 2006 at the request of the Polish Minister of Finance on a draft law 
on the supervision of financial institutions (CON/2006/15), paragraph 2.2.2. 
13   European Commission, ‘Public consultation on possible changes to the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD, 
consisting of Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC)’ (available at www.europa.eu). 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 7
including  adverse  developments  in  financial  markets,  arise  within  a  banking  group  which 
potentially jeopardises the stability of the financial system in any of the Member States where 
entities of the group are located. 
Conclusions  
6. 
In  2001  the  Eurosystem  highlighted  the  importance  of  the  role  played  by  central  banks  in 
supervision.  The  experience  gained  by  central  banks  during  the  financial  market  turmoil 
confirms the fundamental appropriateness of the Eurosystem’s position, which is also shared 
across the Atlantic.  
In  the  US,  a  discussion  has  already  started  on  how  to  improve  coordination  between  the 
various authorities and on how to put the Federal Reserve in a position to better contribute to 
financial market stability. Tim Geithner has recently called for more powers to be given to the 
Federal Reserve in the field of oversight.  
In  the  European  Union,  the  European  Commission  has  launched  initiatives  to  further 
reinforce  the  legal  underpinnings  for  the  cooperation  and  the  exchange  of  information 
between  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks,  and  to  build  a  consistent  institutional 
framework for such an exchange. These initiatives are strongly supported by the ECB and 
should  be  implemented  soon.  Improving  the  institutional  framework  is  necessary,  but  not 
sufficient.  It  has  to  be  followed  by  an  effective  implementation  of  the  provisions  and  the 
activation of the available channels of communication between supervisors and the central 
banks, including the ECB. A substantial amount of work is already underway. It is up to us to 
make sure that it is finalised in time to address any challenges that global financial markets 
may pose to stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L. and Marqués, D. (2007), “Securitisation and monetary policy”, 
forthcoming ECB Working Paper. 
Angeloni,  I.,  Kashyap,  A.N.,  Mojon,  B.,  eds.  (2003),  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  in  the 
Euro Area, Cambridge University Press. 
Berger, A.N. and Udell, G.F. (1992), “Some evidence on the empirical significance of credit 
rationing”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, No 5 (October), 1047-1077. 
Berlin,  M.  and  Mester,  L.J.  (1999),  “Deposits  and  relationship  lending”,  The  Review  of 
Financial Studies, Fall 1999, Vol. 12, No 3, 579-607. 
Bernanke, B.S. and Blinder, A.S. (1988), “Credit, money, and aggregate demand”, American 
Economic Review, 78(2), May, 435-439. 
Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1989), “Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations”, 
American Economic Review, 79(1), March, 14-31. 
Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1995), “Inside the black box: the credit channel of monetary 
policy transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(1), 27-48. 
Bernanke,  B.S.,  Gertler,  M.  and  Gilchrist,  S.  (1999),  “The  financial  accelerator  in  a 
quantitative  business  cycle  framework”,  in  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  Taylor,  J.  and 
Woodford, M. (eds.). 
Bernanke,  B.S.  (2007),  “The  financial  accelerator  and  the  credit  channel”,  Remarks  at  the 
conference  on  the  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Twenty-first  Century,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Georgia, June 15, 2007. 
8 
 BIS Review 77/2008
Bondt, G. de (2005), “Interest rate pass-through: Empirical results for the euro area”, German 
Economic Review, Vol 6, No 1 (February), 37-78. 
Cottarelli,  C.  and  Kourelis,  A.  (1994),  “Financial  structure,  bank  lending  rates,  and  the 
transmission of monetary policy”, IMF Working Paper 94/39. 
De  Graeve,  F.,  Kick,  T.  and  Koetter,  M.  (2008),  “Monetary  policy  and  bank  distress:  An 
integrated  micro-macro  approach”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Discussion  Papers  No  03/2008 
(Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies). 
Ehrmann,  M.,  Gambacorta,  L.,  Martinés  Pagés,  J.,  Sevestre,  P.,  and  Worms,  A.  (2001), 
“Financial systems and the role of banks in monetary policy transmission in the euro area”, 
ECB Working Paper No 105. 
Estrella,  A.  (2002),  “Securitization  and  the  Efficacy  of  Monetary  Policy”,  Economic  Policy 
Review, Volume 8, No 1. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York. May, pp. 243-255. 
Gambacorta, L. (2004), “How do banks set their interest rates?”, NBER Working Paper No 
10295. 
Gambacorta,  L.  and  Mistrulli,  P.E.  (2004),  “Does  bank  capital  affect  lending  behaviour?”, 
Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13, 436-457. 
Goodhart,  C.A.E.  (2000),  The  Organisational  Structure  of  Banking  Supervision,  FSI 
Occasional Papers, No 1 – November 2000-10-25. 
Gropp, R., Kok Sørensen, C. and Lichtenberger, J. (2007), “The dynamics of bank spreads 
and financial structure”, ECB Working Paper No 714. 
Hannan,  T.H.  and  Berger,  A.N.  (1991),  “The  rigidity  of  prices:  Evidence  from  the  banking 
industry”, American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No 4 (September), 938-945. 
Jimenez,  G.  and  Saurina,  J.  (2005),  “Credit  cycles,  credit  risk  and  prudential  regulation”, 
Banco de España Working Paper No 0531. 
Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J. and Saurina, J. (2007), “Hazardous times for monetary 
policy: What do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary policy on 
credit risk taking?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 6514. 
Kashyap  and  Stein  (2000),  “What  do  a  million  observations  on  banks  say  about  the 
transmission of monetary policy?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No 3, pp. 407-428. 
Kok Sørensen, C. and Werner, T. (2006), ”Bank interest rate pass-through in the euro area: 
A cross-country comparison”, ECB Working Paper No 580. 
Masciandaro, D. (2008), Politicians and Financial Supervision outside the Central Bank: Why 
Do They Do it?, American law and Economics Association Annual Meetings, Paper 121. 
Mester,  L.J.  and  Saunders,  A.  (1995),  “When  does  the  prime  rate  change?”,  Journal  of 
Banking and Finance, Vol. 19, No 5 (August), 743-764. 
Mojon,  B.  (2001),  “Financial  structure  and  the  interest  rate  channel  of  monetary  policy”, 
Economie et Prevision No 147, 1, pp 89-115. 
Peek, J., Rosengren, E.S., and Tootell, G.M.B. (1999), “Is bank supervision central to central 
banking?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114 (2), pp. 629-653, May. 
Quagliariello, M. (2006), “Banks’ riskiness over the business cycle: A panel analysis of Italian 
intermediaries”, Banca d’Italia Temi di Discussioni No 599, September. 
Quagliariello, M. (2007), “Macroeconomic uncertainty and banks’ lending decision: The case 
of Italy”, Banca d’Italia Temi di Discussioni No 615, February. 
Sander,  H.  and  Kleimeier,  S.  (2004),  “Convergence  in  Euro  Zone  retail  banking?”,  LIFE 
Working Paper 04-005. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 9
Van Leuvensteijn, M., Kok Sørensen, C., Bikker, J.A. and van Rixtel, A. (2007), “Impact of 
bank competition on the interest rate pass-through in the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 
885. 
10 
 BIS Review 77/2008
