Durmuş Y lmaz: Recent developments in international markets and their 
impact on the Turkish economy 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yılmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at the Euromoney Turkey Finance & Investment Forum, Istanbul, 18 June 2008. 
 Dear Guests, 
I am delighted to be here to address such a distinguished audience in Istanbul. I hope this 
timely and important Forum will contribute much to debates about future growth prospects of 
Turkey, through exploring many prominent issues. 
Let  me  begin  with  recent  developments  in  international  markets  and  their  impacts  on  the 
Turkish economy. 
As  you  may  all  know,  both  developed  and  emerging  countries  have  been  suffering  from 
higher inflation and lower growth rates for a while. There are two main reasons behind this 
undesirable  economic  situation.  One  is  the  turbulence  that  emerged  in  the  second  half  of 
2007 in financial markets; and the other one is the continuously increasing global commodity 
prices. 
The second half of 2007 was not an easy period for central bankers – and 2008 is likely to be 
even  more  challenging.  There  is  an  apparent  acceleration  in  consumer  prices  inflation  all 
over the world and the annual inflation even in developed countries is at its highest level of 
the last 16 years. Improvement in the wealth of big developing countries such as China and 
India has created a demand-driven pressure on commodity prices. Moreover, the utilization 
of foodstuff in the bio-fuels production combined with the unfavorable weather conditions last 
year  has  led  to  further  increases  in  commodity  prices.  Despite  economic  slowdown 
expectations in developed countries, the surge in commodity prices has continued in 2008 
and the oil prices reached USD 140 per barrel. 
On the other hand, the sub-prime mortgage crisis that has started in the U.S. in mid 2007 
has grown to a level that threatens the stability of financial system in many countries. The 
growth expectations were scaled back significantly. 
The turbulence might also have negative implications on the Turkish economy. Nevertheless, 
economic  indicators  show  that  the  Turkish  economy’s  resistant  to  fluctuations  in  global 
markets has increased substantially, compared to the previous episodes of turbulences. The 
current  relative  resilience  is  an  outcome  of  the  successfully  and  decisively  implemented 
macroeconomic policies since 2001 together with comprehensive structural reforms. 
Still,  we  are  facing  challenges  now.  The  year-on-year  consumer  price  inflation  climbed  to 
double-digit levels in May and it will probably remain high till the last quarter of this year and 
then  decline  gradually.  Moreover,  the  growth  rate  of  the  GDP  stood  at  4.5%  in  2007,  as 
compared to 2001-2006 period, which was 7.2% on the average. 
Dear Guests, 
Turkey has several comparative advantages compared to many of its counterparts that can 
support high growth rates in the medium term. 
The first one is the demographic structure. Turkey has a young and skilled population that is 
one  of  the  most  important  ingredients  of  economic  growth.  More  than  half  of  Turkey’s 
population  is  under  the  age  of  30.  However,  unemployment  rate  for  the  young  population 
stands  at  21.2%.  In  order  to  unleash  our  potential,  we  need  to  keep  investments  at  high 
levels and utilize human capital effectively. Since domestic savings rate in Turkey is not high 
enough  to  finance  investments,  we  need  to  attract  foreign  savings,  which  implies  having 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 1
current  account  deficit.  But  the  good  news  is  that  the  quality  of  financing  has  improved 
significantly in recent years. The FDI inflows were more than USD 20 billion in each of the 
last  two  years.  Nevertheless,  I  should  say  that  ratio  of  greenfield  FDI  to  the  total  FDI  is 
relatively low yet. I believe that the greenfield FDI will also increase in the following years as 
we  keep  the  macroeconomic  and  political  stability  in  place  and  continue  to  improve  the 
business environment. 
The second comparative advantage that I would like to underline is the convergence story of 
Turkey  to  European  Union.  Steps  taken  during  the  negotiation  process  will  undoubtedly 
increase  the  momentum  of  Turkey  and  help  unlock  the  growth  potential  of  the  country. 
European  Union  membership  is  our  medium-term  anchor  and  all  parties  in  Turkey  should 
adhere to this aim decisively. 
Dear Guests, 
The  best  way  that  a  central  bank  could  support  sustainable  growth  is  reaching  and 
maintaining price stability, especially in a country that experienced high and chronic inflation 
for decades. 
As  you  may  know,  Turkey  has  adopted  the  full-fledged  inflation-targeting  regime  in  2006. 
Looking back, one can notice that a protracted period of rising food and energy prices have 
led  to  a  significant  over  shooting  of  the  inflation  targets  since  the  adoption  of  the  inflation 
targeting  regime.  This  has  increased  the  stickiness  in  inflation  expectations,  as  economic 
agents have become more backward looking. Under normal conditions, supply shocks are 
expected to alter relative prices rather than the underlying inflation trend. Nevertheless, the 
fact  that  several  long  lasting  shocks  appeared  concurrently  has  increased  the  risks  to  the 
price setting behavior. Our revised projections incorporating the latest developments suggest 
that  it  will  take  a  relatively  long  time  for  inflation  to  reach  4  percent  level.  Even  more 
importantly, current inflation target no longer seems to serve as a nominal anchor in the short 
term. 
Inflation targeting regime is one of the monetary policy regimes and all regimes have their 
own  rules  and  frameworks.  Our  main  policy  document  published  in  December  2005 
describes the framework of our inflation-targeting regime. 24th paragraph of that document 
states that: 
“A  pre-announced  inflation  target  shall  only  be  changed  in  the  event  that  very  sharp  and 
long-term deviations from the target are expected or medium-term targets no longer make 
sense due to factors beyond the control of monetary policy. At this point, a new target will be 
set with the government with respect to the Law.” 
The paragraph that I have just read completely defines the recent conditions and explains 
why we revised the inflation targets for 2009 and 2010. Under these conditions, a revision in 
inflation  targets  has  become  a  technical  necessity.  Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey 
proposed  the  government  to  revise  the  targets  for  2009  and  2010  to  7.5  and  6.5  percent, 
respectively; and to set the target for 2011 at 5.5 percent, and the government accepted our 
proposal. 
I  would  like  to  re-emphasize  that,  we  will  not  treat  the  revised  targets  symmetrically. 
Monetary policy will aim to keep inflation below the revised target path. 
Dear Guests, 
We stick to our price stability objective. At the same time, we are aware of challenges we 
have to face. 
First of all, the rapid rise in food prices may be more permanent than expected due to rapid 
economic growth, slowdown in agricultural productivity and employment shift from agriculture 
to industries. Considering the fact that food has a higher share in the consumption basket of 
developing  economies,  including  Turkey,  this  would  lead  to  a  decoupling  in  inflation  rates 
between industrialized world and developing countries for years to come. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2008
Similarly, commodity prices may remain elevated for the foreseeable future, which may prove 
to be a challenge for Turkey in particular. Note that Turkey is a net commodity importer in 
contrast to many other developing countries. 
Last, but not least, price stability necessitates stability in financial markets. We need to put 
our house in order to attract foreign capital with long-term horizon, rather than highly mobile 
short-term  capital.  I  believe  structural  reforms  together  with  macroeconomic  stability,  fiscal 
discipline and prudent monetary policies will create the necessary economic environment to 
achieve and maintain sustainable growth rates and price stability in the future. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 3
