European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 March 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
Mr Bajuk, President of the ECOFIN Council, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The latest information has confirmed the 
existence  of  strong  short-term  upward  pressure  on  inflation.  It  has  also  confirmed  the 
assessment that there are upside risks to price stability over the medium term, in a context of 
very  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth.  The  economic  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  are 
sound. Incoming macroeconomic data point to moderating but ongoing real GDP growth. Yet 
the level of uncertainty resulting from the turmoil in financial markets remains high. Against 
this  background,  we  emphasise  that  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is  our 
primary objective in accordance with our mandate. Indeed, the firm anchoring of medium to 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  is  of  the  highest  priority  to  the  Governing  Council.  We 
believe that the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving this objective. The 
Governing Council remains strongly committed to preventing second-round effects and the 
materialisation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  We  will  continue  to 
monitor very closely all developments over the coming weeks. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
The latest information on economic activity confirms the picture of moderating growth around 
the  turn  of  the  year.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  the  quarter-on-quarter  growth 
rate  of  euro  area  real  GDP  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007  was  0.4%,  following  0.8%  in  the 
previous  quarter.  Surveys  of  business  and  consumer  confidence,  which  have  followed  a 
downward trend since the summer of 2007, overall remain consistent with ongoing growth. 
Looking ahead, in 2008 both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support ongoing 
real GDP growth in the euro area, albeit at lower rates than during 2007. The fundamentals 
of the euro area economy remain sound and the euro area economy does not suffer from 
major imbalances. While being dampened by the global slowdown, investment growth should 
provide ongoing support, as capacity utilisation is high and profitability has been sustained. 
At  the  same  time,  as  a  result  of  the  improved  economic  conditions  and  wage  moderation, 
employment  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  and  unemployment 
rates  have  fallen  to  levels  not  seen  for  25  years.  While  being  dampened  by  higher 
commodity prices, consumption growth should continue to contribute to economic expansion, 
in line with rising employment.  
These  factors  are  also  reflected  in  the  March  2008  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections. 
Annual real GDP growth is projected to lie in the range of 1.3% to 2.1% in 2008, and to be 
between 1.3% and 2.3% in 2009. In comparison with the December 2007 Eurosystem staff 
macroeconomic  projections,  the  ranges  projected  for  real  GDP  growth  in  2008  and  2009 
have  been  revised  downwards,  reflecting  weaker  global  demand,  stronger  pressure  from 
commodity prices and less favourable financing conditions than were foreseen in December. 
Available forecasts from international organisations broadly confirm this outlook. 
In the view of the Governing Council, uncertainty about the prospects for economic growth 
remains unusually high. Downside risks to the outlook for economic activity continue to exist. 
They relate mainly to a potentially broader than currently expected impact of financial market 
developments.  Further downside  risks  stem  from  the  scope  for  additional  commodity  price 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 1
rises, protectionist pressures and the possibility of disorderly developments owing to global 
imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the annual HICP 
inflation rate was 3.2% in February 2008, unchanged from January. This confirms the strong 
upward pressure on inflation in the short term, stemming mainly from the increases in energy 
and  food  prices  in  recent  months.  Looking  ahead,  we  expect  a  more  protracted  period  of 
relatively high rates of inflation than we did a few months ago. The annual HICP inflation rate 
will  most  likely  remain  significantly  above  2%  in  the  coming  months  and  moderate  only 
gradually later in the year.  
The  March  2008  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  foresee  annual  HICP  inflation  of 
between 2.6% and 3.2% in 2008, and between 1.5% and 2.7% in 2009. Compared with the 
December 2007 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the projected ranges for HICP 
inflation have shifted upwards, mainly reflecting significant additional increases in food and 
energy prices.  
It is important to recall that these staff projections are based on a number of assumptions 
which  are  of  a  purely  technical  nature  and  unrelated  to  policy  intentions.  In  particular,  the 
technical assumptions for short-term interest rates are taken from market expectations as at 
mid-February.  
Moreover,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  projections  are  based  on  the  assumptions  that  the 
recent dynamism in commodity prices will diminish over the projection horizon, in line with 
futures prices, and that pressure from labour costs and profit margins will be limited. 
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to the outlook for inflation over the medium 
term  are  on  the  upside.  These  risks  include  further  rises  in  oil  and  agricultural  prices, 
continuing the strong upward trend observed in recent months. Furthermore, they include the 
possibility  that  stronger  than  currently  expected  wage  growth  may  emerge,  taking  into 
account  high  capacity  utilisation  and  tight  labour  market  conditions.  Moreover,  the  pricing 
power  of  firms,  notably  in  market  segments  with  low  competition,  could  be  stronger  than 
expected. Increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those foreseen thus far 
also pose upside risks to the inflation outlook. 
At this juncture, it is imperative that all parties concerned meet their responsibilities and that 
second-round effects on price-setting, on the one hand, and on wages, on the other hand, 
stemming from current inflation rates be avoided. In the view of the Governing Council, this is 
of  key  importance  in  order  to  preserve  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  thereby  the 
purchasing  power  of  all  euro  area  citizens.  The  Governing  Council  is  monitoring  wage 
negotiations in the euro area with particular attention. In this context, the Governing Council 
is  concerned  about  the  existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to 
consumer prices. Such schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a 
wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
countries concerned. The Governing Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  Annual  M3  growth  remained  very  vigorous  at  11.5%  in  January, 
supported by the continued strong growth of MFI loans to the private  sector. A number of 
temporary  factors  suggest  that  M3  growth  currently  overstates  the  pace  of  the  underlying 
monetary expansion. The relatively flat yield curve in particular has made holding monetary 
assets more attractive. However, even after taking such effects into account, a broad-based 
assessment of the latest data confirms that the underlying rate of money and credit growth 
remains strong. 
The growth of household borrowing has moderated over recent months, reflecting the impact 
of  higher  key  ECB  interest  rates  since  December  2005  and  cooling  housing  markets  in 
several  parts  of  the  euro  area.  However,  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations 
has remained very robust. Bank borrowing by euro area non-financial corporations grew at 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2008
an annual rate of 14.6% in the year to January 2008. Overall, bank loans to the domestic 
private sector have grown at around 11% on an annual basis for the past two years. 
For  the  time  being,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  financial  market  turbulence  since  early 
August 2007 strongly influenced the overall dynamics of broad money and credit aggregates 
up to January 2008. In addition, according to the available data, the turmoil has not led to 
substantial portfolio shifts into monetary assets, as were observed between 2001 and 2003. 
Notwithstanding the tightening of credit standards reported in the bank lending survey for the 
euro  area,  continued  strong  loan  growth  to  non-financial  corporations  suggests  that  the 
supply  of  bank  credit  to  firms  in  the  euro  area  has  not  been  significantly  impaired  by  the 
financial turmoil thus far. Further data and analysis will be required in order to obtain a more 
complete  picture  of  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  developments  on  banks’  balance 
sheets, financing conditions and money and credit growth. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis fully confirms the assessment that there are upside risks to price stability 
over the medium term, in a context of very vigorous money and credit growth. The economic 
fundamentals of the euro area are sound. Incoming macroeconomic data point to moderating 
but  ongoing  real  GDP  growth.  Yet  the  level  of  uncertainty  resulting  from  the  turmoil  in 
financial markets remains high. We emphasise that the firm anchoring of medium to longer-
term inflation expectations is of the highest priority to the Governing Council. We believe that 
the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving this objective. The Governing 
Council 
the 
materialisation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  We  will  continue  to 
monitor very closely all developments over the coming weeks. 
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  fact  that  the  Berlin 
Eurogroup agreement of April 2007, including the consolidation targets, was confirmed in the 
ECOFIN  Council’s  opinions  on  the  latest  stability  programme  updates.  There  is  no 
justification  for  delaying  structural  fiscal  consolidation  in  countries  with  remaining  fiscal 
imbalances. On the contrary, the challenges ahead call for particularly prudent and stability-
oriented fiscal policies to support private sector confidence. Achieving and maintaining sound 
fiscal positions will also allow the free operation of automatic stabilisers and contribute to the 
smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Structural reforms would not only be beneficial for employment and potential growth, but 
would  also  help  to  reduce  inflationary  pressures.  Enhancing  competition,  especially  in 
services  and  network  industries,  is  essential  at  this  juncture  to  support  price  stability  and 
enhance  productivity  growth.  Similarly,  administered  prices,  indirect  taxes,  minimum  wage 
legislation  and  public  sector  wage-setting  should  not  add  to  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
to  preventing  second-round  effects  and 
remains  strongly  committed 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 3
