Jean-Claude Trichet: The growing importance of the Asia-Pacific region 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  New 
Year’s  Reception  Asia-Pacific  2008  of  the  German-Asian  Business  Circle,  Frankfurt  am 
Main, 25 February 2008. 
 I.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be with you today a few days after the celebration of the Chinese New 
Year.  Let  me  take  this  occasion  to  wish  you  and  all  our  Chinese  friends  a  happy  and 
prosperous year of the rat! I have been told that the rat, the first sign of the Chinese zodiac, 
was  considered  in  ancient  times  as  a  protector  and  bringer  of  material  prosperity.  What 
better  symbol  than  this  to  describe  the  giant  steps  made  in  recent  years  by  China  –  and, 
along with China, by the whole of the Asia-Pacific region1 – towards greater prosperity! 
As  you  perhaps  know,  one  of  the  most  famous  historians  of  my  home  country,  Fernand 
Braudel,  is  celebrated  for  having  developed  the  concept  of  “economie-monde”  (“world-
economy”), namely that of a centre of gravity for the global economy2. Arguably, this centre 
of  gravity  has  shifted several  times  over  the  last  four  hundred  years  in  the  western  world. 
From Antwerp in the sixteenth century to Amsterdam in the seventeenth century, to London 
in the nineteenth century and, finally, to New York in the twentieth century. There is now talk 
of an “Asian century” based on the belief that, if ongoing demographic and economic trends 
persist, the twenty-first century will see a shift in the centre of gravity of the global economy 
to Asia. I leave it up to you to assess which city in this vast region might become the capital 
of the new “economie-monde”, should this development materialise. To be sure, there would 
be several candidates! 
I would like today first to offer some reflections on the growing role of the Asia-Pacific region 
in  the  global  economy  in  an  attempt  to  understand  how  the  world  is  changing  and  what  it 
might be like tomorrow. I would then like to offer some reflections on the implications of these 
changes. The Asia-Pacific region is becoming a larger player in the global economy, which 
has an impact on the rules of the game. This is notably reflected in important developments 
in the international financial architecture, the network of institutions and fora involved in the 
governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and financial matters. 
The growing role of the Asia-Pacific region in the global economy 
II.  
Let me therefore briefly elaborate on the first of these two aspects: the growing role of the 
Asia-Pacific  region  in  the  global  economy,  which  is  evident  in  both  demographic  and 
economic terms. 
Consider  first  demography.  The  Asia-Pacific  region  is  home  to  about  half  of  the  world’s 
population.  China  and  India,  with  a  combined  population  of  2.4  billion,  are  evidently  two 
population  giants.  But  we  all  know  very  well  that  the  region  includes  other  countries  with 
large numbers of consumers and investors, such as Indonesia (with a population of over 200 
million)  or  the  Philippines  and  Vietnam,  whose  populations  (around  90  million)  are 
                                                 
1   For the purposes of this speech, the term “Asia-Pacific” refers to a group of economies in littoral East Asia, 
Southeast Asia and Australasia near the Pacific Ocean, as well as to the states in the ocean itself (Oceania). 
2   Fernand  Braudel,  La  dynamique  du  capitalisme,  conférences  prononcées  à  l'université  Johns  Hopkins  en 
1976 ; Champs Flammarion, No 778. 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 1
comparable to that of Germany. The ASEAN countries as a whole represent more than 500 
million inhabitants. The largest cities in the world can also be found in the Asia-Pacific region. 
At present, nine of the twenty largest metropolitan areas are located in this region. And some 
of  these  cities  have  grown  considerably  in  size  in  recent  years  as  a  result  of  profound 
economic transformations and massive migrations from rural areas. 
The numbers are even more impressive in economic terms. The Asia-Pacific region accounts 
for almost 37% of world GDP at purchasing power parity. Moreover, it also comprises some 
of the most dynamic economies in the world. The contribution to global growth of emerging 
Asia alone, perhaps the most dynamic economic area of the world, reached around 40% last 
year. Admittedly, the Asia-Pacific region as a whole remains diverse in terms of standards of 
living. Mature economies, such as Australia or Japan, with GDP per capita of, respectively, 
USD 42,000 and USD 34,000 in 2007 at market rates, remain, of course, well ahead.3 But 
what is striking is that the vigour of growth in the last few years has helped to lift millions of 
citizens in the region’s emerging economies out of poverty. Take China, for instance, where 
people have reaped the benefits of their country’s rapid development through a doubling of 
GDP per capita since the turn of the millennium, to about USD 2,400 in 2007. 
The  remarkable  pace  of  growth  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  is  good  news  for  all  of  us.  The 
region, which has an immense potential, is contributing to global prosperity. The euro area 
has  the  potential  to  take  advantage  of  the  new  opportunities  that  this  rapid  development 
creates. In 2006, emerging Asia accounted for about 10% of euro area exports and 18% of 
its  imports.  It  also  accounted  for  about  6%  of  the  euro  area’s  stock  of  foreign  direct 
investment. 
Importantly, the world economy  might be better able to rely on the dynamism of the Asia-
Pacific  region  should  growth  in  other  regions  lose  some  momentum.  This  is  particularly 
important at the current juncture. However, it is equally important not to forget one caveat. 
We are in a universe of interdependence. If one economy slows down, it has an influence on 
all other economies. Since we are all interdependent, the key question is how, and to what 
extent,  a  possible  slowing  down  in  some  mature  economies  might  be  partially  offset  by 
stronger growth in other regions, notably in emerging Asia, also bearing in mind differences 
in cycles and drivers of growth. 
Implications for the international financial architecture 
III.  
It  is  evident  that  the  developments  we  have  been  witnessing  have  called  for  systemic 
changes in the global policy framework. New players in the Asia-Pacific region are gaining in 
importance and reaching out to more established players. This means that they also have 
more  responsibilities  in  the  global  arena  and  that  the  rules  of  the  game  need  to  adapt  in 
order to keep pace. This is why the governance of the world economy in macroeconomic and 
financial matters has been changing in terms of both format and substance. 
Consider  first  format.  The  various  international  institutions  and  fora  which  are  involved  in 
international  policy  dialogue  on  macroeconomic  and  financial  affairs  have  strived  over  the 
past ten years to better integrate new players from the Asia-Pacific region, alongside those 
already involved. Let me briefly take some examples. 
One of the most important of these fora is the Group of Seven or G7. Finance ministers and 
central  bank  governors  of  the  seven  most  industrialised  nations  of  the  world,  including  of 
course Japan, meet several times a year to discuss issues of mutual interest. My experience 
is that the G7 meetings have proven an invaluable forum for cooperation on macroeconomic 
policies and for giving, when appropriate, signals to market participants. An important step 
                                                 
3   Based on projections published by the International Monetary Fund in October 2007 in its World Economic 
Outlook. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2008
was made a few months ago when the G8 committed in Heiligendamm to embark on a high-
level dialogue with important emerging economies, among which are Asia’s two population 
giants, China and India. This dialogue will focus on issues of global dimension which will be 
at  the  top  of  the  agenda  in  the  years  ahead.  These  include,  for  instance:  cross-border 
investment;  research,  innovation  and  intellectual  property  rights;  climate  change;  energy 
efficiency; and development, particularly in Africa. 
A related example is the creation of the Group of Twenty, or G20. The G20 is an international 
policy  forum  for  dialogue  and  consensus-building  among  systemically  important  countries, 
both industrialised and emerging. It was created a decade ago in the aftermath of the Asian 
crisis, together with the Financial Stability Forum. In the early years of its existence indeed, 
the G20 – one-third of which comprises countries from the Asia-Pacific region – put special 
emphasis on financial stability and crisis prevention, including aspects such as prudent debt 
management,  domestic  financial  deepening  and  exchange  rate  regimes.  Its  agenda  has 
widened  since  then.  It  now  includes  some  of  the  most  important  global  policy  challenges 
ahead of us, such as development, energy and climate change.  
Last, significant reform efforts are under way at the International Monetary Fund to adapt the 
institution  to  a  new  environment  and  a  new  set  of  players,  notably  in  terms  of  quota  and 
voice, two important elements defining the representation of Fund members. 
The international community did a very good job in my opinion, in drawing the lessons from 
the Asian crisis. It is equally important that we draw all lessons from the ongoing process of 
significant market correction that global finance has been experiencing for several months, 
with its episodes of high market volatility and financial turbulence. 
As I said already, the last G7 meeting in Tokyo was a good occasion to exchange views on 
the  underlying  causes  of  the  recent  turbulence  and  on  the  areas  where  significant 
improvements will have to be brought about in global finance. At present we have a large 
consensus  on  both  the  methodology  and  the  six  domains  where  we  agree  action  will  be 
necessary. This large consensus is very important because the challenges that we have to 
cope with are global and the solutions themselves can be nothing but global and very closely 
harmonised between the economies that make up the global economy. 
On  top  of  stressing  the  absolute  necessity  of  working  very  actively,  and  very  much  united 
together  with  the  Asia  Pacific  region,  to  draw  the  right  lessons  from  the  present  market 
correction – which, according to our agreed methodology, we will do when we receive the 
definitive report of the Financial Stability Forum on the occasion of the next spring meetings 
of the Bretton Woods institutions in Washington – I will make three remarks.  
First,  the  international community  is  able  to  produce  a  right  and  pertinent  diagnosis  of  the 
situation of global finance. As chairman of the Global Economy Meeting which takes place 
every  two  months  in  Basel,  with  a  very  important  and  active  contribution  of  governors  of 
central banks from the Asia-Pacific region, I mentioned regularly in 2006 as well as in the first 
months of 2007 that my colleagues and I judged that there was a significant underpricing of 
risks in global finance. This situation was substantiated by a very low level of spreads, a very 
low level of risk premia, an abnormally low level of volatility in a large number of markets. We 
explicitly  and  publicly  called  for  institutions  and  markets  to  prepare  themselves  for  a 
correction that was both unavoidable and necessary to pave the way for more sustainable 
path  of  global  finance.  Such  analysis  and  diagnosis  were  reflected  pretty  well  in  most 
financial stability reviews published by central banks, not the least in the European Central 
Bank publication a long time before the market correction.  
Second,  a  good  analysis  and  a  pertinent  diagnosis  are  a  necessary  condition  for  future 
necessary market corrections to be as smooth and as orderly as possible. But they are not a 
sufficient  condition  per  se  as  is  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  present  episode  of  turbulence 
and  as  was  regularly  observed  in  the  previous  periods  of  sharp  and  abrupt  market 
corrections. And that is the reason why it is so important, so decisive that we draw all the 
lessons from the present episode, across the board, without any prejudices, without giving 
BIS Review 25/2008 
 3
any privilege of untouchability to any part of global finance. From that standpoint I think the 
work of the Financial Stability Forum – scrutinising liquidity risk management as well as credit 
rating agencies, analysing without complacency the weakness in the structure of incentives 
of  the  “originate  to  distribute”  model  as  well  as  the  monitoring  of  the  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles, examining the implementation of the Basel II agreement as well as the arrangement 
for dealing with in particular weak cross-border financial institutions – is of the essence. 
Third, even with a right and pertinent diagnosis, and appropriate significant improvements in 
benchmark  voluntary  principles  and  codes  of  conduct  for  the  private  sector,  as  well  as 
substantial progress in rules and regulations and in cooperation and coordination between 
authorities  where  needed,  my  understanding  is  that  we  could  not  be  sure  that  the 
“unavoidable and necessary market corrections” of the future would be reasonably “smooth 
and orderly”. 
For a higher likelihood of that to happen, we need probably simultaneously what I would call 
a further significant change of culture at national as well as at global level. I would sum up 
this  change 
transparency,  holism  and 
anticyclicality. Transparency because enhanced public information on institutions as well as 
on financial instruments is the only way we have to avoid contagion and herd behaviour in 
times  of  difficulty.  Holism  because,  with  technology  and  globalisation  helping,  we  have 
progressively  built  global  finance  on  the  basis  of  the  very  close  interconnection  of  all 
markets, all institutions, all economies. We must continue to improve our full understanding 
of the functioning of the financial system as a whole. The Financial Stability Forum, gathering 
together banking, insurance and market surveillance authorities, central banks, international 
financial institutions, treasuries etc., was the first major illustration of this need to address the 
global financial system as a whole. We have to reinforce considerably this holistic approach. 
And  anticyclicality  because  a  number  of  rules  and  regulations,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of 
behaviours of public and private institutions as well as of markets, on the other hand, have a 
tendency to be largely procyclical, amplifying the booms as well as the busts in the cycle. We 
must  look  at  all  parts  of  global  finance  with  a  view  to  diminishing  progressively  their 
procyclical components, which implies, in particular but certainly not exclusively, eliminating 
as much as possible asymmetry in the treatment of booms and busts and extending as much 
as possible, where needed, the time horizon adopted by all the institutions concerned. 
in  our  overall  approach  with 
these  words: 
IV.  
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, the centre of gravity of the global economy has 
been shifting westwards over the last four hundred years, from Antwerp to Amsterdam, from 
Amsterdam to London, from London to New York. 
The  world  economy  is  changing  constantly.  The  Asia-Pacific  region  occupies  a  far  more 
important place today than it did only a decade ago, but one which will likely be exceeded in 
importance by its role in the future.  
Since  the  world  economy  is  evolving  constantly,  the  rules  of  the  game  have  to  be 
continuously  adapted.  International  institutions  and  fora  are  changing  and  adjusting.  Many 
initiatives  have  been  taken.  Altogether  this  should  help  make  the  global  economic  and 
financial system more resilient. 
But  we  have  also  learned  that  it  is  never  time  for  complacency.  Efforts  to  ensure  global 
stability and prevent crises have to be made constantly by all of us without exception. 
In  this  context,  I  am  confident  that  the  euro  area  and  the  economies  of  the  Asia-Pacific 
region  will  continue  to  work  in  close  cooperation  in  the  years  ahead  to  ensure  that  these 
important goals are met. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2008
