Shamshad Akhtar: Financial globalization and the Islamic financial 
services industry 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 5th Annual 
Summit of the Islamic Financial Services Board, Amman, Jordan, 13 May 2008. 
  1. Financial globalization has grown in size and scale. There is now a broad consensus that 
an effectively managed financial globalization has the potential to benefit from and contribute 
to: 
• 
• 
Growing world trade integration, 
Easing of investment and cross-border capital flows as economic liberalization gains 
momentum, 
Development of interdependent production structures that have evolved to maximize 
comparative advantage, and 
The revolution in information technology and institutional reforms. 
• 
2. These factors have deepened and diversified financial markets. However, the benefits of 
financial  globalization  have  often  come  under  test.  This  is  largely  when  market  distortions 
and  risk  management  standards  are  compromised;  these  adversities,  with  leads  and  lags, 
usually result in failures and losses for financial markets and institutions. While the world has 
witnessed recurrent episodes of financial crisis, global developments since 2007 have had a 
profound and multiple impact given the multi-dimensional nature of the ensuing crisis. First, 
the financial market turmoil in the subprime mortgage market unfolded itself in the form of an 
unprecedented  global  liquidity  crunch  triggering  huge  financial  and  economic  losses. 
Second,  the  world  is  now  realizing  the  stress  of  growing  global  imbalances  that  have,  for 
several months now, manifested themselves in the rising global commodity prices and have 
fuelled inflationary pressures. 
3. While there are multiple lessons to be learnt from these developments, in principle, these 
events  are  a  fresh  reminder  of  the  risks  associated  with  over-leveraging  and  reckless  off-
balance sheet transactions given the weaknesses in regulatory and supervisory oversight of 
key segments of markets, and the excesses in consumption trends of the global economy 
which have compounded global imbalances and inequalities. 
4.  These  events  have  again  provoked  debates  regarding  the  pros  and  cons  of  financial 
globalization, the impact of which is incrementally visible, resulting in : (i) slowdown of world 
economy and consequently in trade in selected products and markets, (ii) volatility in equity 
markets which in some cases generated losses, and (iii) easing of liquidity in a number of 
ways  by  the  affected  central  banks,  which  is  now  compounding  inflationary  pressures 
otherwise  building  up  because  of  the  international  rise  in  food  and  oil  prices.  Corrective 
actions are underway and lessons being drawn from the unfolding events. 
5. Good news is that the Islamic Finance (IF) industry has generally remained insulated from 
the  recent  episode  in  financial  markets.  This  is  because  Islamic  banks’  transactions  are 
backed by real economic assets and risk management, benefiting from the application of and 
compliance with Shariah principles and guidelines, wherein the banks and investors have to 
share the profit and losses in accordance with the risks taken. While in conventional finance, 
risk-free capital encouraged over-leveraging and overexposures by transferring transactions 
to  off-balance  sheets  conduits.  IF  services  drive  their  inherent  strengths  from  the  Shariah 
guidelines  and  principles.  Notwithstanding,  IF  services,  like  all  businesses,  could  be 
impacted if the global slowdown deepens. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 1
6. Abstracting from the current scenario which is still unfolding, broad evidence confirms that 
financial  globalization,  with  adequate  safeguards,  promotes  economic  growth  and 
development.  Financial  globalization  has  the  potential  to  promote  and  reinforce  IF  by 
ensuring its conformity with conventional finance by fostering newer and better linkages with 
the regional and global financial markets. IF in turn can reinforce and support globalization by 
bringing to it financial innovation and stability, provided it is properly nurtured and developed 
in conformity with the internationally well-accepted and tested financial sector prudential and 
regulatory frameworks. In order to achieve a deeper and sustainable impact, IF would benefit 
by aligning and positioning itself in a way that it takes full advantage of financial globalization. 
7. Notwithstanding, it has to be recognized that financial globalization can have unintended 
negative  consequences.  However,  empirical  evidence  confirms  that  this  happens  under 
specific conditions. Without going into an elaborate debate on this subject, suffice to point out 
that this happens in cases where the financial systems lack diversification or are under- or 
weakly regulated, and when financial globalization marginalizes the developing markets and 
people.  If  IF  is  positioned  to  address  these  areas  upfront,  it  will  in  fact  help  reinforce  and 
augment conventional finance with its inherent principles and guidelines that place emphasis 
on  supporting  economic  transactions,  avoiding  speculation  and  depending  on  proper 
alignment of the risk-reward equation. 
8. Given these considerations, there are ways in which IF can benefit and enrich the process 
of financial globalization so as to mitigate or reduce its negative consequences. For instance, 
IF’s  potential  to  promote  different  types  of  risk-sharing  methods,  supported  by 
• 
emphasis  on  equity  and  asset  backed 
financing,  can  help  promote  risk 
diversification and mitigation. 
IF’s  strong  ethical  principles  for  stakeholders  can  help  distribute,  widely  and 
equitably,  the  fruits  of  financial  globalization  among  the  participants  than  has 
happened thus far. 
Under  IF,  the  lender  supports  transactions  that  are  real  and  backed  by  tangible 
assets with profits linked with the risk taken, rather than encouraging deployment of 
riskless capital investments (interest and rent-seeking). 
Greater  reliance  on  profit  and  loss  sharing  enables  IF  to  structure  equity 
partnerships which carry identifiable risks and discourage speculation. 
Internationalization  of  Sukuks  and  their  flotation,  expected  to  hit  the  $100  billion 
mark soon, is helping IF to better integrate itself with the global financial world; this 
will not only meet the region’s massive infrastructure project financing requirement, 
but will also help diversify financial markets. A number of sovereigns and developed 
markets  are  now  floating  sukuks  which  is  fostering  financial  globalization  through 
geographical and investor base diversification in IF products, while helping engineer 
and improvise sukuk structures to suit the funding needs – this flexibility is helping 
the Sukuk structure to gain recognition as a global product. 
    9. Globalization of IF will magnify along with its growing acceptance as a viable alternative 
financing mechanism as it illustrates its capacity to co-exist and compete with conventional 
finance. As highlighted above, internationalization of IF is growing but this is happening in a 
number  of  ways  which  will  in  due  course  set  the  stage  for  deepening  the  dynamics  and 
interface  between  financial  globalization  and  the  IF  industry.  Some  of  these  developments 
are discussed below. 
10. Aside from widespread growing interest and investment in IF, its growth at one level has 
been catalyzed by the growing global imbalances as oil rich economies accumulated capital 
from the persistent rise in international oil prices. It is the accumulated surpluses and wealth 
of  the  oil  exporting  members  of  the  Middle  East,  including  the  Gulf  Cooperation  Council 
(GCC), that have helped the global financial players to develop IF markets. Over 2002-2006, 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2008
GCC capital outflows, as reported by the International Institute of Finance (IIF), rose to $530 
billion: of this $300 billion outflows went to US, $100 billion to Europe and remaining to Asia 
and other destinations.1 Reportedly, GCC net foreign assets rose to $1.8 trillion or 225% of 
the  region’s  GDP.2  Standard  &  Poor’s  estimate  suggests  that  investible  Arab  capital  now 
exceeds  $2.3  trillion.3  Boston  Consulting  Group  estimates  that  Middle  East  investment 
entities’  combined  asset  pool  is  around  $10.2  trillion.4  Currently  this  wealth  has  been 
deployed across the private banking departments of global financial players such as UBS, 
Citigroup,  Standard  Chartered  and  HSBC  etc.  If  the  IF  industry  augments  its  absorptive 
capacity  to  cater  to  the  growing  demand  for  IF  products,  more  and  more  capital  being 
currently directed into conventional finance, will be invested in IF. 
11.  Emerging  financial  joint  ventures  and  alliances  between  GCC  and  Europe,  as  well  as 
Asia,  have  already  kick-started  the  process  of  IF  globalization.  Islamic  banks  are  at  the 
centre of developing these financial linkages between the Arab world and Europe/Asia. 
Cross-border alliances among financial players have encouraged global banks to invest in IF, 
both in Europe and through their network in GCC and Asia. Also, the establishment of newer 
IF hubs and centers are likely to help retain the emerging capital flows from GCC within Asia. 
Leading  Islamic  finance  houses,  old  and  new,  are  investing  in  regional  financial  hubs 
aggressively  to  broaden  their  reach  to  capture  the  high  net  worth  investments  into  IF. 
Extending the outreach, interest in IF is now emerging in US, Japan, China and Australia etc. 
Directional change in flows is already emerging, but meeting the demand for IF is critical for 
enhancing  the  competitiveness  and  sustainability  of  the  IF  industry  and  institutions,  while 
raising their standing in global finance. 
12.  The  large  global  financial  players  have  been  instrumental  in  fostering  linkages  and 
product  innovation.  This  is  largely  because  the  investor  community  worldwide  is  being 
attracted by the “risk-return” and other innovative features of Islamic products, the product 
range IF offers, and the ethical investment philosophy and governance structure it promotes. 
Worldwide demand for Islamic financing is also gaining momentum as IF conforms itself to 
conventional 
frameworks. 
Recognizing the implications of financial globalization on IF and IF’s implications for global 
finance,  Multilateral  Development  Institutions  have  been  supporting  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services  Board  (IFSB)  to  ensure  effective  alignment  in  the  regulatory  frameworks,  while 
accommodating modifications and refinements of the special features and modalities of IF. 
13.  Investments,  partnerships  and  alliances  between  the  public  and  private  sector,  and 
among  global  and  regional  financial  hubs,  have  allowed  a  two-way  transfer  of  capital  flow 
and  knowledge-sharing  that  is  steadily  promoting  the  integration  of  IF  with  global  finance, 
while  encouraging  the  required  financial  engineering  and  product  innovation  which  will 
enhance IF standing and legitimacy, while enriching the world of global finance. 
14.  While  the  industry  has  the  potential  to  grow  by  20-30%,  there  are  concerns  that  IF  is 
fraught with diversity, fragmentation and heterogeneity. To foster IF to integrally benefit from, 
and contribute to, financial globalization, there is a need for countries to launch a coherent, 
coordinated and synchronized development of the IF industry at national levels which feeds 
into  and  reinforces  the  implementation  of  the  IF  strategy,  approved  by  the  Council  of 
Governors  of  IFSB  last  year.  To  support  and  withstand  financial  globalization,  IF  needs  to 
reorient itself to: 
finance  by  adopting  proper 
regulatory  and  supervisory 
                                                 
1   “Tracking  GCC  petrodollars:  how  and  where  they  are  being  invested  around  the  world”,  Institute  of 
International Finance (2007). 
2   Economic Report on Gulf Cooperation Council Countries, Institute of International Finance, January 2008. 
3   “Globalization of Islamic funds”, Islamic Banking & Finance, Issue 11, August 2007. 
4   “Globalization of Islamic funds”, Islamic Banking & Finance, Issue 11, August 2007. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 3
      Consolidate  and  merge  IF  institutions  to  have  the  scale,  efficiency  and  cost 
effectiveness to compete globally; 
Promote  “globalization”  of  IF  modes  and  instruments  that  are  now  meeting  the 
finance and investment needs for the different sectors; 
Promote and adopt Islamic financial architecture that encourages standardization of 
legal  structure  and  contracts,  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  supported  by 
appropriate  risk  management  of  the  special  features  and  structure  of  the  new 
products, and accounting practices in line with AAOIFI standards;  
Encourage  harmonization  and  convergence  of  religious  views  (emerging  from 
differences  in  interpretations  of  Fiqh-ul-Muamalat  i.e.  the  Islamic  law  relating  to 
financial  transactions)  to  minimize  Shariah  risks  associated  with  the  IF  products, 
operations  and  systems.  Generally,  IF  instruments  and  practices  adopted  by  one 
institution  can  be  eroded  if  the  Shariah  board  of  another  institution  question  their 
compatibility  with  Shariah.  As  the  confidence  of  local  and  the  worldwide  potential 
market  for  IF  rests  critically  on  Shariah  compliant  mechanisms,  there  is  a  strong 
need for coherence amongst different schools of thought, and mutual acceptability 
of  product  within  and  across  countries,  while  recognizing  that  diversity  in  Shariah 
opinions (fatwas) is enshrined in Islamic legal history and will thus remain a feature 
of the market. 
Cultivate  the  IF  industry  as  a  multi-dimensional  and  multi-product  market  by 
exploiting scores of opportunities in fund, assets and wealth management, as well 
as proper financial engineering and innovation to support project and infrastructure 
financing,  structured  financial  derivatives,  and  private  equity,  retail  banking  and 
Islamic mortgages. 
Develop suitable frameworks and applications of PLS-based products. At present, 
the share of equity investment in IF ranges from 0 to 24% of the banking books of 
Islamic  banks.  PLS  modalities  like  mudaraba  and  musharaka,  based  on  equity 
partnership  arrangements,  offer 
innovation.  However, 
weaknesses in legal, regulatory and policy frameworks have impeded their growth. 
Some  of  the  constraints  of  its  effective  application5  include  (i)  equity  holders  and 
investors’ aversion to risk, given the uncertainties over return in PLS arrangements, 
(ii)  absence  of  effective  property  rights  in  most  countries,  (iii)  long  term  nature  of 
PLS  financing  and  (iv)  higher  taxation,  compared  to  interest  income,  on  equity 
transactions  underlying  PLS  arrangements.  Nevertheless,  promoting  PLS 
arrangements  will  not  only  offer  new  products  but  will  also  address  the  serious 
mismatch of assets and liabilities which has aggravated due to the heavy reliance of 
IFIs on short-term, low profit and fixed income assets. 
interesting  options 
for 
15.  In  conclusion,  it  has  to  be  recognized  that  IF  services  have  been  transformed  from 
being a peripheral activity to a sizeable industry which is attracting global interest. Evidence 
and arguments presented above make the case that financial globalization will foster IF and 
given  the  inherent  features  and  richness  of  Islamic  principles,  modalities  and  products’ 
growth  in  IF  will  be  beneficial  for  supporting  the  process  of  regional  and  global  financial 
deepening. Although currently the size of IF is small relative to the global financial system, it 
has promising growth prospects. Well-developed and integrated Islamic money, capital, and 
foreign exchange markets will not only be beneficial for borrowers and institutional investors, 
they  can  also  further  enhance  the  stability  of  IF  institutions,  providing  them  with  improved 
portfolio, liquidity and risk management tools. The challenge for the industry is to consolidate 
                                                 
5   “Lack  of  Profit  Loss  Sharing  in  Islamic  Banking;  Management  and  Control  Imbalances”,  Humayon  Dar  and 
John R. Presley (2001). 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2008
itself to be able to better compete with global players through achieving scale, efficiency and 
cost effectiveness in addition to rapidly building its capacities to standardize regulation and 
supervision, and accounting practices, while strengthening the governance of the industry. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 5
