Y V Reddy: The Indian economy and the Reserve Bank of India – random 
thoughts 
Text of the Shri Yeshwantrao Chavan Memorial Lecture 2007-08 by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Indian  Institute  of  Public  Administration,  Maharashtra 
Branch, Mumbai, 31 March 2008.  
 Shri Johny Joseph, Shri Kale and friends, 
I am grateful to the organisers for bestowing on me the honour of delivering the prestigious 
Yeshwantrao  Chavan  Memorial  Lecture  2007-08.  I  must  compliment  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Public Administration (IIPA), Maharashtra Branch, for organising the Memorial Lecture.  
By accepting this invitation, I am also acknowledging a debt of gratitude to IIPA. I am a Life 
Member of IIPA. While doing research for Ph.D in 1960s, I extensively used its library and 
hostel facilities in Delhi. IIPA had also hosted an exclusive seminar in the 1970s on the draft 
of my book on multilevel planning in India.  
I  did  not  have  the  privilege  of  working  with  Shri  Chavan,  though  no  one  could  miss  the 
nation-wide impact of the towering personality of Shri Chavan on both politics and economy 
of India. Most of us know about his contributions as the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, and 
as the Union Minister of Home, Defence, External Affairs and Finance over a period of fifteen 
years. In 1963, Mr. Welles Hanger, in his book "After Nehru Who", opined that Mr Chavan 
would be the fittest person to succeed Nehru.  
Let me quote the views of one of my distinguished predecessors as Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) Governor, Dr. I G Patel in his book "Glimpses of Indian Economic Policy: An Insider’s 
View", on working with Shri Chavan in the Ministry of Finance.  
"He  was  able,  quick  to  grasp  and,  while  attentive  to  our  advice,  not  devoid  of  political 
sagacity or practical wisdom to put his own stamp on the decision-making process. He was a 
perfect gentleman, available at all times and not anxious to shirk responsibilities……. He was 
loyal to his staff; and one of his endearing habits was that he always read some book or the 
other whenever he found a little time instead of indulging in idle gossip."  
Of particular relevance to the RBI are Shri Chavan’s observations on exchange rate policy of 
India. He gave a detailed reply during a discussion on "Foreign Exchange Parity" in the Rajya 
Sabha on 22nd December 1971. He described the debate as "a very constructive discussion 
of  this  very  complex  and  delicate  matter".  We  economists  know  how  historic  the occasion 
was since it related to the decision by the USA on dollar parity. There are a few observations 
made  by  Shri  Chavan  well  over  thirty  years  ago,  which  are  worth  recalling  due  to  their 
general validity for Indian economy, and I quote: 
"Now  when  everybody  else  is  realigning  and  recharging  and  appreciating  or  depreciating, 
you cannot remain static because you are a part of it, whether you like to or not. We are a 
part of that world....  
...Ultimately in this present competitive world where, really speaking, it is going to be a very 
difficult thing to compete in foreign trade without having a very solid industrial base in our 
own country what should we consider as the ultimate test as to whether our decision is wise 
or not, whether it is strong or weak, will not use that word because strength and weakness 
ultimately depends upon whether your decision is right or wrong. What is the right criteria for 
it?.... 
....Mr. Jain made one point. He asked why I did not mention about depreciation of the Rupee 
as  against  the  Sterling.  I  mentioned  it  in  a  different  way.  I  said  the  Sterling  has 
appreciated……  
BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
...The  mechanism  of  money,  the  foreign  exchange  mechanism  is  a  very  important 
mechanism, and we have to think of it very carefully, cautiously and wisely….."  
With these tributes to the Statesman, Shri Chavan, let me proceed to give a brief review of 
the Indian Economy, followed by a somewhat extensive treatment of the RBI, as suggested 
by the organisers. 
Indian economy: a brief overview 
In  the  first  five  decades  of  the  20th  century  till  we  got  our  independence  in  1947,  the  per 
capita GDP in India was stagnant, as the trend growth in GDP during this period was 0.9 per 
cent with population growing by about 0.8 per cent.  
As  compared  with  the  near  stagnant  growth  in  the  previous  50  years,  the  annual  growth 
averaging at around 3.5 per cent during the period 1950 to 1980 was comparatively better.  
The average growth rate of the Indian economy over a period of 25 years since 1980-81 was 
about 6.0 per cent – a significant improvement over the annual growth rate of the previous 
three decades.  
In the new millennium, the GDP growth rate has further accelerated averaging 7.2 per cent 
during the seven-year period 2000-01 to 2007-08, with the growth rate in the last five years 
(2003-04  to  2007-08)  averaging  8.7  per  cent.  Over  the  years,  while  the  GDP  growth  has 
been accelerating, the population growth rate has moderated, giving a sharp impetus to the 
growth in per capita income.  
The  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  recent  years  has  been  supported  by  a 
sustained  increase  in  the  gross  domestic  investment  rates  from  22.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2001-02  to  35.9  per  cent  in  2006-07.  It  may  also  be  noted  that  over  95  per  cent  of  the 
investment during this period was financed by domestic savings. 
Since  independence,  the  inflation  rate,  in  terms  of  the  wholesale  price  index  (WPI),  on 
average basis, was above 15 per cent in only five out of fifty years and was in single digit for 
thirty six of these years. On most occasions, high inflation was due to shocks – food or oil. 
The  inflation  rate  accelerated  steadily  from  an  annual  average  of  1.7  per  cent  during  the 
1950s to 6.4 per cent during the 1960s and further to 9.0 per cent in the 1970s before easing 
marginally to 8.0 per cent in the 1980s. The inflation rate declined from an average of 11.0 
per  cent  during  1990-95  to  5.3  per  cent  during  the  second  half  of  1990s.  In  recent  years, 
inflation rate has averaged around 5 per cent.  
An  important  characteristic  of  the  recent  growth  phase  of  over  a  quarter  century  is  the 
country's  resilience  to  shocks.  During  this  period,  we  have  witnessed  only  one  serious 
balance of payments crisis triggered largely by the Gulf war in the early 1990s. The Indian 
economy,  in  the  later  years,  could  successfully  avoid  any  adverse  contagion  impact  of 
shocks from the East Asian crisis, the Russian crisis during 1997-98, sanction-like-situation 
in  post-Pokhran  scenario,  and  the  border  conflict  during  May-June  1999.  Viewed  in  this 
context,  this  robust  macroeconomic  performance,  in  the  face  of  recent  oil  as  well  as  food 
shocks, demonstrates the vibrancy and resilience of the Indian economy.  
It is necessary to note that, despite the recent encouraging performance, the Indian economy 
faces  several  severe  challenges.  These  relate,  in  particular,  to  poverty,  education,  health, 
environment, physical infrastructure, and fiscal issues.  
What  has  been  the  role  of  the  RBI  in  the  developments  in  the  Indian  economy?  My 
submission is that the RBI has, as part of public policy, made some contributions to overall 
price stability and financial stability while enabling respectable growth in the recent period. 
Further,  it  is  generally  recognised  that  the  financial  sector  and  the  external  sector  in  India 
display  considerable  strength  and  resilience,  though  there  are  some  areas  that  need 
attention.  In  India,  most  of  the  literature  on  public  administration  concentrates  on 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2008
organisation  and  functioning  of  Central  and  State  Governments,  statutory  corporations, 
public enterprises, and constitutional bodies. Perhaps there is merit in devoting the rest of 
the address to filling up this gap and discussing organisation and functioning of the RBI, in 
some detail. 
On the RBI’s mandate 
I requested my friend Shri Kale – our friendship is a little over thirty years old – to advise me 
on the focus of today’s address. He said that I could shed some light on what RBI does. In 
particular, he suggested that I may narrate the process of decision making in the RBI and the 
extent to which the Ministry of Finance comes into the picture. I believe that Shri Kale was 
being  not  merely  inquisitive  but  also  mischievous  by  posing  some  complex,  if  not 
controversial, issues in a somewhat innocuous fashion. Yet, I will take the bait.  
The RBI was established under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 on April 1, 1935 as a 
private  shareholders'  bank,  but  is  fully  owned  by  the  Government  of  India,  since  its 
nationalisation in 1949.  
The Preamble to the RBI Act describes the basic objective of the constitution of the RBI as 
“to  regulate  the  issue  of  Bank  notes  and  keeping  of  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing 
monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally,  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit  system  of  the 
country  to  its  advantage”.  Thus,  there  is  no  explicit  mandate  for  price-stability  or  formal 
inflation  targeting.  Over  the  years,  the  twin-objectives  of  monetary  policy  in  India  have 
evolved as: maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to facilitate the 
growth process. The relative emphasis between the twin-objectives is modulated as per the 
prevailing  circumstances  and  is  articulated  in  the  policy  statements.  Consideration  of 
macroeconomic and financial stability is also subsumed in the articulation of policy. 
The  RBI  is  also  entrusted  with  the  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  are 
reflected in its balance sheet. While the RBI is essentially a monetary authority, its founding 
statute  mandates  it  to  be  the  manager  of  public  debt  of  the  Government  of  India  and  the 
banker to the Government.  
While the RBI is the monetary authority of the country, as per its founding Statute, the RBI 
has  also  been  entrusted  with  the work  relating  to  banking  regulation  and  supervision  by  a 
separate  enactment  in  1949,  viz.  the  Banking  Regulation  Act.  The  RBI  exercised  a  tight 
regime of exchange control particularly under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 
1973;  but,  a  qualitative  change  was  brought  about  in  the  legal  framework  to  enable 
liberalisation by the enactment of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) in June 
2000 which replaced the FERA. With this, the objectives of foreign exchange regulation have 
been  redefined  as  the  facilitating  of  external  trade  and  payments  as  well  as  the  orderly 
development and functioning of the foreign exchange market in India. 
It is significant to note that the RBI Act precludes the RBI from performing certain business 
such as trading; taking any direct interest in any commercial, industrial or other undertaking; 
purchasing of shares or giving of loans against shares of any company; advancing of money 
on  the  security  of  immovable  property,  and  the  drawing  or  accepting  of  bills  payable 
otherwise  than  on  demand.  These  prohibitions  are  meant  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the 
institution. 
Governance arrangements 
The  "general  superintendence  and  direction  of  the  affairs  and  business"  of  the  RBI  are 
"entrusted  to  the  Central  Board  of  Directors".  The  Central  Board  nominated  by  the 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 3
Government, consists of fourteen eminent persons1 drawn from different walks of life, who 
are the non-official Directors. The Secretary dealing with Economic Affairs in the Ministry of 
Finance  is  also  a  Director  on  the  Central  Board  and  has  voice  but  not  vote.  Further,  the 
Governor,  and  the  Deputy  Governors,  are  also  appointed  by  the  Government,  as  the 
Chairman and non-voting Directors of the Board, respectively. The Central Board meets at 
least six times in a year and at least once a quarter. 
The  RBI  General  Regulations,  1949,  mandate  a  Committee  of  the  Central  Board  (CCB), 
which  is  in  the  nature  of  an  executive  board  and  meets  once  a  week.  The  CCB  quorum 
demands the presence of at least one non-official Director. Currently, the normal attendance 
for the weekly meetings is three or four of the five non-official Directors who are residing in 
Mumbai. The weekly meetings review the economy and the financial market developments, 
and approve the weekly accounts of the RBI (which are placed on RBI website every week 
soon  after  their  approval)  and  all  other  matters  relating  to  the  general  conduct  of  RBI’s 
business.  The  Governor,  and  in  his  absence  the  senior-most  Deputy  Governor  available, 
presides over these meetings. 
The  function  of  supervision  of  the banking  system,  development  financial  institutions,  non-
banking  finance  companies  and  the  primary  dealers,  is  overseen  by  a  separate  Board  for 
Financial  Supervision  (BFS),  which  has  been  constituted  by  the  Government  through 
separate  regulations  formulated  under  the  RBI  Act.  The  BFS  has  four  non-official  Central 
Board Directors as its Members and meets at least once a month, functioning virtually as an 
executive board in matters relating to regulation and supervision. While the Governor chairs 
the  BFS  where  all  the  Deputy  Governors  are  Members,  one  of  the  Deputy  Governors  is 
virtually  its  full  time  Vice-Chairman.  In  addition  to  issue-based  reviews  and  directions,  the 
BFS reviews the functioning of individual banks and in respect of select cases, there is also a 
monthly monitoring of individual banks. Thus, in a sense, the supervision function is handled 
somewhat independently, but within the RBI.  
Yet another body recently constituted through a separate regulation, by the Government, is 
the Board for Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) which has two non-official Central 
Board Directors as its members and meets at least once a quarter. The BPSS is now under 
re-constitution  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  the  recently  enacted  the  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems Act, 2007. 
In addition, the Central Board has three standing committees. The Inspection and Audit Sub-
Committee  has  four  non-official  Central  Board  Directors.  The  Building  Sub-Committee  and 
the  Staff  Sub-Committee  have  at  least  two  non-official  Central  Board  Directors  each,  and 
intensely oversee the two important non-financial assets of the RBI. 
There are also four Local Boards of the RBI for four regions of the country, each of which has 
five non-official Members, appointed by the Central Government, and a Chairman who is one 
of  the  Directors  of  the  Central  Board.  The  Local  Boards  advise  the  Central  Board  on  the 
matters remitted to them and perform the duties delegated to them, currently by a resolution 
of the Central Board. 
                                                 
1   The  Central  Board  of  the  RBI  includes,  as  Directors,  Dr.  Ashok  S  Ganguly,  Shri  Azim  Premji,  Dr.  D 
Jayavarthanavelu, Shri Kumar Mangalam Birla, Shri Lakshmi Chand, Shri Y H Malegam, Prof. Man Mohan 
Sharma, Shri H P Ranina, Prof. U R Rao, Shi Sanjay Labroo, Smt Shashi Rekha Rajagopalan, Shri Suresh 
Neotia, Shri. Suresh D Tendulkar, and Dr. A Vaidyanathan. 
  Prior to 2006, the Board, as originally constituted, included as Directors, Dr. A P J Abdul Kalam, Dr. Amrita 
Patel, Shri D S Brar, Shri K Madhava Rao, Prof. Mihir Rakshit, Shri N R Narayana Murthy, Prof. C N R Rao, 
Shri Ratan Tata, Shri K P Singh, Shri Suresh Krishna, and Prof. V S Vyas 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2008
In recent years, the conduct of monetary policy has acquired complexity and significance in 
view of the greater integration of our economy with the global economy. Though there is no 
legal  requirement  of  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  take  appropriate  decisions,  it  was 
internally decided in 2005 to constitute a Technical Advisory Committee on Monetary Policy 
(TAC-MP). Currently, the TAC-MP consists of two non-official Directors of the Central Board 
and  five  independent  outside  experts2,  apart  from  the  four  Deputy  Governors  and  the 
Governor. The TAC-MP usually meets once in a quarter, a week ahead of the announcement 
of the annual policy or the quarterly reviews of the monetary policy.  
Accountability  of  the  RBI  to  the  Parliament  is  essentially  through  the  Ministry  of  Finance, 
though  the  Governor  and  the  Deputy  Governors  appear,  as  called  upon,  before  the 
Parliamentary Committees, especially before the Standing Committee on Finance. 
Thus,  the  formal  governance  arrangements  in  the  RBI  are  oriented  towards  collegial 
approach to decision making. Yet, as in the case of most of the central banks, the Governor 
holds a somewhat unique position in the organisation. The legal systems as well as tradition 
do  bestow  some  authority  on  the  Governor  that  is  meant  to  be  commensurate  with  this 
unique position. As the Governor is the public face of the RBI in the eyes of the Government 
and the public at large, the Governor is generally seen to be de facto accountable. 
Independence of the RBI  
On  practical  considerations,  central  bank  independence  may  be  broadly  related  to  three 
areas  viz.,  managerial  aspects,  including  personnel  matters;  financial  aspects;  and  policy 
aspects.  
Managerial  independence  refers  to  the  procedures  for  appointment,  term  of  office  and 
dismissal procedures of the top central bank officials and the governing body. It also includes 
the  extent  and  nature  of  representation  of  the  Government  in  the  governing  body  of  the 
central bank and Government’s powers to issue directions.  
Financial  independence  relates  to  the  freedom  of  the  central  bank  to  decide  the  extent  to 
which  Government  expenditure  is  either  directly  or  indirectly  financed  via  central  bank 
credits.  Direct  or  automatic  access  of  Government  to  central  bank  credits  would  naturally 
imply that monetary policy is subordinated to fiscal policy.  
Finally,  policy  independence  is  related  to  the  flexibility  given  to  the  central  bank  in  the 
formulation and execution of monetary policy, under a given mandate. 
While  the  Central  Government  may  give  such  directions  to  the  RBI,  after  consulting  the 
Governor, as it may consider necessary in the public interest, the overall management of the 
RBI’s  affairs  and  business  rests  with  the  Central  Board  of  Directors.  All  Directors  of  the 
Central  Board,  including  the  Governor  and  the  Deputy  Governors,  are  appointed  by  the 
Government and they could be superseded or removed. 
The  staffing  pattern  is  left  to  the  RBI,  but  rules  governing  their  service  conditions  and 
compensation are currently not out of alignment with the public sector, in general, and the 
banking sector, in particular.  
On  financial  aspects  of  the  RBI  vis-à-vis  the  Government,  the  phasing  out  of  automatic 
monetisation  of  fiscal  deficits  by  1997  and  the  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and 
                                                 
2   Currently the outside experts in the TAC-MP are Prof. D M Nachane, Dr. R H Patil, Dr. Shankar Acharya, Shri 
Suman Bery, and Shri S S Tarapore. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 5
Budget Management (FRBM) legislation in 2003 are two important milestones in the direction 
of  providing  safeguards  to  monetary  policy  from  the  consequences  of  expansionary  fiscal 
policy and ensuring a degree of autonomy of the RBI. Consequently, barring emergencies, 
there  are  limits  to  the  ways  and  means  advances  by  the  RBI  to  the  Government  and 
prohibition on RBI from participating in primary issuance of all government securities. 
The  RBI  has  gradually  withdrawn  from  the  practice  of  providing  concessional  finance  or 
refinance for specified sectors, though the statutory provisions continue to enable it. The RBI 
advocates  direct  fiscal  support  to  the  developmental  activities  so  that  the  support  is 
transparent, accountable, and quantifiable, rather than through monetary operations of RBI, 
which would tantamount to quasi-fiscal operations. 
RBI  contributes  to  the  exchequer  by  way  of  transfer  of  balance  of  its  annual  profits,  after 
making  provisions  and  transfers  to  its  Reserves.  The  general  principles  regarding  such 
transfers  have  been  rationalised  as  part  of  the  reform  process  in  1997.  The  present 
arrangement  is  governed  by  the  objective  of  strengthening  the  RBI  balance  sheet  by 
achieving  a  stipulated  level  of  Reserves  in  the  balance  sheet  over  a  period  –  though  the 
time-frame to achieve the level is extended to accommodate immediate fiscal compulsions. 
that 
there  are  no  differences 
Harmonious  relations  between  the  Government  and  the  RBI  have,  no  doubt,  generally 
contributed  to  the  successful  policy  outcomes  thus  far,  but  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to 
conclude 
judgements  and 
instrumentalities. In the given legal and cultural context, while making every effort to give its 
views,  either  informally  or  formally,  but  as  unambiguously  as  possible,  the  RBI  generally 
respects the wishes and final inclination of the Government. The RBI, however, has to accept 
the  responsibility  for  all  its  decisions  and  actions,  while  being  generally  conscious  of  the 
impact  of  its  articulation  and  actions  on  its  credibility.  The  Government,  for  its  part, 
recognises  the  dilemmas  posed  to  the  RBI,  and  accords  significant  weight  to  the  RBI’s 
judgements. 
in  analyses,  approaches, 
In sum, de jure, the RBI has not been accorded autonomy on par with recent trends in some 
of  the  industrialised  as  well  as  emerging  economies;  but,  de  facto,  the  recent  experience 
reflects  a  progressively  higher  degree  of  autonomy  being  enjoyed  by  the  RBI.  During  the 
period  of  reform,  since  1991,  there  has  been  a  gradual  and  mutually  agreed  progress 
towards  greater  autonomy  in  matters  relating  particularly  to  the  financial  markets  and  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Relationship with the Ministry of Finance 
In a way, I have answered this question when I mentioned that there is, in the Indian case, a 
greater  de  facto  rather  than  de  jure  autonomy  available  to  the  RBI.  It  is  necessary  to 
recognise that de facto autonomy is possible only and only when the Central Government, 
and in particular the Ministry of Finance, reposes confidence and trust in the RBI. In a way, it 
can be said that independence in abstract or absolute terms is not feasible in practice. An 
assessment  of  the  extent  of  independence  of  a  central  bank  or  its  autonomy  vis-à-vis 
Government  needs  to  reckon  the  independence  in  respect  of  which  functions;  with  what 
objectives; in which context and through what instruments?  
It is essential to avoid being dogmatic about independence of a central bank and to approach 
the  subject  with  reference  to  fundamental  objectives  in  a  given  context  in  a  pragmatic 
fashion, within the legal framework. Perhaps, in the Indian context and at this juncture, it can 
be  said  that  the  RBI  has  considerable  autonomy  in  monetary  operations  but  it  closely 
harmonises its policies with the public policies in general and co-ordinates actively with the 
Government to bring about structural reforms in the economy. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2008
Before  concluding  this  section,  it  is  instructive  to  explore  explanations  for  what  I  may  call 
globally  prevalent  noises  in  regard  to  relations  between  central  banks  and  Governments, 
especially the Ministry of Finance.  
First,  the  very  purpose  of  creating a  central  bank  is  to  have  a  slightly longer  term  view  of 
macro-economic management. Hence, its perspectives are likely to be different from those of 
the Government.  
Secondly, the design of a central bank involves, among other things, separation of powers to 
spend money (which is with the Government) from powers to create money (which is with the 
monetary authority), with a view to avoiding inflationary financing of Government spending. 
Hence, the focus and emphasis could be different due to the design itself.  
Thirdly, the distinct apolitical identity of a central bank helps the countries to mitigate some 
possible adverse consequences of spurts of political instability, by enabling the currency and 
the credit systems to operate as smoothly as possible at all times.  
Fourthly, the interests of the Government, as a borrower in the financial market and also as a 
significant owner of entities regulated by the central bank, may not necessarily converge with 
those of the central bank. 
Finally, if a central bank always concurs with the Government, the central bank, as a distinct 
entity,  becomes  superfluous,  while  if  it  persists  in  constantly  disagreeing,  it  becomes 
obnoxious. In reality, the relevant issue is how checks and balances work in a given context. 
RBI: approaches to managing reform 
As a part of economic reforms, public policy in India has enabled changes in the domestic 
economy and has been responding to changes in the global economy while reorienting the 
public  institutions  to  meet  the  consequent  newly  emerging  demands  on  them.  The  RBI  is 
also  a  part  of  this  process  of  managing  reform.  I  would  highlight  some  of  the  approaches 
adopted by the RBI in managing the reform process. 
First, considerable attention is being paid to enhancing the knowledge base and skills within 
the  institution.  RBI  officers  are  encouraged  to  upgrade  their  skills  on  a  continuous  basis. 
Select  officers  are  trained,  for  about  one  year,  in  leading  universities,  including  Harvard, 
Stanford, Oxford, Yale, LSE, etc., and these officers number around ninety so far. There are 
on our rolls, about 60 Ph.Ds and over a hundred MBAs focusing on the financial sector. E-
learning  is  facilitated  through  the  Financial  Stability  Institute.  There  are  incentives  for 
acquisition of academic qualifications on a full-time or part-time basis. These are in addition 
to sending officers to several training programmes, both in India and abroad. 
Second, information on global best practices is obtained on a continuous basis. In many of 
the  technical  papers  or  reports  of  working  groups  that  are  placed  on  the  RBI  website,  a 
reference  to  comparative  country-practices  may  be  routine.  In  fact,  a  Committee  had 
assessed  our  standards  and  codes  vis-à-vis  the  global  standards  on  several  aspects  of 
financial  sector  in  2001  and  these  have  since  been  updated.  Currently,  an  exercise  of 
comprehensive self-assessment, using inter-alia the IMF/World Bank Handbook on Financial 
Sector  Assessment  (2005)  is  under  way  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan, 
Deputy Governor, with Dr. Subbarao, Finance Secretary, as the Co-Chairman. The process 
incorporates  obtaining  advice  from  about  forty  nationally  and  globally  renowned  experts3. 
                                                 
3   Advisory  Panel  Members  include  :  Shri  Aman  Mehta,  Dr.  Ashok  Ganguly,  Shri  Ashok  Soota,  Dr.  K  C 
Chakraborty, Dr. R Chandrasekar, Shri Gagan Rai, Dr. Indira Rajaraman, Dr. Jaimini Bhagwati, Shri Mahesh 
Vyas, Shri Nimesh Kampani, Shri Nitin Desai, Dr. Omkar Goswami, Shri Pavan Sukhdev, Dr. Rajas Parchure, 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 7
The  report  on  this  self-assessment  should  be  available  soon  in  public  domain.  Our  senior 
officers  are  involved  in  several  multilateral  working  groups,  such  as  those  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Forum  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  thus  acquiring  in-depth 
knowledge of global practices. In fact, some of our professionals work on deputation in these 
multilateral  institutions  as  also  some  other  central  banks,  thus  bringing  back  a  wealth  of 
experience. Similarly, to facilitate a wider exposure, officers are selectively enabled to work 
in  NGOs  or  other  financial  institutions.  The  annual  conference  of  regional  directors  and 
heads  of  departments  also  provides  an  occasion  to  learn  from  eminent  personalities  from 
diverse fields4. 
Third, continuous efforts are made to benefit from outside expertise. Experts from outside the 
RBI, be it academics or market participants or representatives of industry associations, are 
associated usually as members and occasionally as special invitees on the working groups 
or committees constituted by the RBI. Their participation enhances the quality of work and 
the implementability of their recommendations, in our situation. Several standing Committees 
have the benefit of advice of eminent Professors of IIT, IIM etc5. The Standing Committees 
exist for a wide range of activities namely financial markets, technology, financial regulation, 
etc. The outside expertise adds value to the quality of decision making and credibility of the 
policy measures initiated. 
Fourth, the procedures for decision-making and internal working are made more collegial and 
less hierarchical. The inter-departmental groups constituted with regard to various aspects of 
RBI functions include, for example, Financial Markets Committee (which meets at least once 
a day, in the morning); the Deputy Governors Committee (which meets once a week), the 
Regulated  Institutions  Group,  the  Monetary  Policy  Strategy  Group,  and  the  Reserve 
Management  Strategy  Group  (meet  once  a  month);  and  the  Crisis  Management  Group 
(meets whenever crisis is anticipated or occurs). The process helps enhanced quality of work 
and  wide  participation/commitment.  For 
the  purposes  of  co-ordination  with  Central 
Government,  State  Governments,  other  regulators,  etc.,  we  have  several  standing 
committees/ groups – such as for cash and debt-management, financial conglomerates, and 
technical groups with the Securities Exchange Board of India and the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority. These are standard co-ordinating arrangements, but the RBI, in 
view of its responsibility for financial stability, takes active interest in these and benefits from 
them. 
Fifth,  considerable  emphasis  has  been  laid  on  innovative  approaches  to  managing  the 
reform  process.  For  example,  the  urban  cooperative  banks  faced  severe  problems  due  to 
dual control of the RBI and the State Governments. RBI’s efforts to divest its role altogether 
did  not  succeed.  Hence,  it  was  decided  to  have  institutional  arrangements  for  ensuring 
coordination with the State Governments, whenever a state was willing. The Federation of 
Urban Cooperative Banks is also made a partner in the process. Consequently, Task Forces 
(TAFCUB)  have been  established in several states through Memoranda of Understanding. 
                                                                                                                                                         
Dr.Rajiv Kumar, Dr. Rajiv B. Lall, Dr. M T Raju, Dr. T T Ram Mohan, Shri M B N Rao, Shri Ravi Mohan, Smt. 
Shikha Sharma, Shri Shubhashis Gangopadhyay, Shri U K Sinha, Shri Uday Kotak, Shri C M Vasudev, and 
Shri M S Verma. 
  Peer  Reviewers  include  :  Mr.  Andrew  Large,  Mr.  Andrew  Sheng,  Mr.  Carl  Hiralal,  Mr.  Eric  Rosengren,  Mr. 
Gregory Johnston, Mr. Ian Mackintosh, Mr. Michael Hafeman, Mr. Neil  Patterson, Mr. Ranjit Ajit Singh, Mr. 
Shane Tregillis, Mr. V Sundararajan, Dr. Sushil Wadhwani, Mr. Vito Tanzi, and Prof. William Buiter. 
4   Those  who  addressed  the  conference  in  the  last  four  years  include:  Dr.  A  P  J  Abdul  Kalam,  Shri  Anand 
Mahindra, Shri Azim Premji, Ms. Chetna Gala Sinha, Dabbawala Association Office-bearers, Dr. Devi Shetty, 
Shri Mohan Das Pai, Dr. Pritam Singh, Dr. Sandip Rane, Shri Satish Pradhan, and Dr. E Sreedharan. 
5   These include Prof. Jaju, Prof. Jhunjhunwala, Prof. Krishnamoorthy, Shri T V Mohandas Pai, Dr. R H Patil, Dr. 
Phatak, Shri Rajesh Doshi, Prof. Ram Mohan Rao, Prof. Sarda, and Prof. Sivakumar. 
8 
 BIS Review 37/2008
Yet another example of mutual understanding relates to the introduction of a system of ways 
and  means  advances  as  well  as  the  cessation  of  participation  of  the  RBI  in  primary 
issuances of government securities before the passage of the FRBM Act at the Centre. 
Finally,  a  proactive  approach  is  adopted  on  several  issues.  For  example,  a  bi-annual 
conference of State Finance Secretaries is being convened for over ten years, in which the 
central government nominees also participate. The conference sponsors several studies and 
working  groups  for  which  the  RBI  provides  technical  support.  Constant  feedback  from  all 
stakeholders is sought on several issues that happen to be under the consideration of the 
RBI.  Often,  even  the  draft  circulars  are  put  in  public  domain  for  feedback.  RBI’s 
communication policy is now extended to cover several leading national languages – as will 
be evident from the RBI website. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organisers for giving me this opportunity to share with you 
some thoughts on the Indian economy and the RBI. 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 9
