Donald L Kohn: Condition of the US banking system 
Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 4 March 2008.  
 Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby and members of the Committee, it is my pleasure 
to appear today to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking system. In my remarks, I will 
summarize briefly the role of the Federal Reserve in banking supervision, provide an overall 
view  of  the  health  of  the  U.S.  banking  system,  and  then  discuss  some  key  areas  of 
supervisory focus.  
The U.S. banking system is facing some challenges, but remains in sound overall condition, 
having entered the period of recent financial turmoil with solid capital and strong earnings. 
The problems in the mortgage and housing markets have been highly unusual and clearly 
some banking organizations have failed to manage their exposures well and have suffered 
losses as a result. But in general these losses should not threaten their viability. We, along 
with the other banking agencies, have been  working with banking organizations to identify 
and rectify those shortcomings in risk management and to ensure that the banking system 
continues to be safe and sound. 
inspections.  These 
Role of the Federal Reserve in banking supervision 
The Federal Reserve has supervisory and regulatory authority over a wide range of financial 
institutions  and  activities.  It  works  with  other  federal  and  state  supervisory  authorities  to 
ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry, the stability of the financial system, 
and fair and equitable treatment of consumers in their financial transactions.  
While  the  Federal  Reserve  is  not  the  primary  federal  supervisor  for  the  majority  of 
commercial  bank  assets,  it  plays  an  important  role  as  the  "umbrella  supervisor"  of  bank 
holding companies. The bank holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve number 
approximately  5,000  and  have  consolidated  assets  of  about  $14.2  trillion.  The  Federal 
Reserve  conducts  inspections  of  all  large,  regional,  and  complex  bank  holding  companies 
and maintains inspection teams on-site at the largest bank holding companies. For smaller 
less  complex  organizations,  supervision  is  conducted  through  a  combination  of  off-site 
monitoring  and  on-site 
inspections,  which  are  conducted  using 
established procedures, manuals, and techniques, allow the Federal Reserve to review the 
organization's  systems  for  identifying  and  managing  risk  across  the  organization  and  its 
various legal entities and to evaluate the overall financial strength of the organization. The 
primary purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the holding company and its nonbank 
subsidiaries do not pose a threat to the soundness of the company's depository institutions. 
In fulfilling this role, the Federal Reserve relies to the fullest extent possible on information 
and  analysis  provided  by  the  appropriate  supervisory  authority  of  the  company's  bank, 
securities, or insurance subsidiaries.  
The Federal Reserve is also the primary federal supervisor of state-member banks, sharing 
supervisory  responsibilities  with  state  supervisory  agencies.  In  this  role,  Federal  Reserve 
supervisory staff regularly conduct on-site examinations and off-site monitoring to ensure the 
soundness  of  supervised  state  member  banks.  There  are  over  870  state  member  banks 
whose assets total more than $1.5 trillion, representing about 12 percent of all commercial 
banks by number and about 14 percent of all commercial bank assets.  
Consumer protection within the financial services industry is another important responsibility 
of the Federal Reserve. Among the Federal Reserve's responsibilities in this area are: writing 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
and  interpreting  regulations  to  carry  out  many  of  the  major  consumer  protection  laws; 
reviewing bank compliance with regulations; investigating complaints from the public about 
compliance  with  consumer  protection  laws;  and  conducting  community  development 
activities.  
Recent performance of the US banking system 
I would now like to address the condition of banking organizations supervised by the Federal 
Reserve. I will start by discussing bank holding companies, providing a brief overview of their 
recent performance, condition, and outlook. I will then do the same for state member banks.  
Bank holding companies 
Over  the  second  half  of  2007,  bank  holding  companies  (BHCs)  experienced  a  substantial 
deterioration in asset quality and earnings, largely attributable to the effects of the slowing 
residential housing market on the quality of mortgage and construction loans. The sharp rise 
in  subprime  delinquencies,  moreover,  adversely  affected  the  securitization  market  and 
placed strains on the liquidity and capital of some of the largest BHCs as these institutions 
brought  off-balance  sheet  exposures  onto  their  books.  Many  of  these  institutions  also 
recognized significant valuation write-downs on assets affected by this market volatility.  
The combination of sizable write-downs and substantially higher provisions for loan losses in 
response  to  deteriorating  loan  quality  resulted  in  weaker  profitability  at  BHCs  in  the  third 
quarter  of  2007  and  overall  losses  of  more  than  $8  billion  in  the  fourth  quarter  based  on 
preliminary  regulatory  report  data.  Nonperforming  assets  also  increased  notably  as  the 
quality  of  mortgages,  home  equity  lines  of  credit,  and  loans  to  real  estate  developers 
weakened.  However,  despite  these  adverse  developments,  bank  holding  companies  still 
reported  total  net  income  exceeding  $90  billion  for  the  full  year  of  2007.  In  addition,  the 
overall nonperforming assets ratio remained below levels reached earlier in this decade.  
The earnings performance of the fifty largest U.S. based bank holding companies as a group, 
which together represent more than three-fourths of all assets at bank holding companies, 
has clearly been subpar over the past two quarters and accounts for the industry's overall 
weak performance. In aggregate, these companies generated overall losses of over $9 billion 
for the fourth quarter, incorporating asset write-downs of more than $31 billion and loan loss 
provisions that exceeded loan charge-offs by $14 billion. Nonperforming assets also swelled 
at  these  companies  during  2007,  doubling  from  $33  to  $67  billion,  and  raising  the 
nonperforming  assets  ratio  from  a  historically  low  0.70  percent  at  December  31,  2006,  to 
1.25 percent at the end of 2007. 
Liquidity has also been under pressure at some of the fifty largest bank holding companies. 
In many cases, these pressures reflect difficulties securitizing some assets and the need to 
bring  on  balance  sheet  some  assets  that  had  previously  been  securitized.  As  a  result, 
banking companies have experienced a moderate overall decline in liquid assets as a portion 
of total assets, and strains have emerged in term interbank funding markets. Bank holding 
companies  are  actively  responding  to  these  pressures  and  some  have  sought  to  increase 
more stable sources of funding to bolster their liquidity positions. In addition, as noted in last 
week's Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of steps to address 
the difficulties in term funding markets.  
Asset write-downs and unplanned increases in assets have placed pressure on capital ratios 
and  caused  some  banking  organizations  to  take  a  more  cautious  approach  to  extending 
credit.  However,  large  bank  holding  companies  in  aggregate  and  individually  continued  to 
maintain  regulatory  capital  ratios  in  excess  of  minimum  regulatory  requirements.  As  of 
December  31,  2007,  the  fifty  largest  bank  holding  companies  reported  aggregate  tier  1 
leverage, tier 1 risk-based, and total risk-based capital ratios of 5.3, 7.5, and 11.1 percent, 
respectively.  In  part,  these  capital  ratios  reflect  steps  taken  by  several  large  BHCs  to 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
replenish depleted equity positions by curtailing share repurchases, reducing dividends, and 
raising  additional  capital  in  order  to  maintain  desired  capital  levels  relative  to  regulatory 
norms. Indeed, in recent months, large bank holding companies have raised more than $50 
billion in capital. 
Looking ahead, bank holding companies will continue to face challenging market conditions 
and  persistent  pressure  on  earnings.  More  asset  write-downs  are  likely  as  the  market 
continues to adjust risk premiums and valuations change. Adverse trends in loan quality will 
almost  certainly  continue  and  will  require  close  monitoring  by  banking  institutions  and 
supervisory agencies alike. Liquidity positions will need to continue to be actively managed 
and banking organizations will need to implement risk management improvements to remedy 
the deficiencies that have been noted by companies and supervisors over the past year.  
State member banks 
Most  state  member  banks  entered  the  recent  financial  disturbance  in  sound  condition, 
reporting strong earnings through the first half of 2007 and maintaining high capital ratios. As 
of  December  31,  2007,  more  than  99  percent  of  these  banks  reported  risk-based  capital 
ratios  consistent  with  a  "well-capitalized"  designation  under  Prompt  Corrective  Action 
standards. However, profitability suffered in the second half of 2007 as state member banks 
increased  loan  loss  provisions,  reducing  the  aggregate  return  on  average  assets  from  1.4 
percent  for  the  full  year  2006  to  1.1  percent  for  2007.  In  addition,  although  still  below  the 
most recent peak in 2002, the nonperforming assets ratio moved up sharply over the past 
year. In large part, this increase reflected deterioration in residential mortgages and loans to 
builders and has contributed to an increase in the portion of state member banks with less-
than-satisfactory supervisory ratings from 4.5 percent at year-end 2006 to 6.3 percent at the 
end  of  2007.  Indeed,  half  of  the  state  member  banks  that  were  downgraded  to  less-than-
satisfactory  CAMELS  ratings  since  mid-2007  have  evidenced  significant  financial  or  risk 
management weaknesses related to commercial real estate lending activities. 
State member banks entered 2007 relatively well-positioned to confront and withstand more 
adverse conditions. However, like bank holding companies, these banks face deteriorating 
credit conditions in 2008 and we anticipate further increases in their loan delinquencies and 
charge-offs. We also foresee more difficult liquidity conditions for some of these banks, and 
we expect to see the number with less than satisfactory CAMELS ratings of 3, 4, or 5 grow 
from the low level that has prevailed over the last several years.  
Key areas of supervisory focus 
As  the  nation's  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  acutely  aware  of  conditions  in  the 
economy and financial markets and the challenges those conditions pose to the safety and 
soundness of banking organizations. Accordingly, we have been focusing supervisory efforts 
on those institutions most exposed to residential and commercial real estate or other sectors 
that have come under pressure. We are also attentive to those institutions that would suffer 
most from a prolonged period of deterioration in economic conditions. We continue to focus 
our  examinations  on  the  financial  condition  of  banking  organizations  –  including  the 
adequacy  of  their  liquidity,  capital,  and  loan  loss  reserves  and  their  consequent  ability  to 
recognize additional losses. We are also evaluating risk management practices very closely, 
including scrutinizing governance and controls, given some of the risk management lapses in 
those areas revealed by recent events. 
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  provide  a  summary  of  the  key  areas  of  supervisory  focus, 
including  residential  mortgage  lending,  consumer  protection,  bank  liquidity  and  capital 
positions,  consumer  (nonmortgage)  lending,  commercial  real  estate,  and  commercial 
lending.  
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
Residential mortgages 
Among the challenges currently facing the U.S. banking system, residential mortgage lending 
has presented the largest problems so far. In addition to the economic and social distress 
created for many homeowners and communities, the sharp increases in subprime mortgage 
loan delinquencies and foreclosures over the past year have affected the banking industry 
significantly.  
Delinquency  rates  on  subprime  adjustable-rate  mortgages  (ARMs)  began  to  increase  in 
2006, and by December 2007, more than one-fifth of these loans were seriously delinquent 
(that is, ninety days or more delinquent or in foreclosure). For subprime mortgages with fixed 
interest rates, delinquency rates have moved up significantly in recent months, to the upper 
end of their historical range. For prime and near-prime mortgages, performance weakened 
somewhat in 2007, but generally remained fairly solid. The continued erosion in the quality of 
mortgage credit has led to an increase in initial foreclosure filings, with foreclosures rising the 
most in areas where home prices have fallen after an earlier period of rapid increase.  
Some  banking  organizations  in  particular  have  been  adversely  affected  by  problems  with 
residential  mortgages.  A  number  of  large  organizations  have  suffered  substantial  write-
downs on subprime mortgages. The effect of the problems in subprime mortgages, however, 
extends  beyond  the  mortgage  accounts  themselves.  Securities  backed  in  part  or  full  by 
subprime assets have also declined in value as investors factored in estimates of potential 
losses. Where the securities had been heavily structured or leveraged, these losses have in 
some cases been severe. Further, many banks financed nonbank firms that originated these 
assets through "mortgage warehouse" lines of credit or through repurchase agreements. As 
the banks saw the values of the financed mortgages falling last year, their margin calls put a 
number of originators out of business.  
Most  recently,  home  equity  lending  has  emerged  as  a  more  challenging  area.  As  banking 
organizations  report  increased  delinquencies  and  losses  in  home  equity  lines  of  credit 
(HELOCs),  especially  in  light  of  falling  housing  prices  in  some  markets,  we  continue  to 
monitor current and potential exposures, and are reviewing the industry's collateral valuation 
methods.  
Federal  Reserve  supervisors  have  focused  very  intensely  on  problems  with  residential 
mortgages and are taking appropriate action. In reaction to the immediate problems facing 
homeowners struggling to meet payment obligations, the Federal Reserve and other banking 
agencies have encouraged mortgage lenders and mortgage servicers to pursue prudent loan 
workouts through such measures as modification of loans, deferral of payments, extension of 
loan maturities, capitalization of delinquent amounts, and conversion of ARMs into fixed-rate 
mortgages  or  fully  indexed,  fully  amortizing  ARMs.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  also 
collaborated with community groups to help homeowners avoid foreclosure.  
In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  steps  aimed  at  avoiding  future  problems  in 
subprime  mortgage  markets  while  still  preserving  responsible  subprime  lending  and 
sustainable homeownership. Through examinations and other supervisory activities, we are 
taking  our  knowledge  of  the  root  causes  of  bank-related  mortgage  lending  problems  and 
using it to work with institutions to improve risk management practices in this area. Some of 
this  work  builds  on  the  guidance  on  subprime  mortgages  issued  last  summer  by  the  U.S. 
banking agencies. The guidance is designed to help ensure that borrowers obtain adjustable-
rate mortgages that they can afford to repay and can refinance without prepayment penalty 
for a reasonable period before the first interest rate reset. The Federal Reserve, along with 
the other banking agencies, issued similar guidance on nontraditional mortgages in 2006.  
Given  significant  growth  in  banks'  HELOC  portfolios  over  the  past  several  years,  the 
agencies  have  been  concerned  for  some  time  that  banks'  HELOC  underwriting  placed 
insufficient emphasis on the creditworthiness of borrowers and placed too much weight on 
the value of the collateral during a booming housing market. In 2005, the agencies issued 
joint  guidance  that  outlined  these  concerns  and  set  forth  supervisory  expectations  for  risk 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2008
management of home equity lending activities. The guidance emphasized the importance of 
active portfolio management, particularly for those institutions pursuing significant growth in 
HELOC  balances  and  underwriting  HELOCs  with  high  loan-to-value  limits  and  limited 
documentation on borrowers' asset and income. 
Consumer protection 
As  the  Committee  is  aware,  problems  associated  with  residential  mortgages  stem  in  part 
from  lax  lending  standards.  In  some  cases,  improper  practices  vis-à-vis  consumers 
contributed to the defaults we have seen in the subprime mortgage market. To address these 
practices,  under  the  authority  given  to  it  by  the  Congress,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken 
action to protect consumers in their mortgage transactions. In December, the Board issued 
for public comment a comprehensive set of new regulations to prohibit unfair or deceptive 
practices  in  the  mortgage  market,  under  the  authority  granted  us  by  the  Home  Ownership 
and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA). The proposed rules would apply to all mortgage 
lenders  and  would  establish  lending  standards  to  help  ensure  that  consumers  who  seek 
mortgage credit receive loans whose terms are clearly disclosed and that can reasonably be 
expected  to  be  repaid.  Accordingly,  the  rules  would  prohibit  lenders  from  engaging  in  a 
pattern or practice of making higher-priced mortgage loans without due regard to consumers' 
ability  to  make  the  scheduled  payments.  In  addition,  for  all  mortgage  loans,  our  proposal 
addresses misleading and deceptive advertising practices, requires borrowers and brokers to 
agree in advance on the maximum fee that the broker may receive, bans certain practices by 
loan  servicers  that  harm  borrowers,  and  prohibits  coercion  of  appraisers  by  lenders.  We 
expect  substantial  public  comment  on  our  proposal,  and  we  will  carefully  consider  all 
information and viewpoints while moving expeditiously to adopt final rules.  
The  effectiveness  of  the  new  regulations,  however,  will  depend  critically  on  strong 
enforcement.  To  that  end,  in  conjunction  with  other  federal  and  state  agencies,  we  are 
conducting  compliance  reviews  of  a  range  of  mortgage  lenders,  including  nondepository 
lenders.  The  agencies  will  collaborate  in  determining  the  lessons  learned  and  in  seeking 
ways  to  better  cooperate  in  ensuring  effective  and  consistent  examinations  and  improved 
enforcement of all categories of mortgage lenders. 
We are also working toward finalizing rules under the Truth in Lending Act that will require 
new, more informative, and consumer-tested disclosures by credit card issuers. Separately, 
we are actively reviewing potentially unfair and deceptive practices by issuers of credit cards. 
Using  the  Board's  authority  under  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  Act,  we  expect  to  issue 
proposed rules regarding these practices this spring. 
Liquidity and capital issues 
As noted earlier, liquidity disruptions in certain financial markets have created challenges for 
banking organizations. During times of systemwide stress, such as the one we are currently 
experiencing, significant liquidity demands can emanate from both the asset and the liability 
side  of  a  bank's  balance  sheet.  For  example,  we  have  recently  seen  how  unanticipated 
draws  on  liquidity  facilities  by  structured  investment  vehicles,  commercial  paper  conduits, 
and others can lead to significant growth in bank assets. Moreover, some organizations have 
also  encountered  difficulty  in  selling  whole  loans  or  securitizing  assets  as  planned.  There 
were  also  cases  in  which  reputational  concerns  have  prompted  banks  or  their  affiliates  to 
provide liquidity support to a vehicle or to incorporate some of the vehicle's assets onto the 
bank's balance sheet, even when the bank had no legal obligation to do so. In a few cases, 
these unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, 
even  when  capital  levels  remained  unchanged.  Further  instances  of  unplanned  asset 
expansion could continue.  
Reduced  liquidity  in  the  markets  for  certain  structured  credit  products  continue  to  create 
valuation  challenges  and  concerns  about  these  products  have  spread  to  other  sectors. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 5
Illiquidity in some credit markets may make it difficult for some market participants, including 
banking organizations, to hedge positions effectively.  
From a supervisory perspective, it has become clear that some bankers did not adequately 
explore  scenarios  in  which  market  liquidity  could  be  disrupted,  or  in  which  there  could  be 
sudden demands for the institution's own liquidity. We are working very closely with banking 
organizations  to  ensure  that  they  improve  liquidity  risk  management  practices,  including 
contingency  funding  plans  and  improved  information  systems,  and  ensure  that  these 
practices are integrated with other aspects of risk management. Banking organizations must 
employ  more comprehensive stress testing and  scenario analysis – exercises that capture 
both  bank-specific  problems  and  broader  market  disruptions  –  to  assess  the  impact  that 
problems in market liquidity, as well as funding liquidity, can have on capital adequacy. 
Credit cards and other consumer lending 
Of course the Federal Reserve is focused on the possibility that troubles in the residential 
mortgage sector could adversely affect other types of consumer lending, such as credit cards 
or auto loans. Banking organizations' consumer loans excluding mortgages – which include 
credit cards and auto loans – grew somewhat faster in 2007 than in 2006, suggesting some 
substitution  of  nonmortgage  credit  for  mortgage  credit.  The  pickup  in  consumer  debt  was 
mostly attributable to faster growth in revolving credit, a pattern consistent with the results of 
the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. Banks, on net, reported easing 
lending  standards  on  credit  cards  over  the  first  half  of  2007  and  reported  little  change  in 
those standards on net over the second half of the year. In contrast, significant portions of 
respondents in the second half of 2007 reported that they had tightened standards and terms 
on other consumer loans, a change that may have contributed to a slowing in the growth of 
nonrevolving loans over the final months of 2007.  
Thus  far,  the  quality  of  other  consumer  loans  has  remained  satisfactory.  However,  the 
delinquency rates on credit cards and consumer installment loans at banking organizations 
increased over the second half of the year. Moreover, although household bankruptcy filings 
remained below the levels seen before the changes in bankruptcy law implemented in late 
2005, the bankruptcy rate rose modestly over the first nine months of 2007 and could be a 
harbinger  of  increasing  delinquency  rates  on  other  consumer  loans.  In  view  of  this  risk, 
Federal  Reserve  supervisors  are  monitoring  these  consumer  loan  segments  for  signs  of 
spillover  from  residential  mortgage  problems,  particularly  in  regions  showing  homeowner 
distress, and are paying particular attention to the securitization market for credit card loans. 
Commercial real estate 
Commercial  real  estate  is  another  area  that  requires  close  supervisory  attention.  The 
delinquency  rate  on  commercial  mortgages  held  by  banking  organizations  almost  doubled 
over the course of 2007 to over two percent. The loan performance problems were the most 
striking  for  construction  and  land  development  loans  –  especially  for  those  that  finance 
residential  development  –  but  some  increase  in  delinquency  rates  was  also  apparent  for 
loans backed by nonfarm, nonresidential properties and multifamily properties.  
In the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, a number of banking organizations 
reported  having  tightened  standards  and  terms  on  commercial  real  estate  (CRE)  loans. 
Among the most common reasons cited by those that tightened credit conditions were a less 
favorable or more uncertain economic outlook, a worsening of CRE market conditions in the 
areas where the banks operate, and a reduced tolerance for risk. Notably, a number of small 
and medium-sized institutions continue to have sizable exposure to CRE, with some having 
CRE concentrations equal to several multiples of their capital.  
Despite the generally satisfactory performance of commercial mortgages in securitized pools, 
spreads  of  yields  on  BBB-rated  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  over  comparable-
6 
 BIS Review 26/2008
maturity  swap  rates  soared,  and  spreads  on  AAA-rated  tranches  of  those  securities  have 
risen  to  unprecedented  levels.  The  widening  of  spreads  reportedly  reflected  heightened 
concerns regarding the underwriting standards for commercial mortgages over the past few 
years,  but  it  also  may  be  the  result  of  increased  investor  wariness  regarding  structured 
finance  products.  CRE  borrowers  that  require  refinancing  in  2008,  particularly  those  with 
short-term  mezzanine  loans,  will  face  difficulty  in  locating  new  financing  under  tighter 
underwriting standards and reduced demand for CRE securitizations. 
In those geographic regions exhibiting particular signs of weakness in real estate markets, 
for  several  years  we  have  been  focusing  our  reviews  of  state  member  banks  and  bank 
holding  companies  on  evaluating  growing  concentrations  in  CRE.  Building  on  this 
experience,  we  took  a  leadership  role  in  the  development  of  interagency  guidance 
addressing CRE concentrations, which was issued in 2006. More recently, because weaker 
housing  markets  have  clearly  started  to  adversely  affect  the  quality  of  CRE  loans  at  the 
banking organizations that we supervise, we have heightened our supervisory efforts in this 
segment  even  more.  These  efforts  include  monitoring  carefully  the  impact  that  lower 
valuations could have on CRE exposures, as well as evaluating the implementation of the 
interagency  guidance  on  concentrations  in  CRE,  particularly  at  those  institutions  with 
exceptionally high CRE concentrations or with riskier portfolios. 
Recently,  we  surveyed  our  examiners  about  their  assessments  of  real  estate  lending 
practices at a group of state member banks with high concentrations in CRE lending. We had 
two  main  objectives  for  this  effort.  First,  we  wanted  to  evaluate  the  Federal  Reserve's 
implementation  of  the  interagency  CRE  lending  guidance  and  to  determine  whether  there 
were  any  areas  in  which  additional  clarification  of  the  guidance  would  be  helpful  to  our 
examiners. Second, we wanted to assess the degree to which banks were complying with 
the guidance and gain further information on the degree of deterioration in real estate lending 
conditions. Through this effort, we confirmed that many banks have taken prudent steps to 
manage  their  CRE  concentrations,  such  as  considering  their  exposures  in  their  capital 
planning  efforts  and  conducting  stress  tests  of  their  portfolios.  Others,  however,  have  not 
been as effective in their efforts and we have uncovered cases in which interest reserves and 
extensions  of  maturities  were  used  to  mask  problem  credits,  appraisals  had  not  been 
updated  despite  substantial  recent  changes  in  local  real  estate  values,  and  analysis  of 
guarantor support for real estate transactions was inadequate. Based on these findings, we 
are currently planning a further series of targeted reviews to identify those banks most at risk 
to  further  weakening  in  real  estate  market  conditions  and  to  promptly  require  remedial 
actions. We have also developed and started to deliver targeted examiner training so that our 
supervisory  staff  is  equipped  to  deal  with  more  serious  CRE  problems  at  banking 
organizations as they arise.  
Commercial and industrial loans 
While there are some pockets of poor performance in commercial and industrial lending, for 
the  most  part  the  sector  continues  to  perform  fairly  well.  Commercial  and  industrial  (C&I) 
loans  surged  in  2007  because  of  extremely  rapid  growth  in  the  second  half  of  the  year 
resulting,  in  part,  from  large  banks'  inability  to  syndicate  leveraged  loans  that  they  had 
underwritten.  Finally,  after  the  issuance  of  an  unprecedented  amount  of  leveraged 
syndicated  loans  over  the  first  half  of  2007,  issuance  declined  considerably  in  the  second 
half of the year, when demand by nonbank investors for those loans diminished.  
In the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey of October 2007 and January 2008, many banks 
reported charging wider spreads on C&I loans – the loan rate less the bank's cost of funds – 
representing  the  first  such  tightening  in  several  years.  A  large  proportion  of  banks  also 
indicated that they had tightened lending standards. Most of the banks that tightened terms 
and  standards  indicated  that  they  had  done  so  in  response  to  a  less  favorable  or  more 
uncertain economic outlook and a reduced tolerance for risk. However, about one-fourth of 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 7
the  banks  cited  concerns  about  their  own  liquidity  or  capital  position  as  reasons  for 
tightening.  
The delinquency rate on C&I loans at commercial banks trended higher throughout 2007, but 
remained near the bottom of its historical range at the end of the year. Charge-offs on C&I 
loans at commercial banks also increased in 2007, particularly in the fourth quarter when the 
charge-off  rate  moved  up  from  0.48  to  0.85  percent  of  average  C&I  loans.  In  addition, 
examiners  continue  to  note  early  signs  of  credit  deterioration  at  some  banks  where 
delinquencies have not yet increased significantly. 
Here, too, supervisors are responding to ensure that banks' commercial and industrial (C&I) 
lending activities remain safe and sound. Examiners are focusing on underwriting standards, 
evaluating both the methodology and results of banks' stress tests of credit portfolios and the 
impact of potential shocks on credit and asset quality. Credit administration – that is, banks' 
activities to monitor their loans and maintain their credit operations – are also being watched 
carefully. Examiners are looking for signs of imprudent renewals, excessive waivers of terms 
without compensation, or other activities which might mask recognition of poorly performing 
credits. We are emphasizing that banks employ appropriate internal controls that will ensure 
that  borrowers  meet  their  obligations  under  credit  agreements  –  not  only  obligations  for 
payments, but also obligations to furnish up-to-date information such as financial statements 
– which allow the bank to properly assess credit risk. We also continue to regularly review 
internal  bank  reports  and  meet  with  bank  management  to  discuss  underwriting  and  credit 
performance in order to identify problem areas early and while they are still manageable. 
Supervisory strategies for going forward 
The U.S. banking industry is facing serious challenges; the Federal Reserve, working with 
the other U.S. banking agencies has acted – and will continue to act – to ensure that the 
banking  system  continues  to  be  safe  and  sound  and  able  to  meet  the  credit  needs  of  a 
growing economy. Our initial assessment of the weaknesses at individual firms indicates that 
risk management systems and senior management oversight at some institutions were not 
sufficiently robust. As supervisors, we must redouble our efforts to ensure risk management 
practices  and  controls  keep  pace  with  changes  in  financial  markets  and  business  models, 
providing both positive incentives and clear consequences.  
Supervisors  have  emphasized  for  several  years  the  concept  of  enterprise-wide  risk 
management.  However,  problems  stemming  from  recent  events  indicate  that  bank 
management  in  many  cases  was  not  fully  aware  of  the  latent  risks  contained  in  various 
structures  and  financial  instruments,  and  how  those  risks  could  manifest  themselves. 
Supervisors, therefore, will be enhancing their focus on the capacity of a firm as a whole to 
manage  risk  and  to  integrate  risk  assessments  into  the  overall  decision-making  by  senior 
management. Additional emphasis on enhancing stress-testing is also appropriate to focus 
more bank attention on risks that have a low probability of occurrence but unacceptably high 
potential  costs.  As  part  of  an  international  effort,  we  have  also  been  developing  a  set  of 
preliminary  "lessons  learned"  from  banking  organizations'  experiences  with  recent  market 
events,  containing  examples  of  both  stronger  and  weaker  practices,  to  share  with  the 
banking industry as well as our own examination staff.  
Finally, as part of a responsible and proactive supervisory approach, and as we have done in 
the past, we are conducting critical assessments of our own supervisory programs, policies, 
and practices. This is a prudent step and is consistent with long-standing Federal Reserve 
practice.  In  the  same  vein  as  the  "lessons  learned"  analysis  for  banking  institutions 
mentioned  above,  our  intent  is  to  identify  opportunities  for  improving  our  own  supervisory 
processes  both  within  the  current  environment  and  as  preparation  for  future  supervisory 
challenges. These assessments will be specific to our supervisory programs as well as their 
execution  over  the  past  several  years,  will  be  conducted  across  a  broad  portfolio  of 
8 
 BIS Review 26/2008
institutions and supervisory programs, and should help to further strengthen our supervisory 
objectives and procedures.  
It will take some time for the banking industry to work through this current set of challenges 
and for financial markets to recover from recent strains. The Federal Reserve will continue to 
work with other U.S. banking agencies and the Congress to help ensure that bank safety and 
soundness is maintained. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 9
