Timothy F Geithner: The current financial challenges – policy and 
regulatory implications  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations Corporate Conference 2008, 
New York, 6 March 2008. 
 I am going to talk today about some of the challenges facing the U.S. and financial system. 
These problems took a long time to build up, and, even with a forceful mix of public policy 
and action by the private sector, they will take time to resolve. 
The central questions are: what caused the crisis and what explains its severity? What mix of 
policy measures will best contain the damage? And what changes to the financial system are 
likely to produce greater stability and resilience in the future? 
Origins 
The  origins  of  this  crisis  lie  in  complex  interaction  of  number  of  forces.  Some  were  the 
product of market forces. Some were the product of market failures. Some were the result of 
incentives created by policy and regulation. Some of these were evident at the time, others 
are apparent only with the benefit of hindsight. Together they produced a substantial financial 
boom on a global scale. 
In the five years leading up to the present stress, the world experienced an unusual mix of 
financial conditions. 
Real short-term interest rates were reduced around the world, following a nearly decade long 
secular  decline  in  inflation  rates,  a  slowdown  in  growth  at  the  turn  of  this  decade  and 
subsequent deflation. As central banks raised their policy rates when the outlook improved 
and deflation risks had dissipated, both real and nominal long-term interest rates remained 
anomalously low. 
Global savings appeared to rise faster than did perceived real investment opportunities, and 
this development helped to push down real long-term interest rates around the world. At the 
same time, many emerging market economies built up very large levels of official reserves to 
reduce  external  vulnerability  and  to  hold  the  value  of  their  currencies  stable  against  the 
dollar. The exchange rate policies in these economies – economies that together accounted 
for  a  increasing  share  of  global  GDP  –  made  overall  global  financial  conditions  more 
accommodative,  even  as  the  United  States  and  other  countries  tightened  their  monetary 
policies. 
Expected  and  realized  volatility  in  both  debt  and  equity  markets  were  remarkably  low  for 
most of the last half a decade. Term premiums declined and remained low over much of this 
period.  Credit  spreads  across  a  wide  range  of  asset  classes  fell  to  levels  that  assumed 
unusually  low  levels  of  future  losses.  In  the  United  States,  credit,  and  mortgage  credit  in 
particular, expanded relative to GDP. Many households – including those previously lacking 
access  to  credit  or  with  access  only  to  expensive  credit  –  found  they  could  borrow  on  a 
significant scale to finance the purchase of a home and other expenses. Prices rose across a 
range of real and financial assets, most notably the prices of homes. 
This  constellation  of  broad  economic  and  financial  conditions  was  accompanied  by  rapid 
innovation  in  financial instruments that  made  credit  risk  easier  to  trade  and,  in  principle  at 
least, to hedge. These instruments allowed investors to buy insurance or protection against a 
broader range of individual credit risks, such as the default by a home owner or a company. 
Issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  and 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 1
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), as well as credit default swaps (CDS), expanded on a 
dramatic scale, particularly from 2005 through to mid-2007. And over this same period, the 
composition of the assets in ABS, as well as in CDOs and CLOs, shifted to higher credit risk 
mortgages and loans issued by noninvestment grade companies. 
Even though these instruments allow credit risk to be shared, their holders remain exposed 
to the less probable, but potentially very damaging effects of a significant increase in losses 
driven  by  macroeconomic  factors.  As  underwriting  standards  deteriorated  over  this  period, 
this exposure grew. And yet risk premia continued to fall, suggesting that investors did not 
fully appreciate the dynamic that was at work. As the boom persisted, investors grew more 
confident in the relative stability of macro and financial conditions and in the high levels of 
liquidity of the recent past, and projected that stability into the future. That confidence in a 
more stable future led to greater leverage and a larger exposure to the risk of a less benign 
world. 
The interaction of these forces made the financial system as a whole more vulnerable to a 
range of different weaknesses. The models used by issuers to structure these products and 
by  credit  rating  agencies  to  assess  risk  and  assign  ratings  turned  out  to  be  much  more 
sensitive  to  macroeconomic  assumptions  than  was  apparent  to  investors  at  the  time. 
Assumptions  about  home  price  appreciation  and  the  correlation  of  defaults  within  the 
underlying collateral pool were particularly critical in this context.  
The  proliferation  of credit  risk  transfer  instruments  was  driven  in  part by  an  assumption  of 
frictionless, uninterrupted liquidity. This left credit and funding markets more vulnerable when 
liquidity receded. Banks and other financial institutions lent substantial amounts of money on 
the  assumption  that  they  would  be  able  to  distribute  that  risk  easily  into  liquid  markets.  A 
sizable fraction of long-term assets – assets with exposure to different forms of credit risk – 
ended up in vehicles financed with very short-term liabilities and was placed with investors 
and funds that were also exposed to liquidity risk.  
As is often the case during periods of rapid change, more significant concentrations of risk 
were  present  than  was  apparent  at  the  time.  Banks  and  investment  banks  sold  insurance 
against what seemed like low probability events, but did so at what even at the time seemed 
like low prices. And on the assets they retained, these same institutions purchased insurance 
from financial guarantors and other firms that were exposed to the same risks.  
The  crisis  exposed  a  range  of  weaknesses  in  risk  management  practices  within  financial 
institutions  in  the  United  States  and  throughout  the  world.  Today,  a  group  of  the  primary 
supervisors  of 
the  world  released  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  risk  management  practices  in  these  institutions.  This 
assessment  will  help  lay  the  foundation  for  consensus  on  changes  to  supervision  going 
forward in the major financial centers. The report examines a range of practices that helped 
determine relative performance during this crisis. Banks and investment banks with stronger 
risk management practices and cultures did substantially better. The most common failures 
were in how firms dealt with uncertainty about the scale of losses they would face in a less 
benign  economic  and  financial environment;  the  scale  of  the  cushion they  built  up  against 
that uncertainty; how well they managed the internal tension between risk and reward; and 
how quickly they moved to mitigate risk as conditions deteriorated. 
The typical arsenal of risk management tools relies, by necessity, on history and experience, 
and as a result has only limited value in assessing the scale of potential future losses. These 
limitations were particularly damaging in a period in which significant innovation in financial 
instruments  and  market  structure  was  coupled  with  relatively  stable  macroeconomic  and 
financial  conditions.  Uncertainty  about  the  future,  and  the  greater  complexity  of  leveraged 
structured  products,  created  a  dense  fog  around  estimates  of  potential  loss,  making 
institutions and markets more vulnerable to an adverse surprise when conditions changed, 
and making it harder to manage the many principal agent problems inherent in the financial 
business. 
largest  banks  and 
investment  banks 
the 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2008
In  effect,  some  major  banks  and  investments  banks  made the  choice  to  follow  the  market 
down as underwriting practices eroded. They took on more exposure to low probability but 
extremely  adverse  events,  despite  the  potential  consequences  of  getting  caught  when  the 
music  stopped.  And  even  though  the  largest  firms  were  able  to  move  quickly  to  protect 
themselves as conditions worsened, those actions had significant negative effects on market 
functioning and liquidity.  
The  current  episode  has  a  basic  dynamic  in  common  with  all  past  crises.  As  market 
participants have moved to reduce exposure to further losses, to step on the brake, the brake 
became  the  accelerator,  amplifying  the  shock.  Measured  risk  has  increased  more  quickly 
than  many  institutions  have  been  able  reduce  it,  and  attempts  to  reduce  it  have  added  to 
volatility  and  downward  pressure  on  prices,  further  increasing  measured  exposure  to  risk. 
Uncertainty  about  the  market  value  of  securities  and  about  counterparty  credit  risk  has 
increased, and many hedges have not performed as intended. The rational actions taken by 
even  the  strongest  financial  institutions  to  reduce  exposure  to  future  losses  have  caused 
significant collateral damage to market functioning. This, in turn, has intensified the liquidity 
problems for a wide range of bank and nonbank financial institutions. 
In  this  environment,  banks  have  faced  several  different  types  of  liquidity  and  funding 
challenges.  They  have  been  called  on  to  fund  a  range  of  different  contingent  liquidity  and 
credit  commitments,  as  is  typically  the  case  in  crises.  The  substantial  impairment  of 
securitization  and  syndication  markets  has  been  an  additional  challenge  because  it  has 
reduced banks’ access to liquidity and their capacity to move assets off balance sheets. As 
the  market  value  of  many  securities  has  declined,  and  investors  have  reduced  their 
willingness  to  finance  more  risky  assets,  liquidity  conditions  have  eroded  further.  In 
response,  even  the  strongest  institutions  have  become  much  more  cautious,  building  up 
large cushions of liquidity, bringing down leverage and reducing financing for their leveraged 
counterparties.  
Policy measures 
The  self-reinforcing  dynamic  within  financial  markets  has  intensified  the  downside  risks  to 
growth for an economy that is already confronting a very substantial adjustment in housing 
and the possibility of a significant rise in household savings.  
The intensity of the crisis is in part a function of the size of the preceding financial boom, but 
also  of  the speed  of  the  deterioration  in  confidence  about the  prospects  for  growth  and  in 
some of the basic features of our financial markets. The damage to confidence – confidence 
in ratings, in valuation tools, in the capacity of investors to evaluate risk – will prolong the 
process of adjustment in markets. This process carries with it risks to the broader economy. 
Macroeconomic and supervisory policies have an important role to play in containing those 
risks.  
Let me mention several critical areas of policy. 
Monetary policy 
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has reduced the nominal federal funds rate 
target substantially in a relatively short period of time, with much of this reduction occurring 
ahead of the deterioration in confidence and the broader slowdown in spending that is now 
apparent.  But  even  with  those  reductions  in  short-term  interest  rates  in  place,  financial 
conditions have tightened as risk spreads on a wide range of asset classes and institutions 
have increased considerably. The critical risk to the economic outlook remains the potential 
for  the  strains  in  financial  markets  to  have  an  outsized  adverse  effect  on  real  economic 
activity, particularly by exacerbating the already significant weakness in the housing sector. It 
is important for monetary policy and liquidity instruments to be used proactively in addressing 
this risk.  
BIS Review 27/2008 
 3
But this is not the only challenge we face. Headline and core inflation have come in higher 
than  anticipated,  and  inflation  expectations  have  also  moved  up.  If  the  risk  of  significant 
damage to growth from these financial market pressures is attenuated and if global growth 
remains strong and drives a continuing rise in energy and commodity prices, then inflation 
may  not  moderate  as  much  as  we  anticipate.  If  the  medium  term  outlook  for  inflation 
deteriorates significantly, the FOMC will move with appropriate speed and force to address 
this risk.  
This  requires  a  fine  balance.  The  principal  challenge  for  policy  is  to  provide  an  adequate 
degree of insurance against the downside risks that still confront the economy as a whole, 
without  adding  to  concerns  about  inflation  over  the  medium  term.  We  cannot  know  with 
confidence  today  what  level  of  the  short-term  real  funds  rate  will  be  consistent  with  our 
objectives of sustainable growth and low inflation, but if turbulent financial conditions and the 
associated  downside  risks  to  growth  persist,  monetary  policy  may  have  to  remain 
accommodative for some time.  
Liquidity provision 
Although  concerns  about  credit  quality  are  at  the  root  of  the  current  problems  in  financial 
markets, a substantial impairment in market liquidity conditions can exacerbate and prolong 
the adjustment in credit conditions. To mitigate this risk, we have taken a series of actions to 
help  reduce  the  risk  that  market  liquidity  conditions  exacerbate  the  adjustment  process  in 
credit markets.  
By allowing institutions to finance with the central bank assets they could no longer finance 
as easily in the market, we have reduced the need for them to take other actions, such as 
selling  other  assets  into  distressed  markets,  or  withdrawing  credit  lines  extended  to  other 
financial institutions, that would have amplified pressures in markets. These measures – the 
Term Auction Facility and swap arrangements – have had some success in mitigating market 
pressures,  in  part  by  providing  a  form  of  insurance  against  future  stress.  We  now  have  in 
place a cooperative framework for liquidity provision among the major central banks. And we 
have  considerable  flexibility  to  adjust  the  dimensions  of  these  liquidity  tools.  We  will  keep 
them in place as long as necessary, and continue to adapt them where we see a compelling 
case to do so. 
Encouraging financial repair 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  working  closely  with  other  financial  supervisors  and  regulators  to 
facilitate  the  adjustment  underway  in  markets.  This  approach  has  two  important  elements. 
The first is to encourage improvements in the quality of valuation methods and disclosure by 
the  major  regulated  financial  institutions  and  the  necessary  adjustment  in  valuations  and 
reserves to reflect the deterioration in expected losses. Better disclosure can reduce some 
uncertainty  about  the  incidence  and  magnitude  of  potential  losses  across  the  financial 
system, although it is important to note that these estimates of losses are a function of the 
outlook for the economy and will necessarily change as expectations of the future change.  
The  second  element  is  to  encourage  new  equity  capital  raising,  so  that  the  burden  for 
preserving capital ratios does not fall principally on actions, such as asset sales or reduced 
lending,  that  might  exacerbate  the  credit  crunch.  We  have  seen  a  very  substantial  flow  of 
new  capital  into  the  financial  system  much  more  quickly  than  has  been  the  case  in  past 
crises.  More  will  come.  Those  institutions  that  move  more  quickly  will  obviously  be  in  a 
stronger position to deal with the challenges, and take advantage of the opportunities, ahead.  
Fiscal stimulus 
Monetary policy can, of course, play a powerful role in reducing the downside risks to growth, 
but overall policy will be more effective, particularly given the strains to the financial sector, if 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2008
the full burden does not fall on the tools available to the Federal Reserve. Fiscal policy can 
play an important role. The stimulus program signed into law by the President will provide a 
meaningful level of support to growth, somewhere in the range of three quarters to one and 
half of a percentage point of GDP growth over the next few quarters.  
Targeted support for housing 
Policy  can  also  play  an  important  role  in  helping  cushion  the  effects  of  the  fall  in  housing 
prices and the rise in foreclosures in the United States. The decline in house prices and the 
surge  in  foreclosures  now  underway  will  have  significant  spillovers  to  other  homes  in  the 
same neighborhoods, effects that are not fully incorporated into decisions by private creditors 
and  investors  to  workout  mortgages  on  mutually  beneficial  terms.  The  degree  to  which 
mortgages  are  now  held  in  securitized  and  complex  leverage  structures  exacerbates  the 
incentive  and  coordination  problems  inherent  in  this  situation.  Carefully  designed,  targeted 
programs in cooperation with the private sector can play an important role in resolving the 
various  constraints  that  are  now  impeding  economically  viable  mortgage  restructurings. 
Given the breakdowns in the securitization process and its potential impact on the supply of 
new mortgage credit, it also makes sense to explore ways to expand the scope for existing 
government programs to support financing of new homes.  
This  policy  framework  –  macroeconomic  stimulus,  liquidity  support,  new  equity  for  the 
financial system, and targeted support for housing – will help reduce the risks to the outlook 
and bring about an earlier return to growth rates more in line with the economy’s long term 
potential.  
Longer term reforms of the financial system 
The unwinding of this global financial boom has caused a substantial degree of stress to the 
financial system.  
Was  this  preventable?  I  don’t  believe  that  asset  price  and  credit  booms  are  preventable. 
They cannot be effectively diffused preemptively. There is no reliable early warning system 
for financial shocks. And yet policy plays an important role in determining the dimensions of 
financial  booms,  and  policy  helps  determine  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy to adjust to its aftermath. We need to undertake a broad set of changes to address 
the vulnerabilities in our financial system revealed by this crisis. Just as a long list of factors 
contributed  to  the  trauma,  there  is  no  single  reform  that  offers  the  promise  of  sufficient 
change.  
The Presidents Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum, which 
bring together policymakers and regulators from the major financial centers around the world, 
are  in  the  process  of  outlining  a  comprehensive  framework  of  reforms.  Many  of  these 
recommendations will focus on changes to the mortgage finance market, the ratings process 
for ABS and structured credit products more broadly, regulatory and accounting treatment of 
these  instruments  and  special  purpose  financing  vehicles,  the  disclosure  requirements  on 
instruments and institutions, and other dimensions of the securitization process.  
I want to conclude with a few comments on some of the broader policy questions we face in 
designing these reforms. 
Regulatory reform and simplification 
The regulations that affect incentives in the U.S. financial system have evolved into a very 
complex  and  uneven  framework,  with  substantial  opportunities  for  arbitrage,  large  gaps  in 
coverage,  significant  inefficiencies,  and  large  differences  in  the  degree  of  oversight  and 
restraint upon institutions that engage in very similar economic activities. Some illustrations 
of this include the large shift in subprime mortgage originations to less regulated institutions; 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 5
the incentives to shift risk to where accounting and capital treatment is more favorable; and 
the amount of risk built up in entities that operate in the grey areas of implied support from 
much larger affiliated institutions.  
We need to move to a simpler framework, with a more uniform set of rules applied evenly 
across entities involved in similar functions, and a more effective balance of regulation and 
market  discipline.  And  institutions  that  are  banks,  or  are  built  around  banks,  with  special 
access to the safety net, need to be subject to a stronger form of consolidated supervision 
than our current framework provides. 
Capital 
The  U.S.  banking  system  entered  this  financial  shock  with  capital  cushions  significantly 
above the regulatory thresholds, and in a stronger position to withstand a downturn than was 
the case in the past. This has made it possible for bank balance sheets to expand rapidly, 
which  in  turn  has  helped  offset  the  effects  of  the  withdrawal  of  many  nonbank  financial 
institutions from credit markets.  
Yet the shock absorbers in the financial system as a whole – the financial cushions that are 
critical to financial stability – have proved to be thinner, and behavior has been more pro-
cyclical than desirable.  
This is in part the consequence of changes in the structure of the financial system. Because 
banks are now a smaller share of the system, a given level of stress on nonbanks creates 
greater  strain  on  the  system  as  a whole.  It  is in  part  the consequence  of  the  fact  that  the 
present  system  focuses  on  mitigating  the  risks  of  firm  specific  shocks,  rather  than  a 
systematic  market  shock.  And  it  is  in  part  the  consequence  of  the  fact  that  the  present 
system is not designed to induce institutions, particularly the largest ones, to internalize the 
negative consequences, the negative externalities, of their actions on markets as a whole in 
conditions of stress.  
There  is  no  simple  solution  to  this  problem.  It  requires  a  broad  look  at  the  design  of  the 
present  capital  regime,  the  incentives  it  creates  for  holding  different  forms  of  risk,  and  the 
scope  of  the  application  of  these  requirements.  As  we  move  to  a  more  modern  and  risk-
sensitive  capital  framework  and  reduce  the  perverse  incentives  in  the  current  capital 
requirements, we need to make sure that reserves, capital, and liquidity provisions are more 
forward looking, and adjust appropriately through the peaks and valleys of the cycle. This will 
increase  the  scope  for  banks  and  other  institutions  that  are  subject  to  risk-based  capital 
requirements to act more as a stabilizing force in response to future financial market shocks.  
Market infrastructure 
We  are  in  the  midst  of  a  dramatic  period  of  financial  innovation  and  growth  in  derivative 
instruments, but the pace of change the growth in volume has brought a lot of challenges. 
Substantial progress has been made to strengthen this infrastructure over the past two and a 
half  years,  and  the  resilience  of  the  broader  financial  infrastructure  has  been  a  source  of 
strength for the financial system during this crisis. However, the systems and practices that 
support  the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  market  significantly  lags  that  of  securities 
markets  and  other  mature  markets.  We  need  to  move  quickly  to  put  in  place  a  more 
integrated  operational  infrastructure  that  supports  all  major  OTC  derivatives  products,  is 
highly automated, has robust operational resilience and risk management, and is capable of 
handling very substantial growth in volumes.  
Conclusion 
The  U.S.  economic  and  financial  system  is  undergoing  a  very  challenging  period  of 
adjustment, and we are likely to be living with a high degree of uncertainty for some period of 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2008
time  about  the  ultimate  magnitude  and  duration  of  the  slowdown  underway.  But  it  is 
important to recognize that we have already seen a lot of adjustment. Prices and risk premia 
in many markets already reflect a much more sober and cautious view of the world than they 
did a year ago. And the degree of stress on markets that we have seen over the past six 
months  is  due  in  part  to  the  sheer  magnitude  and  speed  of  that  adjustment  to  a  more 
cautious view of the future.  
The  United  States,  the  world  economy,  and  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  are  more 
resilient, than they were on the eve of previous downturns. The improvements in productivity 
growth  in  the  United  States  of  the  past  decade  have  been  followed  by  significant 
improvements  in  potential  growth  and  wealth  accumulation  in  many  other  countries.  The 
scale of investable assets around the globe is very substantial, and this will be an important 
source  of  demand  for  risk  assets.  The  improvements  in  monetary  policy  credibility  and  in 
financial strength developed over the past few decades mean that policy around the world 
has more room to adjust to deal with the challenge in the present environment.  
Nevertheless, the challenges that remain are substantial. The speed and agility with which 
public policy makers and private financial institutions respond to the continuing pressures in 
a  rapidly  evolving  environment  will  determine  how  quickly  and  how  smoothly  market 
conditions return to normal – and how rapidly the risks to the economic outlook are mitigated. 
BIS Review 27/2008 
 7
