Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy  
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 22 May 2008. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is based on Norges 
Bank’s Annual Report for 2007, Monetary Policy Report 1/08 and the Executive Board’s assessments published 
after the monetary policy meeting on 23 April. 
 I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee and also thank the Committee for this 
opportunity to report on monetary policy in connection with the Storting’s deliberations on the 
Government’s Credit Report. My statement is based on the Bank’s Annual Report, but is also 
updated  based  on  the  Executive  Board’s  assessments  for  the  period  to  the  previous 
monetary  policy  meeting  and  new  information  received  to  date.  I  also  refer  to  this  year’s 
report  from  Norges  Bank  Watch,  an  independent  group  of  experts  that  evaluates  Norges 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation.  The 
target  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  The  inflation 
target  provides  employers  and  employees  with  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations  among 
businesses and  households.  Inflation  stabilised early  in  the 1990s  after falling  from a  high 
level in the previous decade. Annual variations in inflation are now substantially smaller than 
they  were  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  average  inflation  has  been 
somewhat lower than, although fairly close to, the target of 2.5 per cent.  
 BIS Review 65/1008 
 1
 Inflation  measured  by  the  CPI  varies  from  month  to  month,  primarily  as  a  result  of  wide 
fluctuations in electricity prices, but also due to other temporary disturbances.  
The  rise  in  the  CPI-ATE  shows  inflation  adjusted  for  one-time  effects  of  tax  changes  and 
excluding energy products. Inflation, measured this way, has risen since summer 2006. One 
disadvantage  of  this  indicator  is  that  it  does  not  only  exclude  the  temporary  effects  on 
electricity  prices  of,  for example,  changes  in  the  weather;  it  also  excludes  more  persistent 
developments in energy prices. Energy prices have risen more than other prices for a fairly 
long period, leading to an average year-on-year rise in the CPI over the past 5-10 years that 
has been close to ½ per cent higher than the rise in the CPI-ATE.  
Other  available  measures  of  underlying  inflation  also  suggest  that  inflation  has  moved  up. 
While the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE is now 2.4 per cent, other measures of underlying 
inflation are above 3 per cent.  
2 
 BIS Review 65/2008
Recently, inflation has been somewhat higher than our projections from last  year. Inflation 
was broadly in line with expectations through 2007. In 2006, inflation was considerably lower 
than projected at the beginning of the year. A period of intensified competition seems to have 
curbed  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services.  Now  that  inflation 
has picked up, it is also close to the 2006 projections.  
 Inflation was particularly low in the years following the turn of the millennium with the stream 
of ever-cheaper goods from Asia, and solid productivity growth in Norway that resulted in a 
subdued  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services.  Low  inflation  was 
addressed by lowering the interest rate. Solid growth in output and demand for goods and 
 BIS Review 65/1008 
 3
services gradually led to prospects for higher inflation. The interest rate has gradually been 
raised again since summer 2005 to prevent inflation from becoming too high. During 2007, 
the key policy rate neared what we consider to be a normal level. The key policy rate was 
raised in seven increments from 3.50 per cent to 5.25 per cent. The interest rate was raised 
ahead of the curve before inflation approached 2.5 per cent. 
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  high  and  higher  than  expected  since  2003. 
Growth recovered faster and has been stronger than in the 1980s and 1990s. Growth was 
unusually high in 2007 for such an advanced phase of the upturn. Annual growth in mainland 
GDP  in  the  three-year  period  2004-2006  averaged  more  than  4  per  cent.  In  2007,  growth 
was just over 6 per cent.  
Inflation  remained  low  for  a  long  period  despite  strong  growth  and  increasing  capacity 
utilisation. There are several reasons for this: 
 4 
 BIS Review 65/2008
 First, labour has flowed into Norway from other countries. The opening of the labour market 
to the new EU countries has provided us with access to a reserve of labour. Initially, workers 
came  to  Norway  on  short-term  assignments.  They  produced  in  Norway,  but  their 
consumption  largely  took  place  in  their  home  country,  with  an  attendant  increase  in  the 
economy’s net production capacity. An increasing number of workers subsequently moved to 
Norway and took up residence here, often accompanied by their families. This still increases 
production, although the higher number of foreign workers who want to settle in Norway also 
puts added pressure on domestic resources. Per capita output is not likely to increase as a 
result  of  this  kind  of  immigration.  Access  to  foreign  labour  may  nonetheless  relieve  short-
term bottlenecks in some sectors.  
In 2007, the population increased by about 55 000, with net immigration coming to 35 000. 
This is the highest rise in the population ever recorded. This trend seems to have continued 
so far this year. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 5
Second, businesses in Norway have become more efficient in their operations, resulting in 
lower  costs.  It  has  been  profitable  to  hire  more  employees  despite  the  high  wage  level  in 
Norway. The business sector has made use of new technology and businesses have been 
restructured. The many sweeping reforms of the 1980s and 1990s – the fundamental shift in 
the  Norwegian  economy1  –  resulted  in  more  efficient  markets.  We  are  now  reaping  the 
benefits of the measures implemented then.  
                                                  
1   From Jon E. Dølvik, T. Fløtten, G. Hernes and J.M. Hippe (2007): “Hamskifte – Den norske modellen i endring 
(Fundamental shift – the Norwegian model in flux), p.15, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag A/S. Norwegian only. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2008
Third, prices for goods we import have fallen, while prices for goods we export have risen. 
Norway’s  terms  of  trade  have  thus  improved  markedly.  Sales  of  Norwegian  exports  have 
been high, and we can import more goods for the goods and services sold by the business 
sector. Lower import prices have led to low inflation and a substantial increase in employees’ 
real wages. High export prices have resulted in high corporate earnings.  
 Strong economic growth has gradually resulted in high employment and shortages of labour, 
real  capital  and  other  resources.  Information  from  contacts  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional 
network indicates that capacity utilisation has  remained at a high level over the past year. 
Other  indicators  show  that  capacity  utilisation  continued  to  increase  through  2007.  Higher 
 BIS Review 65/1008 
 7
demand for goods and services combined with a shortage of real resources can easily lead 
to higher wage and price inflation.  
 In  assessing  the  inflation  outlook,  we  must  therefore  have  a  view  concerning  the  level  of 
available  resources  in  the  economy.  We  attempt  to  smooth  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment  to  some  extent.  In  order  to  do  so,  we  must  also  judge  whether  output  and 
employment are high or low. The output gap reflects our assessment of the level of capacity 
utilisation.  In  our  projections,  we  use  several  methods,  a  broad  range  of  information  and 
professional judgment. We can never determine the exact level of available resources in the 
economy. We illustrate the uncertainty by fan charts.2  
Growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  higher  than  we  assumed  a  year  ago.  This 
reflects a large supply of labour from other countries and high productivity growth, but also 
increased use of domestic labour and other resources.  
It is likely that capacity utilisation will have to decline to prevent inflation from becoming too 
high.  
                                                 
2   See Norges Bank Watch 2008 for a critical view on measures on capacity utilisation. 
8 
 BIS Review 65/2008
 Unemployment  has  declined  considerably  and  is  now  historically  low.  The  increase  in 
employment  has  been  accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  wage-earners’  share  of  corporate 
earnings. Developments must be viewed in the context of the many positive factors that have 
been at work in the business sector. The impact of a number of these factors may now be 
diminishing.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  will  simply 
continue. Productivity growth seems to be slowing and wage growth is picking up.  
Wage-earners’  share  of  value  added  is  therefore  rising  again,  and  this  will  probably  curb 
labour demand ahead. 
A number of other factors may also contribute to reducing capacity utilisation even though 
petroleum investment remains high and public expenditure is growing at a fast pace. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 9
 There  are  signs  of  a  cooling  housing  market  throughout  the  country.  House  price  inflation 
peaked  about  a  year  ago.  For  Norway  as  a  whole,  house  prices  have  remained 
approximately  unchanged  over  the  past  twelve  months.  There  are  nevertheless  regional 
differences in house prices. House prices are rising fastest in Rogaland, and falling fastest in 
Hordaland and the inland regions.  
Housing investment gradually slackened through 2007, reflecting higher interest rates, rising 
inventories  of  unsold  homes  and  increased  construction  costs.  Several  large  residential 
construction projects have now been shelved. We also expect commercial property starts to 
show a gradual decline. 
10 
  BIS Review 65/2008
Developments in capacity utilisation abroad have an impact on capacity utilisation at home.  
After several years of strong growth in the world economy, growth is slowing in a number of 
countries. Growth in the US seems to have come to a halt, and there are fears of a downturn. 
Growth  is  also  slackening  in  many  western  European  countries,  but  emerging  economies 
such  as  China  and  India  are  still  growing  at  a  brisk  pace.  Inflation  is  picking  up  in  many 
countries due to rising food and energy prices.  
Central bank key rates have been cut in the US and the UK to address deteriorating growth 
prospects. In the euro area the interest rate has been kept unchanged, while the Swedish 
central bank has increased its interest rate.  
Developments in the world economy will affect the Norwegian economy.  
 Since  end-June  2007,  international  money  and  credit  markets  have  been  marked  by 
volatility,  illiquidity  and  reduced  risk-willingness.  The  problems  started  in  the  US  housing 
market,  but  rapidly  spread  to  other  financial  market  segments.  Banks,  funds  and  financial 
undertakings  had  to  bring  back  on  their  books  loans  from  bond  markets,  they  started  to 
question  the  financial  position  of  counterparties  and  held  on  to  their  money.  This  led  to  a 
marked increase in premiums on interbank loans.  
When  the  banks  no  longer  wanted  to  provide  loans  to  each  other,  many  central  banks 
provided liquidity for an extended term and eased collateral requirements. In periods, Norges 
Bank has also provided extra liquidity to Norwegian banks. This has reduced swings in the 
interest rate that banks demand for giving loans to one another.  
Norwegian banks rely to a large extent on foreign funding. This is why the increase in money 
market premiums in the US and Europe quickly fed through to Norwegian interest rates even 
though Norwegian banks are profitable, retain confidence and have limited loss exposures.  
Banks and investors, both in Norway and internationally, now apply a higher premium and 
higher prices for providing capital for acquisitions, restructuring and investments, and highly 
leveraged companies have to pay high risk premiums on loans. It has become more difficult 
to procure financing.  
BIS Review 65/1008 
 11
Household credit growth has eased slightly, but remains high. Corporate credit growth is also 
high.  Norges  Bank’s  bank  lending  survey  indicates  a  gradual  tightening  of  banks’  credit 
standards, but so far the effects of tighter credit have not come into evidence.  
 Developments abroad may also influence the Norwegian economy through reduced trade. It 
may be more difficult to sell our export goods when growth is declining in other countries, 
and prices for our products may fall.  
Oil prices and other commodity prices have increased appreciably since 2002. The rise in 
commodity prices has primarily been fuelled by rapid economic growth, particularly in China 
and  other  emerging  market  economies.  Conditions  are  still  favourable  for  shipping  and  oil 
and gas, engineering industry, aluminium, ferroalloys and salmon. In the event of a persistent 
setback  in world  economic  growth,  the  Norwegian  economy  will  eventually  feel  the  effects 
through lower exports.  
12 
 BIS Review 65/2008
 The  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  our  trading  partners  has  increased. 
Coupled  with  solid  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  and  very  high  oil  prices,  this  has 
resulted  in  an  appreciation  of  the  krone.  In  krone  terms,  this  reduces  prices  for  imported 
goods and services. A strong krone may also result in lower activity in the business sector 
and gradually translate into lower wage growth.  
The  krone  exchange  rate  shows  monthly,  quarterly  and  yearly  variations.  The  long-term 
value of the krone is determined by changes in the terms of trade and permanent differences 
between  domestic  and  external  inflation  and  productivity.  In  recent  years,  the  krone  has 
appreciated.  Inflation  has  nevertheless  moved  up,  and  is  now  close  to  2.5  per  cent.  A 
stronger krone has been needed to keep down inflation.  
BIS Review 65/1008 
 13
 The real krone exchange rate measures changes in either the price level in Norway relative 
to  other  countries  or  the  wage  level  in  Norway  relative  to  other  countries.  In  common 
currency, the relative domestic price level is now between 5 and 10 per cent higher than the 
average for the oil age. The wage level measured in common currency is between 15 and 20 
per cent higher than the average since 1970. 
Norwegian wage costs relative to other countries have reached an unprecedented high level. 
Nevertheless, there is full employment in Norway. So far, our business sector has been able 
to live with the high cost level.  
But, it may be that we have not yet seen the full impact. 
It  is  primarily  through  the  government  budget  –  growth  in  general  government  spending  – 
that  the  authorities  can  influence  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  the  scale  of  internationally 
exposed business.  
14 
 BIS Review 65/2008
 Our projections for economic developments are presented in Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Report. The Report also includes our forecasts for the key policy rate ahead.  
Norges Bank’s Executive Board has decided that the key policy rate should be in the interval 
5-6  per  cent  in  the  period  to  the  next  publication  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  in  June, 
unless the economy is exposed to major shocks. In accordance with this strategy, the key 
policy rate was raised by 0.25 percentage point to 5.50 per cent in April. 
When inflation is close to 2.5 per cent, the normal interest rate level over time is considered 
to be between 5 and 6 per cent. The key policy rate is now in this range after a series of 
incremental increases over the past three years. The interest rate hikes are curbing growth in 
economic activity. At the same time, increased premiums and uncertainty in financial markets 
are increasing the cost of corporate and household borrowing. Moreover, the krone is strong. 
On the whole, monetary policy is probably having a tightening impact. As a result, capacity 
utilisation may ease ahead so that inflation does not become too high.  
BIS Review 65/1008 
 15
 The projections are uncertain. New information may reveal that the Norwegian economy is 
moving on a different path. The projections are based on our assessment of the economic 
situation, the outlook for other countries, the functioning of the economy and what is needed 
to reach the inflation target. We must be prepared for a situation where inflation and output 
deviate  from  Norges  Bank’s  projections  of  the  most  likely  paths.  This  may  also  lead  to  a 
lower or higher key policy rate than envisaged at present.  
Allow me to summarise: 
Monetary policy now reflects that inflation is close to 2.5 per cent and that there are limited 
available  resources.  Capacity  utilisation  has  also  been  high,  at  a  level  needed  to  bring 
inflation  close  to  target.  Capacity  utilisation  must  now  be  curbed  to  prevent  inflation  from 
becoming too high. The key policy rate will be set with the aim of keeping inflation close to 
2.5 per cent.  
Thank you for the opportunity to present these opening remarks.  
16 
 BIS Review 65/2008
