Heng Swee Keat: Monetary Authority of Singapore’s initiative to develop 
Singapore dollar sovereign-rated sukuks 
Speech by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the 5th Annual Islamic Financial Services Board Summit, Amman, Jordan, 13 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
It is my honour this afternoon to join my IFSB colleagues in discussion of this very current 
topic. 
I am very glad that we are addressing this issue of regional integration of Islamic Financial 
Services at this point. This is very timely and relevant to both the soundness and vibrancy of 
Islamic Finance. Let me explain. 
The global Islamic finance industry has grown rapidly – it is estimated that total assets are 
now over US$750 billion. This is impressive. Still, this is a small proportion of conventional 
finance. The potential for growth is hence very large. While each country is taking measures 
to  promote  Islamic  Finance,  we  can  grow  much  faster  as  well  as  increase  the  scope  and 
depth of the industry if we work towards integration at an early stage. Integration increases 
market size, efficiency and liquidity. This in turn provides for more competitive cost of capital, 
spurring further growth. Second, having service providers from different regions allow risks to 
be distributed across a wider group of players, and can improve the overall stability of the 
financial  system.  Regional  integration  between  Middle  East  and  Asia,  which  may  have 
different  business  cycles,  provides  a  cushion  for  financial  institutions  and  investors  from 
country  specific  shocks.  Third,  integration  promotes  greater  interaction  and  knowledge 
sharing, and can help lift the standards of the Islamic finance industry. In short, the 3 facets – 
development, integration and stability of markets – are closely intertwined. Proper attention 
to all these 3 facets will enhance the soundness and vibrancy of Islamic financial services. 
We are in fact seeing greater integration already with more cross borders flows, both within 
the  Middle  East  and  Asia,  and  between  the  two  regions.  Banking  and  capital  markets  are 
opening up to foreign investors, more Shariah products are listed on stock exchanges and 
Islamic  financial  service  providers  are  expanding  their  operations  overseas.  This  is  a 
promising trend. 
Three tasks 
We  should  build  on  this  positive  momentum.  Allow  me  to  share  my  views  on  three  broad 
categories of essential tasks in promoting greater integration in the coming years.  
1st task: promoting more economic integration 
First,  financial  integration  and  economic  integration  are  deeply  linked,  and  mutually 
reinforcing.  Hence,  to  promote  financial  integration,  we  also  need  to  focus  on  economic 
integration. An important tenet of Islamic Finance is that one must not focus on money per 
se, but on how money can facilitate trade in goods, and investment in productive capacities.  
By extension, regional integration of Islamic Finance can promote regional integration of our 
economies.  Linking  borrowers  and  lenders  across  the  Middle  East  and  Asia,  will  help  to 
deepen trade and investment links between the two most dynamic regions, and provide for a 
more efficient intermediation of savings. In other words, financial integration can help drive 
economic integration. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 1
The converse is also true – economic integration can drive financial integration. The deeper 
the trade and investment links, the greater the opportunity for financial integration. While not 
everything will be funded through Islamic Finance, a growing volume will, as these trade and 
investment flows increase. In this regard, the trends are promising. Trade flows between the 
Middle East and Asia have grown significantly, in Singapore alone doubling to USD37 billion 
within the last four years.  
In fact, the potential for even greater flow of trade and investments has been an important 
reason for the interest in Islamic finance among financial institutions in Asia such as those in 
Malaysia, Hong Kong and Singapore. This is evident by our countries respective participation 
in the country showcases yesterday. I made this point to a reporter here who unfortunately 
misquoted me as saying that Malaysia and Hong Kong are competing with Singapore. That 
is not my view as I believe the scope for cooperation is large. I share Professor Rifaat’s view 
that we should collaborate to broaden and deepen markets so as to enhance the vibrancy 
and resilience of Islamic financial services. 
Indeed, we can do more to build on existing synergies. We need to continue to promote more 
trade and investment. The leaders of ASEAN have agreed to establish the ASEAN Economic 
Community by 2015, so that ASEAN will become a single production base with freer flow of 
goods, services and investments. I am pleased that negotiation on a GCC-Singapore Free 
Trade Agreement has just been completed. This will help to expand trade ties. I hope this 
can also catalyze the broader pact between the Middle East and ASEAN, which will help to 
expand trade and investment flows between our two regions.  
Some 250 Middle East companies, including the Saudi Basic Industries Corporation, Proclad 
Group from Kuwait and the Emirates National Oil Company, are currently using Singapore as 
a  base  for  their  Asia-Pacific  operations.  Recently,  the  Al  Futtaim  group  bought  a  major 
department store, Robinsons, in Singapore, as part of their strategic decision to expand into 
South-East  Asia.  Shariah-compliant  funds  which  are  deployed  for  investment  in  Asia  have 
attracted  strong  interest  from  Middle  East  investors.  One  example  is  the  ARC-CapitaLand 
Residences Japan Fund which was issued by a Singapore-based property developer. These 
are just examples from Singapore. I am sure there are more in Malaysia, Indonesia and other 
parts of Asia. My general point is this: the more we can bring the issuers and investors from 
both regions together, the more we can promote the use of Islamic Finance to fund some of 
these projects.  
2nd task: addressing the need for appropriate legal, regulatory and supervisory 
frameworks for Islamic finance 
All of you would be aware that the IFSB and IDB have co-issued The Ten Year Framework 
and  Strategies.1  It  is  a  thoughtful  blueprint.  The  Framework  highlights  the  need  for 
appropriate  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  that  effectively  cater  for  the 
specificities of the Islamic services providers. This is an essential 2nd task not only for the 
development of Islamic Financial services but also for their integration. 
Each  country  will  have  to  look  at  the  legal  and  supervisory  structures  for  Islamic  Finance. 
However,  inconsistent  standards,  in  areas  such  as  legal  documentation  and  settlement  of 
unresolved  issues,  can  inhibit  the  growth  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  sector  across 
borders.  Conversely,  when  consistent  standards  are  applied  across  jurisdictions,  the  cost-
effectiveness of Islamic financial service operating across borders improve. It also improves 
the  attractiveness  of  the  institution’s  products  to  international  investors,  regardless  of  the 
                                                 
1  
Islamic  Financial  Services  Industry  Development  Ten  Year  Framework  and  Strategies.  This  was  a  joint 
initiative  between  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  Islamic  Research  &  Training  Institute,  Islamic 
Development Bank and Islamic Research and Training Institute. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2008
country of origin. A significant challenge today is the need for greater convergence of rules 
and practices in Islamic Finance.  
In  this  regard,  I  commend  the  work  of  international  standard  setting  bodies  for  Islamic 
Finance  –  AAOIFI,  IIFM,  IDB  and  IFSB.  For  example,  IFSB’s  recent  publications  on 
corporate  governance,  disclosure  and  capital  adequacy  standards  are  very  useful.  It  is 
important  that  as  regulators,  we  participate  in  appropriate  standard-setting  international 
organisations, and work towards the convergence of rules and practices across jurisdictions. 
Where convergence is not possible, we can work towards mutual recognition of those rules. 
The  Ten  Year  Framework  and  Strategies  also  highlights  the  need  to  ensure  tax  neutrality 
between the Islamic services providers and their conventional counterparts. Tax neutrality is 
important  –  a  recent  McKinsey  report2  indicates  that  investors  are  more  likely  to  invest  in 
Shariah-compliant  products  if  returns  are  comparable  to  that  of  conventional  products.  In 
facilitating the growth of Islamic finance in Singapore, MAS works with financial institutions to 
ensure a level playing field between Islamic and conventional financing deals. This includes 
the waiver of additional stamp duties incurred by qualifying Islamic financing arrangements 
involving immovable property. 
In developing the Islamic financial services market during its nascent stage, we also provide 
tax  incentives  to  help  offset  the  initial  additional  costs.  In  February  this  year,  our  Finance 
Minister  announced  a  5%  concessionary  tax  rate  on  the  income  derived  from  qualifying 
Shariah  compliant  financial  activities.  In  addition,  all  investors  will  enjoy  tax  exemption  on 
income  derived  from  qualifying  Sukuks.  This  is  to  create  a  seamless  framework  for  the 
industry in Singapore, although I understand that in the GCC and Malaysia the tax framework 
is even more favourable. 
The various changes in our regulatory and tax framework are done in partnership with the 
industry. Based on our latest consultation, to promote the further growth of Islamic Finance 
and  to  meet  the  needs  of  financial  institutions  conducting  Shariah-compliant  activities  in 
Singapore, I am pleased to announce that Singapore will develop a facility to make available 
sovereign-rated sukuks. Our facility is likely to be different from traditional issuances in two 
respects. First, the issuance will be on a reverse enquiry basis, which means we will issue 
according  to  the  needs  of  financial  institutions  in  Singapore  conducting  Islamic  Finance. 
Second, at the initial stage, we plan to price these against the liquid Singapore Government 
securities  market.  This  will  provide  a  transparent  price  discovery  mechanism  for  this  new 
instrument  in  Singapore.  As  the  S$  sukuk  market  grows  and  deepens  in  time,  it  can  then 
develop its own pricing benchmarks. The design of our sukuk issuance facility reflects our 
effort to harness the price discovery potential of existing liquid instruments, while adhering 
carefully to Shariah principles. Further details of this arrangement will be announced in due 
course and we look forward to your feedback.  
We  will  also  make  significant  progress  in  integrating  financial  markets  when  we  provide 
greater market access for Islamic service providers to operate across borders. I am glad that 
regulators in the Middle East and South-East Asia have been very supportive in this area. 
For  instance,  several  major  Islamic  banks  in  the  Middle  East  now  have  operations  in 
Malaysia. More recently, several Middle Eastern banks have also established themselves in 
Singapore. The first home-grown Islamic bank in Singapore, the Islamic Bank of Asia was set 
up  in  Singapore  in  2007.  The  IBA  is  a  joint  venture  between  Singapore’s  DBS  Bank  and 
Middle Eastern investors from Bahrain and the GCC countries. I am pleased that within one 
year of its existence, the bank will be opening a representative office in Bahrain next week. 
However, as such cross-border operations become more common and complex, there is also 
the need to ensure the financial stability and integrity of each domestic market, and that the 
                                                 
2   McKinsey & Company: The World Islamic Banking Competitiveness Report 2007-08. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 3
protection of its consumers and investors are not compromised. As several regulators on our 
IFSB  Board  have  commented,  risk  management  and  prudential  management  cannot  be 
compromised  if  we  wish  to  have  healthy  growth  and  to  avoid  crisis.  In  this  regard,  the 
cooperation of supervisors is very important. 
3rd task: promoting greater cooperation 
Beyond economic integration and supervisory cooperation, the third essential task is what I 
would call the “soft” or “people” aspect. It may seem tangential to talk about this when we are 
looking  at  technical  issues  of  accounting,  regulations  and  capital  adequacy,  but  all 
cooperation depends on trust. Without trust, we cannot work together. But trust cannot be 
built overnight. Trust is developed over time in the face of challenges. There is an old saying 
that you know how good a horse is only after you have traveled with it over long journeys. 
At the highest level, we need strong political ties to promote integration between the Middle 
East and Asia. In this regard, I am glad to see numerous visits have taken place between the 
leaders of Middle East and Asia in recent years. This includes the visit of King Abdullah of 
Saudi Arabia to four Asian countries in 2006 and several meetings between King Abdullah II 
of Jordan and Singapore’s President and Prime Minister, to name just a few.  
I am happy that frequent dialogue and cooperation are taking place at all levels, via platforms 
such  as  the  Asia-Middle  East  Dialogues  or  AMED.  AMED  was  first  held  in  2005  in 
Singapore, and Egypt recently hosted the 2008 meeting. The 2008 meeting involved a total 
of about 50 countries from the Middle East and Asia. 
I  am  also  happy  to  see  strong  cooperation  in  training.  The  Islamic  Development  Bank’s 
IRTI3, Bahrain’s BIBF4 and Malaysia’s INCEIF5 are Islamic finance-focused training institutes 
which provide very good training in this area. Such training programmes, besides imparting 
knowledge,  enable  people  to  know  each  other  better,  and  provide  the  basis  for  future 
cooperation. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me summarise. There are three essential tasks we face in promoting greater 
integration of Islamic financial markets. The first is to encourage greater economic integration 
and  increased  cross  border  flow  of  trade  and  investments.  Economic  integration  drives 
financial integration and vice versa. The second task is to foster appropriate legal, regulatory 
and supervisory frameworks that effectively cater for the specificities of the Islamic services 
providers;  and  to  work  towards  greater  convergence  of  rules  and  practices  in  Islamic 
Finance.  This  requires  greater  trust  and  stronger  ties  among  supervisors.  The  third  is  to 
cultivate stronger people-to-people bonds across all levels, through training, conference and 
dialogues. 
There is a saying which is common to the Chinese and Arabs which goes, “the journey of a 
thousand miles begins with one step”. I am glad to note that a lot of progress has already 
been made on all the three tasks. However, the journey ahead is long. Let us continue to 
work  together  towards  integrating  the  Islamic  financial  markets.  In  this  way,  we  can  grow 
much faster and much more, bringing greater economic benefit to our regions. 
Finally, we are honored to be given the opportunity to host IFSB’s 6th annual Summit next 
year, which will be a landmark event for Singapore and our Islamic finance industry. May I 
                                                 
3  
Islamic Research and Training Institute. 
4   Bahrain Institute of Banking and Finance. 
5  
International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2008
thank the IFSB Council, Professor Rifaat and the IFSB secretariat. I would like to extend a 
very warm welcome to you all to Singapore. 
BIS Review 63/2008 
 5
