Randall S Kroszner: Protecting consumers in the credit marketplace 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Community Development Policy 
Summit, Cleveland, Ohio, 11 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 I am delighted to be here today to help open this important conference. I thank my hosts, 
President Pianalto and her staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, for the invitation. 
This  year's  conference  explores  a  confluence  of  consumer-related  finance  issues  in  the 
context of the current difficulties in the mortgage markets. In my remarks today, I would like 
to  discuss  the  key  role  of  consumer  credit  in  our  economy  and  describe  how  information 
disclosure  and  protecting  consumers  can  work  to  facilitate  and  promote  the  efficient 
functioning of markets for such credit.1  
Good  information  is  essential  to  achieving  well-functioning  markets.  Consumers,  equipped 
with the right information at the right time, can make the choices most appropriate to their 
individual circumstances and desires. For consumers to  make the  most meaningful use of 
the relevant information, such information should be accessible and understandable. In turn, 
businesses rely on consumers through their choices to signal their desires and preferences 
in order to produce the products that consumers want. If consumers are not well informed, it 
is difficult for them to be effective in conveying to businesses what they most want and in 
rewarding  those  businesses  that  do  produce  such  products.  Good  information  in  a 
marketplace  thus  not  only  empowers  consumers  to  make  better  choices  but  also  helps 
competition work more effectively to provide the products consumers most desire. 
There are challenges in ensuring that the appropriate information is provided to help markets 
function efficiently. Product suppliers may not always provide needed information or present 
it  in  a  format  that  enables  meaningful  comparison  across competing  products.  Consumers 
must also have the financial skills to evaluate the information effectively. However, even in 
the presence of good information, practices can emerge that offer little benefit to consumers 
and,  in  some  cases,  may  cause  harm.  In  such  cases,  improved  disclosure  alone  may  be 
insufficient to address these issues. 
Rules  can  establish  standards  that  promote  increased  certainty  and  restrain  abusive 
practices. At the same time, such rules need to be implemented in a careful and informed 
manner  so  that  the  potential  benefits  of  such  rules  are  not  offset  by  unintended 
consequences or the imposition of unnecessary costs. The challenge to policymakers is to 
strike  the  right  balance  –  that  is,  to  find  ways  to  empower  and  protect  consumers  without 
diminishing access to credit and hindering future innovation. With these principles in mind, I 
will briefly describe some of the key steps that the Federal Reserve is undertaking to strike 
this balance in the area of consumer regulation to protect consumers and provide them with 
the information they need, and when they need it, to make sound decisions. 
Credit and the economy 
Credit  is  the  lifeblood  of  the  American  economy.  Whether  it  is  to  finance  an  education, 
purchase  an  automobile  or  home,  or  simply  bridge  short-term  differences  in  the  timing 
between our income and expenses, virtually all of us rely on credit at various points in our 
                                                 
1   Defined here, consumer credit includes both mortgage loans and other types of loans extended to consumers. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
lives.  Accordingly,  choosing  the  right  type  of  credit  with  the  most  appropriate  terms  and 
conditions is important to each of us. The Federal Reserve has an important role to play in 
this regard, as it has been given a mandate by the Congress to help ensure that the costs 
and terms of credit use are both transparent and understandable and to protect consumers 
from unfair and deceptive lending acts and practices. In our role as a supervisor of banking 
institutions, the Federal Reserve also seeks to ensure that lending is undertaken in a safe 
and sound manner. 
Credit  is  not  only  important  to  each  of  us  as  individuals;  it  also  plays  a  central  role  in  the 
working  of  our  economy.  Today's  economy  relies  on  consumer  spending  as  an  engine  of 
growth  –  it  accounts  for  about  70  percent  of  the  gross  domestic  product.  Credit  is  an 
important  underpinning  to  such  spending.  Overall,  evidence  from  the  Federal  Reserve's 
Survey of Consumer Finances shows that about three-quarters of all households carry some 
debt.2 About three-quarters of automobile purchases are currently either financed or leased, 
and about 95 percent of home purchases involve a mortgage. The use of revolving credit is 
similarly  widespread;  about  75  percent  of  consumers  hold  credit  cards.  The  annual 
transaction  volume  on  general-purpose  credit  card  accounts  reached  nearly  $1.8  trillion  in 
2006, and our latest information suggests that consumers owed nearly $1 trillion on revolving 
credit accounts of all types. Because consumer credit plays a central role in the economy, 
the Federal Reserve has a macroeconomic interest in facilitating the efficient functioning of 
consumer credit markets.  
The role of credit 
The prudent use of credit by households provides a number of important economic benefits. 
First, for many families, credit allows for easier and timelier purchase of assets and goods, 
such  as  homes,  educations,  and  automobiles  and  other  consumer  durables  that  can 
generate  savings  in  cost  and  time  and  improve  employment  and  income-generating 
opportunities.3 By facilitating such investment-oriented spending, credit enables consumers 
to  save  and  consume  at  times  that  meet  their  needs.  For  example,  the  purchase  of  an 
automobile,  which  many  are  only  able  to  do  using  credit,  can  expand  employment 
opportunities,  which,  in  turn,  can  lead  to  higher  incomes.  Access  to  consumer  credit  also 
enables  many  entrepreneurs  to  finance  the  start-up  or  expansion  of  small  businesses,  a 
large source of employment in the United States. 
Second,  a  robust  consumer  credit  market  facilitates  the  growth  of  consumer  durables 
industries  (e.g.,  computers,  autos,  and  appliances)  in  which  new  technologies,  mass 
production, and economies of scale have historically created employment growth and new 
wealth. It is simply hard to imagine the pace of development in the automobile and appliance 
industries in the twentieth century without the availability of credit to purchase their output. 
Indeed,  the  lack  of  well-developed  credit  markets  has  been  found  to  be  an  impediment  to 
economic  growth  and  prosperity.4  Even  in  a  well-developed  economy  such  as  ours, 
                                                 
2   Brian  K.  Bucks,  Arthur  B.  Kennickell,  and  Kevin  B  Moore  (2005),  "Recent  Changes  in  Family  Finances: 
Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumers Finances", Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91, pp. A1-
A38. 
3   Refer to, for example, F. Thomas Juster and Robert P. Shay (1964), "Consumer Sensitivity to Finance Rates: 
An  Empirical  and  Analytical  Investigation",  Occasional  Paper  88  (New  York:  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research). 
4   Thorsten  Beck,  Asli  Demirguc-Kunt,  and  Ross  Levine  (2004),  "Finance,  Inequality,  and  Poverty:  Cross-
Country Evidence", Working Paper Series 10979 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 
December). 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
innovation in credit markets over the past two decades or so has expanded credit availability 
to lower-income households and increased options for middle-income consumers as well.5  
Third, from an economy-wide perspective, credit provides an important outlet for the savings 
of consumers through the financial intermediation process. Ultimately, the source of funds for 
consumers who borrow is other consumers who have savings they hold in deposit accounts, 
life insurance and pension reserves, or portfolios of securities that include bonds, stocks, and 
mutual  fund  shares.  Efficient  markets  for  household  credit  are  part  of  a  well-functioning 
system of financial intermediation that allocates savings to the most productive uses. 
The developments in credit markets have generally benefited consumers. However, some of 
these  developments  have  increased  the  complexity  of  our  choices  and  made  mistakes 
potentially  more  costly.6  A  key  challenge  is  to  find  ways  to  improve  consumers'  ability  to 
identify  products  that  are  suitable  to  their  needs  without  diminishing  the  benefits  market 
innovations can provide and without reducing future access to credit. One important way this 
challenge can be met is by improving the information available to consumers. 
The central role of information 
Information is critical to the efficient functioning of markets.7 A central tenant of economics is 
that  markets  are  more  competitive,  and  therefore  more  efficient,  when  accurate  and 
complete  information  is  available  to  both  consumers  and  product  suppliers.  Accurate  and 
complete  information  about  credit  terms  and  prices  is  essential  for  households  to  make 
sound judgments about the use of credit. Information disclosure improves consumers' ability 
to compare products and to choose those products that will help them meet their personal 
goals. 
To  be  effective,  disclosures  must  give  consumers  information  about  credit  pricing  and 
important  terms  at  a  time  when  it  is  relevant,  and  in  language  consumers  can  easily 
understand.  The  information  must  also  be  presented  in  a format  that  allows  consumers  to 
pick out and use the information that is most important to them. Effective disclosures give 
consumers information they notice, understand, and can use. Better credit-term disclosures 
permit  better-informed  credit  decisions  and  lead  to  more-intense  competition  among 
creditors.  In  a  nutshell,  effective  disclosure  empowers  consumers  to  choose  wisely  and 
enhances competition. 
In  some  circumstances,  the  disclosure  rules  can  facilitate  efficient  market  outcomes  by 
establishing guidelines to improve information flows and establishing uniform standards for 
how  information  is  provided.  For  example,  since  enactment  of  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act  of 
1968,  which  requires  uniform  disclosure  of  the  cost  of  credit  and  other  key  lending  terms, 
consumer awareness of and sensitivity to interest rates in credit decisions has increased.8 
Evidence  also  suggests  that  these  disclosures  have  improved  competition  and  helped 
                                                 
5   Joseph Nocera (1994), A Piece of the Action (New York: Simon and Schuster). 
6   For example, Woodward finds that complicated loan arrangements raise the costs to homebuyers engaging in 
mortgage  transactions;  Susan  E.  Woodward  (2008),  A  Study  of  Closing  Costs  for  FHA  Mortgages 
(Washington: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). 
7   Refer to, for example, George J. Stigler (1961), "The Economics of Information", Journal of Political Economy, 
vol. 69 (June), pp. 213-25. 
8   Thomas  A.  Durkin  (2006),  "Credit  Card  Disclosures,  Solicitations,  and  Privacy  Notices:  Survey  Results  of 
Consumer Knowledge  and Behavior", Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92, pp. A109-A121; Thomas A. Durkin 
and Gregory Elliehausen (forthcoming), Financial Economics of Information Disclosure: Applications to Truth-
in-Lending (New York: Oxford University Press). 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 3
consumers.9 The prohibition of the provision of misleading or erroneous information can also 
help to improve competitive outcomes. 
To  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  disclosures,  we  must  know  what  consumers  understand, 
what  information  they  use,  and  how  they  use  the  information  in  making  decisions.  In 
designing  rules,  we  need  to  take  consumers'  actual  behavior  and  understanding  into 
consideration. As a result, the Federal Reserve has been using consumer testing to address 
the  considerable  challenge  of  making  disclosures  effective.  As  mentioned,  consumers 
increasingly face more-diverse and more-complex financial products, including nontraditional 
mortgages  and  credit  cards  with  multiple  and  complex  features.  Given  this  complexity,  we 
are mindful of the challenges of information overload and seek to design disclosures that are 
not  only  accurate,  but  also  clear  and  concise,  so  that  they  are  meaningful  and  useful  to 
consumers. 
Numerous pages of fine print may provide the comprehensive descriptions that lawyers may 
prefer,  but  they  can  also  be  confusing,  or  provide  limited  value,  to  consumers.  We 
increasingly rely on feedback from surveys and testing from actual consumers to determine 
the information they need to make informed choices. In this regard, we recently completed 
several  rounds  of  consumer  testing  for  credit  card  disclosures.  That  testing  has  been 
essential to our effort to redesign and improve them. We have also begun using consumer 
testing  of  mortgage  disclosures  to  help  develop  more-effective  disclosures  around  product 
features and other terms that consumers need to know.  
Limitations of disclosure protections 
When  consumers  are  fully  aware  of  and  understand  product  terms  and  features,  they  are 
better positioned to make the right choices and achieve the outcomes most appropriate to 
their  given  circumstances,  as  well  as  give  the  signals  and  rewards  to  businesses  that 
produce the products and services consumers most value. However, some product features 
and  contract  terms  may  be  so  complex  that  they  are  not  readily  understood.  In  some 
instances, even small misunderstandings, misjudgments, or the challenge of focusing on the 
most essential features of a product can lead to serious problems down the road. This is one 
reason  why  financial  education  and  literacy  efforts  are  essential  to  enabling  consumers  to 
navigate our complex consumer financial marketplace. 
Problems can arise if competition does not ensure that relevant information on some terms 
or  product  features  is  provided  in  a  timely  and  comprehensible  way.10  Moreover,  product 
terms or features can sometimes emerge that offer little or no benefit to the vast majority of 
consumers. Double-cycle billing, for example, is a practice in the credit card industry that is 
so complex that few consumers can fully understand the implications of this practice, even in 
the  presence  of  full  disclosure.  Generally  speaking,  institutions  using  this  practice  assess 
interest not only on the balance for the current billing cycle, but also on the balance for the 
preceding  billing  cycle.  The  Board  has  conducted  extensive  consumer  testing  of  various 
ways  to  describe  this  balance  computation  method  and  found  that  disclosures  are  not 
successful  in  helping  consumers  understand  it.  In  such  cases,  improving  information 
disclosure alone may not adequately address the issue. Consequently, the goal of consumer 
protection  may  be  most  effectively  realized,  weighing  the  potential  costs  and  benefits,  if 
certain product features are modified by rule or prohibited outright rather than disclosed. 
                                                 
9   Durkin and Elliehausen (forthcoming), Financial Economics of Information Disclosure. 
10   Xavier  Gabaix  and  David  Laibson  (2006),  "Shrouded  Attributes,  Consumer  Myopia,  and  Information 
Suppression in Competitive Markets", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121 (May), pp. 505-40. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2008
Current challenges and the Federal Reserve's regulatory proposals 
In  today's  vast  and  complex  consumer  finance  marketplace,  we  face  the  challenge  of 
ensuring  that  disclosures  for  consumer  credit  remain  effective  in  light  of  the  growing 
complexity of consumer credit products and terms. We also face the challenge of identifying 
when restrictions and prohibitions are appropriate to ensure meaningful consumer protection 
and do not involve unintended consequences that could ultimately reduce consumer welfare. 
With  the  increased  complexity  of  mortgage  loans  and  credit  cards  in  recent  years,  for 
example,  there  has  been  great  concern  about  the  need  for  more-effective  disclosure  and 
increased consumer protection in these transactions. The Federal Reserve has undertaken 
extensive  efforts  to  gain  insight  into  industry  practices  and  consumer  experiences  to 
understand how to improve disclosures when possible and to enhance consumer protections 
where needed. 
With  respect  to  mortgage  lending,  we  have  been  working  to  finalize  the  rules  under  the 
Home  Ownership and Equity Protection Act that we proposed in December. In developing 
this proposal, we gained valuable insight through public hearings, discussions with industry 
and consumer groups, input from our Consumer Advisory Council, and other sources. The 
amendments  we  have  proposed  would  better protect  consumers  from  a  range  of  unfair  or 
deceptive  mortgage  lending  and  advertising  practices  that  have  been  the  source  of 
considerable concern and criticism. Our proposal includes key protections for higher-priced 
mortgage  loans  secured  by  a  consumer's  principal  dwelling.  Specifically,  the  proposal 
addresses concerns about underwriting and lenders' consideration of the borrower's ability to 
make the scheduled payments, including verifying the income and assets that lenders rely 
upon in making the loan. The proposal also addresses concerns about prepayment penalties 
and the impact on consumers when lenders fail to establish escrow accounts for taxes and 
insurance. We are working toward issuing final regulations in July. 
For credit cards, the Federal Reserve has employed a two-step strategy toward improving 
consumer  protection.  Our  first  step  was  the  Board's  proposal  to  substantially  revise  and 
improve  credit  card  disclosures  under  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act.  We  have  done  extensive 
consumer  testing  to  determine  the  type  of  information  and  its  format  that  consumers  find 
most useful in shopping for and choosing a credit card. We issued this proposal last year, 
and we are still carefully considering the public comment letters received on that proposal, 
many  of  which  contain  suggestions  for  how  we  might  further  improve  the  disclosures.  We 
believe  that  this  proposal  will  result  in  credit  card  disclosures  that  are  significantly  more 
effective for today's complex products. Testing disclosure forms and formats with credit card 
users is crucial to ensuring that the disclosures are understandable and useful to consumers. 
Effective disclosures can help to empower consumers and enhance the competition because 
consumers find it easier to comparison shop. We are continuing to use consumer testing as 
we work toward issuing final rules by year-end.  
This extensive consumer testing – and the thousands of public comments generated by our 
2007 credit card proposal – suggested that disclosures might not provide sufficient consumer 
protection  with  regard  to  certain  practices.  Therefore,  in  May  we  took  the  next  step  in  our 
ongoing effort to enhance protections for consumers who use credit cards by proposing rules 
under  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  Act  to  prevent  financial  harm  to  consumers  from 
specific practices. We proposed rules that go beyond disclosure and could require financial 
institutions to make changes to their business models and to alter some practices.  
The  Board  has  worked  jointly  with  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  and  the  National  Credit 
Union Administration in drafting and issuing a proposal intended to prevent financial harm to 
consumers  from  specific  practices that  the  agencies  find  to  be  potentially  abusive.  Among 
other things, the proposed rules would address the following: 
• 
Creditors would be required to provide consumers a reasonable amount of time to 
make payments before they are considered late.  
BIS Review 75/2008 
 5
   As a general rule, for accounts having multiple interest rates for different balances, 
creditors  would  be  prohibited  from  maximizing  interest  charges  by  applying 
payments exceeding the minimum to the lowest rate balance first.  
Creditors  would  no  longer  be  permitted  to  increase  the  interest  rate  on  existing 
account balances at any time for any reason. Instead, card issuers could only apply 
a higher rate to the existing balance under limited circumstances, such as when a 
consumer has been delinquent for 30 days. Of course, creditors could still increase 
the rate on new transactions and could offer variable-rate cards that have the rate 
on existing balances adjust based on changes to an index.  
Creditors  could  no  longer  accrue  finance  charges  using  the  two-cycle  balance 
computation method.  
The  rules  also  prohibit  a  practice  associated  with  the  issuance  of  some  subprime  credit 
cards, in which most of the credit limit is used for security deposits and high fees imposed at 
account opening before the consumer actually receives the card.  
In addition to rules for credit cards, our proposal also addresses potentially abusive practices 
in connection with banks' payment of overdrafts to ensure that consumers have a choice of 
obtaining overdraft protection and receive information related to its service and costs.  
Conclusion 
A  robust,  innovative,  and  competitive  consumer  finance  market  is  crucial  to  a  healthy 
economy and, as I described earlier, can provide significant benefits to consumers. Such a 
market  works  most  effectively  and  brings  the  greatest  benefits  when  consumers  are  well-
informed and are not subject to abusive practices. The Federal Reserve is working diligently 
to best use its authorities to provide both creditors and consumers with rules that strike the 
right balance between ensuring that consumers receive useful information at an appropriate 
time  and  restricting  certain  practices,  while  at  the  same  time  minimizing  the  risk  of 
unintended  consequences  and  the  imposition  of  unnecessary  costs  that  could  reduce  the 
benefits of a vital consumer finance marketplace.  
6 
 BIS Review 75/2008
