Donald L Kohn: Condition of the banking system 
Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 5 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman Dodd, Ranking Member Shelby and members of the Committee, it is my pleasure 
to appear today to discuss the condition of the U.S. banking system, as a follow-up to the 
testimony I gave at a hearing held by your Committee in early March. In my remarks today, I 
will  provide  an  updated  view  of  the  health  of  the  U.S.  banking  system,  discuss  some  key 
lessons  learned  from  recent  events,  and  then  outline  a  few  important  areas  in  which  the 
Federal Reserve is responding in its role as banking supervisor.  
Within  the  past  year,  we  have  seen  a  number  of  banking  institutions  suffer  losses,  some 
quite substantial. These and other institutions have been facing a range of risk management 
challenges,  some  of  them  relatively  fundamental  in  nature  and  others  associated  with  the 
increased  use  of  complex  and  relatively  new  products.  Fortunately,  bank  managers  are 
acting on lessons learned from recent events and taking steps to rectify identified problems. 
Supervisors  are  also  taking  steps  to  respond  to  lessons  being  learned  from  recent  events 
and,  where  appropriate,  enhancing  supervisory  processes.  Some  of  these  steps  include 
enhancing  our  understanding  of  the  adverse  implications  of  greater  complexity  in  financial 
products  and  markets,  stepping  up  our  continuing  efforts  to  address  the  challenges 
associated  with  supervising  large,  complex  consolidated  entities  by  multiple  regulatory 
agencies,  and  ensuring  that  we  continue  to  send  strong  supervisory  messages,  in  good 
times and bad.  
Condition of the banking system 
As you know, the Federal Reserve is responsible for supervising bank holding companies, 
working together with the primary supervisors of the banks and their affiliates. We ourselves 
are the primary supervisors of state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve 
System.  My  update  on  banking  conditions  will  focus  on  these  two  groups  of  banking 
organizations. 
As the U.S. housing market has weakened and the economy has slowed over the past year, 
banking organizations have recognized significant losses stemming both from higher credit 
charges  against  residential  mortgage-related  loans  held  on  their  books  and  sharp  asset 
value write-downs of securitized mortgage-related positions and leveraged loans. Indeed, the 
50  largest  bank  holding  companies,  which  represent  more  than  three-fourths  of  all  bank 
holding company assets, reported losses of more than $9 billion in the fourth quarter of 2007. 
Overall, bank holding companies in aggregate generated a loss of more than $8 billion during 
the difficult fourth quarter of 2007. 
The  largest  50  bank  holding  companies  performed  better  in  the  first  quarter  of  2008, 
reporting  profits  of  $5.2  billion  and  reduced  trading  losses.  Consequently,  bank  holding 
companies  overall  reported  net  income  of  nearly  $10  billion  for  the  quarter,  down 
substantially from the $36.5 billion in income they reported for the first quarter of 2007 but a 
considerable  improvement  over  the  prior  quarter's  losses.  Nonetheless,  the  headwinds  of 
heavy trading book losses proved difficult to overcome for some firms and seven of the fifty 
largest  bank  holding  companies  still  recorded  net  losses  for  the  quarter.  Moreover,  as 
economic  conditions  have  softened,  these  large  companies  have  reported  increasing 
problems in mortgage loan portfolios, particularly home equity lines of credit, and in loans to 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
residential real estate developers. In some cases, broker-dealer subsidiaries of bank holding 
companies  have  suffered  valuation  losses  on  their  holdings  of  mortgage-related  assets. 
Reflecting this deterioration in mortgage-related exposures, nonperforming assets more than 
doubled  over  the  past  year  from  $37  billion  to  $81  billion  and,  as  of  March  31,  2008, 
nonperforming assets as a share of overall assets reached the highest level since 2002.  
Loan loss provisions rose sharply during the first quarter to $32 billion, exceeding net charge-
offs  by  more  than  $14  billion,  as  the  institutions  were  building  their  loan  loss  reserves  in 
advance  of  expected  further  deterioration  in  loan  quality.  Increased  concern  over  the 
potential  for  more  losses  from  traditional  lending  activities  has  also  been  evident  in  the 
Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which in 
recent quarters has shown banks tightening their lending standards and terms. 
The 50 largest bank holding companies continue to work at improving their liquidity positions 
in the wake of recent market turmoil. Several of these companies had brought on balance 
sheet substantial assets that were originally securitized or otherwise held off balance sheet, 
forcing alterations in funding strategies and increasing pressures in the term funding market. 
As  the  Committee  is  aware,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  a  number  of  steps  with  its 
liquidity facilities to address the difficulties in term funding markets.  
In  order  to  bolster  equity  positions  diminished  by  recent  writedowns,  U.S.  bank  holding 
companies – some at the urging of supervisors – have raised more than $80 billion in capital 
so  far  in  2008.  In  addition,  some  have  reduced  dividends  to  further  shore  up  their  capital 
base. Reflecting these steps, aggregate tier 1 leverage, tier 1 risk-based, and total risk-based 
capital  ratios  for  the  largest  50  bank  holding  companies  increased  over  the  first  quarter, 
expanding the margins above regulatory minimums. We expect bank holding companies to 
continue  to  report  weak  earnings  and  further  asset  valuation  writedowns  and/or  significant 
credit costs in coming quarters. Indeed, despite higher provisioning during the past several 
quarters,  coverage  of  nonperforming  loans  by  loan  loss  reserves  has  not  kept  pace  with 
growth in problem assets and bank holding companies may likely face the need to further 
bolster loan loss reserves. In view of this uncertain outlook, additional capital injections and 
the consideration of dividend cuts are still warranted for some of these companies and we 
have  strongly  encouraged  supervised  bank  holding  companies  to  enhance  their  capital 
positions. Stronger capital positions also will allow banking institutions to participate in and 
support the rebound in lending that will accompany the strengthening of the U.S. economy. 
Consistent with trends in commercial banks overall, conditions at state member banks have 
weakened over the past year. Problems in residential mortgage, home equity, and loans to 
home builders have pushed the nonperforming assets ratio at these banks to 1.57 percent, 
more  than  twice  the  level  of  one  year  ago  and  the  highest  rate  since  1993.  Loan  loss 
provisions have also accelerated, rising to a high of 1.14 percent of average loans during the 
first quarter of 2008 in large part reflecting the deterioration in residential real estate-related 
loan  portfolios.  Despite  this  deterioration,  state  member  banks  still  reported  aggregate  net 
income  of  $3.7  billion  and  a  return  on  assets  of  about  one  percent  for  the  first  quarter  of 
2008.  Moreover,  more  than  98  percent  of  these  banks  reported  risk-based  capital  ratios 
consistent with a "well-capitalized" designation under prompt corrective action standards.  
Over the coming months, we expect banking institutions to continue to face deteriorating loan 
quality.  House  prices  are  still  declining  sharply  in  many  localities  and  losses  related  to 
residential real estate – including loans to builders and developers – are bound to increase 
further. In addition, weak economic conditions could well extend problems to other segments 
of lending portfolios including consumer installment or credit card loans, as well as corporate 
loan  portfolios.  Moreover,  banking  organizations  must  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  that 
liquidity conditions become tighter if uncertainties in the capital markets fail to subside or if 
credit conditions deteriorate significantly. Accordingly, we anticipate that the number of banks 
with less than satisfactory supervisory ratings will continue to increase from the relatively low 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
levels  that  have  existed  in  recent  years  and  we  are  monitoring  developments  at  all 
supervised institutions closely.  
Risk management lessons for financial institutions 
Recent market events point to a number of risk management lessons for financial institutions. 
I will highlight just a few key points; many of these lessons have been documented more fully 
by  recent  public  reports  and  discussed  in  speeches  by  Chairman  Bernanke,  myself,  and 
other Federal Reserve officials.1  
The period leading up to the recent market turbulence was an unusually good one for the 
banking  system,  characterized  by  high  profits,  strong  balance  sheets,  rapid  innovation, 
business growth, and relatively few bank failures. Unfortunately, the extended period of good 
times in the banking system bred a sense of overconfidence among many bankers and other 
market participants, causing them to underestimate risks and not fully consider the potential 
for those good times to end. Most notably, many market participants expected housing prices 
to  continue  their  upward  trend  and  did  not  properly  consider  what  might  happen  if  prices 
leveled  off  or  fell.  In  order  to  be  good  risk  managers,  bankers  need  to  understand  that 
overconfidence and complacency must be continually battled, especially during an extended 
period of good times.  
Another key lesson is that if risks are to be successfully managed, they must first be properly 
identified, measured and understood. Unfortunately, recent events have revealed significant 
deficiencies in these areas. Notable examples are the underestimation by many firms of the 
credit  risk  of  subprime  mortgages  and  certain  tranches  of  structured  products,  as  well  as 
poor understanding of particular market risk characteristics of structured credit products. In a 
number  of  cases,  bank  managers  did  not  exercise  proper  due  diligence  in  valuing  their 
positions  and  assessing  their  risks,  relying  solely  on  third-party  assessments  of  risk  that 
turned  out  to  be  overly  optimistic.  Other  firms  did  not  fully  consider  the  linkages  and 
correlations between credit risk and market risk, leading to mismeasurement of their overall 
exposure.  
Some 
insufficient 
appreciation  of  the  need  for  a  range  of  risk  measures,  including  both  quantitative  and 
qualitative metrics. For example, some firms placed too much emphasis on the mechanical 
application of value-at-risk or similar model-based indicators. Sophisticated quantitative tools 
and models play an important role in good risk management, and they will continue to do so. 
But  no  model,  regardless  of  sophistication,  can  capture  all  of  the  risks  that  an  institution 
might  face.  Those  institutions  faring  better  during  the  recent  turmoil  generally  placed 
relatively  more  emphasis  on  validation,  independent  review,  and  other  controls  for  models 
and similar quantitative techniques. They also continually refined their models and applied a 
healthy  dose  of  skepticism  to  model  output.  Stress  tests  and  scenario  analysis  are  tools 
through  which  institutions  can  gain  perspective  on  risks  that  fall  outside  those  typically 
captured by statistical models. 
Another crucial lesson from recent events is that financial institutions must understand their 
liquidity  needs  at  an  enterprise-wide  level  and  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  that  market 
liquidity  may  erode  quickly  and  unexpectedly.  As  is  now  widely  recognized,  many 
took  an  excessively  narrow  perspective  on  risk  with 
institutions 
                                                 
1   President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (2008),  "Policy  Statement  on  Financial  Market 
Developments", March 13. 
Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  "Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and 
Institutional Resilience", April 7. 
   Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008).  "Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence", March 6. 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 3
contingency  funding  plans  did  not  adequately  prepare  for  the  possibility  that  certain  off-
balance-sheet  exposures  might  have  to  be  brought  onto  the  firm's  balance  sheet.  Nor  did 
they  adequately  account  for  the  possibility  of  widespread  and  protracted  declines  in  asset 
market  liquidity.  Unexpected  balance  sheet  expansions  subsequently  added  to  funding 
pressures as well as to pressures on capital ratios.  
Effective  oversight  of  an  organization  as  a  whole  is  one  of  the  most  fundamental 
requirements of prudent risk management. Senior managers at successful firms are actively 
involved in risk management, which includes determining the firm's overall risk preferences 
and creating the incentives and controls to induce employees to abide by those preferences. 
Often those incentives and controls must provide a counterweight to the incentives to seek 
short-run profits that can be inherent in prevailing compensation practices. Strong oversight 
requires access to a variety of high-quality information on a timely basis. Successful senior 
managers also work to ensure that critical information is transmitted horizontally as well as 
vertically;  during  recent  events,  some  firms'  business  lines  did  not  share  vital  information 
relevant to risk positions and business tactics, with adverse implications for profitability.  
The  leaders  of  well-managed  institutions  of  all  sizes  generally  seek  to  have  strong  and 
independent  risk  functions.  Such  functions  support  clear,  dispassionate  thinking  about  the 
entire firm's risk profile. In addition, the institution benefits when senior managers encourage 
risk managers to dig deep to uncover latent risks and to point out cases in which individual 
business lines appear to be assuming too much risk. The lessons I just noted emphasize the 
importance of risk management fundamentals, which means that they apply not only to those 
institutions  suffering  substantial  losses  recently,  but  also  to  institutions  faring  better  during 
recent events. 
Supervisory consideration of lessons learned  
Risk  management  shortcomings  at  financial  institutions  highlighted  by  recent  events  also 
present policy and operational challenges for supervisors. The primary responsibility for risk 
management  appropriately  rests  with  the  management  of  each  institution,  and  our 
supervisory efforts are not aiming to prevent individual banks from suffering losses, which is 
part  of  the  banking  business.  However,  we  are  working  to  make  sure  that  financial 
institutions  have  a  better  understanding  of  their  potential  for  loss  and  that  there  are  not 
broader  breakdowns  in  risk  management  that  can  affect  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy. While events continue to unfold, some key lessons for supervisors, in addition to 
bankers, are coming into focus. I would first like to highlight a few key lessons, and then in 
the next section will describe corresponding supervisory actions. 
For  one,  the  increased  complexity  and  linkage  within  and  among  increasingly  globalized 
markets  presents  greater  challenges  not  just  for  bankers  but  also  for  supervisors. 
Supervisors  need  to  enhance  their  understanding  of  the  direct  and  indirect  relationships 
among markets and market participants, and the associated impact on the banking system. 
Supervisors  must  also  be  even  more  keenly  aware  of  the  manner  in  which  those 
relationships within and among markets and market participants can change over time and 
how those relationships behave in times of stress – not just at banking institutions, but also at 
other  financial  firms  that  play  prominent  roles  in  financial  markets  and  whose  actions  and 
condition can have an impact on financial stability. 
Before the recent market turbulence, the Federal Reserve – in many cases along with the 
other U.S. banking agencies – acted on a number of fronts to alert financial institutions about 
emerging  risks,  for  example  by  issuing  supervisory  guidance  on  nontraditional  mortgages, 
home equity lending, commercial real estate, and subprime lending. We must continue to be 
vigilant  about  emerging  risks,  not  just  in  these  more  turbulent  times,  but  also  when  good 
times  return  –  and  we  must  be  insistent  that  banking  organizations  factor  these  risks  into 
their own risk management practices. It is also clear that supervisors need to enhance their 
focus  on  consumer  compliance  issues  at  the  point  of  contact  between  lenders  and 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2008
households  and  on  the  linkages  between  weaknesses  in  consumer  lending  practices  and 
safety and soundness, such as occurred with subprime mortgages. 
The current U.S. regulatory structure, with multiple supervisory agencies, has a number of 
strengths and benefits, but challenges can arise in assessing risk profiles of large, complex 
financial  institutions  operating  across  financial  sectors,  particularly  given  the  growth  in  the 
use of sophisticated financial products that can generate risks across various legal entities. 
Congress established a consolidated supervisory framework for bank holding companies in 
recognition that some risks cross legal entities and are managed on a consolidated basis. 
Accordingly,  monitoring  those  properly  requires  a  supervisory  approach  directed  at  more 
than  one,  or  even  several,  of  the  legal  entity  subdivisions  within  the  overall  organization. 
Recent  events  have  highlighted  the  fundamental  importance  of  enterprise-wide  risk 
management; both supervisors and bankers need to understand risks across a consolidated 
entity and assess the risk management tools being applied across the firm. 
The  implementation  of  consolidated  supervision  in  the  United  States  generally  works  well, 
with strong, cooperative relationships between the Federal Reserve and other relevant bank 
supervisors  and  functional  regulators.  Information  sharing  among  relevant  supervisors  and 
regulators is essential to ensure that a banking organization's global activities are effectively 
supervised  on  a  consolidated  basis,  and  we  have  worked  over  the  years  to  develop  and 
enhance  interagency  coordination  and  information  sharing.  But  as  institutions  grow  larger 
and  more  complex,  we  need  to  ensure  that  our  system  of  consolidated  supervision  keeps 
pace. 
Supervisory actions going forward 
We are acting in response to lessons from recent events to ensure the continuing safety and 
soundness  of  the  U.S.  banking  system.  Of  course,  we  also  continue  to  study  recent  and 
ongoing events to gain additional information and insights.  
As  a  first  step,  supervisors  are  redoubling  their  efforts  to  help  organizations  improve  their 
risk-management practices, given the challenges some banks are facing today. Accordingly, 
we  have  increased  supervisory  attention  to  this  issue.  For  instance,  supervisors  are 
reinforcing  and  strengthening  their  focus  on  assessments  and  testing  of  fundamental  risk 
management  processes,  requiring  vigorous  corrective  action  when  weaknesses  are 
identified. We are also ensuring that institutions take a more forward-looking approach to risk 
management;  for  example,  our  examiners  are  reviewing  due  diligence  around  commercial 
real  estate  valuations  and  ensuring  that  bankers  make  appropriate  adjustments  based  on 
market conditions. This approach is consistent with recent lessons we have all learned from 
residential real estate. Additionally, we are more intensely verifying assertions made by bank 
management about the robustness of their risk management capabilities. Naturally, we have 
focused first on the institutions in most need of improvement, but we will continue to remind 
stronger institutions of the need to remain vigilant against potential weaknesses. 
Supervisors are also enhancing their understanding of the full spectrum and the scale of the 
risks  inherent  in  increasingly  complex  banking  activities  and  the  potential  for  risks  to 
crystallize in times of stress. In particular, we are focusing on the inter-relationships among 
risk  types,  not  just  with  respect  to  those  areas  that  precipitated  recent  events,  but  more 
broadly. These forward-looking risk identification processes include a more comprehensive 
understanding  of  institutions'  main and  emerging  business  lines  and the  full  range  of  risks 
they  generate.  We  are  also  counseling  institutions  to  improve  their  own  risk  identification 
processes and to emphasize the importance of stress testing and scenario analyses. 
Better  risk  management  at  banking  organizations  must  be  accompanied  by  more  robust 
liquidity and capital cushions. As developments of the past months clearly demonstrate, the 
difficulty  in identifying  complexity  and  linkages  –  and  their  potential  impact  during  times  of 
stress  –  requires  institutions  to  maintain  sizable  and  more  reliable  liquidity  and  capital 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 5
cushions, given the inherent uncertainty in financial markets. This is a key point supervisors 
are reinforcing strongly. 
The Federal Reserve is nearing completion of enhancements to its supervisory guidance to 
clarify our role as consolidated supervisor of bank and financial holding companies – often 
known  as  our  "umbrella  supervisor"  role.  The  updated  guidance  is  primarily  intended  to 
provide greater clarification to our own examination staff. For example, it provides for more 
consistent Federal Reserve supervisory practices and assessments across institutions with 
similar  activities  and  risks,  detailing  expectations  for  understanding  and  assessing  primary 
governance functions and risk controls, material business lines, nonbank operations, funding 
and liquidity management, consumer compliance, and other key activities and risks. Again, 
from  a  financial  stability  perspective  the  Federal  Reserve  has  an  interest  not  just  in 
identifying the risks within an individual organization, but also understanding the broader set 
of risks affecting all key market participants. 
The  updated  consolidated  supervision  guidance,  which  will  be  made  publicly  available, 
naturally  reiterates  the  importance  of  coordination  with,  and  reliance  on,  the  work  of  other 
relevant supervisors and functional regulators. The consolidated supervision guidance under 
development  is  being  updated  based  on  the  lessons  from  recent  events  noted  above.  We 
need to continue to work closely with other supervisors and regulators as we implement the 
enhanced  consolidated  supervision  guidance,  with 
interagency 
coordination  of  supervisory  activities  across  all  bank  holding  companies,  particularly  the 
largest and most complex organizations. 
We are also considering new or augmented supervisory guidance on other aspects of risk 
management,  including  further  emphasis  on  the  need  for  an  enterprise-wide  perspective 
when assessing and managing risk. For example, we are developing supervisory guidance to 
clarify  expectations  surrounding  compliance  risk, 
firm-wide 
compliance  risk  management  for  large,  complex  organizations.  Another  example  is  our 
participation in the development of enhanced guidance on the management of liquidity risks, 
which is being developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
As you know, the U.S. federal banking agencies are also in the process of implementing the 
Basel  II  framework,  which  is  intended  to  enhance  the  quality  of  risk  management  by  tying 
regulatory capital more closely to institutions' underlying risks and by requiring strong internal 
systems  for  evaluating  credit  and  other  risks.  We  understand  that  Basel  II  must  be 
implemented carefully and so have established an extended transition process with multiple 
safeguards. Indeed, findings from recent supervisory reviews on the use of economic capital 
have  direct  application  to  the  evaluations  we  will  make  under  Pillar  2,  where  banks  are 
required to have their own robust internal process to ensure that they have adequate capital 
for their entire risk profile. Importantly, Pillar 2 underscores the current supervisory authority 
to require institutions to hold additional capital if the agencies are not satisfied with the levels 
chosen by bank management. We are also working with the Basel Committee to ensure that 
the  Basel  II  framework  appropriately  reflects  the  lessons  of  recent  events,  such  as  by 
strengthening  the  capital  treatment  of  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  and assessing  the  use  of 
external credit ratings to determine capital charges. 
focusing  particularly  on 
focus  on 
improving 
Conclusion 
The  Federal  Reserve  plays  an  important  role  in  the  strong  supervisory  structure  we  have 
here in the United States. And we are committed to making our supervisory and regulatory 
processes as strong as possible, improving them when necessary. Going forward, we must 
continue to send strong supervisory messages to senior management at financial institutions 
– perhaps with more force and frequency than in the recent past – particularly since during 
extended periods of good times institutions can lose their focus on the importance of sound 
risk management fundamentals. We continue to review our supervision practices to identify 
and act on potential areas for improvement in light of recent events. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2008
