Radovan Jelašić: Recent economic and financial developments in Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  First 
Presentation  of  Inflation  Report  to  the  Economic  and  Financial  Community,  Belgrade, 
25 February 2008. 
 During the past week, instead of the usual EUR 3 million purchased from exchange dealers, 
the National Bank of Serbia sold EUR 10 million a day in the IFEM for one reason only – to 
boost  the  forex  market  trading  volumes.  Namely,  last  week’s  trading  volumes  in  the  IFEM 
were five times lower than usual, despite central bank’s interventions, and the market-based 
exchange  rates  were  threatened  by  the  widened  spread  between  the  quoted  buying  and 
selling exchange rates. However, I would like to point out that the aim of these interventions 
by  the  National  Bank  was  not  to  defend  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate,  because  had  this 
been the case, the NBS would have organized fixing sessions and asked banks to specify 
the affordable buying or selling exchange rate. Owing to the central bank’s intervention, the 
market  was  revived  by  Friday  afternoon  when  trading  volume  reached  EUR  73.3  million, 
triple  the  amount  recorded  on  Wednesday  or  Thursday.  As  foreign  exchange  trading  by 
banks is performed on behalf of their clients, the decline in trading volumes confirms that all 
market players apprehensive of future events exercised increased caution and restraint. The 
National Bank of Serbia will closely monitor movements in the forex market, and will reduce 
the volume of its interventions to the amount of its daily purchase of foreign exchange from 
licensed exchange dealers once normal liquidity conditions are restored.  
As regards the labeling of banks based on their ownership structure, I repeat once again that 
all  banks  operating  in  our  banking  system  are  Serbian  banks,  irrespective  of  the  origin  of 
their capital. Whether domestic or foreign, the capital was invested in our country, and placed 
at the disposal of our enterprises and households. The shareholders of parent companies of 
banks with majority foreign owned capital are not necessarily nationals of those countries in 
which parent companies are located. These misconceptions show a lack of understanding of 
the principles of modern financial flows which know no boundaries. To illustrate, one of the 
largest  shareholders  of  Morgan  Stanley  holding  a  9.9  percent  stake  is  the  Chinese 
government investment fund, and the most significant ownership stakes in Citibank belong to 
Middle East investors. Both Oviesse and Benetton are selling sweaters made in Albania and 
Turkey…  Specifying  ethnic  background  of  companies  in  the  21st  century  and  urging  the 
general public to boycott them shows not only a lack of responsibility, but also a lack of taste 
and common sense. I feel certain that our citizens know better and will continue to buy those 
products and services that suit them best, guided exclusively by their economic interest. The 
key  principle  of  the  late  18th  century  economy  of  comparative  advantage  explains  that 
international  trade  is  beneficial  to  all  parties  involved,  and  I  guess  that  Serbia  of  the  21st 
century wishes to benefit from international trade and finance, as well.  
I would also like to remind you on this occasion that today’s standard of living in Serbia is 
largely  based  on  foreign  direct  investments  and  access  to  foreign  borrowing.  Hence, 
pensions  are  paid  out  regularly  and  on  time,  new  jobs  are  created  (in  the  banking  sector 
alone, the number of jobs is 50% higher than at the onset of transition), our citizens can take 
out  mortgage  loans,  etc.  In  order  to  finance  the  current  account  deficit  measuring  16%  of 
GDP  in  2007,  Serbia  needs  foreign  direct  investments  and  fresh  money.  If  we  were  to 
finance growth and development exclusively from our domestic accumulation, the volume of 
lending  in  2007  would  have  been  4  to  5  times  lower.  It  is  true  that  the  National  Bank  of 
Serbia  can  sustain  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  short  run  by  relying  on  monetary  policy 
measures  and  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  However,  in  the  medium  and 
long run, you do not make something out of nothing. I feel it is my duty to warn you that the 
ultimate  costs  of  a  significant  decline  in  the  level  of  FDIs  and  restrictions  on  foreign 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 1
borrowing will in the long-run be borne by our enterprises and citizens. However, I am sure it 
will not come to this, because it is not in Serbia’s interest. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2008
