Lucas Papademos: Globalisation and central bank policies 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Bridge Forum Dialogue, Luxembourg, 22 January 2008. 
 to  be 
Introduction  
I.  
For years now, globalisation has been, and continues to be, a buzzword in the public debate. 
Its  persistent  significance  is  certainly  also  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  such  a  multi-faceted 
phenomenon  which  has  yet 
fully  understood  and  assessed.  Globalisation 
encompasses a broad range of aspects – economic, social, political, cultural and intellectual 
– and many of these are of relevance to public policy. Even though public discourse often 
focuses on the economic consequences of globalisation – the integration of markets and its 
associated  distributional  effects  –  globalisation  is  about  more  than  the  free  exchange  of 
goods, services and capital on global markets. It is also about an unprecedented opportunity 
to exchange knowledge and ideas across the globe. And the Bridge Forum Dialogue here in 
Luxembourg  provides  an  excellent  platform  to  see  this  intellectual  facet  of  globalisation  in 
action. I should like to thank Governor Mersch, the President of the Forum, for having invited 
me,  and  I  am  looking  forward  to  an  enriching  debate  with  my  fellow  panellists  and  the 
audience on the theme of this year’s event: “Globalisation: how to manage it?”  
Exploiting  my  professional  comparative  advantage,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  central  bank 
perspective.  In  my  remarks,  I  intend  to  address  three  aspects  of  globalisation  and  their 
potential impact on central bank policies: 
• 
First,  I  will  discuss  to  what  extent  globalisation  may  affect  the  conduct  and 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  controlling  inflation  and  influencing  domestic 
economic activity. Or: does globalisation alter the job of a central bank, and if so, 
how?  
Second,  I  will  explore  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets, which is of course a particularly pertinent issue during the ongoing financial 
market turmoil, and its potential implications for financial stability. Or: did we sow the 
wind of financial globalisation, only to reap the whirlwind of market turbulence?  
Third,  I  will briefly  seek  to  shed  some  light  on  links  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability,  and  how  globalisation  may  affect  this  interrelation.  Or:  did  past 
central  bank  policies  worldwide  play  a  part  in  building  up  imbalances  in  global 
financial markets whose correction and unwinding we are witnessing at present? 
  Globalisation and monetary policy 
II.  
In  recent  years,  it  has  been  argued  that  globalisation  has  had  –  or  is  likely  to  have  – 
significant  implications  for  the  conduct  and  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  controlling 
inflation and influencing domestic economic activity. It has been suggested by some that the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  could  be  impaired  as  a  consequence  of  the  impact  of 
globalisation  on  the  structure  and  functioning  of  markets  –  product,  labour  and  financial 
markets  –  which  would  affect  –  and  in  the  extreme  disrupt  –  important  channels  of  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Various  effects  have  been  discussed  and 
analysed,  and  a  number  of  empirical  studies  have  attempted  to  estimate  their  quantitative 
significance. Simply put, globalisation could undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy 
as  a  result  of  its  impact  on  both  domestic  aggregate  demand  and  aggregate  supply.  The 
channels through which monetary policy influences aggregate demand could be impaired if 
domestic  interest  rates  and  domestic  aggregate  demand  are  increasingly  determined  by 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 1
global factors rather than domestic monetary policy. On the supply side, globalisation could 
affect  inflation  dynamics  in  various  ways,  notably  by  reducing  the  responsiveness  of 
domestic  inflation  to  domestic  firms’  marginal  cost  increases,  by  making  “global  economic 
slack”  rather  than  the  domestic  output  gap  an  important  determinant  of  domestic  inflation 
pressure, and possibly by influencing the trend rate of change in the terms of trade. 
Effects of globalisation on aggregate demand 
With regard to the influence of globalisation on domestic aggregate demand, two arguments 
have  been  advanced.  First,  in  a  financially  integrated  world  it  has  been  argued  that  it  is 
global monetary liquidity rather than domestic liquidity which affects domestic interest rates 
and  domestic  economic  activity,  mainly  –  though  not  exclusively  –  through  its  effects  on 
liquidity  premia.  Second,  it  has  been  claimed  that  the  level  of  longer-term  domestic  real 
interest  rates  is  likely  to  be  determined  by  global  savings  and  investment  rather  than  its 
national components. These influences can be expected to be more pronounced for smaller 
economies. Therefore, a smaller country which cannot affect the global supply of liquidity to 
any significant degree could then lose effective control of inflation. This reasoning, however, 
is dubious, and not supported by theory or confirmed by empirical evidence. For example, in 
a two-country new Keynesian model, it has been shown that, provided exchange rates are 
flexible,  global  monetary  factors  can  affect  the  domestic  price  level  only  through  their 
potential short-term effects on global output.1 Interestingly, the sign of the spill-over effect is 
the opposite of what would be expected from the global liquidity hypothesis. A comparatively 
loose  foreign  monetary  policy  induces  a  depreciation  of  the  foreign  currency  and  has  a 
negative impact on domestic demand and prices in the home country. The main conclusion 
of rigorous theoretical analysis is that monetary policy can affect domestic demand even in a 
fully financially integrated world and even in a small country, as long as exchange rates are 
flexible.  The  exchange  rate  channel  plays  a  more  prominent  role  than  the  interest  rate 
channel  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism,  to  an  extent  which  depends  on  the 
relative size of a country and the degree of financial market integration. This result is fully 
consistent  with  basic  economic  theory.  Thus,  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  control  price 
developments over the medium term by influencing aggregate demand is not undermined, 
although  the  role  and  relative  importance  of  different  transmission  channels  might  be 
affected by increasing global financial integration.  
What is the empirical evidence about the potential impact of globalisation on this channel of 
the  monetary  transmission  mechanism?  It  is  theoretically  plausible  that  globalisation  can 
influence to a certain extent key determinants of long-term interest rates, such as the global 
riskless real interest rate and the real risk premium.2 Moreover, inflation expectations and the 
inflation  risk  premium  may  also  have  been  influenced  to  some  degree  by  the  forces  of 
globalisation, though monetary policy across the globe has certainly been the main factor. 
There is some empirical evidence that in the euro area, as well as in a broader sample of 
OECD countries, long-term rates are reacting less to changes in short-term rates than they 
used to.3 Global factors seem to be increasingly important in determining national real bond 
yields.4 Furthermore, the co-movement of US, German and Japanese bond yields has been 
exceptionally  high  over  the  past  few  years.5  My  interpretation  of  these  findings  is  that, 
although  global  forces  have  played  an  important  role  in  determining  domestic  long-term 
                                                 
1   See Woodford (2007). 
2   See Wu (2006). 
3   See Reichlin (2006). 
4   See Giannone, Lenza, Reichlin (2007). Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1990) found that real interest rates for seven 
of the nine OECD countries they investigated mainly depended on world factors for the period 1958-1989. 
5   See Ferguson et al. (2007). 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2008
interest rates, they do not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that the effectiveness of 
monetary  policy  in  controlling  inflation  has  been  reduced.  The  increased  significance  of 
global factors identified by empirical analysis is likely to reflect common trends as well as the 
similar orientation of monetary policies and their success in containing inflationary pressures. 
If national monetary policies diverge from such a common orientation, which itself has been 
fostered by increasing competition between currencies,6 the observed regularities are likely 
to be affected. A central bank is still able to influence aggregate demand and preserve price 
stability under floating exchange rates.  
theory  does  not  provide  unambiguous  conclusions  about 
Effects of globalisation on aggregate supply 
Let me now turn to the effects of globalisation on the aggregate supply and on the dynamics 
of inflation. Several effects have been identified or suggested, some of which are relatively 
direct  and  others  indirect.  Globalisation  can  affect  inflation  dynamics  through  various 
channels:  (1)  by  influencing  the  responsiveness  of  wages  and  prices  to  measures  of 
domestic slack in the labour and product markets (that is, by affecting the slope of the short-
term  Phillips  curve  and  the  sensitivity  of  profit  margins  to  cyclical  factors);  (2)  by  affecting 
trend productivity growth; and (3) by causing shifts in the “natural rate of unemployment” or 
NAIRU;  (4)  by  making  a  measure  of  “global  economic  slack”  an  important  determinant  of 
domestic inflationary pressure; and (5), more directly, by affecting the trend rates of change 
of  the  relative  prices  of  imported  final  goods,  intermediate  products  and  commodities.  It is 
important  to  keep  in  mind  the  various  channels  and  potential  effects  because  their  impact 
can be offsetting, and also because theoretical arguments and empirical analyse often focus 
only on some of the potential channels, thus providing a partial picture. I will elaborate on 
some of these effects and the empirical evidence for the euro area. 
Economic 
impact  of 
globalisation on the slope of the short-term Phillips curve, that is, on the responsiveness of 
domestic inflation to measures of domestic economic slack, e.g. the output gap and/or the 
deviation  of  unemployment  from  its  natural  rate.  Arguments  can  be  advanced  –  and  have 
been advanced – that imply that globalisation would tend to make the Phillips curve flatter7 or 
steeper.8  Kenneth  Rogoff  has  agued  that  inflation  becomes  more  responsive  to  domestic 
excess demand if price rigidities are reduced and the economy becomes more flexible as a 
result of increased competitive pressure induced by globalisation.  
The proposition that a measure of “global economic slack” rather than the domestic output 
gap  is  a  more  important  determinant  of  domestic  inflation  pressure  has  been  discussed 
extensively.  This  hypothesis,  if  valid,  would  imply  that  the  slope  of  the  short-term  Phillips 
curve, which depicts the responsiveness of inflation to domestic excess demand, becomes 
flatter.9  Thus,  in  a  globalised  world  –  so  it  has  been  argued  –  a  much  stronger  monetary 
policy response would be required, other things being equal, to preserve price stability over 
the medium term in the presence of adverse shocks. But also in this regard there exists no 
robust empirical evidence or solid and convincing theoretical foundation to support the claim 
that a structural change has taken place.10 Empirical estimates for the euro area do not show 
a significant change in the slope of the short-term Phillips curve. Furthermore, it would be 
misleading to interpret the recently observed low correlation between domestic output gaps 
and  domestic  inflation  in  some  countries  as  a  structural  change  in  the  short-term  Phillips 
the 
                                                 
6   See Kroszner (2007). 
7   See Bean (2006a and 2006b). 
8   See Rogoff (2004, 2006). 
9   See Borio and Filardo (2007). 
10   See Ihrig et al. (2007). 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 3
curves. A reduced correlation – or even a lack of it – could simply be a consequence of the 
effective  monetary  policies  of  central  banks  which  have  succeeded  in  anchoring  inflation 
expectations to price stability.11  
Direct effect of globalisation on domestic inflation 
The two more direct effects of globalisation on world and domestic inflation dynamics have 
been more visible but have partly offset each other, and the relative impact may be changing 
over  time.  On  the  one  hand,  raw  materials  and  basic  commodities,  notably  oil  and  other 
sources  of  energy,  have  become  scarcer  relative  to  world  demand,  leading  to  substantial 
upward pressure on prices. [see Chart 1] For example, Brent crude oil prices have increased 
almost tenfold over the last nine years, reflecting to a very large extent the impact of rising 
demand,  especially  in  emerging  market  economies  [see  Chart  2],  although  supply-side 
factors have also played a role during some periods. On the other hand, the integration of a 
large  reserve  of  low-cost,  skilled  labour  in  the  international  economy  and  the  increasing 
production  of  manufactured  goods  in  emerging  market  economies  have  put  downward 
pressure on import prices of manufactured goods as well as on wage demands in industrial 
economies. As a consequence, the prices of a wide range of manufactured goods have been 
declining since 2000. This is reflected in the unit value of imports of manufactured products 
in the euro area, which in mid-2007 was virtually at the same level as in 2000. [see Chart 3] 
The  counteracting  effects  of  these  global  price  pressures  on  euro  area  inflation  can  be 
observed more clearly if we take a look at the development of the overall Harmonised Index 
of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  and  selected  components  (energy  and  non-energy  industrial 
goods). [see Chart 4] The prices paid by consumers for energy products, which account for 
approximately 9% of euro area private consumption, surged at an average rate of 5.4% per 
annum following the series of sharp oil price increases over the period 1999-2007. But, the 
prices of other consumer goods, such as non-energy industrial goods, which account for over 
30% of total private consumption, increased at a more moderate rate of 0.7% per annum on 
average during the same period. 
In an environment of significant and persistent changes in the relative prices of energy goods 
and agricultural products, the price increases of these goods, which are comparatively more 
visible to consumers than the relatively more stable prices of many other consumer goods, 
may,  therefore,  adversely  affect  inflation  expectations.  Consequently,  it  is  crucial  for 
monetary policy to anchor inflation expectations to price stability, and to ensure that second-
round effects of increases in energy prices and other commodity prices on price and wage-
setting do not materialise.  
All in all, the empirical evidence on how globalisation has directly affected consumer price 
inflation in the advanced economies reveals a rather muted impact. Inflation in the euro area 
is likely to have been 0.0-0.3 percentage points lower per annum as a result of the net impact 
of  the  inflation-dampening  effect  of  non-commodity  import  prices  and  the  inflation-
augmenting effect of commodity import prices over the past decade.12 The two effects are 
linked  and  have  partly  offset  each  other  as  they  reflect  the  impact  of  emerging  market 
economies on the prices of manufactured goods and world commodity prices. The size and 
sign of the net impact on the inflation of advanced economies in the future are surrounded by 
uncertainty, and are likely to change as globalisation unfolds. 
                                                 
11   See Boivin and Giannoni (2006) and Bean (2005). 
12   See ECB (2008); Pain et al (2006) and Pula and Skudelny (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2008
Impact on monetary policy strategies 
Do central banks need to adapt their monetary policy strategies to cope with the challenges 
of  globalisation?  It  has  been  shown  that  the  rationale  for  maintaining  price  stability  –  the 
primary objective of the ECB and of many other major central banks – is strengthened by 
financial globalisation for at least two reasons. First, if international risk-sharing loosens the 
link  between  domestic  consumption  and  domestic  output,  optimal  monetary  policy  would 
tend to increase the relative weight on price stability at the expense of output variability, as it 
is  real  consumption  which  ultimately  matters  for  social  welfare.  Second,  the  welfare-
maximising  weight  to  be  attributed  to  price  stability  also  increases  when  international  risk-
sharing is obtained by means of cross-border holdings of nominal assets (e.g. non-inflation 
indexed bonds), as inflation would seriously distort effective risk-sharing. These interesting 
arguments bring me to the second part of my  presentation on the potential implications of 
globalisation for financial stability. 
Globalisation and financial stability 
III.  
Let me now focus on the effects of globalisation on the functioning of financial markets and 
institutions and the potential implications of these effects for the performance of the central 
bank task of safeguarding financial stability. This issue is both important and topical as the 
pace  of  global  financial  integration  has  accelerated  in  recent  years  and  as  the  ongoing 
financial  market  turmoil  has  clearly  demonstrated.  Financial  globalisation  involves  the 
increasing integration of financial markets and the growing presence of cross-border financial 
institutions.  Financial  globalisation  is  often  defined  and  measured  by  the  extent  to  which 
countries are linked through cross-border financial holdings. A commonly used indicator of 
financial  globalisation  is  the  sum  of  countries’  gross  foreign  assets  and  liabilities  as  a 
proportion  of  GDP.  The  evolution  of  this  indicator  documents  the  impressive  dynamics  of 
financial  globalisation  since  the  mid-1990s,  especially  for  advanced  economies  (and  to  a 
lesser extent for emerging markets and developing countries). [see Chart 5]. In the euro area 
alone, the ratio of the sum of foreign assets and liabilities to GDP increased from 190% in 
1999, the year the euro was launched, to 280% in 2005. It is also impressive and relevant 
that the pace of financial integration for advanced economies was much faster than that of 
their  trade  integration  from  the  early  1990s  onwards.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  ratio  of  the 
sum  of  external  assets  and  liabilities  to  the  sum  of  exports  and  imports  [see  Chart  6]. 
Interestingly, this same  ratio has been roughly  stable for emerging market economies and 
developing countries over the same period. Finally, another pertinent indicator measures the 
extent  and  rapidly  growing  importance  of  the  total  cross-border  bank  assets  and  liabilities 
since  the  early  1990s,  which  increased  fivefold  from  about  5  trillion  US  dollars  in  1990  to 
almost 25 trillion US dollars in 2006. [Chart 7].  
Globalisation and the development of financial markets  
The fast pace of financial globalisation has reflected, and at the same time has contributed 
to,  the  rapid  development  of  financial  markets.  Both  financial  integration  and  development 
have been driven by several factors: deregulation, capital liberalisation, financial innovation 
and advances in communication and information technology. These factors have contributed, 
in  a  mutually  reinforcing  manner,  to  the  exceptional  growth  of  the  overall  size  of  financial 
markets  relative  to  GDP  [Chart  8]  and  the  consolidation  of  the  banking  sector,  with  the 
emergence  of  large  and  complex  financial  institutions.  They  have  also  contributed  to  the 
exponential growth of new financial instruments, the adoption by banks of the “originate and 
distribute”  business  model  and  the  increasing  presence  of  new  financial  intermediaries.  In 
addition,  the  distribution  of  net  saving  flows  across  the  globe,  with  large  excess  saving 
(relative  to  domestic  investment  opportunities)  in  some  emerging  market  economies 
searching for higher global investment returns also contributed to the fast pace of financial 
globalisation and development in recent years. When examining and assessing the effects of 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 5
globalisation on the financial system – its efficiency and stability – it is important to keep in 
mind  the  role  of  the  other  factors,  e.g.  financial  innovation,  new  business  models,  risk 
management  practices,  which  have  simultaneously  exerted  a  significant  impact  on  the 
functioning of financial markets and institutions. 
The  securitisation  of  bank  loans  and  the  development  of  credit  risk  transfer  (CRT) 
instruments  and  complex  structured  finance  products  have  fundamentally  changed  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system  and  the  distribution  of  risk  across  sectors  and  borders. 
Since  the  mid-1980s,  an  unprecedented  growth  in  the  development  and  issuance  of  new 
financial market instruments has allowed the transfer of risks across market participants also 
in connection with previously relatively illiquid assets like bank loans and mortgages. While 
initially  the  focus  was  on  transferring  market  risk,  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  have 
increasingly  gained  in  importance  since  the  1990s.13  With  respect  to  securitisation,  this 
development can best be described by pointing out that the outstanding value of US agency 
mortgage-backed securities grew from about 100 billion US dollars in 1980 to about 4 trillion 
dollars in 2006 [Chart 9]. Annual securitisation is about 3 trillion US dollars a year in the US 
and about 500 billion euro in Europe. In both areas, mortgage-backed securities account for 
the  bulk  of  the  total.  With  respect  to  credit  risk  transfer  instruments,  the  increase  in  the 
notional value of global credit default swaps has been phenomenal, from 90 billion US dollars 
in 2001 to 34 trillion US dollars in 2006. Over the same period, the share of credit default 
swaps in the overall derivatives market increased from 1 to 11% [Chart 10]. Collateralised 
debt obligations (CDOs) are another major type of security used to transfer credit risk. The 
global  issuance  of  CDOs  more  than  tripled  between  2004  and  2006  [Chart  10].  One 
prominent  feature  of  the  development  of  the  financial  system  is  that  it  has  become  much 
more “leveraged”, as indicated by the ratio of total monetary and financial assets relative to 
the monetary base (central bank money).  
Financial globalisation and economic growth 
What have been the effects of financial globalisation and development on the efficiency and 
stability of the financial system, on trend economic growth and on output and financial market 
volatility?  Let  me  first  examine  the  impact  on  efficiency,  growth  and  output  volatility.  The 
available empirical evidence supports the view that the development of the financial sector, 
as measured by financial market size and other indicators of its features and sophistication, 
has had positive effects on the efficient functioning of product markets and has fostered (total 
factor)  productivity  gains  and  output  growth.14  The  evidence  on  the  impact  of  financial 
globalisation  on  economic  growth  is  not  as  conclusive  or  sufficiently  robust.15  This  partly 
reflects the fact that the impact is conditional on the macroeconomic policies pursued as well 
on  the  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  in  place,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  isolate 
empirically and estimate its net contribution. Moreover, the impact of financial globalisation 
on growth may take some time to become visible as it exerts its influence through various 
channels, some of which involve indirect effects. Indeed, a new approach which emphasises 
the  indirect  effects  of  financial  globalisation  growth  by  promoting  the  development  of  the 
financial  sector,  by  strengthening  competition  and  by  enhancing  market  discipline  on 
macroeconomic  policies  suggests  that  the  total  impact  on  growth  of  financial  globalisation 
through these indirect effects can be significant. In particular, for advanced economies their 
integration into global financial markets fosters (total factor) productivity growth and improves 
risk-sharing.  Moreover,  there  is  some  evidence  that  financially  integrated  economies  can 
                                                 
13   See Ferguson et al. (2007), Ch. 9. 
14   See Hartmann et al. (2007). 
15   See Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei (2006). 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2008
absorb shocks – and can tolerate a higher level of volatility – without this volatility having an 
adverse effect on growth.16  
Globalisation and the volatility and liquidity of financial markets  
An important issue for financial system stability is whether financial globalisation has been –
or can be– a key factor in reducing volatility and increasing liquidity in financial markets. Over 
a number of years, before the current financial market turmoil, global financial markets were 
characterised  by  abundant  liquidity  which  had  indeed  reached  unprecedented  levels. 
Financial  market  liquidity,  a  concept  distinct  from  monetary  liquidity,  is  a  measure  of  the 
ability  of  market  participants  to  undertake  transactions  without  triggering  large  changes  in 
asset prices. The abundant financial market liquidity over the period 2003 until the summer of 
2007 was associated with very low market volatility, especially in equity and bond markets 
[chart 11], low risk aversion [chart 12], low corporate bond yield spreads [chart 13] and credit 
spreads, high leverage and high market turnover. It also reflected the “search for yield” and 
confidence in the smooth functioning of the market. A composite indicator of financial market 
liquidity in the euro area equity, bond, credit and foreign exchange markets,17 constructed at 
the  ECB  [chart  14]  shows  that  financial  market  liquidity  had  increased  significantly  since 
2001, rose sharply in 2003 and 2004 and remained at high level until the summer of 2007. A 
similar indicator constructed by the Bank of England for the UK financial market highlights 
the global dimension of this phenomenon and a similar trend. It has been argued by some 
that increasing financial market integration –the liberalisation of international capital flows– 
was  a  key  determinant  of  this  increase  in  market  liquidity  and  the  associated  decline  in 
market  volatility.  But  a  more  careful  analysis  shows  that  other  factors played  an  important 
role, such as the rapid growth of new financial instruments, the increasing presence of very 
active  and  highly  leveraged  financial  market  participants.  Moreover,  ample  market  liquidity 
also  reflected  an  increase  in  risk  appetite  and  a  rise  in  leverage.  And  the  recent  market 
developments  showed  that  an  abrupt  and  sizeable  increase  in  risk  aversion  caused  an 
evaporation of liquidity in many markets and a rise in market volatility. Therefore, although 
financial globalisation can play a role in containing market volatility, it cannot be expected to 
have a dominant and permanent impact. 
Impact on financial stability – the financial market turmoil 
What  are  the  broader  potential  implications  of  financial  globalisation  for  the  stability  of 
financial systems? How are real and financial shocks likely to propagate across borders and 
asset  classes  in  a  financially  integrated  world?  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  obviously  an 
augmented  risk  of  cross-border  contagion  of  asymmetric  shocks  to  the  rest  of  the  world  if 
cross-border  asset  holding  is  widespread.  On  the  other  hand,  this  risk  has  to  be  weighed 
against the positive side of the very same coin, which is the benefit gained from an increase 
in  international  risk-sharing  by  means  of  diversification.  The  resilience  of  financial  asset 
prices to negative shocks is improved when the market is more liquid and the investor base 
more heterogeneous. On balance, despite the ongoing financial turmoil, I would argue that 
financial  integration  has  had  a  stabilising  influence  on  the  global  financial  system  for  the 
reasons  just  mentioned.18  If,  however,  risk  assessment  and  management  is  inadequate, 
                                                 
16   See Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2005, 2006). 
17   The  financial  market  liquidity  indicator  is  constructed  to  gauge  market  tightness,  depth  and  resiliency,  and 
liquidity risk premia. 
18   The available empirical evidence on how measured financial openness affected the severity of banking crises 
is  somewhat  inconclusive.  The  finance  literature  argues  for  a  joint  consideration  of  efficiency  and  stability 
issues, see Ferguson et al. (2007), ch. 6.3 for references to the literature. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 7
asset  valuation  is  difficult  and  highly  uncertain,  and  incentives  are  distorted,  the  risks  to 
financial stability could increase. 
The current financial turmoil provides a clear example of how a shock to a relatively small 
segment of a national financial market can spread globally across borders and across other 
markets. As early as 2005, US sub-prime loan delinquencies started to rise. Consequently 
the  value  of  credit  products  based  on  sub-prime  mortgages  rated  lower  than  AA  started 
falling. But it was not until two hedge funds from Bear Stearns with active exposure in the 
sub-prime  market  had  almost  lost  all  their  capital  by  June  2007  and  when  some  rating 
agencies in early July announced that they would downgrade many asset-backed securities 
(ABSs)  and  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  that  a  significant  reassessment  of  the 
expected  returns  of  structured  finance  products  took  place  and  AA  and  AAA-rated  asset-
backed securities (or ABS) also started falling in value. The following general re-pricing of 
risk [see Chart 15] and tensions in credit markets (e.g. also the corporate bond market) now 
affected several countries other than the US (e.g. the corporate bond markets in the US and 
Europe).  Financial  market  liquidity  for  most  structured  credit  products  started  evaporating 
[Chart 16].  Equity  markets have also been affected by the increase in risk aversion and a 
general  flight  to  quality.19  As  a  consequence  of  inadequate  risk  management,  and  in 
particular liquidity risk management, the interbank money market came under pressure. Due 
to the complexity of pricing structured credit products and the lack of transparency of banks’ 
exposures  to  investment  vehicles  heavily  in  need  of  refinancing  their  ABS  investments 
(which,  at  that  time,  were  more  or  less  fully  illiquid),  an  adverse  selection  problem  in  the 
interbank market led to concerns about systemic risk. Banks were reluctant to lend to each 
other  because  of  concerns  about  the  counterparty’s  exposure  to  sub-prime  related  assets 
and  also  uncertainty  about  their  own  liquidity  needs.  In  August  2007,  interest  rates  in  the 
unsecured  money  market  started  to  rise  significantly  above  the  policy  rates,  also  for  very 
short-term maturities. Indicators of financial market liquidity, in a number of markets, declined 
dramatically. 
Since August 2007, the ECB has launched a series of market operations aimed to address 
pressures in the money market, to ensure that very short-term money market rates remain 
close to the ECB’s policy rates and thus to contain spill-over effects to the financial system 
and the real economy. These operations have succeeding in stabilising the very short-term 
interbank rate and reduced tensions in the long-term money market. Because money market 
pressures  had  remained  at  elevated  levels  globally  until  December  [Chart  17],  a  global 
response was called for, in the form of a joint action of major central banks in the advanced 
economies,  including  the  ECB,  to  provide  US  dollar  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  also 
outside the US. Overall, the central bank operations have had a positive impact on money 
markets  worldwide  and  contributed  to  mitigating  the  effects  of  the  turmoil  on  the  financial 
system and the economy. However, persisting uncertainty in financial markets – which these 
actions  cannot  address,  and  were  not  intended  to  address  –  imply  that  pressures  in  the 
longer-term  money  market  remain,  although  at  significantly  reduced  level  since  December 
2007.  The  European  Central  Bank  continues  to  stand  ready  to  act  in  a  swift  and  decisive 
manner in order to ensure the orderly functioning of money markets.] 
Causes of the financial market turmoil 
What have been the underlying main causes of the financial market turmoil? What have been 
the key weaknesses in the functioning of the financial system that have been revealed? And 
what are the appropriate further responses of market participants and policy-makers? A full 
diagnosis of the causes and weaknesses is not yet complete and, indeed, not possible as the 
                                                 
19   See ECB (2007b), Box 7, on the propagation of the sub-prime shock to other markets. 
8 
 BIS Review 9/2008
   market adjustment is still ongoing. Nevertheless, I would like to highlight four areas that are 
also pertinent to the issues of financial integration and development we are discussing.  
• 
the 
imperfect 
information  available  about 
First, the underlying causes and triggers are to be found in the price dynamics of the 
US housing market and the excesses and shortcomings (in the practices) in the US 
sub-prime mortgage market. So, a main determining factor of the financial market 
turbulence  is  that  same  one  –  property  price  overvaluation  –  that  characterised 
previous episodes, as emphasised by Kenneth Rogoff.  
Second,  weaknesses  in  the  functioning  of  the  market  for  structured  finance 
products.  These  included  valuation  uncertainties  due  to  the  complexity  of  many 
products, 
the  underlying  asset 
characteristics,  inadequate  appreciation  by  investors  of  the  embedded  risks,  and 
excessive reliance on the ratings of such products by credit rating agencies.  
Third, weaknesses in the implementation of the “originate-and-distribute” model by 
banks  and  in  the  chain  of  distribution  and  acquisition  of  credit  risks.  These 
shortcomings included inappropriate incentive structures for banks, as well as other 
financial  entities  and  agents  in  the  securitisation  process,  which  fostered  moral 
hazard  and  contributed  to  the  inadequate  assessment  and  management  of  credit 
and funding-liquidity risk.  
Fourth,  the  role  and  features  of  new  financial  entities  –  the  off-balance  sheet 
conduits  and  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  –  which  were  linked  to  banks 
through  management  and  financing,  and  played  a  key  role  in  the  transmission  of 
tensions  from  the  structured  finance  product  markets  to  the  money  markets,  as  a 
result of the maturity mismatch on their balance sheets and the associated funding 
liquidity  risk.  The  creation  of  these  investment  vehicles  and  the  associated 
substantial off-balance sheet  exposures  of  banks  to  the  structured  credit  products 
was  the  unintended  consequence  of  regulatory  arbitrage,  and  reflected  the  poor 
assessment and management of the funding and market liquidity risks as well as the 
reputational risks faced by a number of banks. 
Overall, the weaknesses in the functioning of the financial system revealed by the financial 
market turmoil lead to the general conclusion that financial integration and development have 
not  been  accompanied  by  adequate  appreciation  of  risks,  effective  risk  management  and 
sufficient market discipline. The divergence between financial development, on the one hand, 
and sufficient discipline and effective risk management, on the other, should be bridged. This 
should be done not by measures that stifle financial innovation and market efficiency, but by 
actions and an institutional framework that encourage prudent behaviour and adequate risk 
assessment and management. More specifically, the securitisation of bank loans and other 
assets and the “originate and distribute” model should not be abandoned. Securitisation and 
the  new  bank  model  do  entail  economic  and  social  benefits  as  they  contribute  to  a  better 
allocation  of  financial  resources  and  a  wider  diversification  of  risks  across  markets  and 
frontiers. At the same time, it is evident that this bank model and the securitisation process 
should be strengthened by improving incentive structures, risk assessment and management 
practices, and by increasing transparency. Similarly, the structured finance market, in order 
to  be  revitalised,  will  require  actions  that  address  the  valuation  problems  and  increase 
transparency  and  disclosure,  so  as  to  enhance  the  understanding  and  assessment  of  the 
embedded risks and to improve the practices of agencies and financial entities involved in 
their  creation,  rating  and  distribution  of  such  products.  Standardisation  of  some  of  the 
structured finance products could facilitate the market’s functioning. More generally, the risk 
management  systems  and  practices  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  should  be 
further improved. This will require better and more extensive stress-testing in order to enable 
them to better assess the potential impact of tail risks and correlated risks. 
The  actions  needed  to  enhance  market  discipline  and  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  systems  are  currently  being  examined  both  by  market  participants  and  policy-
BIS Review 9/2008 
 9
makers.  The  recent  experience  has  provided  financial  institutions  and  other  markets 
participants  with  strong  incentives  to  address  the  weaknesses  revealed  in  various  ways, 
including  via  improved  transparency  about  exposures  and  greater  disclosure  of  risks  in 
products  and  processes.  Financial  regulators  and  supervisors  are  also  examining  ways  to 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  through  a  robust  framework  that  ensures 
adequate  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  and  encourages  market  discipline  and  promotes 
effective risk management. At global level, the Financial Stability Forum will present a report 
to the G7 Ministers and Governors in April 2008 which will include recommended actions to 
achieve these objectives. 
What has been the impact of financial globalisation in the unfolding of the ongoing financial 
turmoil? It is a key factor that had contributed to boosting market liquidity, reducing market 
volatility and fostering financial development in the preceding years. Moreover, it facilitated 
the propagation of shocks and the spreading of sub-prime related risks to Europe, as a result 
of  the  acquisition  of  large  exposures  by  European  banks  to  structured  finance  products 
based  on  bank  assets  originating  from  across  the  Atlantic  and  European  banks  major 
involvement in the dollar asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market, where, at a certain 
point in time, they accounted for about 50% of the funding. But, having said that, it would be 
wrong to conclude that financial globalisation is to be blamed for the financial turmoil as it 
cannot  be  considered  responsible  for  the  fundamental  causes  and  key  weaknesses  I 
identified  earlier  and  which  resulted  in  the  associated  mispricing  of  risks  and  the 
mismanagement  of  assets  and  liabilities  by  some  financial  institutions.  On  the  contrary, 
financial  globalisation  has  contributed,  other  things  being  equal,  through  international  risk-
sharing to cushioning the impact of shocks on national financial systems and economies and 
it  has  also  facilitated  the  boosting of  the  capital  buffers  and  the  restoration  of  the  balance 
sheets of banks weakened by the turmoil. 
Beneficial cooperation between authorities 
The  recent  financial  market  episode  has  highlighted  an  important  implication  of  financial 
integration for central banking: the usefulness of effective cooperation and coordinated action 
by  central  banks  in  managing  liquidity  and  ensuring  the  efficient  functioning  of  interbank 
money markets. It has also clearly shown the benefits of closer cooperation and improved 
information-sharing  between  financial  supervisors  and  central  banks.  Such  enhanced 
interaction would contribute to a better assessment of the potential systemic implications of 
financial shocks, and assist in addressing market tensions or problems faced by individual 
financial institutions. 
Globalisation, monetary policy and financial stability 
IV.  
There  is  one  final  and  important  issue  I  would  like  to  briefly  consider:  the  interrelation 
between  globalisation, monetary  policy  and  financial stability.  It  has  been  plausibly  argued 
that  globalisation  has  played  an  important  role  in  determining  the  low  level  of  world  real 
interest  rates,  for  example  as  a  result  of  emerging  market  savings  having  been  mainly 
invested in developed economies due to a lack of investment opportunities in the respective 
home  markets.20  This  has  induced  a  decline  in  the  equilibrium  global  real  interest  rates, 
which  monetary  policies  have  accommodated  with  low  nominal  interest  rates.21  Obviously 
there  remain  risks  associated  with  a  potential  abrupt  unwinding  of  global  imbalances  and 
investment strategies strongly influenced by a low interest rate environment. But monetary 
                                                 
20   See Caballero (2006). 
21   See Bernanke (2005). 
10 
 BIS Review 9/2008
policies  have  not  played  a  role  in  the  emergence  of  global  imbalances  and  associated 
financial stability risks. 
Alternatively, it has been argued that the benign effects of global competition and low-cost 
imports on consumer prices might have led to an underestimation of the stimulating effects of 
a monetary policy, which is consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium 
term, but which can be characterised as accommodative over the long term, as evidenced by 
buoyant credit and money growth over a prolonged period of time.22 A strong and persistent 
expansion of monetary liquidity could fuel or even trigger an asset price boom. During the 
bust phase of the asset price cycle, the associated credit crunch might lead to an economic 
downturn  and  a  negative  deviation  from  the  objective  of  consumer  price  stability,  and 
possibly even to deflation, which would exacerbate a financial crisis.  
An  environment  of  abundant  monetary  liquidity  can  affect  the  risk-taking  behaviour  of 
investors  and  financial  intermediaries.  Ample  monetary  liquidity  and  financial  market 
liquidity23 could be indicators of the ongoing execution of arbitrage strategies, such as carry 
trades, and short-termist or myopic “search-for-yield” behaviour, which can temporarily distort 
the  pricing  of  risk.24  It  is  not  low  inflation  itself  but  rather  low  rates  of  return,  which  could 
trigger  “searching-for-yield”  investment  strategies,  providing  financial  market  liquidity  to 
previously much less liquid markets and affecting relative asset prices.  
In  fact,  ECB  research  shows  that  there  is  evidence  that  monetary  liquidity  shocks  have 
played  a  role  in  driving  asset  prices,  particularly  housing  prices  across  OECD  countries, 
during the boom phase of asset price cycles, and that these shocks have also to explain the 
negative  effects  on  economic  activity  during  the  subsequent  bust  phase.25  The  intriguing 
aspect of this hypothesis, and of the associated empirical findings, is that the monetary policy 
stance  might  be  perfectly  appropriate  for  and  consistent  with  the  preservation  of  price 
stability over the medium term. Nevertheless, the potential implications for asset price boom-
and-bust-cycles could signal that the monetary policy stance could prove accommodative for 
maintaining price stability in the long run. 
The jury is still out concerning the final verdict as to which of the two views is right. In my 
opinion, however, one general conclusion is valid: a monetary policy strategy which carefully 
monitors money and credit developments is likely to contribute to the detection of potentially 
destabilising  financial  imbalances  is  likely  to  help  detect  potentially  destabilising  financial 
imbalances at an early stage.  
Conclusions 
V.  
Our  discussion  on  how  to  manage  globalisation  comes  at  a  difficult  moment  in  time,  a 
challenging  period  for  financial  markets  and  institutions  worldwide,  and  a  period  of 
heightened uncertainty about the potential impact of the ongoing reappraisal of risk on the 
real  economy.  This  makes  this  joint  intellectual  effort  to  understand  the  underlying 
mechanisms  and  forces  of  globalisation  even  more  topical,  and  our  joint  quest  to  identify 
ways to manage globalisation even more valuable.  
In  my  contribution,  focusing  on  the  central  banker’s  perspective,  I  argued,  first,  that 
globalisation  does  not  fundamentally  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in 
preserving  price  stability.  Although  the  channels  through  which  monetary  policy  affects 
economic  variables  are  certainly  influenced  by  globalisation,  the  respective  effects  are 
                                                 
22   See Borio and Lowe (2002). 
23   See ECB (2007a), Box 9 for an elaboration of the measurement of financial market liquidity. 
24   See Rajan (2005, 2006). 
25   Adalid and Detken (2007). 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 11
estimated to be small. Second, there is no doubt that financial globalisation has had positive 
effects on the efficiency of financial markets, on global risk-sharing and ultimately economic 
growth worldwide. That said, the current financial market turmoil also revealed a number of 
weaknesses in the globalised financial system, where tensions in one relatively small market 
segment in one country can rapidly spread across other markets and countries. One of the 
lessons  to  be  learnt  is  that  financial  market  integration  across  the  globe  needs  to  be 
accompanied  by  adequate  appreciation  of  risk,  effective  risk  management  and  sufficient 
market  discipline.  In  addition,  the  episode  has  underscored  the  benefits  of  effective 
coordination and, if necessary, joint action by central banks, as well as closer cooperation 
and  improved  information-sharing  between  financial  supervisors  and  central  banks.  Third, 
the  experience  of  the  ongoing  market  turmoil  has  highlighted  the  need  to  deepen  our 
understanding of how globalisation affects the complex and multi-faceted nexus of monetary 
policy and financial stability. At this juncture, it is more important than ever that central banks 
continue  to  pursue  their  primary  objective  of  price  stability  and  effectively  contribute  to 
safeguarding financial stability and preserving confidence. 
Thank you very much.  
References 
Adalid,  R.  and  C.  Detken  (2007),  “Liquidity  Shocks  and  Asset  Price  Boom/Bust  Cycles”, 
European Central Bank Working Paper Series, No. 732. 
Barro,  R.  J.  and  X.  Sala-i-Martin  (1990),  “World  Real  Interest  Rates”,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 5. 
Bean, C. (2006a), Comments on Ken Rogoff: “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy” at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  30th  Annual  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 26 August. 
Bean, C. (2006b), “Globalisation and Inflation”, Speech to LSE Economics Society, London 
School of Economics, 24 October. 
Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2005),  “The  Global  Savings  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, 10 March. 
Borio, C. and A. Filardo. (2007), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on 
the global determinants of domestic inflation”, BIS Working Papers No. 227. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the 
Nexus”, BIS Working Paper 114. Bank for International Settlements, Basel. 
Boivin,  J.  and  M.P.  Giannoni  (2006),  “Has  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  Effective?”,  The 
Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445-462, (January 2003) NBER Working Paper 
Series, No. 9459. 
Caballero, R. (2006), “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages”, NBER Working Paper 
Series, No. 12753. 
European Central Bank (2007a), Financial Stability Review, June.  
European Central Bank (2007b), Financial Stability Review, December. 
European  Central  Bank  (2008),  “Globalisation,  trade  and  the  euro  area  macroeconomy”, 
Monthly Bulletin, January, pp. 75-88  
Ferguson,  R.,  P.  Hartmann,,  F.  Panetta,  and  R.  Portes  (2007),  International  Financial 
Stability, IXth Geneva Report, ICMB, Geneva. 
Giannone,  D.,  M.  Lenza  and  L.  Reichlin  (2007),  “The  Equilibrium  Level  of  the  World  Real 
Interest  Rate”,  paper  presented  at  the  First  Annual  Risk  Management  Institute  Research 
12 
 BIS Review 9/2008
Conference “Capital Flows and Asset Price: The International Dimension of Risk”, Singapore 
6-7 July. 
Hartmann,  P.,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial 
markets and innovation in productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 72, 
September 
Ihrig,  J.,  S.B.  Kamin,  D.  Lindner  and  J.  Marques  (2007),  “Some  Simple  Tests  of  the 
Globalization  and  Inflation  Hypothesis”,  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, No. 891. 
Kose,  M.A.,  E.  S.  Prasad,  K.  Rogoff  and  S.-J.  Wei  (2006),  “Financial  Globalisation:  A 
Reappraisal”, NBER Working Paper 12484 
Kose,  M.  A.,  E.  S.  Prasad  and  M.  E.  Terrones  (2005),  “Growth  and  Volatility  in  an  Era  of 
Globalisations”, IMF Staff Papers, vol. 52, pp. 31-63 
Kose,  M.  A.,  E.  S.  Prasad,  and  M.  E.  Terrones  (2006),  “How  Do  Trade  and  Financial 
Integration Affect The Relationship Between Growth and Volatility?”, Journal of International 
Economics, vol. 69, pp. 176-202. 
Kroszner, R. S. (2007), “Globalization and Capital Markets: Implications for Inflation and the 
Yield  Curve”,  Remarks  at  the  Center  for  Financial  Stability  (CEF),  Buenos  Aires, 
Argentina,16 May. 
Pain, N., I. Koske and M. Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and inflation in the OECD economies”, 
OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 52,  
Pula, G. and F. Skudelny (2007), “The impact of rising imports from low-cost countries on 
euro  area  prices  and labour  markets  –  some  preliminary  findings”,  paper  presented  at  the 
ECB conference on “Globalisation and the macroeconomy”, July. 
Reichlin,  L.  (2006),  Panel  remarks  at  the  Thirteenth  International  Conference  “Financial 
Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment” Bank of Japan, Tokyo. 
Rajan,  R.  (2005),  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”  NBER  Working 
Paper No. 11728. 
Rajan, R. (2006), “Monetary Policy and Incentives”, in Fernández de Lis, S. and Restoy, F., 
Central Banks in the 21st Century, Proceedings of an international conference sponsored by 
the Banco de España; Madrid, Banco de España. 
Rogoff, K. (2004), “Globalization and Global Disinflation”, International Monetary Fund, paper 
prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “Monetary Policy and 
Uncertainty:  Adapting  to  a  Changing  Economy”,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  28-30  August 
2003. 
Rogoff,  K.  (2006),  “Impact  of  Globalization  on  Monetary  Policy”,  Harvard  University,  paper 
prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “The New Economic 
Geography: Effects and Policy Implications” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24-26 August. 
Woodford, M. (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control”, Colombia University (prepared 
for the NBER conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Barcelona, Spain, 
June 11-13, 2007). 
Wu,  T.  (2006),  “Globalization’s  Effect  on  Interest  Rates  and  the  Yield  Curve”,  Economic 
Letter – Insights from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Vol. 1, No. 9. 
 
 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 13
  14 
  BIS Review 9/2008
   15
BIS Review 9/2008 
    16 
 BIS Review 9/2008
   17
BIS Review 9/2008 
    18 
 BIS Review 9/2008
   19
BIS Review 9/2008 
    20 
 BIS Review 9/2008
   21
BIS Review 9/2008 
  22 
 BIS Review 9/2008
