Heng Swee Keat: A more challenging global and domestic economic 
environment 
Opening remarks by  Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Annual  Report  2007/2008  Press 
Conference, Singapore, 24 July 2008. 
 1. There is heightened uncertainty in the global economy and financial markets. The US sub-
prime mortgage crisis has led to financial turbulence that hit many American and European 
financial  institutions,  forcing  them  to  recapitalize  and  tighten  lending  standards.  These 
stresses  in  financial  markets  have  been  a  drag  on  economic  activity  in  the  industrialized 
countries  through  various  channels,  including  the  adjustment  in  the  housing  market  and 
wider credit spreads.  
2. The pace of US economic growth is slowing, constrained by the ongoing credit crisis, the 
unprecedented fall in the housing markets across the country, and rising commodity prices. 
In Europe and Japan, business expectations and consumer confidence continue to weaken. 
In Asia, growth has held up relatively well, helped in part by the robust expansion in China 
and India so far. Nonetheless, rising inflation will impact the real earnings of households and 
corporates in the region, with a concomitant pullback in spending. Overall, global growth is 
expected to fall to 2.9% this year from 3.8% in 2007. At the same time, inflation has emerged 
as  a  significant  risk  factor.  Slower  growth,  together  with  rising  inflationary  pressures, 
presents challenges for the global economy.  
3. In Singapore, economic activity is moderating. After 17 consecutive quarters of sequential 
expansion, the growth momentum has eased since the fourth quarter of 2007 as anticipated, 
to around the economy’s medium term potential. On average, GDP grew slightly over 4% in 
the first half of this year, registering 6.9% in the first quarter and 1.9% in the second quarter 
of 2008. The weaker performance in Q2 was due in part to a sharp decline in the output of 
the pharmaceutical sector, which can fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter because 
of company-specific production cycles.  
4.  In  the  coming  months,  activities  which  rely  directly  on  G3  demand,  such  as  electronics 
manufacturing, or are sentiment-driven like stockbroking, will be more adversely affected by 
the global headwinds. However, other industries including construction, marine and offshore 
engineering as well as financial intermediation services are expected to continue to provide 
support  to  GDP  growth  over  the  rest  of  2008.  Our  assessment  for  full-year  GDP  growth 
remains  at  4-6%.  Given  the  uncertainty  in  the  external  environment,  we  will  be  carefully 
monitoring the incoming data.  
5. CPI inflation came in at 7.5% in June, bringing the average for the first six months of this 
year  to  7.1%.  Global  oil  prices  had  surged  towards  the  end  of  May,  reaching  a  high  of 
US$147  per  barrel  (WTI)  in  mid-July.  Though  they  have  pulled  back  slightly,  prices  are 
currently  around  US$125,  up  from  US$98  in  Q1  this  year.  Our  major  trading  partners  are 
also facing a rise in inflationary pressures, as fuel subsidies were partially lifted in some of 
these countries. Apart from oil, food prices are expected to remain elevated, even as the rate 
of increase moderates. 
6.  These  external  developments  –  higher  oil  prices,  continued  high  prices  of  food,  and 
inflationary  pressures  in  our  trading  partners  –  have  affected  Singapore  because  of  our 
openness and heavy dependence on imports. We are thus revising our CPI inflation forecast 
for this year to 6-7%, compared to the earlier estimate of 5-6%. Given the outcome in the first 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 1
half  of  the  year,  the  new  forecast  range  implies  that  headline  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to 
come down over the rest of the year. There are several reasons for this: 
• 
• 
First, the one-off impact of the GST hike will cease to affect headline inflation in July. 
Second,  although  global  commodity  prices  are  likely  to  remain  high,  any  further 
price increases are expected to be milder, compared to the first half of the year.  
Third, there are early signs of an easing of domestic cost pressures as the economy 
slows and asset markets consolidate. The rate of increase in commercial rentals, for 
example,  appears  to  have  peaked.  Recent  employment  surveys  have  also  shown 
that  employers  have  become  more  cautious  about  hiring,  suggesting  that  the 
pressures on the labour market could ease. 
Fourth,  MAS  had  pursued  a  policy  of  targeting  an  appreciation  of  the  Singapore 
dollar  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  (S$NEER)  since  2004.  In  a  pre-emptive 
move, MAS further undertook a tightening of monetary policy in October 2007 and 
April 2008, even as there were heightened concerns over developments in the US 
economy. 
  7. Between April 2004 and June 2008, the S$NEER appreciated by 12.2%. Against the US$, 
the S$ appreciated by 23.4%. The policy moves have had a clear restraining effect on CPI 
inflation. For example, while WTI oil prices in US$ have increased by more than 70% from a 
year ago, domestic electricity tariffs and petrol prices rose by around 30% each. Similarly, 
while the IMF global food and beverage index has soared by 43% from a year ago, domestic 
food  prices  picked  up  by  a  more  moderate  9%.  The  effects  of  our  policy  tightening  will 
continue to restrain cost and price pressures going forward. 
8.  However,  we  cannot  totally  insulate  ourselves  from  the  increases  in  global  food  and  oil 
prices. Hence, we  must ensure that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored  and that 
external  price  changes  do  not  trigger  second  round  effects.  For  monetary  policy,  our 
objective continues to be price stability over the medium-term. At the same time, other policy 
responses,  as  well  as  changes  in  household  and  business  behaviour  have  been 
complementary toward this end. 
9.  MAS’  current  monetary  policy  stance  announced  on  10  April  2008  remains  appropriate 
given our assessment of current external economic developments. The next monetary policy 
statement will be released in October as scheduled.  
Financial stability 
10.  The  international  financial  system  and  the  global  economy  are  still  facing  significant 
challenges and downside risks. So far, prompt action by financial authorities in the US and 
Europe has helped avert a wider crisis. But financial markets remain uncertain and volatile. 
11.  Singapore  banks  have  limited  exposure  to  US  mortgage  related  securities,  and  they 
remain well capitalised. Over the past year, MAS has intensified our monitoring of financial 
markets and our supervision of financial institutions. We have also conducted stress tests of 
Singapore  banks  and  the  domestic  operations  of  the  large  foreign  banks  here,  and  the 
results reported by the banks showed them to be resilient. Nevertheless, there is no room for 
complacency. The current crisis provides important lessons on the areas we have to work on 
to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  Singapore  financial  system.  MAS  is  also  participating  in 
several  international  working  groups  that  are  reviewing  ways  to  strengthen  supervisory 
practices and standards.  
2 
 BIS Review 94/2008
Strengthening resilience: Basel II, liquidity management and standing facilities 
12. As new international regulatory standards and practices are finalised, MAS will consider 
strengthening our standards and market infrastructure where appropriate while taking care to 
avoid  a  disproportionate  response.  Let  me  highlight  three  areas,  where  we  had  started 
reviewing our regulatory framework before the crisis and have proceeded to implement these 
new measures to further strengthen the resilience of our financial system. 
13.  First,  an  area  found  to  be  wanting  elsewhere  in  the  credit  crisis  was  the  inadequate 
capital requirements that Basel I placed on banks in respect of their securitisation activities. 
On 1 January 2008, all Singapore-incorporated banks have adopted Basel II, a more risk-
sensitive  capital  framework.  The  greater  focus  on  enhancing  internal  risk  management 
required  under  this  new  framework  is  especially  timely  given  the  volatile  and  uncertain 
environment. 
14. Second, MAS has been working on improving liquidity risk management of banks before 
the  current  crisis.  Events  in  recent  months  reinforced  the  critical  importance  of  liquidity 
management. To enable banks to better manage their liquidity risk, MAS has put in place a 
revised Minimum Liquid Assets framework. Banks can apply to adopt a more risk-sensitive 
methodology for determining their regulatory liquidity reserves, which takes into account their 
risk management capability.  
15.  Third,  at  the  macro-level,  to  enhance  liquidity  management  in  the  system,  we  will  be 
making some changes to the MAS Standing Facility that has been in place since June 2006.  
16.  The  Standing  Facility  allows  banks  to  place  excess  funds  with  or  borrow  from  MAS 
against Singapore Government Securities collateral. This has helped to moderate intra-day 
volatility  in  interest  rates  as  banks  can  avoid  any  undue  scramble  to  square  large,  and 
potentially destabilising, positions in the market. The Standing Facility is currently open to the 
11  Primary  Dealer  banks  which  are  the  most  active  banks  in  the  Singapore  dollar  money 
market.  Non-Primary  Dealer  banks  could  access  the  Facility  through  the  Primary  Dealer 
banks. 
17. While the existing arrangement has worked well, experience in other developed markets 
has  also  demonstrated  that  such  a facility  is  particularly  useful  in  times  of  unusual  market 
volatility, as this enhances confidence that liquidity needs in the banking system will be met.  
18.  Hence,  to  enhance  the  robustness  of  the  system,  MAS  will  widen  participation  in  the 
Standing  Facility  to  MEPS+  participating  banks,  subject  to  necessary  documentation.  The 
PSA/ISMA Global Master Repurchase Agreement continues to be a requirement for banks to 
access the borrowing facility which will remain collateralised against Singapore Government 
Securities. We will provide more details on this to the banks over the next few weeks. 
Corporate governance, market conduct 
19. Apart from dealing with issues relating to the safety and soundness of banks, and the 
stability of financial system, MAS has also been working on improving the responsiveness of 
our rules, as well as on improving corporate governance and market conduct. 
20.  MAS  is  proposing  amendments  to  the  Securities  and  Futures  Act  and  the  Financial 
Advisers  Act.  The  amendments  aim  to  facilitate  new  business  activities  and  products  in 
response to market needs, to enhance the market misconduct enforcement framework and 
to fine-tune the legislation to achieve greater clarity, consistency and operational efficiency. 
Policy  and  legislative  consultation  on  the  proposed  amendments  to  the  Acts  have  already 
been conducted. We will table the Amendment Bills within the next few months. 
21.  To  continue  to  strengthen  corporate  governance,  MAS,  together  with  Accounting  and 
Corporate  Regulatory  Authority  (ACRA)  and  SGX,  have  established  an  industry-led  Audit 
Committee Guidance Committee (ACGC). The ACGC will develop guidance to assist audit 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 3
committees better understand and carry out their role and responsibilities. MAS, ACRA and 
SGX  are  also  working  with  the  Singapore  Institute  of  Directors  to  review  the  professional 
development of directors in Singapore. 
22.  In  the  area  of  insurance,  we  have  set  out  mandatory  requirements  to  strengthen  life 
insurers’ internal governance practices on the management of their participating funds and 
enhance  disclosure  standards  to  participating  stakeholders.  To  enable  policyholders  to 
access  a  wider  and  more  cost  effective  range  of  Investment-Linked  Insurance  Products 
(ILPs), MAS revised ILP rules. 
Singapore’s financial sector 
23. Let me now turn to the performance of our financial sector. Notwithstanding the onset of 
the global financial turmoil towards the end of the year, the domestic financial services sector 
recorded  strong  growth  in  2007.  Growth  was  broad-based,  across  all  segments  of  the 
industry. Domestic non-bank credit registered strong gains while the Asian Dollar Market also 
strengthened. 
24. Singapore’s financial centre continues to grow in diversity. We remain the largest REITs 
centre  in  Asia-ex-Japan,  and  a  pipeline  of  business  trusts  in  sectors  such  as  shipping, 
aviation and infrastructure is being developed. A broad suite of instruments from FX, fixed 
income,  derivatives  to  commodities  are  now  traded  here,  contributing  to  the  growth  of 
Singapore as a trading hub. Activities in Islamic Finance are growing with the entry of new 
players, and MAS is honoured to host the 6th Islamic Financial Services Board Summit in 
May next year. 
25.  The  asset  management  industry  in  particular  has  shown  robust  growth  in  2007.  Our 
latest  Asset  Management  survey  shows  that  the  industry  has  continued  its  strong  double-
digit growth for the seventh year, with a 32% increase in assets under management (AUM), 
reaching almost S$1.2 trillion for the year 2007. In tandem with this growth, the number of 
investment professionals rose by about 22% to close to 2,200.  
26.  Reflecting  Singapore’s  role  as  an  international  financial  centre,  the  sources  of  assets 
managed in Singapore as well as their investment destination remains diversified. The Asia-
Pacific region continues to be a key driver of growth for the industry. More than 80% of the 
total AUM was sourced from outside Singapore with Asia-Pacific accounting for 44% of the 
total. Almost 60% of the funds managed in Singapore are invested in the Asia-Pacific region.  
27.  The  asset  management  industry  has  also seen  a  greater  diversity  in  terms  of  players, 
strategies  and  products.  Large  traditional  managers  continue  to  expand  and  anchor  their 
investment  capabilities  here.  Singapore  has  also  grown  in  importance  as  a  centre  for 
alternative  investments  such  as  hedge  funds,  private  equity  and  real  estate.  The  strong 
growth  of  the  asset  management  industry  has  in  turn  drawn  in  several  ancillary  service 
providers  such  as  fund  administrators  and  prime  brokers.  All  these  developments  reflect 
Singapore’s ideal position for asset managers to deepen and broaden their activities in the 
Asian time-zone.  
Annual accounts 
28. On our financial statements, MAS recorded a net profit of S$7.44 billion for the financial 
year.  The  profits  comprised  mainly  interest  income,  as  changes  in  the valuation  of  foreign 
assets and the foreign exchange effects of a stronger Singapore dollar largely offset each 
other. Total assets, including the Currency Fund, grew by S$35.58 billion during the year to 
S$253.79 billion at end-March 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2008
Remaining vigilant 
29. We need to remain vigilant in the face of a number of risks in the global economic and 
financial  environment.  We  will  continue  to  work  closely  with  the  industry  to  identify 
vulnerabilities and threats to financial stability through macro surveillance and stress testing. 
MAS’ work in the coming year will continue to be driven by our mission of supporting non-
inflationary economic growth, and fostering a sound and reputable financial centre. 
30. Thank you. 
BIS Review 94/2008 
 5
