Stanley Fischer: Main aspects of the new law for the Bank of Israel 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the conference in 
memory of the late Amnon Ben-Natan, Tel Aviv, 3 January 2008. 
 In the course of the last 25 years central banking has undergone a significant change, partly 
in reaction to the inflation of the 1970s and 1980s. These changes had a marked effect on 
Israel’s central bank too. 
This evening I would like to speak about the main aspects of the new central bank law on 
which we are working with the government; we hope that in the near future a new bill will be 
submitted  to  the  Knesset,  which  will  become  a  modern  law  governing  the  Bank  of  Israel. 
Before  speaking  about  the  law,  I  will  describe  two  basic  changes  in  the  attitude  towards 
central banking that have taken place over the last decades: first, the emphasis placed on 
the independence  of  the  central  bank  as  a  major  factor  in  the  successful  fulfillment  of  its 
functions and achievement of its objectives; second, the need for central bank transparency 
and  accountability  relating  to  its  monetary  policy,  regarding  both  the  analysis  of  the  data 
underlying its decisions and the results of the policy. 
Central bank independence 
1.  
In  the  1990s  researchers  began  to  examine  the  link  between  central  bank  independence, 
inflation and economic growth, and to make international comparisons. Professor Cukierman 
was among the pioneers in this field. The meaning of independence in the case of a central 
bank refers to its authority to make decisions without having to obtain approval for them from 
sources outside the bank. 
The findings of the research were clear: a country that strengthens the independence of its 
central bank can expect lower inflation at no cost in terms of growth. 
This lesson, and experience gained in countries with independent central banks, especially 
Germany, also had an effect on decision makers. With the establishment of the European 
Monetary  Union,  the  formation  of  the  new  republics  following  the  break-up  of  the  Soviet 
Union, and the democratization process in Latin America, new laws were passed for many 
central  banks,  and  in  all  cases  the  emphasis  was  on  their  independence.  The  most  well-
known and notable instance is the United Kingdom: the first economic decision of the Blair 
government  elected  in  1997  on  taking  office  was  to  grant  independence  to  the  Bank  of 
England. Till then it had not been independent, and interest rate decisions were taken by the 
Treasury.  In  light  of  the  significant  improvement  in  the  economy  in  the  last  ten  years, 
particularly  with  regard  to  inflation  and  steady  growth,  it  is  clear  that  that  government 
decision proved to be a very wise one. 
The  independence  of  central  banks  is  vital  for  their  success  in  carrying  out  their  functions 
and achieving their goals. Why is that? The answer is that democracies have an inflationary 
bias. There are two reasons for this: 
The  first  is  that  an  expansionary  interest  rate  policy,  i.e.,  a  reduction  in  the  interest  rate, 
tends to have a positive effect, mainly on GDP, and only later does it lead to inflation, and 
since  governments  in  democracies  generally  have  a  short-term  horizon,  this  leads  to  a 
preference  for  interest  rate  reductions.  This  tendency  is  most  marked  in  the  approach  to 
elections. An independent central bank can make decisions with a view to the long term, and 
can ignore political pressures. 
The  second  reason  is  that  the  central  bank  can  finance  government  activity  by  printing 
money,  which  results  in  inflation.  It  is  very  easy/convenient  for  the  government  to  request 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
financing from the central bank, instead of imposing taxes or trying to raise money by issuing 
bonds  on  the  financial  markets.  In  the  well-known  words  of  Keynes  in  the  period  of 
hyperinflation in Europe after World War I: 
“A government can live for a long time, even the German 
Government or the Russian Government, by printing paper 
money… A government can live by this means when it can live by 
no other. It is the form of taxation which the public finds it hardest 
to evade and even the weakest government can enforce.” 
This  situation  was  a  familiar  one  in  Israel  in  the  early  1980s,  until  an  end  was  put  to  it  in 
1985, when as part of the Economic Stabilization Program the law known as the “No Printing 
Law”  was  passed.  This  law  prohibited  the  central  bank  from  providing  loans  to  the 
government,  and  in  practice  was  the  first  step  towards  the  independence  of  the  Bank  of 
Israel.  Unfortunately,  no  progress  was  made  since  then  with  regard  to  the  Bank’s 
independence. 
This did not happen only in Israel. Throughout the world, in the course of the last 25 years 
central banks have been granted independence. Why did governments give independence to 
their central banks and relinquish the ability to obtain finance from them and to influence their 
interest rate policy? 
a. 
Governments understood that without giving their central banks independence, they 
would  probably  find  themselves  in  situations  of  high  inflation,  as  happened  in  the 
1970s and 1980s. 
They  also  realized  that  the  economy  performs  better  with  an  independent  central 
bank. 
A  by-product  of  the  above  was  that  globalization  had  the  effect  of  increasing  the 
importance of central bank independence, in light of the importance that domestic 
and foreign investors afford to that factor as a major consideration in their decisions 
about the countries in which to invest. 
b. 
c. 
This was supported by the findings of the 2005 study by Professor Alex Cukierman, which 
confirmed  his  earlier  results:  the  independence  of  central  banks  and  price  stability  are 
positively  correlated.  Over  and  beyond  that,  central  bank  independence  is  positively 
correlated with high, steady growth, price stability and low rates of interest. 
There are two types of central bank independence: 
a. 
Target  independence:  this  is  the  case  with  central  banks  such  as  the  European 
Central Bank (ECB) that set their own monetary policy targets, such as the inflation 
target.  These  central  banks  also  have  the  resources  with  which  to  achieve  their 
targets. 
Tool  independence:  this  is  the  situation  in  which  the  government  determines  the 
targets for the central bank, e.g., the inflation target, and it is up to the central bank 
to employ the tools available, generally the interest rate, to achieve those objectives. 
Most  central  banks  have  this  independence,  and  in  practice  so  does  the  Bank  of 
Israel. In my opinion, this is the preferred and proper situation for democracies. 
b. 
I  would  like  to  stress  a  very  important  point:  an  integral  feature  of  central  banks’ 
independence  throughout  the  world  is  their  administrative  independence.  This  is  a  vital 
condition, as it prevents external and interested parties from obtaining the means that they 
could  use  to  try  to  undermine  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to  make  its  decisions 
independently. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
Central bank transparency and accountability 
2.  
The  independence  of  a  central  bank,  especially  in  democracies,  must  be  accompanied  by 
the bank’s responsibility to account for its policies and the achievement of its objectives. For 
that  purpose  it  is  necessary  to  provide  it  with  clearly  defined  targets  against  which  its 
performance can be measured. 
It  is  thus  important  that  the  central  bank  submit  a  regular  report  to  the  legislature, 
government  and  public  on  its  policy  and  the  achievement  of  its  goals.  The  report  should 
describe the decisions made and the reasons behind them, the instruments employed and 
how they were operated, the resources employed and how they were used, etc. Thus, for 
example,  with  regard  to  interest  rate  policy,  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Israel, 
usually  publish  annual  reports,  economic  forecasts,  periodic  inflation  reports,  minutes  of 
interest rate discussions, press releases on decisions taken, etc. 
This 
transparency  and  accountability  ensures  an  open  channel  of 
communication between the central bank and the public in general, and the financial markets 
in  particular,  and  constitutes  an  important  mechanism  of  control  over  the  central  bank,  its 
management and its policies. It enables the central bank to stay attuned to public criticism, 
and  it  enables  the  public  to  better  understand  the  functions,  policy,  decisions  and 
achievements of the central bank. 
The  two  subjects  I  have  spoken  about  so  far,  central  bank  independence  and  the 
requirement for transparency and accountability incumbent on the central bank lead me to 
my main subject this evening. 
framework  of 
The new law for the Bank of Israel 
3.  
The  current  Bank  of  Israel  Law  dates  back  to  1954,  and  is  not  appropriate  either  to  the 
current reality of Israel’s modern economy, or to the global economy. Although amendments 
have  been  introduced  into  the  law  that  grant  the  Bank  of  Israel  a  greater  measure  of 
independence, in particular the “No Printing Law”, the Bank’s de jure independence is more 
restricted  than  its  de  facto  independence.  It  is  therefore  important  to  bridge  the  gap  by 
passing a new law that will provide a proper legal basis for the reality that has been created. 
The new law will clearly define the independence of the Bank, its goals, and the mechanisms 
for  decision  making,  and  should  impose  on  the  Bank  a  comprehensive  framework  of 
transparency  and  accountability.  The  new  law  should  thus  contain  the  correct  mixture  of 
independence, transparency and control mechanisms for the Bank of Israel, according to the 
generally accepted standards in the advanced economies. 
In my first few months as Governor of the Bank we cooperated with the Ministry of Finance, 
the  Prime  Minister’s  Office  and  the  Ministry  of  Justice  in  producing  a  bill.  We  made  good 
progress, but decided to shelve the matter until a new Bank of Israel wage agreement was 
reached, and that took longer than we had anticipated. We are now reverting to this issue, 
and I hope that we will soon have a final version. 
Independence 
a. 
The new law will give the Bank of Israel instrumental independence, i.e., independence in 
making the decisions on the interest rate as needed to perform its functions and reach its 
goals. And as I stated above, this independence must also be reflected in the management 
of the Bank. 
Defining the targets 
b. 
The new law should clearly define the Bank of Israel’s targets, along the lines of the targets 
of other modern central banks. The modern approach, and that adopted in the major central 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
banks  such  as  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  ECB,  generally  define  three  targets,  and 
determines their order of priorities. The targets, I order of their importance in the proposed 
law, are: 1) the achievement and maintenance of price stability; 2) subject to that, support for 
the  government’s  other  economic  objectives,  headed  by  growth  and  employment;  and  3) 
support for the economy’s financial stability. 
Decision making 
c. 
This  divides  into  two  subjects  –  decisions  on  interest  rate  policy  and  decisions  on  the 
management of the Bank. 
Monetary policy – the Monetary Committee 
i. 
In a small number of countries, including New Zealand, Canada and Israel, the governor of 
the central bank makes the decision on the interest rate. In most countries that decision is 
made by a  monetary committee that operates in the central bank. Generally the monetary 
committee has some members from outside the central bank and some from within, with the 
governor of the bank heading the committee. This is the preferred model, as has been shown 
in  many  studies,  because  decisions  reached  by  a  committee  are  on  average  better  than 
those made by one person. In addition, the participation of external members, who are not 
beholden to the central bank or its governor but are committed to the attainment of the target 
set for the bank, is an important part of the mechanism of external control over the bank’s 
policy. 
Management of the Bank – the Administrative Council 
ii.  
The  new  Bank  of  Israel  Law  will  specify  an  administrative  council  alongside  the  monetary 
committee, with an absolute majority of external members, one of whom will serve as chair of 
the council. The Governor and Deputy Governor will serve as members. This model is the 
one  followed  in  several  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  Bank  of 
England. 
The  role  of  the  council will  be  to  make  decisions  related  to  the  management  of  the  Bank, 
such as approving work plans, the Bank’s budget and wages. The council will also appoint 
an audit committee from among its external members. All this is intended to provide another 
system of external control over the activities of the Bank. 
To adhere to the principle of the Bank’s independence, and its professional expertise, it is 
essential  that  the  external  members  of  the  monetary  committee  and  the  administrative 
council, who will be appointed by the government, should be experts in the relevant fields, 
free of conflict of interests, and independent of the government and political institutions. 
Transparency and accountability 
d.  
The new Bank of Israel Law will require the Bank to account for its decisions, policies and 
achievements  in  a  clear,  ordered  fashion,  by  means  of  reports  to  the  Knesset,  the 
government and the public, in line with the practice in the leading central banks. This is part 
of  the  gamut  of  the  areas  of  the  Bank’s  responsibilities  that  includes  the  Monetary 
Committee, the Administrative Council, and the Governor. 
In its reports the Bank will explain the considerations underlying its decisions, including the 
relevant  information  available  at  the  time,  economic  forecasts,  and  how  it  views  expected 
economic  developments.  The  reports  will  include  inflation  reports  and  periodic  reports, 
minutes  of  the  discussions  of  the  Monetary  Committee,  press  releases,  etc.  The  Bank  of 
Israel, even prior to the enactment of the new law, already publishes an extensive range of 
reports as per the list above. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
The  issue  of  new  and  modern  legislation  for  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  been  on  the  public 
agenda since the beginning of the 1990s. At the end of 1998 the public committee headed by 
the  late  Judge  Dov  Levin  –  whose  members,  including  Professor  Alex  Cukierman  and 
Professor  Haim  Ben-Shahar,  were  experts  on  the  subject  –  submitted  very  precise 
proposals. The proposals were made following an extensive professional review based inter 
alia  on  developments  in  this  field  throughout  the  world,  particularly  in  the  advanced 
economies. In addition, after I took office as Governor of the Bank, the government made a 
decision adopting the principles that would be incorporated in the new Bank of Israel Law, 
and this in the spirit of the recommendations of the Levin Committee and developments in 
this area around the world. 
All that remains now is to complete the legislative process as quickly as possible. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 5
