Jürgen Stark: Monetary policy during the financial turmoil – what have 
we learned? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “The ECB and its Watchers X”, Frankfurt am Main, 5 September 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  begin  my  remarks  this  morning  by  recognising  the  contribution  made  by  this 
conference  over  the  past  ten  years  to  the  ECB’s  communication  with  market  participants, 
journalists and academics. While the issues have evolved over time, these conferences have 
invariably  served  to  improve  the  transparency  and  understanding  of  the  monetary  policy 
process. I trust that this tradition will be continued today. 
The past thirteen months have been the most challenging of the ECB’s ten-year history, both 
for  the  ECB  itself  and  for  other  central  banks  across  the  globe.  We  have  experienced 
significant, multiple and coincident shocks, notably the emergence of financial tensions and 
sustained  significant  increases  in  commodity  prices.  The  latter  has  led  to  worryingly  high 
rates  of  inflation.  These  shocks  have  created  an  extremely  complex  and  challenging 
environment  for  central  banks.  Many  observers  and  commentators  have  characterised  us 
and our monetary policy as facing a dilemma – or even a trilemma – as we simultaneously 
confront 
• 
• 
• 
How have we addressed these challenges at the ECB? Have we ever been in a dilemma – 
or  trilemma  –  situation.  I  will  demonstrate  how  certain  longstanding  principles  of  sound 
central banking – which were embedded in our monetary policy framework from the outset – 
have guided our deliberations and actions through the recent turbulent times. On the basis of 
our experience during this challenging period, I will then distil a few key lessons for central 
banks, in particular regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
inflation rates rising to levels not consistent with price stability 
a slowdown of economic activity 
and threats to financial stability. 
The principles of sound monetary policy making 
2.  
The  cumulated  experiences  of  central  banks  over  a  long  period  of  time,  together  with 
developments  in  modern  economic  theory,  have  forged  a  set  of  widely-accepted  general 
principles for the conduct of sound monetary policy. As a starting point, allow me to list the 
most important ones:  
First,  monetary  policy  must  be  given  a  clear  and  unambiguous  mandate  to  maintain  price 
stability. Ever since the classic contributions of Tinbergen and Theil,1 it has been recognised 
that a central bank endowed with one policy instrument can only pursue one goal. Given the 
“long-run neutrality” of money and monetary policy – surely one of the most widely-accepted 
principles  in  modern  macroeconomic  thinking  –  the  only  feasible  objective  for  monetary 
                                                 
1   See Tinbergen (1952) and Theil (1961). 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 1
policy is to control the price level, since ultimately it is impotent with respect to the level of 
real income or employment. 2
Second, the central bank must be credible in its commitment to deliver this objective. Private 
longer-term inflation expectations must be securely anchored at levels consistent with price 
stability.3 To achieve this, the central bank must always be ready – and be seen to be ready 
–  to  take  whatever  action  is  necessary  to  deliver  price  stability.  Making  this  commitment 
credible requires, in turn, that the  central bank operates under the appropriate institutional 
set-up  and  that  it  develops,  over  time,  a  track  record  demonstrating  its  willingness  and 
capacity to act so as to maintain price stability. 
Third, the central bank must be independent of political influence. A large body of theoretical 
and  empirical  literature  has  established  that  central  bank  independence  is  conducive  to 
maintaining price stability.4 Given the many short-term pressures they face to deviate from 
the objective of price stability, the involvement of politicians in monetary policy only serves to 
undermine its credibility and thereby its effectiveness.  
Fourth, so as to maintain its legitimacy, an institution endowed with independence to pursue 
a specific public objective must act in a transparent manner. Transparency and accountability 
also buttress the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to price stability, by ensuring 
that  the  public  understand  that  the  motivation  behind  monetary  policy  decisions  is  the 
achievement of the primary objective. 
Fifth, monetary policy must maintain a medium-term orientation. The long and variable lags 
that characterise the monetary policy transmission process make it impossible for monetary 
policy  to  offset  the  inevitable  unanticipated  shocks  that  buffet  the  economy  and  the  price 
level  in  the  short-run.  Attempts  to  “fine  tune”  inflation  developments  on  a  month-to-month 
basis are doomed to fail and would only introduce additional unnecessary volatility into the 
economy.  
Sixth, monetary policy must be underpinned by a comprehensive analytical framework, which 
ensures that all information needed to take monetary policy decisions is available to policy 
makers in a form that supports efficient and timely decision-making. Given the importance to 
maintaining  credibility  and  a  medium-term  orientation,  such  a  framework  must  include  a 
thorough analysis of monetary and credit developments, reflecting the necessarily monetary 
nature of inflation over the longer term. 
Finally, a clear distinction must be maintained between: on the one hand, the determination 
of the monetary policy stance required to maintain price stability; and, on the other hand, the 
provision of liquidity to the money market. This so-called “ separation principle” ensures that 
the  specification  and  conduct  of  refinancing  operations  are  not  interpreted  by  market 
participants as signals of future changes in the monetary policy stance. At the same time, it 
maintains  the  focus  of  the  monetary  policy  decisions  firmly  on  the  delivery  of  the  primary 
objective, thereby avoiding dilution or complication stemming from competing considerations 
regarding the functioning of the short-term money markets. 
The  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  is  firmly  grounded  in  this  set  of  interrelated  and  mutually 
reinforcing core principles. Some are embedded in the institutional framework of the ECB. In 
particular,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  assigns  the  ECB  the  primary  objective  to  maintain  price 
stability and endows us with the necessary independence to pursue this goal.  
                                                 
2   See, for instance, Lucas (1997). 
3   The  importance  of  expectations  in  economic  behaviour,  including  price  and  wage  setting  decisions,  was 
formalised in the seminal contribution of Phelps (1967). 
4   See, for instance, Rogoff (1985), Alesina (1988, 1989) and Grilli et al. (1991). 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2008
Other principles have guided the design of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. The strategy 
represents  a  framework  for  taking  and  communicating  monetary  policy  decisions  so  as  to 
deliver price stability. It embodies a quantitative definition of price stability, which promotes 
transparency  about  our  objective  and  serves  as  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations.  The 
strategy is clearly geared towards the medium term, as it emphasises that price stability will 
be  maintained  over  this  horizon.  Moreover,  the  strategy  represents  a  comprehensive 
framework  for  analysis.  In  particular,  it  encompasses  two  distinct,  but  complementary, 
perspectives  for  assessing  the  available  data  –  an  economic  analysis  and  a  monetary 
analysis  –  which  help  to  organise,  evaluate  and  cross-check  the  large  set  of  information 
relevant for assessing risks to price stability. The prominent role assigned to money in the 
strategy provides a nominal anchor which helps to cement the credibility of our commitment 
to price stability and to underpin the medium-term orientation of our policy.  
The  key  principles  I  have  listed  are  also  embodied  in  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework for the implementation of the monetary policy. This framework strives to ensure 
that money market interest rates at the very short end of the yield curve remain in line with 
the level of interest rates decided by the Governing Council. A broad set of instruments and 
procedures  are  available  to  achieve  this  aim.  Crucially,  at  all  times  this  function  has  been 
clearly distinguished from the determination of the monetary policy stance, thereby ensuring 
adherence  to  the  separation  principle.  This  has  supported  the  “neutrality”  of  liquidity 
operations  with  respect  to  monetary  policy  decisions:  the  specification  and  result  of  such 
operations are neither intended to offer, nor have been understood as offering, signals about 
future Governing Council decisions on key ECB interest rates. 
Finally,  an  overarching  characteristic  of  our  monetary  policy  framework  is  the  premium 
attached to transparency. This is illustrated in the clear formulation of our objective and the 
extensive  documentation,  for  instance,  of  our  strategy,  our  analytical  framework  and  our 
assessment. Indeed this series of conferences is testament to the ECB’s commitment to the 
principle of transparency. 
I regard this set of principles as indispensable elements of best practice in central banking. In 
this  respect,  they  play  a  very  important  role  in  monetary  policymaking,  regardless  of  the 
prevailing economic conditions. The significant success of the ECB and the single monetary 
policy over the past ten years is grounded in adherence to the principles.  
Yet the experience of the past year has shown that adhering to these principles is particularly 
important  in  more  challenging  times,  such  as  those  characterised  by  the  ongoing  financial 
market tensions and recent commodity price surges. In the remainder of my remarks, I would 
like to focus more specifically on a few of these principles that have proven to be particularly 
relevant in guiding our policy in this environment. 
Monetary policy during the financial market tensions 
3.  
From the end of 2005, the Governing Council had gradually been raising key ECB interest 
rates in order to address the upside risks to price stability over the medium term implied by 
vigorous growth of broad money and credit aggregates and increasing resource constraints. 
This  process  was  ongoing  in  the  summer  of  2007,  and,  following  the  Governing  Council’s 
decision  to  hike  rates  in  June,  market  participants  expected  further  increases  in  key  ECB 
rates in the second half of the year. It was in this context that significant financial tensions, 
initially in the money market, emerged in early August. 
The monetary policy stance 
a)  
With  the  onset  of  these  financial  tensions,  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  the 
prospects for the euro area economy and the outlook for price developments became subject 
to  heightened  uncertainty,  as  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy  increased  with  the  emergence  of  turbulence  in  the money  market.  Moreover,  it  was 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 3
unclear what implications the – possibly temporarily – high market interest rates (and rising 
spreads  between  market  and  policy  rates)  would  have  for  spending  and  pricing  decisions 
and the availability of credit. Characterising the monetary policy stance in this context was 
particularly  complex,  and  caution  was  needed  when  assessing  the  potential  impact  of 
financial tensions on the real economy and the outlook for price stability. 
In this challenging environment, having a single, clear and unambiguous objective helped to 
focus  attention  on  the  fulfilment  of  our  mandate,  at  a  time  when  many  siren  voices  were 
calling for actions in other directions. In turn, this clear focus supported our credibility with the 
markets and public, while the quantitative definition of price stability provided an anchor for 
inflation expectations. Moreover, our monetary policy strategy ensured that the appropriate 
medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  was  maintained.  Maintaining  such  a  medium-
term  perspective  ensured  that  we  were  not  unduly  influenced  by  market  developments, 
which  –  particularly  in  a  context  of  heightened  tensions  –  can  be  rather  excessive  and 
perhaps near-sighted.5  
These characteristics of the monetary policy strategy imparted a “steady-handedness” to our 
policy decisions, even in the face of the challenges posed by financial market tensions. As a 
result,  we  have  avoided  a  “go-stop”  type  of  policy,  which  is  well  known  to  have  plagued 
economies  in  the  past.6  Rather  than  becoming  an  additional  source  of  uncertainty  and 
volatility in a challenging period, our steady-handed approach has led monetary policy to be 
a  crucial  element  of  stability.  Importantly,  this  steady-handedness  has  bolstered  the 
credibility  of  our  commitment  to  deliver  our  objective  of  price  stability  and  has  therefore 
contributed to ensuring that inflation expectations in the euro area remain firmly anchored. 
The role of monetary analysis 
b) 
The prominent role our strategy assigns to money was instrumental in this respect. Paying 
due attention to trend developments in money has helped us to look through the transient 
impact of the many temporary shocks that buffet the economy, to act in a consistent manner 
over  time  and  to  maintain  our  focus  on  the  medium-term  horizon,  when  the  effect  of 
monetary policy on its primary objective – price stability – will materialise in full. In addition, 
the monetary analysis has ensured that due consideration is given in policy discussions to 
underlying developments in the level of key nominal variables, thereby supporting the focus 
of policy discussions on our mandate. 
As  financial  tensions  emerged,  the  policy-relevant  signal  extracted  from  the  broad  based 
monetary analysis conducted at the ECB confirmed that liquidity in the euro area was ample 
and continued to increase at buoyant rates. The monetary analysis therefore clearly signalled 
that medium-term risks to price stability continued to increase. This insight was crucial to the 
formulation  of  our  policy  response  to  the  financial  market  tensions.  Given  that  the  risks 
identified have materialised as inflation has trended upwards over recent months, this signal 
does not seem to have been inappropriate, when assessed now with the benefit of hindsight.  
The  identification  of  the  policy-relevant  signal  in  money  contained  in  its  lower-frequency 
developments  involves  “filtering”  the  monetary  data  in  order  to  quantify  and  remove  short-
term “noise”. The filtering process entails an encompassing and detailed examination of bank 
balance sheet data, including the components, counterparts and sectoral contributions to the 
monetary  aggregates.  This  is  complemented  by  an  analysis  of  the  balance  sheets  of 
households,  non-financial  corporations  and  other  financial  intermediaries,  as  well  as  a 
comprehensive  overview  of  the  relevant  financial  and  economic  indicators.  In  practice,  all 
                                                 
5   Blinder has formulated a “Law of Speculative Markets: the markets normally get the sign right, but exaggerate 
the magnitude by a factor between three and ten” (Blinder, 1997). 
6   On “go-stop” monetary policy, see Goodfriend (1997) and the references cited therein. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2008
these  assessments  are  supported  by  a  range  of  models,  statistical  tools  and  expert 
judgement.  
In  an  environment  characterised  by  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial  markets,  such 
analysis merely serves to identify those short-term distortions of the monetary data that are 
not related to medium-term inflation dynamics; the “noise” identified as a by-product of the 
process is of little interest in its own right.  
However,  in  the  context  of  financial  tensions,  those  elements  that  have  typically  been 
regarded as short-term noise have been found to offer important insights into the behaviour 
of the banking sector and, more broadly, how tensions in the money market and shocks to 
bank  capital  have  influenced  the  financial  system  and  the  economy.  In  particular,  such 
insights have helped to inform our assessment of the conditions facing the financial sector 
and, importantly, the availability of financing to the non-financial sector.  
As an example of this type of analysis, consider the following. Last autumn, it was argued by 
many  commentators  that  the  continued  buoyancy  of  lending  to  the  non-financial  private 
sector  in  the  euro  area  was  misleading,  because  it  represented  “re-intermediation”  effects 
triggered  by  the  tensions  themselves.  In  other  words,  it  was  suggested  that  the  loan  data 
were  distorted  by  the  inability  of  banks  to  shift  loans  off  their  balance  sheets,  given  the 
effective closure of the securitisation market. As a result, these loans had to be retained on 
banks’ balance sheets and therefore boosted the lending figures. Careful analysis revealed, 
however, that owing to the accounting framework underlying the statistical reporting in some 
euro area countries, the scope for such re-intermediation in the euro area was very limited 
and, in any case, could not account for the robust growth of lending to the private sector.  
A  further  hypothesis  advocated  by  some  commentators  since  the  onset  of  the  financial 
tensions, was that the ongoing strength in MFI lending to non-financial corporations mainly 
reflected the drawdown of pre-committed credit facilities, at terms agreed before the tensions 
erupted and did not represent new credit decisions. The analysis of the data on overdrafts, 
where  drawdowns  under  existing  contracts  are  reported  in  most  euro  area  countries, 
suggested that the outstanding amount of overdrafts had been increasing continuously, well 
before the financial tensions emerged. While the average monthly flow of overdrafts to non-
financial corporations rose somewhat after August 2007, this increase can only account for a 
very small part of the average monthly flow of MFI lending to this sector during this period. 
Another  argument  put  forward  was  that  due  to  the  alleged  reduction  in  the  availability  of 
financing 
from  market-based  sources,  additional  bank 
borrowing  may  have  been  used  to  compensate  for  this.  As  a  result,  according  to  this 
argument,  the  data  on  MFI  lending  to  firms  was  being  upwardly  affected  by  a  substitution 
effect, while the total new financing available to them had in fact stalled. An encompassing 
analysis of the financing of non-financial corporations based on data on MFI loans, the net 
issuance of securities other than shares and the issuance of equity – which are available in a 
timely  manner  –  refuted  this  argument.  More  specifically,  the  data  at  the  euro  area  level 
pointed  to  some  limited  moderation  in  the  flow  of  financing  to  non-financial  corporations 
stemming  from  developments  in  the  issuance of  debt  securities  and equity,  which  did  not, 
however, provide scope for material substitution effects. 
In  addition,  the  analysis  of  money  and  credit  developments  was  able  to  provide  us  with 
insights that were helpful in calibrating our liquidity policy. For instance, a detailed, security-
by-security  analysis  of  Asset  Backed  Commercial  Paper  (ABCP)  issuance,  enabled  us  to 
monitor  the  refinancing  patterns  of  these  programmes.  Combining  this  with  information  on 
credit  institutions’  commitments  to  ABCP  issuers,  we  were  able  to  arrive  at  a  quantitative 
assessment of the tensions in the money market that the breakdown of activity in the ABCP 
market was generating, in the run-up to the year end.  
Finally, in the context of identifying the sources and causes of tensions in the money market, 
the  role  of  money  market  funds  –  which  are  a  crucial  provider  of  funding  to  the  banking 
system – was examined. The analysis of developments in the portfolio allocation of money 
to  non-financial  corporations 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 5
market  funds  helped  to  shed  light  on  the  question  of  whether  their  behaviour  had 
exacerbated  the  liquidity  shock  suffered  by  credit  institutions.  In  particular,  the  analysis 
showed that while money market funds continued to supply funding to the banking system at 
robust aggregate levels, changes in their portfolio composition – including a reduction in the 
maturity  profile  –  are  likely  to  have  increased  the  uncertainty  for  banks  regarding  their 
sources of funding, thereby contributing, at the margin, to the ongoing tensions in the money 
market. 
Such analysis not only supported the assessment of the underlying monetary trends, but also 
informed  the  shorter-term  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  tensions  on  the  financial  sector,  on 
financing conditions and credit availability and, ultimately, on the real economy. In addition, 
the  insights  attained  through  the  broad  monetary  analysis  have  contributed  to  generating 
plausible scenarios regarding the possible impact of the financial market tensions on the real 
economy, which have also informed the monetary policy discussions. 
Overall, the conclusion emerged that the availability of funding to the euro area non-financial 
sector had not been significantly impaired as a result of the financial market tensions. While 
we continue to monitor developments closely, this assessment was a valuable input into the 
policy discussion, in a context where the existence of a “credit crunch” was widely perceived 
to be established. This is not to deny, of course, that the growth in loans to the non-financial 
private  sector  has  moderated  recently,  and  indeed  is  expected  to  continue  to  do  so. 
However,  this  largely  reflects  the  regular  impact  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
tighter credit conditions, with no signs so far of an additional effect coming from the financial 
tensions affecting, for example, the capital position of banks. 
Money market operations and liquidity management 
c)  
While the ECB has maintained a steady hand in its monetary policy decisions, we have not 
been passive in the face of financial tensions. Rather – and contrary to the expectations of 
some observers – we have proved able to act rapidly and, when necessary, significantly, to 
support  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  that  is  central  to  the  implementation  and 
transmission of monetary policy. 
During  this  period  of  heightened  stress  and  uncertainty,  the  ECB  has  used  its  liquidity 
operations in a pragmatic manner, consistent with both the monetary policy stance decided 
by the Governing Council and the market-oriented approach that has always characterised 
our liquidity management. Although the frequency of liquidity operations has increased when 
necessary  and  the  timing  and  maturity  of  liquidity  provision  has  evolved  over  time,  such 
actions aimed at reassuring market participants about the continuation of transactions in the 
money market and have neither involved substantial changes to the operational framework 
nor impinged on the monetary policy decisions and the primary objective of price stability.  
This  approach  is  the  direct  application  of  the  separation  principle,  making  a  distinction 
between  the  determination  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  its  implementation  through 
liquidity  operations.  It  has  also  contributed  towards  maintaining  transparency,  by  avoiding 
that monetary policy decisions and liquidity operations become entwined and thus confused. 
At the same time, it is clear that the separation principle does not preclude that the decisions 
on the appropriate monetary policy stance be underpinned by, among other considerations, 
an assessment of the extent to which the tensions in the financial markets may impact on the 
real economy and the outlook for price stability. 
Looking  in  more  detail  at  the  operations  deployed  since  the  outset  of  the  financial  market 
tensions, three measures are important.  
First,  relative  to  normal  times,  the  Eurosystem  has  adjusted  the  distribution  of  liquidity 
supplied  over  the  course  of  the  reserve  maintenance  period,  while  the  total  amount  of 
liquidity over an entire reserve maintenance period has remained essentially unchanged. So-
6 
 BIS Review 105/2008
called “frontloading” of the provision of liquidity has supplied more liquidity at the beginning of 
the maintenance period, while reducing it later.  
Second, the Eurosystem has lengthened the average maturity of its outstanding refinancing 
by undertaking additional longer-term operations.  
Third, fine-tuning operations have been used more frequently – albeit still to a very modest 
extent – especially in the first few months of the period of tension. 
Despite  higher  than  usual  volatility,  as  a  result  of  these  actions  the  average  level  of  the 
EONIA has remained close to the minimum bid rate, as intended. The stance of monetary 
policy reflected in the Governing Council’s monthly decisions has therefore been effectively 
achieved and signalled, maintaining the separation principle. 
the  broad  ranges  of 
The  basic  structure  of 
counterparties  and  collateral  eligible  for  use  in  Eurosystem  operations,  has  been  in  place 
since the beginning of Monetary Union. All the current features have been in place since well 
before the emergence of financial tensions a year ago. In contrast to the experience in other 
countries,  no  fundamental  changes  were  required  to  the  design  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
operational framework in order to address the dislocation in the money markets.  
Acceptance  of  a  wide  range  of  collateral  has  helped  the  banking  system  to  manage  its 
liquidity  situation  in  the  period  of  stress.  In  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework,  the  eligibility  of  bank  loans  and  asset-backed  securities  for  the  refinancing 
operations of the Eurosystem has helped banks’ refinancing. However, the ECB only accepts 
collateral of good credit standing (i.e. with at least an A- rating).  
the  operational 
framework, 
including 
International cooperation 
d)  
In  parallel, central  banks  have  also  strengthened  their  cooperation,  first  through enhanced 
information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments,  and  later  on  by 
coordinated steps to provide liquidity. Since December 2007, the ECB has, in cooperation 
with  other  major  central  banks,  conducted  several  term  auction  facilities  –  so-called  TAF 
operations  –  in  which  it  provides  US  dollar  liquidity  to  euro  area  banks  on  behalf  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. These liquidity-providing operations do not have a direct effect on 
euro  liquidity  conditions,  but  are  rather  conducted  to  address  the  concerns  of  euro  area 
banks regarding the limited availability of funding denominated in US dollars and are aimed 
at improving global funding conditions. 
Lessons for monetary policy 
4.  
My remarks thus far have illustrated how our monetary policy framework has enabled us to 
address the challenges that emerged in the past thirteen months. It is clear, however, that we 
should refrain from being complacent given that important challenges remain ahead.  
Inflation remains at worrying levels and financial tensions persist. If anything, the challenges 
for monetary policy are intensifying rather than waning. In such an environment, it is all the 
more  important  to  draw  on  our  experience  to  derive  lessons  that  can  help  to  address  the 
challenges ahead. A number of such lessons stand out.  
First,  we  must  follow  and  be  guided  by  certain  longstanding  principles  of  sound  central 
banking, particularly in the field of monetary policy. This is true at all times, but particularly so 
during times of turbulence. At the same time, a degree of pragmatism is always required to 
calibrate  the  appropriate  response  to  the  inevitably  idiosyncratic  nature  of  any  individual 
episode. But such pragmatism must respect the core principles I have elaborated on today. 
Second, monetary policy is best placed to discharge its duty if it draws on a comprehensive 
analytical framework to identify risks to price stability. In particular, one of the main lessons of 
our recent experience has been to confirm and underline the importance of the analysis of 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 7
developments in money and credit when formulating monetary policy decisions. In particular, 
a thorough and broad based monetary analysis (a) is crucial in identifying medium-term risks 
to price stability; (b) has enhanced our understanding of market developments; and (c) can 
support  the  early  detection  of  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  misalignments,  which 
appear to be among the roots of the current tensions.7  
To be more precise, the close link between monetary developments and evolving imbalances 
in asset and credit markets implies that a thorough monetary analysis can help central banks 
to detect such imbalances at an early stage and thereby to respond to the implied risks to 
price and financial stability in a timely and forward-looking manner. This has proved to be an 
invaluable asset for the ECB, notably in times of global financial turbulence. Indeed, had it 
not been for the timely policy action of the ECB in late 2005 – when key rates were raised 
largely  on  the  basis  of  the  insights  offered  by  the  monetary  analysis  –  the  build-up  of 
inflationary  pressures,  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  misalignments  that  have 
subsequent become apparent would have been even greater. 
Third, as regards the implementation of monetary policy, the main lesson to be drawn from 
this  episode  is  the  need  to  be  flexible  and  pragmatic  in  liquidity  operations,  while  always 
ensuring  that  they  remain  separate  from  and  subservient  to  the  decision  regarding  the 
monetary policy stance. In other words, the separation principle must be adhered to.  
Experience has shown that such a broad and flexible operational framework is able to cope 
with dislocations in the market without the need to resort to fundamental adjustments. At the 
same time, it should be recalled that the ECB, as indeed any central bank, cannot ensure 
that the money market  is always shielded from all volatility. The smooth functioning of the 
market  depends  largely  on  the  behaviour  of  the  market  participants,  reflecting  underlying 
trust,  confidence  and  transparency.  The  central  bank  is  responsible  for  managing  the 
provision  of  liquidity  in  a  way  that  promotes  a  market-oriented  approach  and  avoids 
rendering market participants dependent on its operations for their very short-term liquidity 
needs. From this perspective, it is important not to create incentives that would discourage 
market  participants  from  making  their  contribution  to  the  normal  functioning  of  the  money 
market.  
Above all, it is not the role of the central bank to replace the markets. Our aim is to create an 
environment  that  supports  the  efficient  and  smooth  functioning  of  a  market  among  private 
sector  participants.  As  long  as  tensions  in  the  money  market  persist,  we  will  continue  to 
undertake the liquidity operations required. Market participants should not, however, become 
reliant upon the ECB to meet their funding needs. Indeed, we encourage market participants 
to step up to their role as market makers, in order to help in restoring normality in the money 
market.  
Fourth, the best contribution that monetary policy can make to the economy is to deliver price 
stability,  which  should,  therefore,  be  its  primary  objective.  By  delivering  price  stability, 
monetary policy also contributes, in the most efficient manner, to economic conditions that 
foster  growth,  employment  and  financial  stability.  However,  it  is  not  within  the  power  of 
monetary  policy  to  ensure  the  attainment  of  financial  stability.  Responsibility  for  this  lies 
primarily with market participants themselves, as well as with regulators and supervisors. In 
this respect, a central bank only contributes to financial stability.  
Fifth,  and  related  to  this,  safeguarding  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to 
deliver price stability is of the essence, particularly in a context where shocks, such as the 
increase  in  commodity  prices,  threaten  to  unhinge  inflation  expectations.  In  the  present 
company I do not need to go into the details of the repercussions that the vicious circle that 
would result from such an un-anchoring of inflation expectations would have. What I would 
                                                 
7   See Adalid and Detken (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 105/2008
like to stress, however, is that a move to adjust the quantitative definition of price stability, in 
the  current  environment,  would  seriously  damage  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank  and 
should, therefore, be dismissed out of hand. 
This brings me to my sixth and final point: in a world where financial institutions operate in 
many  jurisdictions  and  in  many  currencies  there  are  obvious  benefits  in  terms  of  both 
efficiency and effectiveness if central banks cooperate when conducting their money market 
operations. As previously mentioned, in the face of the tensions in the money markets, the 
major  central  banks  have  stepped-up  their  cooperation,  with  rather  impressive  results. 
Clearly there are further benefits to be reaped from enhancing this cooperation. 
Concluding remarks 
5.  
In  the  current  challenging  environment,  maintaining  price  stability  is both  more  demanding 
and more important than usual. Siren voices from various quarters ask that we subordinate 
this  duty  to  other  considerations.  Such  voices  are  becoming  ever  more  voluble.  In  this 
context,  the  principles  embedded  in  our  monetary  policy  framework  have  been,  I  think, 
instrumental in ensuring that we stay the course.  
As  an  activity  intrinsically  related  to  the  anchoring  of  longer-term  expectations,  monetary 
policy  making  must  be  governed  by  principles  and  implemented  by  practices  that  have 
withstood  the  test  of  time.  My  experience  as  a  central  banker  in  a  period  of  significant 
financial tension has reinforced, more than ever, my conviction that adhering to the sound 
core principles on which I have elaborated is of the essence. 
Thank you for your attention. 
(ed.)  NBER 
in  S.  Fischer 
“Macroeconomics  and  Politics”, 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB 
working paper No 732. 
Alesina,  A. 
(1988), 
Macroeconomics Annual 1988, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Alesina,  A.  (1989),  “Politics  and  Business  Cycles  in  Industrial  Democracies”,  Economic 
Policy, 4(8), pp. 58-98. 
Blinder, A. (1997), “What Central Bankers Could Learn from Academics – and Vice Versa”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2), pp. 3-19. 
Borio, C. (2008), “The financial turmoil of 2007-?: a preliminary assessment and some policy 
considerations”, BIS Working Paper No 251. 
Goodfriend, M. (1997), “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A 20th Century Odyssey”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 83(1), pp. 1-22. 
Grilli, V., D. Masciandaro, D. and G. Tabellini (1991), “Political and Monetary Institutions and 
Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries”, Economic Policy, 6(12), 342-392. 
Lucas, R.E. Jr. (1997), “Monetary Neutrality”, in T. Persson (ed.) Nobel Lectures, Economics 
1991-1995, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore. 
Phelps,  E.  (1967),  “Inflation  Expectations  and  Optimal  Unemployment  over  Time”, 
Economica, 34(135), pp. 254-81. 
Rogoff, K. (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(4), pp. 1169-89. 
BIS Review 105/2008 
 9
IX” 
conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  September  7 
Stark, J. (2007), “Enhancing monetary analysis”, speech delivered at the “The ECB and its 
Watchers 
(available  at 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html). 
Theil,  H.  (1961),  Economic  Forecasts  and  Policy,  2nd  edition,  Vol.  15  of  Contributions  to 
Economic Analysis, North Holland, Amsterdam. 
Tinbergen, J. (1952), On the Theory of Economic Policy, 2nd edition, Vol. 1 of Contributions 
to Economic Analysis, North Holland, Amsterdam. 
10 
 BIS Review 105/2008
