Lucas Papademos: Address upon receiving the 2007 “Risk Manager of 
the Year” Award of the Global Association of Risk Professionals 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the 9th 
Annual Risk Management Convention & Exhibition, New York, 26 February 2008. 
 I.  
Introduction  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Chairman of the Board of Trustees, Mr William Martin, for his kind 
words of praise for the European Central Bank (ECB). It is indeed a great pleasure for the 
ECB to receive the Risk Manager of the Year Award, which I gladly accept on behalf of the 
Governing  Council  and  all  my  colleagues  at  the  ECB.  I  am  aware  that,  in  receiving  this 
award,  the  ECB  finds  itself  in  the  privileged  company  of  distinguished  past  recipients  who 
have made important contributions to academic research and business practice in the area 
of risk management. This is the first time that the award has been given to an institution and, 
in  particular,  a  central  bank.  Mr  Martin  explained  why  the  Board  of  Trustees  decided  to 
honour the ECB for a number of its achievements. Indeed, given the inevitable uncertainty 
characterising our economies and the risks that can affect their performance, central banks 
may  be  seen  as  institutions  whose  tasks  involve  the  prevention  and  management  of  risks 
that can impact on the achievement of their policy objectives. Preventing and managing such 
risks  involves  monitoring,  analysis,  assessments,  decisions  and  actions  that  engage  the 
entire institution: its decision-making bodies, its management and its staff.  
Risk management has undergone fundamental changes over the past two decades. In the 
financial sector, it has had to deal with the unprecedented increase in the complexity of new 
financial instruments, as well as with multiple interactions between the different types of risk 
and  different  markets  in  the  world  economy.  Responding  to  the  challenge,  the  techniques 
used to analyse and manage risk have reached a level of sophistication that has made risk 
management  an  academic  field  of  study  in  its  own  right.  Equally  importantly,  it  is  now 
recognised that risk management plays a central role in the business model of any enterprise 
and  that  risk  management  expertise  is  an  essential  tool  for  senior  managers.  With  almost 
75,000 members in 100 countries, the Global Association of Risk Professionals (GARP) is 
undoubtedly  the  main  force  in  the  international  community  of  risk  managers.  Its  activities, 
which are aimed at the “advancement of the risk profession through education, training and 
the promotion of best practices globally” are making a valuable contribution to improving risk 
management  across  the  world.  This  is  especially  important  because  the  rapid  pace  of 
innovation  and  the  increasing  level  of  integration  among  our  economies  and  financial 
systems necessitate better risk management – both in terms of systems and practices – in 
order  to  optimise  economic  performance,  that  is,  achieve  higher  sustainable  growth, 
preserve price stability and minimise financial volatility.  
From the very beginning, the ECB, as an institution, has placed particular emphasis on risk 
management. As a new central bank, established only ten years ago, it has aimed to meet 
the highest governance standards in terms of organising its risk management function and 
has  applied  state-of-the-art  tools.  Moreover,  in  the  context  of  our  task  to  contribute  to 
safeguarding the stability of the euro area financial system, we closely monitor and carefully 
analyse  developments  in  risk  transfer  instruments,  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  risk 
management strategies and methods by financial institutions. 
For  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  this  morning,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  issues 
pertaining to the ECB’s role and activities in assessing, preventing and managing the risks 
associated  with  achieving  its  primary  objective  of  preserving  price  stability  and  fulfilling  its 
responsibility to help safeguarding financial stability. I will do so by reviewing the Bank’s risk 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 1
assessments, policy decisions and market operations in 2007 and by examining some policy 
challenges that we face this year. More specifically, I will first discuss the extent to which the 
ECB,  other  institutions  and  market  participants  managed  to  foresee  the  eruption  of  the 
financial market turmoil, and if they did not, why not? Second, I will explain the ECB’s money 
market operations since last August, their rationale and their effects thus far. Finally, I will 
address some challenging issues concerning the economic outlook and the financial markets 
in the euro area.  
II.  
The financial market turmoil: to what extent did we foresee, or could we have 
foreseen, it? 
Since the financial market turmoil erupted last summer, the underlying causes, as well as the 
factors  that  have  contributed  to  the  propagation  and  spreading  of  initial  triggers  across 
markets and countries, have been the subject of extensive debate. And these issues will be 
discussed further by other speakers at this convention. What may be of greater interest and 
relevance  to  risk  professionals  are  the  answers  to  the  following  questions:  Did  we  see  it 
coming? To what extent did we see it coming? And if the answer is, at least in part, no: Could 
we,  or  should  we,  have  seen  it  coming?  In  fact,  the  ECB,  as  well  as  other  central  banks, 
international institutions and some market participants, had identified a number of risks and 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  well  before  the  financial  market  tensions  erupted  in 
August last year.  
In the four years to the summer of 2007, the exceptionally benign macroeconomic, financial 
and monetary conditions and the process of financial globalisation, including a “savings glut”, 
had  contributed  to  reducing  risk  aversion  and  market  volatility,  had  fostered  a  “search  for 
yield” and rising leverage, and had resulted in the emergence of imbalances and the possible 
underpricing of risk. Thanks to financial innovation, we witnessed an unprecedented growth 
in  the securitisation  of bank  loans,  in  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  and  in  other complex 
structured  finance  products.  Consequently,  monitoring  the  distribution  and  identifying  the 
concentration of credit risk in the financial system became increasingly difficult. These and 
other concerns had been expressed in various documents, speeches and statements back in 
2006  and  even  before,  for  example,  in  the  ECB’s  Financial  Stability  Reviews  of  June  and 
December 2006. 
In  early  2007  the  warnings  became  stronger  and  more  specific.  For  example,  the  ECB’s 
Financial Stability Review of June 2007 had warned (i) that the crisis in the US sub-prime 
mortgage market could deepen and spread to other markets; (ii) that financial market liquidity 
could vanish abruptly if investor uncertainty and risk aversion were to rise, revealing several 
vulnerabilities in the financial system; (iii) that investors may be relying excessively on credit 
rating  agencies’  risk  assessment  of  structured  products;  and  (iv)  that  it  had  become 
increasingly  uncertain  whether  those  who  ultimately  held  the  credit  risk  could  manage  it 
effectively.  
But  this,  of  course,  is  not  the  whole  story.  There  were  a  number  of  other  factors  and 
mechanisms  that  played  a  role  in  the  propagation  and  amplification  of  the  market  turmoil 
which neither we, nor other institutions, foresaw, at least not fully, notably: (i) the way various 
intertwined vulnerabilities would eventually combine; (ii) the speed and intensity with which 
tensions  in  one  specific  segment  of  the  credit  market  in  one  country  could  spread  so 
extensively  to  other  markets  and  countries;  (iii)  the  size  of  banks’  off-balance  sheet 
exposures  to  the  US  sub-prime  related  structured  finance  products;  (iv)  the  activities, 
features and implications of new financial entities – conduits and other structured investment 
vehicles – that have been sponsored by banks and linked to them by liquidity commitments. 
Finally,  it  was  impossible  to  predict  the  extent  to  which  risks  were  transferred  to  market 
participants who were ultimately unable to bear them. 
Should policy-makers and market participants have been able to foresee these weaknesses 
and  risk  propagation  channels  in  the  financial  system?  Of  course,  “hindsight  is  always 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2008
twenty-twenty”, as a well-known actor once remarked. But can we at least explain why we 
did not see them ex ante? There are several reasons. But let me point to two main ones. The 
first  is  that,  to  some  extent,  some  of  these  factors  were  impossible  to  see.  Insufficient 
transparency and disclosure on the part of financial institutions, especially as regards their 
(on- and off-balance sheet) exposures to complex structured finance products, are partly to 
blame and are issues that need to be addressed urgently in order to improve the functioning 
and resilience of the financial system. Similarly, inadequate information about the quality of 
the assets underlying complex structured finance products led to valuation problems, as did 
inappropriate accounting for the illiquid nature of many of these products. In the same vein, 
the lack of transparency regarding the models and methodologies and the information used 
by credit rating agencies in producing their credit ratings limited the understanding of those 
ratings and obscured the true risk characteristics of the complex structured finance products.  
The second reason is that some market participants did not care to see. Here I am referring 
to  the  role  and  effects  of  distortions  in  the  incentive  structures  embedded  in  the  business 
models of banks and other financial market participants in the originate-and-distribute chain 
which have had a bearing on the provision of information about the quality of assets and the 
distribution, accumulation and containment of risks in the financial system. Even 2000 years 
ago,  long  before  securitisation  and  credit  risk  transfer  had  been  invented,  Seneca  had 
identified the problem of inappropriate incentives when he warned that one should “be wary 
of  the  man  who  urges  an  action  in  which  he  himself  incurs  no  risk”.  Investors  relied  too 
heavily  on  credit  rating  agencies  in  assessing  the  value  of  complex  structured  finance 
instruments and were not fully aware of the true risk structure implied in their positions. The 
lack of appropriate incentives led many market participants to ignore the warning lights that 
had started flashing well before the summer of 2007 when the turmoil erupted. 
The ECB’s money market operations during the financial market turmoil  
III.  
As the market tensions spread from the US sub-prime mortgage market through the market 
for structured finance products and for asset-backed commercial paper to European money 
markets, how did the ECB react? The liquidity squeeze in the interbank money markets that 
was  observed  in  early  August  2007  was  triggered  by  the  larger-than-expected  funding 
liquidity needs, or perceived needs, of some banks, while at the same time those financial 
institutions  that  had  liquidity  balances  tended  to  hoard  them  because  of  uncertainty  about 
their future liquidity position and increased counterparty risk. In the face of these information 
asymmetries and heightened uncertainty, the normal functioning of the euro money market 
was severely impaired. The ECB therefore stepped in and addressed these tensions, initially 
by  launching  a  series  of  overnight  fine-tuning  operations,  and  subsequently  by  taking  four 
specific measures to ensure that very short term money market rates remained close to the 
ECB’s policy rate and to contain upward pressures in the longer-term money market. 
First,  the  ECB  shifted  the  time  pattern  of  liquidity  provision  through  its  main  refinancing 
operations in the interbank money market by providing more liquidity at the beginning of the 
reserve maintenance period and less towards the end of the period. This “frontloading” led to 
more balanced liquidity conditions and helped to keep very short-term rates close to the key 
policy rate, without changing the overall amount of liquidity provided. Second, responding to 
banks’ greater preference for assuring the fulfilment of their liquidity needs on a longer-term 
basis,  the  ECB  increased  the  share  of  refinancing  provided  via  three-month  longer-term 
refinancing  operations  and  reduced  the  share  provided  via  the  one-week  main  refinancing 
operations.  Again,  the  total  amount  of  outstanding  refinancing  remained  unchanged; 
however, the average maturity was extended. Third, the ECB undertook a number of specific 
measures designed to address expected money market tensions around the year-end. And 
fourth,  to  ensure  the  availability  of  funding  denominated  in  US  dollars,  the  ECB  joined  a 
concerted action with other central banks, notably the Federal Reserve System in December 
2007, the aim of which was to improve global funding conditions.  
BIS Review 21/2008 
 3
It  may  be  useful  to  clarify  that  the  Eurosystem  requires  adequate  collateral  from  its 
counterparties  for  its  credit  operations.  Adequate  collateral  in  this  context  has  two 
dimensions:  First,  the  Eurosystem  should  be  protected  from  incurring  losses  in  its  credit 
operations.  Second,  sufficient  collateral  should  be  available  to  counterparties,  so  that  the 
Eurosystem  can  provide  the  amount  of  liquidity  deemed  necessary  for  its  monetary  policy 
and payment systems operations. To facilitate this, the Eurosystem accepts a broad range of 
assets as collateral, which also reflects the variety of practices that had been applied by the 
National  Central  Banks  of  the  euro  area.  This  collateral  framework  remained  unchanged 
during the recent market tensions. The diversity of eligible collateral had a stabilising effect 
during  the  financial  market  turmoil,  allowing  counterparties  to  obtain  liquidity  from  the 
Eurosystem against adequate collateral.  
Why  did  the  ECB  intervene  in  money  markets?  The  objective  was  twofold.  The  interbank 
money market plays a crucial role in the transmission of the effects and signals of monetary 
policy.  If  money  markets  do  not  function  in  an  orderly  manner  and  very  short-term  money 
market  rates  deviate  significantly  from  the  central  bank’s  policy  rate,  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy is impaired. The ECB therefore had to act swiftly and decisively in order to 
steer these rates close to the official ECB interest rates and contain upward pressures on the 
longer-term  money  market,  in  order  to  avoid  the  money  market  tensions  feeding  into  the 
credit market, spreading to other markets and adversely affecting the real economy.  
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the  ECB  conducted  these  money  market 
operations without changing the overall monetary policy stance and, needless to say, without 
aiming  to  “bail  out”  any  specific  financial  institution  with  a  special  liquidity  need.  We  have 
clearly  distinguished  between  two  types  of  central  banking  action.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
ECB, like other central banks, takes decisions on the monetary policy stance and the level of 
official interest rates. These have a clear medium-term orientation, they are geared towards 
preserving price stability and are based on our assessment of the risks to price stability. On 
the other hand, the ECB conducts money market operations that provide liquidity to ensure 
the  orderly  functioning  of  the  interbank  money  market,  with  a  view  to  fulfilling  its  task  of 
safeguarding financial stability and to ensuring that the effects of its interest rate decisions 
are transmitted to the financial markets and the real economy effectively.  
So,  did  we  accomplish  what  we  wanted  to  achieve?  Very  short-term  money  market  rates 
have remained very close to the level of the ECB’s key policy interest rates, and tensions in 
the term money markets have eased gradually for maturities up to three months. Moreover, 
banks  now  seem  to  be  able  to  satisfy  their  US  dollar  liquidity  needs,  allowing  the  ECB  to 
discontinue the US dollar swap arrangement for the time being. However, we clearly have 
not yet returned to the status quo ante. Central banks’ liquidity operations cannot address the 
underlying causes of the money market tension reflecting a lack of confidence among market 
participants and uncertainty in other financial markets. 
The economic outlook and the adjustment of financial markets 
IV.  
Let  me  conclude  by  addressing  some  policy  issues  that  we  are  facing  this  year.  The 
economic outlook for the euro area is surrounded by an unusually high level of uncertainty 
and  is  subject  to  several  risks.  The  ECB’s  latest  assessment  confirmed  that  risks  to  price 
stability  remain  on  the  upside  and  that  risks  to  economic  growth  continue  to  lie  on  the 
downside. The ongoing process of risk reappraisal and balance sheet adjustment in financial 
markets is likely to last for some time, and it is highly uncertain what impact it will have on the 
real  economy.  Indeed,  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  are  linked  to  and  are 
interacting with the uncertainty surrounding the ongoing risk reappraisal in financial markets. 
Although  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  turmoil  on  the  euro  area  economic  activity  is 
difficult to measure and forecast, the latest available information and analysis suggest that it 
is not likely to be sizeable. Real GDP is expected to grow in 2008 at a more moderate pace 
than previously projected, but most recent forecasts from international organisations and the 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2008
private sector point to GDP growth of between 1.6% and 1.8% in 2008. The upper end of this 
range is not far below the euro area’s potential rate of growth. The sound fundamentals of 
the euro area economy and the absence of major macroeconomic imbalances should help 
cushion the adverse effects of the financial market tensions and the deceleration of global 
economic  growth.  Nevertheless,  we  cannot  be  complacent,  as  risks  to  euro  area  growth 
remain on the downside. 
An important and relevant question is whether the ongoing process of de-leveraging and re-
intermediation and the impact of the financial market turmoil on banks’ balance sheets are 
likely  to  lead  to  a  credit  crunch.  The  evidence  so  far  is  reassuring.  On  the  basis  of  the 
available  data,  there  have  been  no  signs  of  a  credit  crunch  or  even  indications  of  a 
deceleration in the rate of loan credit growth to the private sector which has remained strong, 
in particular the pace of credit expansion to non-financial corporations. It is, of course, true 
that we have witnessed a tightening of financing conditions and credit standards in the euro 
area. However, the increase in the average real cost of financing has been relatively modest 
over  the  past  few  months,  although  credit  spreads  for  parts  of  the  corporate  sector  have 
widened substantially. Moreover, the considerable tightening of credit standards reported by 
banks (in the January 2008 bank lending survey for the euro area) has taken place from a 
very “loose” level and has not significantly constrained the availability of credit. The available 
information suggests that the decline in securitisation activity and the re-intermediation of off-
balance sheet assets onto banks’ balance sheets have not affected substantially the supply 
of  bank  loans,  and,  for  the  time  being,  the  re-intermediation  of  non-bank  credit  has  not 
artificially distorted upwards the figures for credit growth. 
Nevertheless, caution is warranted before reaching any conclusions on the likely effects of 
the  financial  market  turmoil  on  the  cost  and  availability  of  bank  credit.  The  impact  of  the 
market  turmoil  on  some  banks’  balance  sheets  has  been  considerable  and  a  number  of 
credit institutions will have to strengthen their capital positions and be more cautious in their 
lending  policies.  Moreover,  the  time  lags  in  the  effects  of  a  change  in  credit  standards  by 
banks  on  loan  demand  imply  that  it  could  be  some  time  before  their  cumulative  impact 
becomes  observable.  More  data  and  further  analysis  are  required  before  a  better 
assessment can be made of the extent to which the ongoing process of risk reappraisal and 
banks’ balance sheet adjustment will affect credit growth in the future. 
With  regard  to  the  prospects  for  price  stability,  the  short-term  inflation  outlook  is  not 
satisfactory. The annual inflation rate in the euro area, which was 3.2% in January 2008, is 
likely to remain at such an elevated level significantly above 2% in the coming months and 
moderate  towards  2%  very  gradually,  and  more  slowly  than  previously  envisaged.  The 
likelihood  that  inflation  will  remain  at  a  high  level  for  a  prolonged  period  underscores  the 
importance of this temporary but protracted upward pressure on inflation not spilling over to 
the  medium  term.  The  assessment  derived  from  economic  analysis  that  there  are  upside 
risks to price stability over the medium term is confirmed by the continuing vigorous money 
and credit growth. 
It  is  therefore  imperative  that  the  risk  of  second-round  effects  on  wage  and  price  setting 
stemming from short-term inflation pressure be avoided. It is also essential that medium and 
long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored  to  price  stability.  The  ECB  remains 
committed to preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price 
stability over the medium term. This commitment will guide the determination of the monetary 
policy stance. At the same time, the ECB stands ready to respond flexibly, effectively and in 
a  timely  manner,  in  order  to  address  potential  money  market  liquidity  pressures,  so  as  to 
support its monetary policy objective and mitigate the risks to the financial system and the 
real  economy.  If  necessary,  this  will  be  carried  out  in  close  concertation  with  other  major 
central banks, as has been done successfully in the past. 
The ongoing adjustment of financial markets is likely to last for some time. This could prove 
to  be  challenging  and  further  test  the  shock-absorption  capacity  of  components  of  the 
BIS Review 21/2008 
 5
financial  system.  Policy-makers  and  market  participants  have  already  taken  significant 
measures,  and  several  additional  initiatives  are  under  way,  to  address  the  identified 
weaknesses in the financial system, enhance risk management practices, restore confidence 
and strengthen the resilience of the financial system. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
The policy challenges that the ECB and other central banks are facing this year and beyond 
require  the  close  monitoring  of  all  developments,  as  well  as  comprehensive  analysis  and 
determined  action  to  prevent  certain  risks  from  materialising  and  to  effectively  manage 
others. Fundamentally, however, the performance of our economies and the resilience of our 
financial  system  depend  on  market  participants’  decisions,  actions  and  risk  management. 
The close cooperation of policy-makers and market participants is an essential ingredient for 
achieving sustainable economic growth and preserving price stability. To this end, the Global 
Association  of  Risk  Professionals  has  an  important  role  to  play,  as  the  expertise  and 
experience  of  its  members  will  contribute  to  further  improvements  in  the  field  of  risk 
management. Once again, I should like to thank you, also on behalf of all my colleagues at 
the Bank, for awarding the Risk Manager of the Year Award to the ECB.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2008
