Caleb M Fundanga: Access to finance – corporate governance and 
sustainability 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
opening  of  the  Microfinance  and  Small  to  Medium  Enterprises  Conference  on  “Access  to 
Finance: Corporate Governance and Sustainability”, Lusaka, 17 June 2008. 
 • Honourable Felix Mutati, MP – Minister of Commerce, Trade and Industry;  
• Mr Michael Mundashi – Non-Executive Director Standard Chartered Bank;  
• Mrs Mizinga Melu – Managing Director Standard Chartered Bank  
• Mr Prashant Thakker – Global Head of Microfinance Institutions of Standard CharteredBank 
• Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  honoured  to  have  this  opportunity  to  make  keynote  remarks  at  this  conference  on 
Microfinance Institutions and Small to Medium Enterprises organised by Standard Chartered 
Bank, whose theme is “Access to Finance: Corporate Governance and Sustainability”. 
I  wish  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participants,  particularly  those  that  have  travelled 
from outside the country. I hope that you will find time to see some of the tourist spots of 
Lusaka and experience the warm hospitality that Zambia has to offer. 
Distinguished  Guests,  following  the  liberalisation  of  the  Zambian  economy  in  the  early 
1990’s,  the  number  of  small-  and  medium-scale  enterprises  (SMEs)  has  increased 
significantly as the Government divested from running business in the economy to pave way 
for increased participation of the private sector. For instance, in the mining sector, the supply 
of goods and services has been taken up by private companies including those that can be 
classified as SMEs. 
Similarly, the transport sector, which was dominated by Government through the United Bus 
Company of Zambia (UBZ), Zambia Railways and Zambia Airways, etc, is now largely run by 
the private sector, consisting mostly of small and medium entrepreneurs. One can go on to 
mention the tourism, manufacturing, real estate, construction and others. 
This development is of great benefit to the economy in general and individual entrepreneurs 
in particular. Therefore, small- and medium-scale enterprises have the potential to make a 
significant  contribution  to  the  growth  of  the  economy,  thereby  improving  the  economic 
welfare of the population. 
As you may know, SMEs in Zambia often have a direct impact on community development. 
Since they are usually based in places where the owners live, they draw upon the community 
for their workforce and rely on it to do business. They provide employment, particularly for 
low-skilled  workers,  as  well  as  women  and  the  youth,  who  usually  make  up  the  greatest 
proportion of the unemployed. 
However,  this  sector  has  faced  difficulties  in  accessing  credit  for  working  capital  and 
expansion of their investments. Mr Chairman, even if more SMEs wished to modernise their 
plant and equipment, they would find it hard to do so because of the difficulty of obtaining 
financing.  Many  banks  choose  not  to  provide  credit  to  SMEs  as  they  are  perceived  to  be 
more risky and yet less profitable. Some banks that might want to make such loans may lack 
the knowledge of how to make small loans and package them appropriately. 
The other challenge lenders have to work with in assessing SMEs for them to access credit 
is the lack of reliable data. For example, data on the share of bank credit to SMEs are almost 
non-existent in Zambia. Even in banks where credit data are available from credit registries, 
in  most  cases  they  do  not  include  information  about  the  size  of  firms.  Any  estimates 
regarding the share of credit to SMEs have to rely on proxies, such as the size of loans. 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 1
Mr Chairman, it is clear that lending to SMEs is different from lending to large firms. In the 
case of young firms, it is more difficult to acquire information. Moreover, given the small size 
of  the  loans,  it  does  not  pay  for  the  bank  to  undertake  a  detailed  review  of  the 
creditworthiness  of  SMEs.  Thus,  for  SME  lending  to  be  profitable,  banks  must  experiment 
with  new  approaches  and  technologies  for  risk  assessment  and  loan  management.  Such 
experimentation produces positive externalities by generating knowledge that is difficult for 
the bank to keep for itself, since trained agents can leave the bank to work with competitors. 
The other benefit we get from SMEs is that when there are adverse shocks in the market, 
their small size and flexibility allow them to speedily adjust to market changes. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is encouraging to note that, in the recent past, banks and non-bank 
financial institutions have expanded their provision of finance to SMEs, although there is still 
a lot of room for further improvement. 
We have recognised that a long-term strategy for SMEs calls for action across a wide range 
of  policy  domains,  including  education,  research  and  development,  financial  sector 
regulations, competitive policies and a sound banking sector. These actions should address 
the need to create a healthier overall economic environment in which the business sector, 
SMEs in particular, operate. All key stakeholders should therefore strive to put in place SME-
specific policies and programmes that provide the sector with the support it needs to prosper. 
The banks are not an exception in this regard. 
The  most  recent  statement  of  policies  for  SMEs  are  outlined  in  the  Fifth  National 
Development Plan, and they are in line with the country‘s long-term economic programme as 
enunciate  in  the  Vision  2030.  The  primary  stated  objective  of  this  policy  is  to  create 
conditions  conducive  to  sustainable  growth  in  a  structural  context  of  private  sector 
participation, openness and enhancing efficiency within a competitive environment. 
In order to enhance their contribution to economic growth, the Government during the Fifth 
National Development Plan (FNDP) period is focusing on addressing constraints that have 
negatively  impacted  on  the  performance  of  the  manufacturing  sector.  One  of  the  specific 
interventions in assisting enterprises, particularly the SMEs, is to access affordable finance. 
As major players in credit provision, Banks have an urgent challenge to provide products that 
are suitable to SMEs and within their reach. 
Honourable  Minister,  at  current  levels,  interest  rates  are  too  high  for  the  SMEs  to  access 
credit.  We  urge  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  continue  reviewing  the  cost  of 
borrowing as part of the process to improve SMEs access to the much needed finances to 
expand their operations, employ more people, and thereby provide impetus to significantly 
reduce poverty rates in the country. 
Honourable Minister, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, in view of the financing gap for the 
SMEs,  the  microfinance  sector  in  Zambia  has  taken  a  leading  role  to  fill  this  vacuum. 
However,  the  services  provided  by  the  microfinance  institutions  fall  short  of  meeting  the 
demands  of  SMEs.  The  sector  can  be  said  to  be  relatively  young  with  the  pioneers  being 
established in the early 1990’s. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, I am glad to note that the conference will also focus on 
the very important aspect of corporate governance. 
Corporate governance is vital to building a solid, efficient and sustainable financial system 
and  growth  of  businesses.  Without  these  sound  foundations,  the  institutions  capable  of 
reaching out to the poorest in society will never be encouraged. It is generally agreed that 
there is a strong link between corporate governance and access to finance. The following are 
some of the attributes of an enterprise with good corporate governance: 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2008
A well managed and coordinated company; 
Role and duties are clarified; 
Easier access to finance; 
Financial awareness and the ability to respond quickly; 
Significant reduction in business risk and corporate failure; and 
Increase in monetary value of the firm. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
In the case of Zambia, a BoZ Microfinance Survey of 1999 highlighted that most of the MFIs 
were  inadequately  capitalised  and  had  weak  corporate  governance  structures.  The  survey 
also  pointed  out  that  there  were  about  98  MFIs  operating  across  the  country  in  an 
unregulated environment. 
The study further revealed that the nature of microfinance business in Zambia was generally 
targeted at the lower income group which have limited or no access to financial institutions 
offering financial services such as credit or savings. 
Following  the  study,  broad  consultations  were  held  with  various  stakeholders,  including 
Government, commercial banks and other financial institutions, and the general public. The 
purpose of the consultations was to ensure that the development of legislation relating to the 
microfinance sector was as comprehensive and appropriate as possible. The consultations 
by  the  Bank  of  Zambia  were  extended  to  various  countries  to  obtain  international  best 
practice that could be of benefit to our local environment. 
Therefore,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  MFI  sector  grows  in  a  sustainable  manner  and  to 
protect public deposits, the BoZ developed the Banking and Financial Services “Microfinance 
Regulations” which came into effect on 31 January 2006. 
The  Regulations  were  aimed  at  strengthening  the  sector  and  ensuring  accountability  and 
transparency in operations and providing effective smooth integration of the sector into the 
mainstream financial sector. 
Honourable  Minister,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  the  time  of  the  coming  into 
effect  of  the  Microfinance  Regulations,  there  were  only  three  microfinance  institutions 
licensed by the Bank of Zambia. Today, the number of licensed microfinance institutions has 
increased  to  thirteen.  This  number is  expected  to  increase  further  in  light  of  the  additional 
applications that are currently being considered. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  pleasing  to  see  the  extent  to  which  commercial  banks  are 
working at providing financial services to the medium and small scale entrepreneurs. This is 
so because such financial inclusion is bound to lead to wealth creation. 
It  is  imperative  that  commercial  banks,  in  providing  financial  services,  ensure  that  the 
projects they are supporting are financially viable. The role of the commercial bank, in this 
regard, goes beyond sifting out unviable projects and providing finance for the best projects. 
As Bank of Zambia, we are pleased to see that the private sector, especially banks, are now 
taking  steps  to  partner  with  Government  in  working  towards  reduction  of  poverty  through 
increased provision of financial services to a wider clientele. 
We are also pleased to witness the unique partnership between Banks and MFIs and SMEs 
on  sharing  skills  and  experiences  in  areas  of  common  interest.  This  is  key  to  creation  of 
common understanding. 
I  wish  to  conclude  by  urging  participants,  to  actively  participate  in  the  deliberations  of  this 
conference. I am certain that this conference will benefit both the local institutions and our 
visitors from abroad. 
 
BIS Review 79/2008 
 3
Once again, I would like to thank Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Plc, for organising such 
an important workshop for MFIs and SMEs. 
Honourable Minister, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2008
