Peter Pang: The 10th anniversary of the BIS Representative Office for 
Asia and the Pacific 
Remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to 
a reception for the 10th Anniversary of the BIS Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific, 
Hong Kong, 7 July 2008. 
 Mr Hannoun, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to celebrate with you this evening the 10th anniversary of the BIS 
Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific. 
Ten  years  is  a  long  time.  Long  enough  for  us  to  see  the  robust  recovery  of  the  Asian 
economies following the 1997 financial crisis. Long enough to see China catapult onto the 
world stage and its emergence as a global economic powerhouse. Long enough for oil prices 
to rise 11-fold from US$13 a barrel in 1998 to US$145 a barrel now. And it is long enough for 
terms  like  Google,  eBay,  Facebook  and  MySpace  to  move  from  being  the  preserve  of 
computer  geeks  to  the  mainstream.  I  am  sure  you  all  have  your  own  stories  to  tell  about 
these past ten years.  
It was also 10 years ago that the BIS made the important decision to set up its first overseas 
office in the Asia-Pacific region, and to strategically locate it in Hong Kong. This put the BIS 
at the right place, and at the right time, to meet the growing needs of Asia. To this end, the 
functions  of  the  Asian office  have evolved  and  expanded over  time  –  from  organisation  of 
meetings and seminars to conducting research, to providing dealing and banking services. 
And the office has grown from a start-up staff of six to its current 33. 
We are celebrating this occasion in this lovely restaurant above the Star Ferry – which is an 
icon in Hong Kong and a symbol of quality and value-for-money service. The BIS Asian office 
is also a "STAR" entity. The word "STAR" has been chosen carefully and with good reason – 
each letter of the word symbolises and embodies the excellence of BIS' activities: 
S: 
Surveillance – The Asian office is clearly a star performer in its surveillance work on 
regional economic and financial developments. This is self-evident from reading the 
background notes prepared on the region for various BIS and regional central bank 
meetings.  
Topical  studies  and  research  –  The  Asian  office,  with  its  pool  of  economists  and 
financial  experts,  is  well  placed  to  conduct  research.  Under  the  auspices  of  the 
Asian  research  programme  initiated  in  2006,  many  topics  that  are  of  interest  and 
relevance  to  Asian  central  banks  have  been,  and  continue  to  be,  explored  and 
developed. The BIS has made important contributions in this area, with its research 
providing useful information and insight for policymakers in the region.  
Avenue  for  meetings  –  To  promote  discussion  and  policy  analysis  among  central 
banks, the Asian office has hosted and supported numerous meetings and events in 
the  region,  collaborating  with  other  organisations  such  as  the  Financial  Stability 
Institute, EMEAP and SEANZA.  
Reserves management – The Asian office plays a vital role in the management and 
administration  of  Asian  Bond  Funds  1  and  2  that  aim  to  broaden  and  deepen 
regional  and  domestic  bond  markets.  The  dealing  room  of  the  Asian  office  also 
provides  Asian  central  banks  with  ready  access  to  BIS  banking  services,  helping 
facilitate their liquidity and portfolio management of foreign reserves.  
T: 
A: 
R: 
Over  these  10  years,  I  have  seen  the  Asian  office  play  a  significant  role  in  helping  to 
strengthen  financial  sectors,  develop  financial  infrastructure,  and  promote  stability  and 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
financial integration in this region. And since its establishment, the HKMA has stepped up its 
participation  in  the  BIS'  wide  range  of  activities,  sometimes  co-hosting  seminars  and 
meetings, fostering an even closer relationship between us. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  with  thanks  the  great  work  of  the  BIS 
management and its staff, who have made the Asian office a success. In particular, I would 
like  to  thank  Bob  McCauley  who  has  contributed  significantly  to  the  achievements  of  the 
Asian Office in the past decade. The accomplishments of the BIS in Asia over the past 10 
years call for celebration. With this in mind, let's celebrate these achievements and anticipate 
even  greater  endeavours  to  come.  I  propose  a  toast  and  wish  the  Asian  office  continued 
success for the next 10 years and beyond. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
