Jean-Claude Trichet: Financial integration in Europe and important 
financial sector issues 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Second  Symposium  of  the  ECB-CFS  research  network  on  “Capital  Markets  and  Financial 
Integration in Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 13 February 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to address such a distinguished audience of researchers, market 
participants  and  policy  makers  here  at  the  Second  Symposium  of  the  ECB-CFS  research 
network  on  “Capital  Markets  and  Financial  Integration  in  Europe”.  As  you  will  probably  all 
appreciate, we are living in challenging times right now. And many, although not all, of the 
main challenges relate to financial sectors. So, for my remarks today I have made a selection 
of important financial sector issues, some more structural and others more related to recent 
developments.  
My  presentation  is  divided  into  two  broad  parts.  In  the  first  part,  I  would  like  to  broadly 
address  the  importance  of  financial  integration  in  Europe,  review  the  current  state  of 
integration and tell you about our activities in this area. In the second part I would like to look 
at one specific part of the European regulatory set-up that has been less often discussed in 
the  past  in  relation  to  financial  integration,  namely  the  structure  of  deposit  insurance 
schemes. I will conclude by some remarks on the present very significant market corrections 
and financial turbulences that we experienced in the international financial system since the 
summer last year.  
Financial integration 
Financial  integration  is  an  important  part  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda  and  the  European  Union’s 
Single  Market  Program.  In  particular,  among  industrial  countries  the  free  flow  of  capital 
across borders unleashes competitive pressures that reduce the cost of capital and allows 
for better sharing of risk for consumers and firms. It is therefore the long-standing view of the 
Eurosystem that financial integration is an important process for the general well-functioning 
of the European economy. 
Since its creation in 2002, the ECB-CFS network has featured important pieces of research 
that further substantiated our conviction in this regard. We have seen more of this since this 
morning in the present Symposium. One paper adds that the benefits of financial openness 
through the corporate sector arise particularly from improvements in total factor productivity, 
rather  than through  capital  accumulation.1  Another  illustrates  how  cultural  factors,  such  as 
mutual  trust  and  confidence,  matter  for  the  degree  of  risk  sharing  even  among  European 
regions within the same country.2 While we have certainly made a lot of important progress 
in European financial integration over the last decades, not the least through the introduction 
of the euro, available research also suggests that a lot of benefits in terms of cross-country 
risk sharing are still to be reaped and therefore further efforts are necessary.  
                                                 
1   Bonfiglioli  (2006),  International  financial  integration,  productivity  and  capital  accumulation,  mimeo.,  Institut 
d’Analisi Economica CSIC, July. 
2   Ecinci,  Kalemli-Ozcan  and  Sorensen  (2007),  Financial  integration  within  the  EU  countries:  the  role  of 
institutions, confidence and trust, NBER working paper. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 1
Research  presented  this  afternoon  also  threw  a  positive  light  on  the  role  of  financial 
integration with respect to Central and Eastern European countries. In fact, this contrasts a 
bit with some previous literature that argued that developing and emerging market countries 
are  less  able  to  reap  the  benefits  of  financial  integration.  One  paper  argued  that  foreign 
banks  appear  to  allocate  credit  more  efficiently  than  domestic  banks  in  this  region.3  And, 
accordingly, another finds that financial integration has helped convergence and economic 
growth in Central and Eastern European countries.4  
Financial  integration  is  also  of  key  importance  for  the  performance  of  the  tasks  of  the 
Eurosystem.  First,  a  well-integrated  financial  system  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area.  Second,  financial  integration  is 
relevant  for  our  task  of  contributing  to  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability.  Integrated 
markets reinforce the shock-absorption capacity of the system, as they are more liquid and 
offer better opportunities for financing and risk distribution. Finally, without prejudice to the 
main objective of price stability, we support the general economic policies of the European 
Union. 
What is the current state of European financial integration? Here I will be very brief today, as 
I have characterised this already at various occasions in the past and as financial integration 
is not a fast-moving process. The degree of integration in the euro area varies considerably 
across different market segments. The euro money market is already highly integrated, as it 
is  closest  to  the  single  monetary  policy  and  supported  by  area-wide  large-value  payment 
systems, such as TARGET or EURO 1. An important exception is the market segment for 
short-term  debt  securities,  which  shows  some  fragmentation  owing  to  the  prevailing 
differences  in  market  standards  and  practices.  The  bond  markets  are  also  relatively  well 
integrated. For instance, the cross-border holdings already constitute around 40% of the total 
of  the  long-term  debt  securities  held  by  monetary  financial  institutions.  Equity  markets  are 
less advanced than bond markets but show signs of increasing integration. For example, the 
proportion of variance of equity returns explained by euro area shock is around 38% when 
measured  over  the  period  of  1999-2007.  Still  relatively  fragmented  securities  clearing  and 
settlement  systems  continue  to  constitute  obstacles  to  the  further  integration  of  securities 
markets in Europe.  
In  general,  wholesale  and  capital  market-related  activities  of  banks  show  solid  signs  of 
increasing integration, while retail banking and the underlying retail payment systems have 
remained  more  fragmented,  as  has  been  the  case  for  mortgage  markets.  Finally,  as  was 
discussed  in  detail  in  an  ECB  staff  presentation  earlier  during  this  Symposium,  financial 
markets in the member states that joined the European Union in 2004 are significantly less 
integrated than those in the euro area.5 In sum, a lot has been achieved in the past, not the 
least through the introduction of the euro, but more needs to be done in the future to reap the 
full benefits of the Single Market for Financial Services. 
Let  me  now  mention  some  examples  where  we  have  focused  our  efforts  to  contribute  – 
within the realm of our competencies – to improving financial integration and where we plan 
further  work.  We  tend  to  group  our  efforts  relating  to  financial  integration  in  four  types  of 
activities: (i) giving advice on the legislative and regulatory framework; (ii) acting as a catalyst 
for collective private sector initiatives; (iii) enhancing knowledge and raising awareness; and 
(iv) providing central bank services. I select examples from each group. 
                                                 
3   Giannetti  and  Ongena  (2007),  Lending  by  example:  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  foreign  bank  entry  in 
emerging markets, mimeo., Tilburg University. 
4   Abiad, Leigh and Mody (2007), International finance and income divergence: Europe is different, IMF working 
paper, WP/07/64, March. 
5   Baltzer, Cappiello, De Santis and Manganelli (2007), Measuring financial integration in the new EU member 
states, mimeo., ECB. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2008
As regards legislative and regulatory advice, the Eurosystem was fully involved in the review 
of  the  Lamfalussy  framework  that  took  place  at  the  end  of  last  year  and  published  a 
contribution to the assessment regarding the banking sector. We generally share the broad 
agreement among EU bodies that the Lamfalussy framework has significantly increased the 
efficiency and effectiveness of financial regulation and supervision in the EU.  
At the same time, however, a number of further improvements seem warranted to reap all 
the benefits. First, increased regulatory convergence is called for, in particular for reducing 
national options and discretions in EU directives. Indeed, the inconsistent implementation as 
well as the “gold plating” of EU rules at the national level give rise to significant compliance 
costs for financial institutions operating across borders. Second, we need to strengthen the 
basis  and  decision  powers  of  the  “level  3”  committees  of  supervisory  authorities  pursuing 
supervisory convergence and cooperation Third, further improvements in the arrangements 
for the supervision of cross-border financial groups should be achieved. All authorities need 
to  be  adequately  informed  to  effectively  perform  the  ongoing  supervision  of  cross-border 
institutions  as  well  as  to  be  fully  prepared  to  address  potential  cross-border  situations  of 
financial  distress.  Given  the  increased  scope  and  intensity  of  the  cross-border  activities  of 
EU  banking  groups,  the  need  for  effective  information-sharing  and  cooperation  in  their 
supervision is now more important than ever. In this respect, the Eurosystem underscores in 
particular  the  importance  of  strengthening  information  sharing  also  between  supervisory 
authorities  and  central  banks  without  supervisory  responsibilities  with  respect  to  the  major 
EU banking groups. 
Next, I am turning to our role as catalyst for market activities fostering financial integration. 
The example I choose here is the Single Euro Payments Area, in short SEPA initiative, led 
by the European Payments Council, which has started officially last month. It is a market-led 
initiative  aiming  at  removing  technical,  legal  and  commercial  barriers  against  smooth 
cashless cross-border payments in euro. The objective is to make cashless paying with euro 
as easy, efficient and safe as it is today within one country. This has genuine benefits for 
consumers, firms and public administrations having to conduct cross-border payments. The 
launch included both the roll-outs of the SEPA credit transfer system and the SEPA cards 
framework. The SEPA direct debit system will follow before the end of 2009. The ECB has 
supported  the  European  Payments  Council  in  a  variety  of  ways.  For  example,  the  ECB 
regularly organised meetings with stakeholders such as end-users, infrastructures providers 
and card schemes. We have also published a study of SEPA’s potential economic impact, 
which highlighted, among other things, the room for cost reductions for banks.6  
The  ECB  is  also  very  active  in  enhancing  knowledge  about  financial  integration.  Our 
research network on “Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe” with the Center for 
Financial  Studies  at  the  University  of  Frankfurt  and  whose  Second  Symposium  you  are 
currently  attending  is  one  good  example.  A  major  task  of the  ECB  in  this  area  is also  the 
“Report on Financial Integration in Europe”. This report was published for the first time last 
year and it displays, among other things, our most important indicators to assess the degree 
of financial integration in different parts of the financial system. The second report will come 
out next month, and will again feature a number of interesting analyses and conclusions. 
I would like to mention yet another example in this group of activities, namely our contribution 
to  the  possible  extension  of  the  market  transparency  provisions  in  the  Market  in  Financial 
Instruments  Directive,  in  short  MiFID,  to  financial  instruments  other  than  equities.  The 
interest  of  the  ECB  in  this  issue  follows  in  particular  from  the  great  importance  of  well-
functioning markets for the transmission of monetary policy impulses. We explained our view 
at a public hearing held by the European Commission in September 2007. Focusing on post-
                                                 
6   Schmiedel (2007), The economic impact of the Single Euro Payments Area, ECB occasional paper, no. 71, 
August. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 3
trade  transparency  in  retail  and  wholesale  bond  markets,  we  proposed  a  market-led 
controlled  experiment  about  the  trade-off  between  transparency  and  liquidity.  In  such  an 
experiment, post-trade transparency could be gradually introduced, starting for example with 
the most liquid bond market segment, in order to assess its effects on market liquidity. The 
ECB  stands  ready  to  support  such  an  experiment.  In  the  present  time,  the  importance  of 
transparency  in  financial  markets  to  allow  for  an  efficient  processing  of  information  has  of 
course become particularly evident. 
Finally,  we  provide  central  banking  services  that  also  foster  financial  integration.  For 
example, most recently we successfully launched TARGET2, the second generation of our 
large-value payment system. By moving from a system composed of mutually interconnected 
national  real-time  gross  settlement  systems  to  a  common  system  with  a  single  shared 
platform for payments, we achieve further harmonisation for users in different countries and 
realise  considerable  scale  economies.  We  achieved  a  single  price  structure  for  both 
domestic and cross-border transactions, the possibility of consolidated liquidity management 
for cross-border financial institutions and a harmonised set of cash settlement services for a 
variety of connected systems. The new system started in November last year with the first 
wave of countries. More countries will join in a few days and the last wave will follow in May 
this year.  
With  a  view  to  maximising  the  benefits  from  TARGET2,  the  Eurosystem  is  currently  also 
exploring  the  possibility  of  providing  settlement  services  in  central  bank  money  for  euro-
denominated  securities  transactions.  The  objective  of  this  project,  called  TARGET2-
Securities, is to concentrate securities and cash settlements within Europe on an  efficient, 
single  platform.  The  user  requirements  of  the  system  are  currently  the  subject  of  a  public 
consultation.  The  Governing  Council  will  take  into  consideration  the  views  of  the 
stakeholders  as  well  as  the  relevant  public  authorities  prior  to  making  a  decision,  by  mid-
2008, on whether to launch the project. 
Deposit insurance 
Let me move to an area that has received relatively scarce attention in relation to financial 
integration,  which  is  the  design  of  deposit  insurance  schemes.  Although  I  look  at  it  today 
primarily  from  an  integration  perspective,  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  deposit  insurance 
plays also an important role in crisis prevention and resolution. Deposit insurance serves two 
different but interrelated purposes. Its consumer protection purpose is to protect small and 
unsophisticated bank depositors against loosing a potentially important part of their wealth. 
Its financial stability purpose is to avoid bank depositor runs.  
While  it  is  nowadays  hardly  challenged  any  more  that  deposit  insurance  is  a  necessary 
element  of  the  regulatory  set-up,  there  is  also  awareness  that  an  ill-designed  deposit 
insurance  scheme  can  have  important  adverse  effects.  On  the  one  hand,  a  too  generous 
coverage – protecting also large sophisticated depositors – could reduce market discipline 
for  banks  and  therefore  create  distortions  in  the  allocation  of  risks,  including  potential 
incentives for excessive risk taking by banks. This, in turn, could contribute to instability and 
related  costs.  On  the  other  hand,  unclear  arrangements  or  only  partial  coverage  for  retail 
depositors could open the way again for bank runs. 
In order to illustrate the relevance of deposit insurance schemes for financial integration, let 
me recall the definition of financial integration we are using for our work. According to this 
definition, a market for a given set of financial instruments or services is fully integrated when 
all potential participants in that market (i) are subject to a single set of rules when they decide 
to  deal  with  those  financial  instruments  or  services,  (ii)  have  equal  access  to  this  set  of 
financial  instruments  or  services,  and  (iii)  are  treated  equally  when  they  operate  in  the 
market. The instrument in question here is the basic bank deposit. Differences of rules and 
regulations across countries  about how  deposits  are  guaranteed  could  therefore  affect  the 
degree  of  integration  achieved.  Given  that  small  depositors  tend  to  be  immobile,  and 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2008
therefore cross-border retail deposit holdings are rather limited in the EU at present, the main 
issues arise with respect to the compliance costs for cross-border banks and the competition 
between banks that are subject to differing rules and regulations governing deposit insurance 
schemes. 
Let  me  compare  some  main  features  of  deposit  insurance  schemes  across  European 
countries, starting with coverage.7 In EU countries, the amount of fully insured deposits per 
depositor varies between 20,000 euros, the minimum threshold prescribed by the Directive 
on Deposit Guarantee Schemes, and about 103,000 euros. Everything else equal, depositors 
that possess as much as 100,000 euro in a bank account are more likely to be sophisticated 
and  therefore  less  needing  protection  than  small  depositors.  And  without  such  insurance, 
large  and  sophisticated  depositors  may  exert  some  market  discipline  on  banks.  In  other 
words, banks with a large share of their deposits in a country with high coverage may have 
different  incentives  and  access  to  deposit  finance  compared  to  banks  in  lower  coverage 
countries.  A  related  point  could  be  made  about  the  different  types  of  deposits  that  are 
covered by the respective schemes.  
A second important parameter of a deposit insurance scheme is the funding structure. In the 
EU some schemes are pre-funded, i.e. they collect the means for being able to pay out in 
case  of  a  bank  failure  beforehand,  others  are  only  funded  ex  post,  i.e.  in  case  of  a  bank 
failure the necessary amounts are collected from other banks, and again other schemes use 
a combination of the two. For the pre-funded schemes the premium structure is of relevance. 
Some schemes use flat rates in proportion to banks’ deposits and others take some aspects 
of  bank  risk  in  the  pricing  into  account.  All  this  leads  to  greatly  varying  “coverage  ratios” 
across the EU, defined as the size of funds divided by the total amount of deposits covered. 
The differences in funding structures can lead to differences in the costs of deposit insurance 
for banks headquartered in different countries.  
As the views of stakeholders tend to be divided, an important issue for further analysis and 
research is whether differences in coverage and funding structures have a significant impact 
on the competition among banks originating from different countries. 
In  addition,  cross-border  banks  with  subsidiary  structures  have  to  obey  to  the  rules  of  the 
deposit insurance scheme in each country where they are represented. This is complicated 
and costly for them. Once they have become a member of a scheme and paid into it, it is 
often  impossible  to  recover  the  funds  in  case  they  would  like  to  streamline  the  group  by 
moving to a branch structure, e.g. by becoming a Societas Europea. This might discourage 
cross-border groups from streamlining their company structure, which could become a factor 
limiting financial integration. In this area as well, I a missing a study providing answers that 
take all benefits and costs of different options into account. 
All these observations raise the issue as to whether the mechanisms for coordination at the 
level  of  the  EU  should  be  used  to  achieve  more  convergence  in  the  various  aspects  of 
deposit insurance schemes in the context of the presently decentralised approach to financial 
regulation  and  stability.  This  convergence  could  go  in  the  following  directions.  First,  in 
addition to setting a lower bound, also the maximum amount covered could be limited and 
the  specification  which  deposits  are  included  and  which  not  better  harmonised.  Partial 
insurance, or the so-called co-insurance, for smaller deposits could be removed where it still 
exists,  as  recent  experience  seems  to  suggest  that  it  may  reintroduce  incentives  for  retail 
depositors to run a bank. Second, it may be advisable to move towards pre-funded schemes, 
which are financed through risk-sensitive premia. This would bring bank incentives better in 
line.  Obviously,  it  would  also  mean  significant  transitional  costs  for  the  countries  that 
                                                 
7   For  a  comprehensive  comparison  of  EU  deposit  insurance  schemes,  see  European  Commission  (2007), 
Scenario  analysis:  estimating  the  effects  of  changing  the  funding  mechanisms  of  EU  deposit  guarantee 
schemes, Joint Research Centre, February. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 5
presently  operate  schemes  funded  ex  post.  Pre-funded  schemes  would  also  permit  to 
mobilise very rapidly the guarantee which might be a decisive advantage to avoid bank runs. 
Such European convergence of deposit insurance practices would, however, not solve the 
problem  that  at  least  as  important  differences  exist  between  European  and  non-European 
countries.  
Deposit insurance is naturally not only relevant for financial integration but also, very much, 
for the handling of financial crises. Clearly the cross-country differences I mentioned above 
(and several others more) are at least as much an issue for crisis prevention, management 
and  resolution  as  they  are  for  financial  integration.  Convergence  in  deposit  insurance 
arrangements across European countries should not advance in a way that neglects either 
the  financial  stability  or the  financial  integration aspect  of  it.  Both  need  to  be  well  aligned. 
Overall, we agree with the Commission’s “bifurcated” approach, according to which further 
progress at a shorter time horizon should first be achieved using the available non-legislative 
mechanisms  and  more  fundamental  reforms  requiring  legislation  should  be  based  on  a 
deeper analysis, particularly considering the results of the debates on the financial stability 
set-up and burden sharing that are presently under way in Europe.8  
Let me conclude with some remarks on the ongoing process of significant market correction 
that  global  finance  is  experiencing  since  several  months,  with  its  episodes  of  high  market 
volatility and financial turbulences. 
The  last  G7  meeting  in  Tokyo  was  a  good  occasion  to  exchange  views  on  the  underlying 
causes of the recent turbulences and on the areas where significant improvements will have 
to  be  brought  about  in  global  finance.  The  communiqué  of  the  G7  that  Ministers  and 
Governors signed captures pretty well the large consensus we have at present on both the 
methodology  and  the  six  domains  where  we  agree  action  will  be  necessary.  This  large 
consensus is very important because the challenges that we have to cope with are global 
and  the  solutions  themselves  can  be  nothing  but  global  and  very  closely  harmonised 
between the economies that are making up the global economy. I think particularly of the two 
vast continental economies that are on both sides of the Atlantic. 
On top of stressing the absolute necessity to work very actively, and very united together, to 
draw the right lessons from the present market correction – which, according to our agreed 
methodology, we will do when receiving the definitive report of the Financial Stability Forum 
on the occasion of the next spring meetings of the Bretton Woods Institutions in Washington 
– I will make three remarks.  
First,  the  international community  is  able  to  produce  a  right  and  pertinent  diagnosis  of  the 
global  finance’s  situation.  As  chairman  of  the  Global  Economy  Meeting  which  takes  place 
every two months in Basel, under the auspices of the BIS, I mentioned regularly in 2006 as 
well as in the first months of 2007 that my colleagues and I were judging that there was a 
significant underpricing of risks in global finance. This situation was substantiated by a very 
low level of spreads, a very low level of risk premia, an abnormally low level of volatility in a 
large number of markets. We had explicitly and publicly called for institutions and markets to 
prepare themselves for a correction that was both unavoidable and necessary to pave the 
way for more sustainable path of global finance. Such analysis and diagnosis were reflected 
pretty well in most Financial Stability Reviews published by central banks, not the least in the 
ECB  publication  a  long  time  before  the  market  correction.  The  BIS  publications  were 
themselves equally clear in this respect. 
Second,  a  good  analysis  and  a  pertinent  diagnosis  are  a  necessary  condition  for  future 
necessary  market  corrections  to  be  as  smooth  and  as  orderly  as  possible.  But  it  is  not  a 
                                                 
8   See European Commission (2006), Financial services: Commission proposes self-regulatory improvements to 
deposit guarantee schemes, Brussels, 28 November. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2008
sufficient  condition  per  se  as  is  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  present  episode  of  turbulence 
and  as  was  regularly  observed  in  the  previous  periods  of  sharp  and  abrupt  market 
corrections. And that is the reason why it is so important, so decisive that we draw all the 
lessons from the present episode, across the board, without any prejudices, without giving 
any privilege of untouchability to any part and parcel of global finance. From that standpoint I 
think the work of the Financial Stability Forum – scrutinizing liquidity risk management as well 
as  credit  rating  agencies,  analysing  without  complacency  the  weakness  in  the  structure  of 
incentives of the “originate to distribute” model as well as the monitoring of the off-balance 
sheet  vehicles,  examining  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  agreement  as  well  as  the 
arrangement for dealing with in particular weak cross-border financial institutions – is of the 
essence. 
Third, even with a right and pertinent diagnosis, and appropriate significant improvements in 
benchmark  voluntary  principles  and  codes  of  conduct  for  the  private  sector  as  well  as 
substantial  progress  in  rules  and  regulations,  in  cooperation  and  coordination  between 
authorities  where  needed,  my  understanding  is  that  we  could  not  be  ensured  that  the 
“unavoidable and necessary market corrections” of the future will be reasonably “smooth and 
orderly”. 
For a higher likelihood of that to happen we need probably simultaneously what I would call a 
further significant change of culture at national as well as at global level. I would sum up this 
change in our overall approach with these words: Transparency, Holism and Anti cyclicality. 
Transparency  because  enhanced  public  information  on  institutions  as  well  as  on  financial 
instruments  is  the  only  way  we  have  to  avoid  contagion  and  herd  behaviour  in  times  of 
difficulty. Holism because, technology and globalisation helping, we have progressively built 
global finance on the basis of the very close interconnections of all markets, all institutions, 
all economies. We must continue to improve our full understanding of the functioning of the 
financial system as a whole. The Financial Stability Forum gathering banking, insurance and 
market  surveillance  authorities,  central  banks,  international  financial  institutions,  treasuries 
etc., was the first major illustration of this necessity to address the global financial system as 
a  whole.  We  have  to  reinforce  considerably  this  holistic  approach.  And  Anticyclicality 
because a number of rules and regulations, on the one hand, and of behaviours of public and 
private institutions as well as of markets, on the other hand, have a tendency to be largely 
procyclical, amplifying the booms as well as the busts in the cycle. We must look at all parts 
and  parcels  of  global  finance  with  a  view  to  diminishing  progressively  their  procyclical 
components which implies, in particular but certainly not exclusively, eliminating as much as 
possible  asymmetry  in  the  treatment  of  booms  and  busts  and  extending  as  much  as 
possible, where needed, the time horizon adopted by all the institutions concerned. 
Many thanks for your kind attention.  
BIS Review 17/2008 
 7
