Jean-Claude Trichet: Introduction and chair of the panel on “Stylised 
facts of globalisation and world inflation” 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
International Symposium on “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary Policy”, organised by the 
Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 I would first like to thank the organisers of this Banque de France international symposium 
for their invitation to chair this panel on “Stylised facts of globalisation and world inflation”. I 
am  particularly  glad  to  have  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  panel,  as  discussions 
regarding the conduct of monetary policy in a global economy are a constant feature of our 
policy analysis and research at the ECB.  
We are fortunate to be joined today by Professor Kenneth Rogoff, who will be talking about 
globalisation and monetary policy, providing a general overview and looking at some recent 
issues.  Professor  Rogoff  has  produced  remarkable  research  in  the  area  of  international 
macroeconomics and monetary policy and is therefore the ideal speaker for this morning’s 
presentation.  Kenneth  Rogoff  started  his  career  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  was  Chief 
Economist and Director of Research at the IMF and is now a professor at Harvard University.  
Richard  Fisher  will  be  the  first  discussant.  Richard  Fisher  was  Deputy  US  Trade 
Representative  from  1997  to  2001  and  is  now  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Dallas.  Our  second  discussant  will  be  John  Lipsky,  who  was  Chief  Economist  and  Vice 
Chairman at JPMorgan before being appointed First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF. 
And Professor Philippe Martin will be our third discussant. Philippe Martin, whose research in 
the field of international macroeconomics has been published in numerous leading journals, 
is a professor at the University of Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne and a Membre de l’Institut. 
I look forward to listening to the contributions of this very distinguished panel to the ongoing 
debate  regarding  the  links  between  globalisation  and  inflation.  Over  the  last  15  years  the 
world  has  witnessed  a  substantial  and  continuous  decline  in  the  level  of  inflation  that  has 
coincided  with  the  advent  of  the  global  economy.  The  natural  question  to  ask  is  therefore 
whether  globalisation  has  been  one  of  the  main  factors  driving  price  moderation.  With  the 
development  of  international  trade,  competitive  pressures  from  low-cost  countries  have 
indeed helped to control prices and wages, especially in the manufacturing sector. Pressure 
to innovate has probably also boosted productivity, with beneficial effects for inflation.  
The  question  is  therefore  whether  these  channels  have  indeed  given  rise  to  the  recent 
moderation in prices and, if so, whether they are likely to continue to perform this stabilising 
role in the future. The current surge in commodity prices, including food more recently, which 
is resulting, in particular, from supply being unable to match higher demand from emerging 
markets,  reminds  us  that  globalisation  can  also  lead  to  upside  risks  to  world  inflation. 
Furthermore, global events could become so important in driving inflation that they affect the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For  instance,  it  could  be  that  the  traditional  links  between 
inflation and “domestic”  variables –  particularly the level of  unemployment – have  become 
obsolete in a world where emerging Asia as well as previous communist countries provide 
such a large amount of labour at low cost. 
Although it remains difficult to reach firm conclusions on the overall effects of globalisation, 
the  most  recent  developments  in  manufacturing  import  prices  suggest  that  globalisation 
continues to have a dampening effect on inflation of manufactured goods prices. First, extra-
euro area manufacturing import price inflation originating from “low-cost” countries remains 
lower than average import price inflation from other euro area trade partners. Second, with 
price  levels  of  imports  from  low-cost  countries  remaining  substantially  lower  than  those  of 
imports from high-cost countries, the size and persistence of the dampening effect on euro 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
area  import  prices  depends  predominantly  on  the  “share  effect”.  Although  there  are  some 
signs that this effect is weakening, the share of imports from low-cost countries in the euro 
area has continued to increase. 
A number of other challenges can be mentioned. Globalisation is associated with possibly 
epochal changes of demand and supply, the structural part of which is difficult to assess. The 
progressive  completion  of  global  financial  integration  has  created  a  set  of  sophisticated 
networks that link the fortunes of markets, asset classes and financial institutions around the 
world.  We,  in  the  Eurosystem,  are  very  closely  monitoring  the  ongoing  significant  market 
correction  we  have  experienced  since  the  middle  of  last  year,  taking  into  account  all  their 
possible  consequences  including  on  inflation.  Over  time,  globalisation  may  have  complex 
indirect effects on inflation beyond the more traditional links I have just mentioned.  
I look forward to listening to your views about all of these issues. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
